{1}
Pages 1 - 125 -- Readings and an Address, Birmingham, 1932 (Volume 112).
THE GLORY OF THE SON OF GOD (1)
@John 2:1 - 12, 18 - 25
J.T. I hope that these meetings may be used of the Lord to show the bearing of John's gospel as typical of conditions in Christendom at the present time. In order that the present application of this gospel may be clear to us, it may be noted that the things related generally took place in Judaea, which, because of its attitude toward Christ at that time, corresponds with the modern apostate religious world. The synoptic gospels generally engage us with occurrences in Galilee. Then none of the signs in John deals with demon possession, so we have not to do with these either, but with man's trained mind, active in denial of the truth. Moreover, the word used for works of power, as is well known, is "sign", not "miracle"; that is to say, the signs are not to call the congregation together, so to speak, like the bells of a church, as in the synoptic gospels, but to instruct the spiritual mind as to certain features of the Lord's service. I think the Lord would help in considering this sign as regards the manifestation of His glory. "This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested his glory; and his disciples believed on him". The Spirit would indicate to us that the 'signs' are to be read in that light. They are the manifestation of His glory, not of course in the sense in which He will be manifested presently in glory, but in the moral sense, to the end that those who are known as His disciples should believe; therefore, although the signs are for all, they are especially for those already disciples, as is said later, "That ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and
{2}
that believing ye might have life in his name", (@John 20:31).
Rem. There are a certain number of signs through the gospel, so it would help if you would enumerate them.
J.T. They are: The water made wine (chapter 2:1 - 12); the nobleman's son healed (chapter 4:46 - 54); the impotent man healed (chapter 5:1 - 16); the multitude fed (chapter 6:1 - 14); Christ walking on the water (chapter 6:15 - 21); the blind man's eyes opened (chapter 9); Lazarus raised (chapter 11); the voice from heaven (chapter 12:28 - 30); Christ's enemies falling to the ground when He said "I am" (chapter 18:6); His own resurrection (chapter 20); the condition of the grave clothes, the appearance of the angels, Christ's appearance to Mary, His coming in through closed doors to the disciples (all in chapter 20); finally His manifestation to Peter and those with him (chapter 21). The Lord's own resurrection is the greatest sign. The Jews asked, "What sign shewest thou to us, that thou doest these things?" Jesus answered, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up". "He spoke of the temple of his body".
Ques. Are they cumulative and all leading up to a climax, so to speak?
J.T. I think the climax is the appearance of Christ after He arose. That is the great end in view, to draw us into the spiritual realm where Christ is known as outside of what is material, coming through closed doors. The end of chapter 20 says, "Many other signs therefore also Jesus did before his disciples, which are not written in this book; but these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name", @John 20:30,31. It is as if the writer intended us to consider specially the first twenty chapters. The great end in view is to draw us into the spiritual realm, the world in which Christ is
{3}
apprehended outside of what is material, and I am sure we all own the immensity of that.
Rem. The signs were in the presence of His disciples.
J.T. That would show, as already said, that the disciples were in view -- that *they*  might believe.
H.E.S. Your thought is of the spiritual realm as seen in chapter 20.
J.T. Yes, the spiritual realm is especially opened up in chapter 20, which of course we shall come to towards the end of our meetings. What is before us today is the manifestation of Christ's glory for faith, and it may help to compare this with the first reference to His glory in chapter 1. As become flesh His glory is contemplated by certain persons: it will help to compare those two features of His glory, @John 1:14 and @John 2:11.
Ques. How do you distinguish them, the contemplation of the glory and the manifestation?
J.T. The first, as I understand it, is what I should refer to as private, seen by certain persons. It alludes to what was apprehended spiritually throughout the whole course of the Lord's sojourn here among His own. The writer of the Acts refers to the period "in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up", @Acts 1:21,22. During that period I apprehend there were opportunities for discerning what was there, the relations between Himself and His Father -- a very wonderful suggestion. As become flesh He dwelt among us: "The Word became flesh and dwelt", or tabernacled, "among us", (@John 1:14) which I suppose alluded to provisional circumstances, that they were not final. His position then was not final or fixed, it was provisional, but such as would bring within our range results that are final, what He is with the Father.
Ques. Is that His personal glory?
J.T. Yes, His glory particularly as loved: "a glory as of an only-begotten with a father", @John 1:14.
{4}
G.W.W. You laid emphasis on the word 'tabernacled'.
J.T. I thought it alluded to the transient, provisional position He had taken up. You see, it is *'with'*  or alongside the Father. It is not His service there, nor His activities mediatorially, but what He is with the Father. You want to think of Jesus according to all the lovableness and affection involved in such a relation: "an only-begotten with a father".
Ques. I was wondering, that being so, whether "full of grace and truth" would bring in mediatorship?
J.T. That is what they are intended to convey about Him. He was "full of grace and truth". They would be there, and that, I think, is the secret of the word 'sent' in John's gospel. It is that side of things; He is sent. He was there with the Father, full of all that was needed in His mediatorial service, and He came out thus. His personal position is alluded to, and what was seen there, not His activities.
Ques. Would you distinguish between what is moral and what is personal?
J.T. What they contemplated was personal. It was a question of a divine Person become flesh: "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us", (@John 1:14) meaning that He was where they could see Him, but then He is not spoken of as *'with'*  them. He "dwelt among us" is general, but the point is. He was contemplated as "with a father". It is the secret really of understanding the economy of this gospel, that is to say, the Father and the Son. If we are to see the precious, blessed relations that existed and the glory of them, it is the glory as of an only one with a father. Any one contemplating that would understand the economy of John's gospel, which is that "the Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand", @John 3:35. The contemplation of the relations between the Father and the Son is what gives lustre to everything.
{5}
Ques. Would that be characteristic? It is not *the*  Father, but "as of an only-begotten with a father".
J.T. Yes; it is a relation well known among men, employed to indicate to us what was contemplated; that is to say, the peculiar glory of the relations between the Lord as Man here with the Father.
E.J.McB. Would Abraham and Isaac going together be a figure of it? @Genesis 22.
J.T. Yes, indeed! The converse between them is very beautiful, pointing unmistakably to what we are now considering.
W.C.G. How does the sentence in John's epistle fit in: "The eternal life, which was with the Father" (@1 John 1:2)?
J.T. It fits in exactly, but it is not there the Person that is in view, but the *thing*  that was in Him: "that eternal life". Some have assumed that that alluded to a past eternity, what He was in Deity, but it is not so at all. It refers to what He was as Man here. It is there eternal life is apprehended: "That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life; (and the life has been manifested, and we have seen, and bear witness, and report to you the eternal life, which was with the Father, and has been manifested to us)" (@1 John 1:1, 2).
Ques. Is the thought here that whilst He was the Word become flesh and dwelling amongst them in grace and truth, they contemplated His glory as with the Father?
J.T. That is the idea. The tabernacling would mean that He moved about. We read of "all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us", @Acts 1:21. They had thus opportunity of seeing in varied circumstances this beautiful thing that was discerned by some, this beautiful relation between the Father and the Son. It is said in Luke that "by day he was teaching in the temple, and by night, going out, he
{6}
remained abroad on the mountain called the mount of Olives" (@Luke 21:37). What was He doing there? That is the idea of His secret relations.
Rem. What was quoted from the epistle has reference to incarnation and not to the past eternity.
J.T. Obviously; it is a question of "that eternal life", which is Christ as Man, so that the first allusion to life in chapter 1 of the gospel is, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men" verse 4. It was in Him as Man that light shone.
Ques. Is the thought that the life He lived here became the light of men? How could we know the Lord apart from the life He lived here?
J.T. @John 1:1 - 3 contemplates the Lord's eternal personality. He was in the beginning with God, and was God, and all things received being through Him. Nothing is said of light in these verses, but we have it in verse 4: "the life was the light of men". It is what was there in that connection, that is, the life was exclusively for men. It does not go beyond men, great and glorious as it is; it was not for angels, it is for men, and it shone in Him as a Man. It could not shine otherwise to be intelligible to us. Verses 4 - 13 form an epitome of Christ's presence in this world and its results.
A.S.L. Verse 4 is one of those reciprocal expressions that can be put either way.
J.T. The parts of the statement are of equal value, showing when you come to John's gospel that what shines is a tangible thing, that there is something substantial behind it. When God said, "Let there be light, and there was light", (@Genesis 1:3) we are not told what the light was; it is simply light, but in this gospel the light is the result of something substantial.
A.S.L. Is it the light of the love of God: "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he*  hath declared him", verse 18? Is the light that is shining, the full revelation of God in Christ?
{7}
J.T. I think verse 18 is greater than verse 4. The word 'revelation' is not there. "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him", @John 1:18. The declaration of God goes beyond the light of life. We ought to distinguish between those two verses.
A.S.L. I was thinking too of another verse: "The darkness is passing and the true light already shines" (@1 John 2:8). What is that "true light"?
J.T. It is the same idea carried forward in John's epistle, only in @John 1:4 it is what shone in Christ, and in John's epistle it is what shines in the saints. That is, the light that shone into our souls becomes life in our souls and in turn shines as "true light" to others.
A.S.L. How would you define the expression "true light"?
J.T. Well, it is to expose the false things that were coming in. John's epistle is to show that the life was a tangible thing; it was not something abstract or theoretic, but tangible. It says in the first chapter, that which we have seen, heard, and handled concerning the word of life, but in chapter 2, it is in the saints. In measure, what it was in Him, it is in the saints.
A.S.L. "Which thing is true in him and in you" (@1 John 2:8).
J.T. The extension of the testimony was dispersing the darkness.
A.S.L. Then the true light has already shone.
J.T. It is shining in the saints. Of course, Christ is the life always, but John's epistle deals with it as in the saints.
Rem. Is the distinction between *declaration*  and *revelation*  of great importance? I feel the Lord is helping us as to this.
J.T. I think it is, because the import of *declaration*  is to bring God out; it is not to remove a veil. The original word for *revelation*  implies a veil removed
{8}
that what it concealed may be seen. *Declaration*  is God brought out, which is a different idea, and has in view our limitations, that we are not capable of looking in to see all that is there in the Deity. But the "only-begotten Son" brings God out, declares Him.
A.S.L. Would that be at all analogous to the verse in @Colossians 1, where He is spoken of as the "image of the invisible God" (@Colossians 1:15)?
J.T. That would carry representation too, but *declaration*  is a strong word, involving that God is brought out.
Ques. Would you connect *declaration*  with God and *revelation*  with the Father?
J.T. "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him", @John 1:18. The *declaration*  includes both I think. I should not like to leave out what is conveyed in the title Father, because in John's gospel the Father is the name of God which conveys grace and affection; He does not judge anyone.
Ques. Would the declaration of God include what was ministered by the Lord during His life as well as in His death?
J.T. It would include both. God is there, and no one but the Son could declare Him. The Person was Himself divine. So all that God is, was brought out. Whether it were understood or not, there it was.
S.J.B.C. Do you think the pronoun "him" is left out (verse 18) because it is the declaration of the Father and the Son? The article is left out in regard to God; it is an abstract statement, and the *declaration*  has been made as far as our spiritual capacity can take it in.
J.T. The article is before 'Father'; I think the Father is there very definitely. The *declaration*  of God involves the Father and the Son. The Declarer has part in what is declared. The omissions you mention and the emphasis on 'he' in the verse, place the *declaration*  and the Declarer in greater prominence. For the
{9}
*declaration*  of God a divine Person came into manhood and was owned in it as Son. The preposition "in" (Greek *eis*  ) in verse 18 indicates that the Lord as Man had come into the position spoken of.
H.F.N. Would you say a little more in regard to your remark as to *revelation* ?
J.T. Many have the idea that it is just the removal of a veil for us to look in. Of course, there is revelation, as the Lord says, "No one knows who the Son is but the Father, and who the Father is but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son is pleased to reveal him" @Luke 10:22. There is the thought of seeing the Father, but it is in the Son, in Christ as Man, that we see the Father. It is not a veil removed for us to look into the relations of deity before incarnation; the suggestion is, of what is there *in the Son*. It involves what is most precious. The Lord calls the attention of certain persons to the Father in such a way that the Father is seen. There is a difference between Christ revealing the Father to certain persons, and the Father being in Him to be seen by all. The latter would be included in @John 1: 18. Compare @John 14:8 - 11 and @John 15:24.
F.S.M. *Revelation*  is connected rather with the sense of sight, whereas *declaration*  is more what is heard.
J.T. The idea in *declaration*  could be illustrated by a case at court. The case is fully set out so as to be intelligible to all concerned. The matter in question is brought out by certain substantial, incontrovertible evidences. The declaration of God is public. It is not to certain persons only.
D.L.H. Is there not in *declaration*  the idea of showing in a public way? The word used in @Romans 3:25 is "showing forth". God's righteousness is shown in the mercy seat. It is there for all.
J.T. It is there whether people see it or not. The word in @John 1:18 is the strongest as to what we are
{10}
dealing with, that is God coming out, not only in Christ in a personal sense, but in certain things that happened.
J.J. Is there the thought of interpretation in @John 1:18?
J.T. Interpretation is not strong enough as to what is in view.
A.S.L. Is it not the idea of setting forth or making manifest?
J.T. It is the idea of bringing a thing out to where you are; whether it is to your intelligence or to your heart, the thing is brought out. God is declared by the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father.
M.W.B. With regard to revelation does it imply a work in the soul, as referring to some specific person?
J.T. I think so. It is the Lord selecting persons to reveal to. The word is used in the last book of the Bible, but it is the same idea; it is the "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show to his bondmen", @Revelation 1:1. It conveys the restricted thought -- to certain persons.
A.S.L. There are the two words in @John 17, "manifested" and "made known".
J.T. The manifestation in verse 6 would be the Father's name made evident so as to be readily grasped; "made known" would be that the Lord had instructed the disciples as to it, and would do so. Verse 26 is deeper than verse 6.
Eu.R. Would you say a word as to light in distinction to what you have been saying as to revelation? Is light more limited?
J.T. Well, it is the light of life. Life is necessarily more limited than God; that is all I was thinking. Life is spoken of by itself, and *this*  helps us to understand John's epistle. John's gospel is God, the epistle rather the life.
Eu.R. In chapter 3 it says, "Light is come into the world", @John 3:19.
{11}
J.T. Christ was the "true light". John was not the true light: "The true light was that which, coming into the world, lightens every man", @John 1:9. It sheds light on everything, and that is the Person of Jesus; God shone in Him.
Ques. "They ... have known truly that I came out from thee, and have believed that thou sentest me"; (@John 17:8) would that be declaration?
J.T. The Lord is telling His Father about the disciples, how they had come into things. What He says of the disciples in @John 17, while involving *declaration*,  is more *revelation*. I am sure the Lord would help us as to the distinction between the glory contemplated (verse 14) and the glory manifested (verse 18). I believe the glory contemplated is the secret of coming into the economy that is opened up to us in this gospel, the relations between the Father and the Son, the beautiful relations and affections that were seen, and then the truth that subsisted in Him, so that in His public service those who companied with Him were intelligent as to what He was doing and saying. But when He begins to perform signs He is calling attention to Himself in a public way, that He might be believed on.
Ques. Would you say what was indicated in the "beginning of signs"?
J.T. It was on the third day, as you will notice. Therefore, it is a *complete*  testimony, and comes in, I think, as confirmatory of the teaching that is opened up in chapter 1. Chapters 1 and 2 stand together as an introduction to the book, so that this being on the third day directs us back to the other days. There is development in the truth that had been the testimony of John the baptist leading to followers of Jesus. That was the beginning of discipleship and these disciples begin to gather other disciples. In the first instance Andrew finds Simon, pointing to material for the church, then the Lord finds Philip, and Philip finds
{12}
Nathanael, pointing to the remnant of Israel. Then the third day is the culmination of all this, in which you have not relief for man indicated, but positive blessing; that is, the first sign is joy brought in. The Lord has come, not merely to set things right, but to bring in positive joy, and thus "he manifested his glory and his disciples believed on him".
Ques. Would you say that the signs indicate the great moral results that flow from verse 18 of chapter 1?
J.T. Quite so. The millennial day will show the great results of what is indicated in chapter 1.
Ques. Would this first sign manifesting His glory embrace both the millennial day and the present day of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes, Scripture has always a moral significance. Our concern now is to see not only the primary application of any sign but its present bearing, and I think we ought to be prepared for positive joy, that the Lord can bring in the very best at the end.
J.J. You said at the beginning that the occurrences were mainly in reference to Judaea; why is this in Cana of Galilee?
J.T. I think it is to help us as to the position of the testimony now. Whilst His activities are mainly in relation to the public body, there is what is in Cana of Galilee, and the real thing goes on there. Compare @Isaiah 9:1. So the first three signs are in Galilee, but it is as having come out of Judaea. It is an important matter that as having come up out of Judaea He performs these signs. It opens up the position for the moment, that there is something outside the great public system; the Lord honours that and brings in positive blessing there in household conditions.
P.L. Would that be Philadelphia?
J.T. That would be the bearing of it.
Ques. Would you connect reproach with Galilee?
J.T. That is what it means, viewed from the stand-point of Jerusalem, and so at the end of the sign, the
{13}
Lord is said to have "descended to Capernaum, he and his mother and his brethren and his disciples; and there they abode not many days". I think the allusion is to the Lord recognising the Jewish remnant. The sign relates to the millennium; but the subsequent period is "not many days", that is the Lord's relations with the remnant for a little while before He takes up the church. So the next part of the chapter alludes to the truth of the assembly, but those few days which He spent with His mother and brethren and disciples, bear on the position in the early part of Acts. But it is only a few days awaiting Paul's ministry, which brought those few days to an end.
C.H.W. Does the thought of His glory manifested there refer to Him as Christ the Son of God? I was wondering whether it is contrasted with the glory of God in chapter 11.
J.T. "His glory" here is general, giving character to all the signs. In this connection His disciples are said to have believed on Him.
Rem. Those "not many days" would be practically ended when Paul says, "Lo, we turn to the gentiles", @Acts 13:46.
J.T. That is what I understand. Christ rebukes His mother because she associated herself with Him on natural lines, yet He does recognise her in the testimony, for He descends to Capernaum with her, which I think refers to His ministry in a sphere of *special*  testimony. Compare @Matthew 11:23.
Rem. The connection you make between "not many days" at Capernaum and the early part of Acts is most interesting and instructive, and seems to indicate the line of the operation of the Spirit which prepares for the assembly to emerge out of the remnant, and so be ready for Paul's ministry.
J.T. That is what I understand; and then the cleansing of the temple which the Lord calls His Father's house, is another reference to that. They said it was forty and six years in building, which was quite to be
{14}
expected from them, for the natural man makes much of what he has. But the Lord did not intend to refer to Herod's great structure. He did not mean to honour Herod at all; He was thinking of His Father's house. They said it took forty and six years to build, but He spoke of the temple of His body. Now we are coming into something that fits in with Paul; it is the *inner*  side, something that would contain the whole mind of God, which Israel never did nor could. So, when He was raised from the dead His disciples believed the Scriptures and the things which Jesus had said. You have the full bearing of the Scriptures and the things that Jesus said at the end of the chapter, which I think brings us on to ground on which there is preparation for the assembly.
E.J.McB. I was very interested in your reference to the Lord remaining some days with the remnant of Israel. It was rather intended to lead them out to the new thing.
J.T. "Not many days" does not suggest that the circumstances suited His heart; He had something more than that before Him. It was a combination of His mother and brethren and disciples; His disciples come last. Presently the first two disappear and the disciples will be everything, for that is the point; His disciples believed on Him, not yet His mother and His brethren.
P.L. In @Acts 1 the disciples are referred to and then His mother and brethren; the order is reversed.
J.T. The order in @Acts 1 is really the apostles first, those who represented Christ, and I think that Mary and the Lord's brethren in the upper room, mentioned last, have a spiritual significance. They are where they can be influenced and moulded, and withal they had, because of their special relations with Him, much that even Peter could not have. This especially refers to His mother. It is when we are in accord with our
{15}
relative importance that we are of true value. The upper room in @Acts 1 has the assembly in view.
E.J.McB. Do I understand that the secret of John lies in the fact that we have a joy that is beyond any known joy here -- the new wine?
J.T. Yes. That is the first sign which shows the character of the present position. It is not merely a question of setting things right, but that there is positive joy for all, and if we are not in possession of that there will be very little testimony. The faith of the disciples is in relation to that joy, and it is brought about by vessels being filled with water up to the brim. And as they are filled, the Lord says, "Draw out now". It is a fitting sign to be first, but in a moral sense it indicates what is happening. "Draw out now" from such full water-pots, and you have the very best wine.
Ques. Why is it six?
J.T. It is beyond five, which is the human number. I suppose there is allusion to something to be *added*  for completion; the addition of the water is the complete exercise.
P.L. Would you have a suggestion of this in Nehemiah, you have the purifying and then the singing, the great joy that follows?
J.T. You have there what corresponds. This sign throws light on the whole inquiry. We are dealing with positive blessing, brought in on the third day. "His disciples believed on him"; it does not say His mother or His brethren did.
Ques. What would be the idea of the vessels being stone vessels?
J.T. I think to give you the idea of permanency.
Eu.R. Is there importance in Mary's word, "Whatever he may say to you, do".
J.T. She qualifies there, in saying that, but there is nothing said as to her believing. It is His disciples; that is the idea.
{16}
G.J.E. Would you say in connection with what we have in chapters 1 and 2 of the gospel of John and the joy indicated, that it is carried forward in the first chapter of the epistle where it says "that your joy may be full" (@1 John 1:4)?
J.T. That suggestion is helpful and opens up something of the prominence of the water in the epistle; the water is given before the blood. Coming into the joy of eternal life begins with the water; the vessels being filled up to the brim, the Lord turns what is in them into the occasion of joy.
Ques. You said the water comes before the blood; you are referring to the order in John's epistle?
J.T. Yes, it throws light on the position as was remarked. I believe the difficulty in entering on eternal life is from the non-application of the water, or, if it be applied, not filling up to the brim. Filling up to the brim means the exclusion of all else. It is what purifies; the stone vessels were for purification.
Ques. Then do you connect the joy with the joy of eternal life?
J.T. Surely; it is the millennial day which is the period for the display of eternal life. It is commanded in Zion, and the nations go into it.
Ques. Then would chapter 6 where it is a question of eating His flesh and drinking His blood be for the continuance of it?
J.T. Quite so; to support us in it *now* .
J.J. Do you think verse 10 covers the whole of the present period from beginning to end?
J.T. "Every man sets on first the good wine, and when men have well drunk, then the inferior; thou hast kept the good wine till now". In its present bearing it covers the whole period, but it is properly millennial in its application. It is the public thing. The millennial day is the day of eternal life, and therefore it is the best kept to the last; but the Lord would have *us*  have the best, although we get it in a different way. We get it in
{17}
a *faith*  period which is the time of special blessedness. They get it in the time of *sight*. In the book of Revelation there are seven blessednesses available. Special blessednesses are of course above the ordinary, and while this sign primarily alludes to the millennial day, believers have it now. As the Lord says, "Blessed they who have not seen and have believed", @John 20:29. One golden thread running through John's gospel is faith, the person who believes misses nothing; he gets the very best, even the companionship of the Father, and the Son, chapter 14:23.
Ques. Is the expression "Draw out now" for our present enjoyment?
J.T. Exactly; it is a question of drawing out now what is there.
Ques. Why did the Lord have to be invited? What follows is consequent upon that, is it not?
J.T. The passage shows how the Lord in His service takes advantage of ordinary circumstances. This was a very ordinary circumstance in Cana of Galilee and the Lord took advantage of it. It is just possible that He was linked in some way with the family by personal relations, but He uses the opportunity to bring in the best.
S.J.B.C. Going back to the water for a moment, do you think this chapter is life out of death?
J.T. It is purification; it was "according to the purification of the Jews". It is the water that purifies; the idea of purification in a vessel, that is, in you or in me. It is the idea of the application of the death of Christ so that the Lord can change it into an occasion of joy, and that would be life.
H.F.N. Does the best involve the whole of John's ministry as reserved for the saints in these last days?
J.T. That is just the point. In this first sign in which the Lord manifests His glory that we might believe on Him, we begin with what is best and that is kept to the last.
{18}
M.W.B. In that connection what link do you see between the glory manifested here and the glory which they beheld?
J.T. The glory they contemplated was a question of the relations between Him and His Father, but this glory comes out *in the Lord's service*. The former is the greater of the two; it is linked up with His Father.
M.W.B. I wondered whether the wine would imply the enjoyment connected with the intimacy of that relationship into which we may be brought now through redemption.
J.T. I think that is right. It may be carried intelligently and profitably into John's epistle. We are not to be content with anything less than the fulness of joy.
{19}
THE GLORY OF THE SON OF GOD (2)
@John 4:46 - 54
J.T. Our remarks this morning reached the idea of the temple; the Lord raising His body viewed in this way pointing to what comes out in the apostle Paul's ministry, both in its Corinthian and Ephesian aspects, not that the church is formally introduced, but the idea in the word translated temple is that the light of God is there. Chapters 1 and 2 form an introduction, showing how the truth of the gospel reaches on to the truth of the temple, in relation to which the whole scope of Scripture is apprehended, so that it says, "When therefore he was raised from among the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and believed the scripture and the word which Jesus had spoken", (@John 2:22). Then chapters 3 and 4 present the truth radically, that is, new birth, dealing with the man from top to bottom; and chapter 4 dealing with the Spirit, not given in the highest intelligent order in which He works in us, but in relation to the lower affections; and the sign which we have read, connects with the idea of a believer's household. This doubtless has in view the spiritual house of chapter 8, where the thought of the house is introduced, without being formally stated to be the house of God. It is said in chapter 8 that the Son abides in it for ever, verse 35. We may be helped now by having in view that chapter 4 brings out the effect of the light on certain individuals so that they become sons of light, the woman in regard of her body and the nobleman in regard of his house.
Ques. Just what do you mean by lower affections?
J.T. Those organs with which water has to do. It is not the Spirit as viewed in the sense of "breath" as in chapter 20, but the Spirit in the sense of 'water' having
{20}
deliverance in view. In chapter 20 the breathing contemplates representation, the disciples being sent out, but chapter 4 is more deliverance: it is living water; the woman understood that her body was to be a vessel.
A.F.M. Would you mind distinguishing between the water in the waterpots and the water indicated by the Lord to the woman?
J.T. In the first case, as we saw this morning, the use of the vessels was for purification; they allude to persons as receiving that which brings about a change in them. It is the idea of a complete change from one substance to another. Chapter 4 contemplates permanent *satisfaction*,  as drinking the water that Christ gives we never thirst (verse 14). Whilst change takes place, it is not in the thing, but in its activities; it becomes in the believer "a fountain of water, springing up", @John 4:14. Then I think the importance of the believer's household, as in John's gospel, ought to be noted, because the setting is in relation to the Lord's sojourn in Samaria; as to which, nothing is said, of anyone entertaining Him; there is nothing as to suitable accommodation.
Ques. Does the fact that it is emphasised that this was again in Cana of Galilee suggest that the one is the carrying on of the other?
J.T. I think so. It is a sort of sequel; it was after He came out of Judaea; showing that it is something outside the realm of ordinary religious profession. "The Galileans received him", (@John 4:45).
P.L. Does it link up with the two believing households in the second and third epistles of John -- that of the elect lady, and Gaius?
J.T. The idea is carried through there very clearly; here it is, "He believed, himself and his whole house", verse 53.
A.F.M. Is there a connection between the woman receiving the water, the men of Samaria, and the believing household?
{21}
J.T. There is clearly. The Samaritans were enlightened through the woman. They desired Him to stay there and He stayed two days, but there is nothing said about suitable accommodation for Him there.
A.F.M. Do they not say something more than the woman? It says, "When therefore the Samaritans came to him they asked him to abide with them, and he abode there two days. And more a great deal believed on account of his word; and they said to the woman, It is no longer on account of thy saying that we believe, for we have heard him ourselves, and we know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world". (@John 4:40 - 42) Was not that a point of advance to bring about assembly conditions in Samaria?
J.T. No doubt, but there is nothing to indicate any accommodation for the Lord as yet; it is said, "He abode *there*  two days". There may be reception of light and appreciation of Christ in an evangelical way as "the Saviour of the world", without suitable accommodation. Of course the Lord valued the desire of the Samaritans, but the setting of the believing household here is significant. The Lord is dealing with the truth in relation to man's whole moral being in chapter 3 and the body in chapter 4; so that the whole person is involved in the two chapters, and then we have a believing household. We cannot have a believing household save as we are dealt with radically, by getting to the root of things. Our being has to be dealt with in the new birth of chapter 3 and in the living water of chapter 4. The body is affected so that the woman becomes a son of light in this respect. It is said in chapter 12, "While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light" (@John 12:36). I think she becomes a son of light in regard of her body, and the nobleman becomes a son of light in regard of his house; but the body involves that it is a question of the person, whether one becomes a vessel of what is spiritual. The fact that the woman *left*  her waterpot indicates that
{22}
she understood this.
J.J. Would it be right to say that the household in @John 4 corresponds with Paul's ministry to the Corinthians, which you were speaking of as the temple of His body, and then the household in chapter 12 with Ephesians? Are those two households the outcome of the two lines?
J.T. Well, we have the households of Chloe and Stephanas in Corinthians; they were reliable persons. In the household of Chloe it was shown that there was full sympathy as regards the conditions in the assembly at Corinth, so that what was discerned by those of that house was the state of division amongst the Corinthians, though they did not say anything about it in their letter to Paul -- nor was anything said about the wicked person in chapter 5. That chapter is based on a report, by whom we do not know, but chapter 1 speaks of the *showing*  of the division at Corinth, which is a most important matter. It was the real difficulty there, so that I have no doubt the idea of the nobleman's household in chapter 4 may be taken to represent what was at Corinth. In this respect the Lord had something for Himself there, and it linked on with Paul. The house in chapter 12 of this gospel is not named; but it was a house in which things could be done for Christ without much being said. A great affair took place as the Lord reached Bethany, but it was not marked by words. It was a place of silent spirituality, so that I think we may see the import in this way, of believing households.
F.I. The condition in the house here was the result of the son being made to *live*. What is the significance of that?
J.T. I think we have to note the thought of the son. There are two words used. The Holy Spirit says that the man besought the Lord in regard of his son (verse 47). *He*  speaks of him as a 'child' to the Lord, but the Lord calls him son (verse 50). When the man arrived
{23}
at his house it says, "The father therefore knew that it was in that hour in which Jesus said to him. Thy son lives; and he believed". The idea of a nobleman and his child is dropped at the end; it is now the father and the son (verse 53). The radical truth of chapters 3 and 4 prepare for the believing household. Of course, much more is involved, but it is remarkable that this second sign comes in at the end of the instruction of chapters 3 and 4, so that it is not now a nobleman, a distinguished person in this world, whose son was healed, *but a father*.
H.M.S. Would you tell us what is the force of the answer of the Lord Jesus to the nobleman, "Unless ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe", because we might have thought that the very fact of the father coming to the Lord Jesus was a sufficient proof of his belief?
J.T. I think it is a *general*  statement as to how things were, "unless *ye*  see". The Lord would convey to us that we ought to be able to believe without signs and wonders. Of course the signs are to the intent that we should believe, but as we increase in spirituality we believe things without signs.
H.E.S. Is the idea in John's gospel generally that all that is natural is to be set aside so that what is spiritual may be introduced?
J.T. That is what I thought we might note specially; that is, in these two chapters, the dealing with what we are morally, from top to bottom.
E.J.McB. Do you think that the woman was purified by the word the Lord had spoken to her? and that the nobleman represented the corresponding conditions of family life in the home, brought to pass by the Lord coming back to the city where He had brought in the true joy, and then putting it into the family setting?
J.T. Yes. The believing household in this chapter will be seen later as bearing on the general position, so I think what has just been suggested ought to be weighed
{24}
over; that is, the dealing with the moral being radically in its entirety, and then the person in relation to his body, because unless these are understood we may have light in our households, but not the simple, primary thought of God -- the father and the son. We finish with this in verse 53. The Father is a primary thought, and belongs to God, and so is the Son.
P.L. Would the thought of the circumcision of his household by Abraham answer a little to chapter 3 in that way, and would the relationships of father and son seen in Abraham and Isaac be the result?
J.T. That is very good. In @Genesis 17 circumcision is introduced into the house. There was no Isaac there as yet, but the principle of circumcision is introduced, and the test would be: Will Abraham maintain it? "God", it says, "went up", having "left off talking with him", @Genesis 17:22. He broke off the conversation as if it would be resumed, but that it would remain for Jehovah to see whether the resulting conditions would be suitable. Well, we are told that Abraham circumcised *all*  the males in his house; it was thorough. That is, the house is now on the principle, not of the flesh, but of the Spirit. "We are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh", (@Philippians 3:3). Then, following on that in chapter 18, Abraham is in the tent door in the heat of the day, showing that he was not governed by fleshly feelings; he was not overcome by the heat; he was in vigour, and Jehovah comes. Three men come to him, and then you have the full thought of Isaac introduced. His house is right, but the world is not right, and so the destruction of Sodom follows. We see in this gospel that God intends to put houses right. He will put the world right too, that is to say, the judgment of it will come, so that it should be a suitable place for Isaac. But in the meantime the principle of the world to come is to be seen in the believer's house, in the father and the son. Therefore the importance of considering
{25}
chapter 3: "Except any one be born anew", born throughout as we might call it. It is not merely another time, but a radical dealing with the person. "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God", (@John 3:3) nor enter into it.
W.C.G. Does it correspond with the word in the epistle, "If what ye have heard from the beginning abides in you, ye also shall abide in the Son and in the Father. And this is the promise which he has promised us, life eternal" (@1 John 2:24, 25)? Is it on that line?
J.T. I think so. It is the permanency of divine dealing with us in our moral being, and then in a judicial way, the Son of man lifted up (chapter 3:14,15). Then there is the competent witness to bring in heavenly things; and in chapter 4: the body of the believer; because what we are morally is expressed in our bodies, and the body has to be dealt with. "The body is dead on account of sin", we are told in @Romans 8:10, which enters into chapter 4, so that the woman understands now that she is a vessel herself. She had brought out the waterpot for water, but she does not take it back with her. She leaves it at the well and goes back herself and goes to the men of the city. That would mean her body was dead; she had no fear of them. She is in power, she is evidently superior now to the influences that hitherto would have damaged her.
H.E.S. Is it not the thought that now she is free from natural influences and thoughts and is moved only by what is spiritual?
J.T. Yes. The history of the woman has to be taken into account if you are to understand the force of the use of her body, that is, the body is dead, and without making any mention of the body, she leaves her waterpot, clearly implying that she herself could carry things, that she was a vessel of what the Lord was speaking of.
F.C.H. What would be the bearing of water in chapter 3? "Except any one be born of water and of Spirit", @John 3:5.
{26}
J.T. It is the testimony of death entering into the fibre of our being. It is a divine operation. It is not new creation, but *birth*,  involving things in *principle*,  as in a babe, to be developed later.
A.M.H. Are you including more in chapter 3 than the sovereign act of God in relation to new birth? You referred to @Romans 8. Do you include the first seven chapters in @John 4?
J.T. Chapters 3 and 4 enter into @Romans 1 - 8. Here the new birth is the sovereign act of God, but it involves a process in me, in that it is "born of water and of Spirit". The person is in some sense responsible as acted upon. It is not the idea of being dead and made to live; it is the idea of birth, which no one can define. But there it is in its effects. It is a mysterious thing, but the babe carries all the members that are to be developed.
A.M.H. You say it brings in an element of responsibility?
J.T. In the sense that it is not a dead person made to live, nor one created, as in Adam's case. Adam was not born at all, he was created; but here it is birth.
Ques. Does the water involve that the intelligence of the person is taken account of?
J.T. Well, I think there is something in that. I should not like to say much beyond what I have said. It is not a dead person acted upon, but a person with a moral being, and this transaction of God must affect the person throughout. It involves what is seen in a birth, that is to say, all the elements are there that may be developed into a man.
S.J.B.C. The Lord said, "Except a man be born again". The individuality remains. It is the same person, so Nicodemus understood it that way: "How can a man be born when he is old" (@John 3:4)?
J.T. The personality remains. I do not like to build too much upon it, but it is the person who has been dealt with, a person with a previous history, and it is
{27}
anyone. "Except any one be born anew", whether it be a religious man, or otherwise, this must happen.
Eu.R. The Lord says, "That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit", @John 3:6. Would that give the idea of definiteness to what is born in that way?
J.T. Yes. It does not say that which is born of water is water; the water is just a testimony to the death of Christ, but *'Spirit'*  is positive, there is something there, and, I believe, all that will be developed later in the man.
Eu.R. What is the bearing of verse 16 upon it? "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal", @John 3:16.
J.T. That is, of course, the great testimony as to the love of God. The teaching runs into that, but the great features for us now as to our formation, are in the new birth and the lifting up of the Son of man. These are two radical ideas: ideas that deal with things, not in their effects, but at the roots. The understanding of these truths enables us to appropriate and enjoy the love of God and eternal life.
S.J.B.C. I suppose it would bring in the heavenly things afterwards, the Son of man being lifted up and eternal life.
J.T. The passage treats of God dealing with the moral question *thoroughly*. Much difficulty arises in souls because the truth of @John 3 and 4 is not understood.
G.W.W. Is your thought that this radical dealing with things has in view a complete moral change in the person?
J.T. Yes; the identity is the same, but he is completely changed, changed in the sense of a new texture in his moral being, and new things produced on the principle of birth. It is not a change as in @2 Corinthians 3, through something presented objectively. It is a
{28}
transaction inwardly which is seen in its effects. "The wind blows where it will", the Lord says, "and thou hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it comes and where it goes; thus is every one that is born of the Spirit". (@John 3:8) You cannot explain it, but there is a definite result manifest.
G.W.W. So the divine thought is, that moral effects will follow that action.
J.T. That is it. Then the uplifting of the Son of man deals with all that I come to realise as obnoxious to God -- the flesh. That is dealt with judicially in the cross, in the Lord Jesus being lifted up. Then, chapter 4 is the Spirit making all that a matter of known power in the soul, so that the person -- spirit, soul and body -- is secured for the testimony, because if I am not secured for the testimony I am not of much value morally. The point is to be secured for the testimony.
G.W.W. Does that touch on @2 Corinthians 3?
J.T. Well, it would, but John is dealing with what happens inside of us, as already said.
G.W.W. You were thinking of the perfect moral transformation that new birth has in view. I wondered whether chapter 4 might at all link on with that work in @2 Corinthians 3, the moral transformation that is effected by the Spirit.
J.T. There is a link, only the change in @2 Corinthians 3 is said to be the result of beholding the glory of the Lord.
A.S.L. Does Paul speak of new birth? Peter does.
J.T. Peter speaks of it in a more advanced way, as born by the word of God, @1 Peter 1:23.
A.S.L. Why do you think Paul does not speak of it?
J.T. Paul's ministry was toward the nations; it was not toward the Jewish world. John is dealing with the religious world. In this world, men pride themselves on being religious, but the Lord says, "Except any one be born anew"; it is to bring out the uselessness of the flesh, although most refined religiously.
{29}
A.S.L. Is that not why the Lord speaks of new birth to Nicodemus?
J.T. Yes. It is important to notice that it is the person that is dealt with. It is the whole moral being that is dealt with, and then corresponding with that, the body in chapter 4. It is expressed here in the fact that the woman left her waterpot.
D.L.H. When you speak of the body are you referring to the human body?
J.T. Yes, the woman's body.
D.L.H. Is not that referred to by the Lord when He says, "Shall be in him a well of water"? Does not that refer to the idea of the body?
J.T. Just so; the whole person is in view in the teaching of the chapter.
Ques. What had the Spirit in view when He said in chapter 2, "But he spoke of the temple of his body" (@John 2:21)?
J.T. The Lord had His own body in view; it was there that the whole mind of God was; not in the temple that Herod had built in forty and six years; it was in the Lord's own body that the light was, where all inquiry was to be made.
D.L.H. And the church has that character now.
J.T. It leads us on to Paul's ground in Corinthians and Ephesians. In @1 Corinthians 3 it is local, and in @Ephesians 2:21 it bears on the coming world.
Eu.R. In Corinthians the apostle brings the truth of the Spirit to bear on the bodies of believers @1 Corinthians 6.
J.J. Do you think the introduction of worship into chapter 4 is on account of what you have said -- that the whole man has been radically dealt with in chapter 3?
J.T. Yes. The new birth has in view that we should be brought into accord with God. God is a Spirit and is to be worshipped in spirit and in truth; hence that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.
J.J. You could not speak of worship apart from the clearance of the ground, which is seen in these chapters.
{30}
J.T. If you are to have worship, the outgoing of our affections Godward, you must see how essential it is to have the internals right. The psalmist calls upon 'all that is within' him to praise Jehovah (@Psalm 103:1). Think of that woman, of all the evil that had been within her; but now all is reversed. There is in principle purification, and the Spirit welling up, she could now call upon all that was within her to praise God. It is what is *within*  us. Those who understand anatomy could tell us something about our bodies, but I do not think anybody understands the human body but God, and the things inside us that are so wonderfully formed for God's praise -- the means of singing and all that, and those internal organs that act of themselves. How important it is that all should be purified and cleansed, so that every automatic, as well as every organ governed by the intelligence, should be called upon to praise God.
P.L. You get the expression, "I will praise thee, for I am fearfully, wonderfully made", @Psalm 139:14.
J.T. It says, "Curiously wrought in the lower parts of the earth" (verse 15). I believe it could be brought out that all the framework, all the cavities and membranes and so on, have been designed by God, that the believer might become a vessel of God's praise.
Rem. "Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service" (@Romans 12:1). I suppose the vessel of the woman in @John 4 would be an expression of that.
J.T. Exactly, and the Holy Spirit says that she went to the men of the city, which I think reminds us that Christ being in us "the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness" (@Romans 8:10). She was immune from their influences. Christ was now in her, so to speak. "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?"(@John 4:29)
{31}
A.S.L. So Peter could say, "Ye denied the Holy One and the Just", @Acts 14:3.
J.T. He was entirely free of the effect of his own denial of Him. If you are to bear witness you must be clear of the thing that had influenced you.
Ques. It says, "Go thy way". Is there instruction there for the obedience of faith? Does it suggest a new way?
J.T. It is simply 'go' here, but the passage says the man went his way. In Mark you have *the*  way, meaning that it is the only way, the one the Lord Himself was on; and you have that carried on into Acts. Of Saul it is said that, "if he found any who were of the way, both men and women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem";(@Acts 9:2) but here it is the man's way, meaning, I think, that the Lord had confidence in him, that he could be trusted.
W.W. Is it important that the man said, "Come down ere my child die", but Jesus said, "Go, thy *son*  lives"? Is this according to John's gospel, connected with the thought of life, rather than healing?
J.T. I think that is right. But before we come to that, there is the effect of the woman's testimony and the desire on the part of the Samaritans to have the Lord stay with them, but there is nothing said about a house or accommodation for Him. That is to say, He is regarded as the Christ, and sought after, and believed on, and said to be the "Saviour of the world", but there is nothing said as to suitable accommodation, and hence we have this second sign resulting in a believing household.
A.F.M. Would Lydia be a contrast in opening her house for the testimony at Philippi?
J.T. That is the idea exactly. The Lord opened her heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul, but she was not content to listen merely. She opened her house to Paul. We may say. So and so is in town, I will go and hear him. That is very good, but what
{32}
about suitable accommodation for him? Now the Samaritans went to Him and believed on Him and sought to have Him in the place. That was very well, but there is nothing said of accommodation. That is a very important side to the position, and I believe that is why this second sign comes in, so that you have living accommodation, a believing house with a father and a son.
F.S.M. Do I understand that in each sign there is some distinctive glory of the Son of God which would enhance Him in the vision of our souls, and which signifies some phase of His personal glory? In the first sign it was the provision of joy. What would be the special feature in relation to the Son of God in connection with the second sign?
J.T. I think it lies in the idea of father and son. "Thy son lives". On the ground of social status death was there, but it is no longer a nobleman and his child but a father and a son living. There is the suggestion of divine relations and affections in the house of God.
F.S.M. Is it a household in life?
J.T. Exactly, but I think it is life and dignity, not simply a child living but a *son*  living. We reach the thought of God in this way -- the Father and the Son.
D.L.H. When you speak of accommodation are you thinking of accommodation for Christ?
J.T. Yes, either for Him, or the testimony, or for others, such as Paul. For instance, as was remarked, the Lord opened the heart of Lydia to attend to the things spoken by Paul. Luke and Silas were there, but it was Paul. You have thus a woman whose house was available to him who specially represented the testimony of God. You get there a person who would attend to what Paul said. What a house that was; what holy converse would go on there. What would she talk about? About what Paul said. So it is a household setting of things in Philippi. Then you have the jailer. After he was converted, it says that "he laid the table
{33}
for them", @Acts 16:34. He did not bring Paul and Silas in to give them something to eat merely, but he washed their stripes and laid the table, indicating that the household was in dignity. His service to the apostle was a dignified service; the accommodation was suitable. That is what I think we should see here, as the result of this sign.
Ques. Is this thought of the Father and the Son the same in character as we have in chapter 1:14: "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father"?
J.T. I think the Lord wishes to accustom us in our houses to the economy of the Father and the Son; that is John's gospel. In the end of chapter 3 you have, "The Father loves the Son and has given all things to be in his hand", @John 3:35. So the economy is formally set up, and now you come into a believing house and you have a father and a son. There is some reflection of the divine economy in that house.
P.L. And what a living son we see in Onesimus returning and Paul saying, "Prepare me also a lodging", @Philemon 22.
J.T. Onesimus would be no longer a servant but a son.
P.L. There are suitable conditions now, and accommodation for Paul.
J.T. How delightful would be the incoming of Paul to Philemon's house with Onesimus there! The conditions would be entirely suitable. After Paul leaves the prison at Philippi he goes to Lydia and sees the brethren.
H.M.S. In speaking of the work of God in this household is it the more remarkable because the man was a courtier? You spoke about John presenting the word in religious darkness; is there not also there the great element of worldliness? He may have been a Herodian, but the blessing extends all through the house; you have the father and the son, and then the servants are evidently affected.
{34}
J.T. It is the Lord dealing with what you might call the social side. This man does not represent the religious side but the social side; he was a courtier. He would go to court and would have correct manners, but now all is changed, and it is a father and a son. There are the manners of the divine economy, the economy of the Father and the Son.
G.W.W. And in the house, so that the distinctiveness of this new thing in Christianity is to find this moral answer in the household.
J.T. Exactly; it is not Christ and the assembly. John is not dealing with that, but with the economy of the Father and the Son, and it is that which is to be reflected in believing households.
H.F.N. Are the households in John on a higher spiritual level than in the other gospels? Does John lift them on to an entirely spiritual level?
J.T. Exactly. We have that here unmistakably, and then in chapter 12 the house filled with the odour of the ointment.
H.E.S. Is it the idea that this spiritual dignity that is coming in transcends all religious or social dignity?
J.T. Just so, and witnessed in *believers*.
A.F.M. Would you mind saying a word about the fever? It says, "Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him".
J.T. I suppose that, like the condition in Peter's house, it is a condition of restlessness.
F.W.W. What is involved in believing here?
J.T. It is *general*,  the word is, "He believed, himself and his whole house". The idea of believing had now become current and was understood; so if we say now that a person is a believer, we understand what is meant. It rather emphasises what we were saying, that the truth was making headway.
F.W.W. The truth was now becoming characteristic of households.
{35}
J.T. It says, "Himself and his whole house".
Ques. In chapter 2 it says, "Many believed on his name, beholding his signs which he wrought. But Jesus himself did not trust himself to them",(@John 2:23,24) and here you have, "Unless ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe". Now it comes to the point that he does believe with all his house. Would that indicate an advance?
J.T. I think so; it goes further than the jailer's faith. He believed in relation to his house, but I think the faith here is attributed to every one in this man's house. "Himself and his *whole*  house".
J.J. This morning you referred to the days; here it seems to be a question of hours. You have the sixth hour at the beginning of the chapter, and then the seventh hour.
J.T. Well, hours count. They do not come into the division of time in @Genesis 1; it is simply day and night, but John remarks considerably on hours. I suppose he used the Roman way of reckoning time. Then the Lord said, "Are there not twelve hours in the day?"(@John 11:9) On this day there was a great work done in this particular hour and the man took notice of it. It reminds us of the importance of detail in divine things.
W.R.P. Does the believing of verse 53 go beyond the believing of verse 50?
J.T. I am glad you call attention to that, because in verse 50 the Lord said, "Go, thy son lives. And the man believed the word which Jesus said to him, and went his way". But now in verse 53 it says, "The father therefore knew that it was in that hour in which Jesus said to him. Thy son lives; and he believed, himself and his whole house". I think it is in keeping with the idea in John of progressive faith. It is a question in John, among other things, of the work of God, and the man in chapter 9 is illustrative of this. It is progressive, and we are shown in that chapter the progress of the truth in a man's soul. It is very fine to see a man progressing and the light spreading to his house.
{36}
Ques. Is that seen in Timothy's mother? She believed as to the progress of things.
J.T. She was a *believing*  woman; she would believe the testimony as it came to her; whatever came from God she would accept.
W.C.G. The great woman of Shunem made room for the prophet and got a living son @2 Kings 4.
H.M.S. Do you think this man had faith in the Saviour's power, which brought him to Jesus, and he believed His bare word, and then afterwards he believed on the Lord's Person, so that the sign had its full effect in his soul?
J.T. I think so. If you went into this man's house you would find he was, in a general way, a believer. I mean, he would not eliminate from his faith certain features of the truth as some do, as for instance household baptism. He would be a believer of any testimony God gave. Like Lydia and the things spoken by Paul, he would attend to those things. That is what I apprehend is meant by the second reference to believing; I think it is progressive.
D.L.H. Would you get something similar in 1 Peter where they tasted that the Lord is gracious and then, "To whom coming, a living stone, cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious, yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house" (@1 Peter 2:4,5)? Is that anything corresponding to what we have here?
J.T. That is a very good scripture to bear out the thought of progress being made. Having "tasted that the Lord is gracious", then you move towards Him, and are "being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ", @1 Peter 2:3,5.
Ques. Would what you are saying about believing lead to the remark in the close of chapter 20? "That ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name", @John 20:31.
{37}
J.T. Exactly; this is an illustration. If the sign led this man to believe and his whole house, what about me and my house? That is the point. So that in chapter 12, the Lord said, "While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light". @John 12:36 I think we see through these chapters sons of light. This man is a son of light in relation to his house. I want to be a son of light in relation to my body, and then in relation to my house.
P.L. So would you say in regard of John the evangelist that he was a son of light in relation to his house in that the Lord could commit His mother to him?
J.T. That is very beautiful; he "took her to his own home", @John 19:27. The Lord must have had the fullest confidence in that house, but, mark you, she was to be there as *John's*  mother. She was not to be a visitor or one cared for by charity, but there as his own mother.
Rem. It is all the more beautiful because she had sons of her own. The Lord did not send her to their house.
J.T. The apostle John must have had an immense advantage in having the Lord's mother in the capacity of his mother. There it is a mother and son, but here a father and son.
H.D'A.C. The faith of this man was limited in the first case to just believing the word that Jesus had spoken, but in the second case there is no limit.
J.T. It is the general thought. If you went into this man's house, you would find he would be attending to all the things that were current as coming from Christ; the things that were unfolded were matters of consequence to him.
G.W.W. There would be a great difference between the state of the household in verse 50 and in verse 53; things would be very different, so that you would not expect to find in verse 50 the conditions that were in verse 53.
{38}
J.T. Just so; the servants were cognisant of the thing; they were in it. "Already, as he was going down, his servants met him and brought him word saying. Thy child lives. He enquired therefore from them the hour at which he got better. And they said to him. Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him". They knew; they were not careless servants in this matter. Hours count in the things of God, as well as days, weeks and years. John says, "It is the last hour" @1 John 2:18, and it denotes a crisis.
Ques. In verse 47 it speaks of the son being about to die; would that refer to @Romans 8? "If ye live according to flesh, ye are about to die" (verse 13), and the apostle goes on to speak about the "spirit of adoption".
J.T. Just so. He did not die, but he was about to die. I suppose it is the state of things marking Christians around us.
F.W.W. Would a similar process to this go on in our own souls as the Lord's glory is manifested to us? There is a great deal of difference between a dying child and a living son.
J.T. Just so. The effect of the ministry of Christ at the present time, is to bring us into dignity -- the position of sons.
{39}
THE GLORY OF THE SON OF GOD (3)
@John 5:1 - 32
J.T. I would suggest that we consider this chapter in relation to the Lord's service in the public profession in modern times. This sign is not a sequel as the two earlier signs are; it is a new feature, and introduces the great subject of the Lord's relations with His Father in His public service. It is a unique chapter in the gospel, and serves as an occasion to consider the relations of the divine Persons in their operations. The scene of the service is Jerusalem, not as yet abandoned by God, but rather where there were still interventions of divine mercy. The intervention of Christ in this scene in this manifest way, making a man completely whole, serves to bring out what Christendom is in its public aspect and profession; and that the work of grace in relation to it, though perfectly done, may end in no moral issue or result for God. So divine Persons themselves are brought into evidence as acting of themselves and by themselves, not mediately but directly, as if to remind us that divine activities will go on to the end whatever happens.
Rem. You have in mind that there was no moral fruit resulting in this man who received the benefit, as there was, for instance, in the blind man in chapter 9, but that the sovereign activities of God go on irrespective of the result.
J.T. I think that is one lesson in the chapter, that although there were no outward permanent results, divine Persons go on in their activities in grace. In chapter 9 we see there is a result in the blind man which leads through the flock in chapter 10 up to the family in chapter 11, which is an encouraging side, because it shows that if one act of divine grace in the
{40}
public sphere may not result in anything for God, divine Persons go on until there *is*  something. The exercise begun in the blind man has its culmination in the early verses of chapter 12.
The man in our chapter is not detached from the current religious system; the Lord finds him in the temple. There is no thought of his coming into suffering because of his witness for Christ. In that way it may be applicable to what has taken place in the profession leading up to the last days. The man remains attached to his system instead of suffering with Jesus, and so the Lord has to say to him, "Sin no more, that something worse do not happen to thee". That is the position; something worse will come. But the sign is perfect in itself; the man was made thoroughly well.
H.E.S. Are you distinguishing between the public sphere and that which is produced, particularly later on, in the vessel?
J.T. I am distinguishing between what has taken place in the public body without result for God, although the work was perfect in itself, and what subsequently had result in something for God. That is, chapters 9 to 12 inclusive, contemplate something for God; so that I think we may regard it as indicating that this dispensation will finish up with something for God. However small, it will be there in quality; but here there is nothing, and so divine Persons are seen acting by themselves. Even as to witness, the Lord appeals to His Father: "The Father who has sent me himself has borne witness concerning me" (verse 37).
Ques. Would it be at all like Sardis? "I have not found thy works complete before my God", @Revelation 3:2. There was nothing fruitful for God.
J.T. Just so. Certainly Sardis had "received and heard", but there was no result; but Philadelphia had result for God.
Ques. In what way would His glory shine out when there is no result as in this case?
{41}
J.T. In the perfection of the work done and the grace that led Him to think of the man. The public position is described in the first four verses, and then it says, "There was a certain man there who had been suffering under his infirmity thirty and eight years. Jesus seeing this man lying there, and knowing that he was in that state now a great length of time, says to him, Wouldest thou become well? The infirm man answered him. Sir, I have not a man, in order, when the water has been troubled, to cast me into the pool; but while I am coming another descends before me. Jesus says to him. Arise, take up thy couch and walk. And immediately the man became well, and took up his couch and walked". That is certainly the shining out of glory; and the public profession today, indicated in Jerusalem here, has had the advantage of corresponding testimony.
Ques. The rich grace and power of God are there and available, whether it is received or not; it is what comes out from God in grace. So your thought is that the Father and the Son seen in their own immediate relationships, can handle the situation.
J.T. That is how the truth stands.
A.P.M. What is the application of this sign today?
J.T. Well, Sardis has been alluded to, but the revival a hundred years ago resulted publicly in disaster. What we are going on with now is, you might say, a remnant of a remnant. The great body of those affected by the light went off in independency and remained there. Others have gone off since, adding to the darkness. Thus in the many of those who were affected directly by the movement referred to, there was no result for God. Indeed there has been not only the opposition of imitation, but also, from time to time, direct attacks. They come back, knowing the place, with lanterns and torches and weapons. Compare @John 18:2, 3.
Eu.R. What is the import of the pool here?
{42}
J.T. It is not running water. It alludes, I think, to the stationary character of Christendom. Running water requires scope; you cannot have running water in such an institution as Presbyterianism for example; you cannot have it in those enclosures. Whatever is of God is not sluggish; running water is the Spirit given scope; the way is made for Him, the saints being together in affection. Our meeting here today is on that principle, thank God!
H.M.S. And would this sign be in the nature of declaration, and not revelation in the way you have been speaking of it?
J.T. Somewhat. It is a public matter; God is seen here in the very centre of official religion. The evangelist tells us that "there *is*  in Jerusalem, at the sheepgate, a pool". One has often wondered why it is in the present tense, Jerusalem doubtless having been destroyed at this time; I think it means that this state of things continues around us. God has not wholly abandoned the public profession; the symbol of mercy is still there. You have the idea of a pool and occasional interventions in the troubling of the waters, but no permanent result.
Ques. Would the river at Philippi "where prayer was wont to be made"(@Acts 16:13) at the outset, and the Spirit's speaking at the close be in contrast to the pool?
J.T. I think that is right; a river is living. Rivers have power of self-purification. At the outset God brought in the rivers. In @Genesis 1 the waters are gathered together into one place and the dry land appeared, but in chapter 2 you have a river going out of Eden to water the garden, and that is a thought that runs through Scripture.
Rem. Like @Revelation 22.
J.T. Exactly, and it brings out the gold. Apparently the link is with the gold. It says of the land encompassed by the river Pison -- where the river has free course -- that "the gold of that land is good; bdellium and the
{43}
onyx stone are there", @Genesis 2:12. They come into evidence in relation to the river.
H.E.S. Were you suggesting that, however stagnant established religion might be, God in His grace was in activity?
J.T. There *is*  a pool in Jerusalem. I should not like to think that God had wholly abandoned the public body. I do not think He has.
Rem. I suppose we see the evidence of that in souls being brought into new birth and in evangelical work.
J.T. Yes. The work of God goes on, otherwise many of us would not be here today. There are angelic visitations, but the Lord comes in and acts entirely aside from these here. That is, He is not working on that principle. The yearly visitation is angelic; there is distance, whereas the Lord Jesus is operating aside from that altogether; He disregards the pool. He asks the man, "Wouldest thou become well?" He had been there a long time, and that is how matters are in the systems; you have to *wait*. It is a question in the general profession of officialism and what it decides. Whatever God may do has to be held up until officialism moves, and, moreover, there is no power in yourself either. There is no man there; the principle of sympathy is not there. "Sir, I have not a man", the infirm man says, "in order, when the water has been troubled, to cast me into the pool". Now, the Lord comes in in contrast to all that, and that is what I think we may see in the subsequent part of the chapter, how divine activities go on outside of all those things, and that they *will go on*. There is no thought whatever of divine Persons ceasing to operate. The Lord proceeds immediately to say, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work". From the very outset the Father works.
H.F.N. Are we justified in regarding what underlies this sign, as indicating that the Lord's intent in the
{44}
man walking, was that he might move in relation to the sphere where divine Persons are operating? In keeping with what was said as to the father and the son in the house (chapter 4), in this chapter you have the Father and the Son working together. Is there a link in any way?
J.T. That is very suggestive. The intent of the sign was to make the man superior to his circumstances. He carried his bed, and if he did that, he ought to be able to move in relation to divine operations, to move out of the limitations suggested in the pool. I think what is intended is to make him a son of light in relation to his circumstances, that his circumstances should not hold him, but that he should be free to move in relation to what divine Persons were doing. But he did not; he was found in the temple. He did not move spiritually at all.
H.F.N. In chapter 1 it says, "No man hath seen God at any time",(@John 1:18) and then we have a reference here to the fact that there was no man to put him into the pool. Does the chapter supply the man?
J.T. I think so; the One in whom God is declared was ready to help the infirm man. We are here in the presence of one of the features of the declaration of God. It implies that we are made superior to our circumstances, which I think applies at the present time, because circumstances are very pressing. God would show us how we are to be superior to them, to carry them as it were, so as to move on with what is being done divinely. The great pressure that exists abroad today is a very serious matter, and it is a question whether we come into the good of this sign, and so are made superior to our circumstances -- sons of light in relation to them -- whether we may be able to carry them and move on. The sequel here, shows that divine Persons have to move on by themselves, and they will do so if we do not go on with them.
{45}
Ques. What would you say was the real difficulty with this man seeing he did what the Lord wanted him to do?
J.T. He did not leave the system. He is not cast out; he bears no testimony that arouses any opposition to himself. He remains where he was, and the Lord finds him in the temple and says to him, "Behold, thou art become well; sin no more". I think that would mean that the Lord had no confidence in him. As with the woman in chapter 8, there is nothing to indicate much work in her either, so the Lord says to her, "Sin no more". But we do not get that with the woman at Sychar, nor with the man in chapter 9, nor with Lazarus, -- he is let go; but here evidently the Lord has not much confidence in the man. If one comes into divine benefits and is not moving in relation to them, we lose confidence in him.
M.W.B. Do you think the work here would have in view believers being brought into the liberty of the house in chapter 8?
J.T. I think it would. If we move on from this point as the Lord intended, superior to our circumstances, we shall find ourselves in the liberty of the house. But he was in the temple, he was not detached from the system that served him so poorly, and he did not seek out the Man who served him so well.
Ques. The benefits brought in by Christ are enormous, but the great failing is there is no personal attachment to Christ? Is that the thing that comes out here?
J.T. People remain where they were, but the Lord may follow them up, even though there is no attachment to Him. So the Lord says, "Sin no more, that something worse do not happen to thee". What a solemn suggestion as to the public body today and anyone remaining in it.
Ques. Would this sign answer to the Lord standing at the door and knocking in Laodicea? The man being
{46}
found in the temple would indicate that he had not opened the door to the Lord's knocking, so to speak -- that he did not value the Lord's company.
J.T. That is right. There is no response personally to the Lord, and he is left with this solemn word of warning that something worse may happen to him.
Rem. Had he moved he would have answered to Philadelphia: "I know thy works", but here there was no work for the Lord to take account of.
J.T. Works that He approves are seen in those who are separate from evil. "Sin no more" is answered to by those who have the Spirit.
Rem. I wondered whether it would help to compare this chapter with chapter 4. In chapter 4 the Lord speaks of a fountain of water and the results are wonderful, but here it is a pool.
J.T. The man does not move out of the circumstances in which he was, although he had the power. It is a question of the word of Christ. There was no conversation with the man as in chapters 3 and 4. It is just the word of Christ and the perfect result of it, a man made thoroughly well, but no moral effect in him, so that he stays where he is and rather brings persecution on the Lord.
D.L.H. What is the force of the thirty and eight years, two years short of forty which is the full period of testing?
J.T. I suppose, applying it today, the two years remaining would be to finish the history of Christendom. Forty years is a *tentative*  period. These thirty and eight years would indicate that nothing good was being worked out. Forty years would be the finish, so that Paul says, "Wrath has come upon them to the uttermost", @1 Thessalonians 2:16. I suppose the man comes into that in principle, for he did not leave the doomed system. Later the Lord says, "*Now*  is the judgment of this world", @John 12:31. Those who remain in it are judged with the world.
{47}
D.L.H. "Sin no more" would refer to the government of God.
J.T. Exactly; sinning again would imply that he remained in the old environment, and would come in for what was coming upon it.
Ques. The Lord here distinctly heals this man apart from the pool; why did He send the blind man to the pool?
J.T. I rather think the water was running in Siloam (compare @Isaiah 8:5, 6). Anyway the word there is "sent". There is a moral process in that man.
Rem. The Lord discerned the work of God.
J.T. The Lord knew. "Neither has this man sinned nor his parents, but that the works of God should be manifested in him", @John 9:3. The *works*  of God are manifested in him, but not in this man. "I have done one work", the Lord said -- not works; the works bear on each other and include the whole of God's operations in a believer.
H.E.S. Is it a marked feature of John's gospel that divine results are permanent? The thought is to produce movement in us, but that movement is not reached in the public body.
J.T. That is right. The first sign indicated that the disciples believed on Him; there was permanent result. They went down to Capernaum, and they are mentioned last after His mother and His brethren, but there is nothing of that with this man; he does not seek the Lord at all.
Ques. Is it not important in chapter 8, in regard of the woman, that He says to her, "Sin no more", and immediately speaks of following? "He that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life", @John 8:12. Is it not a question of attraction?
J.T. Yes; it was for her to follow. He did not ask her to do it, as He did others. As I said, she is another case where results are doubtful.
Ques. What relation has the sheepgate to the pool?
{48}
J.T. I suppose, professedly, it is where the sheep are cared for.
P.L. Would you say that the shepherd in chapter 10 and the door, are rather in contrast to the sheepgate and the five porches?
J.T. That helps. The gate involves an enclosure, a fold, as the pool implies a stationary thing. It was right so far to have an enclosure, but the time was coming when the shepherd's voice would be heard. The voice of Jesus was there. "Wouldest thou become well?" and the man is empowered to carry his bed, that is, he can move. There was no need to stay in what was stationary; there was a way out. The shepherd was there, but the man did not take advantage of the liberty He gives; he is not characteristically a sheep.
P.L. Would the five porches suggest the indefiniteness of what is connected with Christendom? There is no way defined; the Lord says, "I am the way", @John 14:6.
J.T. Five would be here not only ordinary human weakness, but impotency. "Having five porches" possibly alludes to the different sects, involving *many*  ways, whereas the Lord is the *one*  way that we are to follow.
Ques. Would the position of this man be in any way akin to the Galatians, in having received certain benefits and not continuing in them?
J.T. Exactly; they were going back to the limitations of the law which had served them so poorly. Paul speaks of the "beggarly elements", meaning the poverty of it, in contrast to sonship, which would be involved in the believer having power to carry his circumstances. The idea is that if I have been relieved from my circumstances I can follow the Lord. What better can I do than keep with the Lord who so benefits me?
F.W.W. Does the Lord raising the question of the sabbath suggest the idea of the Father working and He working with Him?
{49}
J.T. The sabbath had been broken (compare @Zechariah 11:10,11). You could not keep sabbath in the presence of sin. Christ is the sabbath of God. It is remarkable that the Lord does these things on the sabbath so as to bring out that there could be no sabbath in the presence of sin. The sabbath is in Himself, and the Father rests in Him, because, potentially, sin is dealt with in His becoming a Man, compare @John 1:29.
H.M.S. With regard to the effect of the great sign in this chapter. Is it that the *dead*  hear the voice of the Son of God; whereas the result of the sign in chapter 9 is more the sheep hearing the voice of the shepherd?
J.T. I think we can understand the shepherd coming in in chapter 10, because the idea of sheep is suggested in the man who was an outcast. I think the figure of the shepherd is to bring in the care that we need, as believing on the Son of God. It is to bring out the tender care of the shepherd, so that the idea of unity should come in leading up to the family. But this man does not show himself to be a sheep, and so divine Persons proceed in their operations, leading up to the voice of the Son of God and persons living by that voice, not only by the word. He says, "He that hears my word, and believes him that has sent me, has life eternal, and does not come into judgment, but is passed out of death into life", but then the voice is more than the word. We do not get anything more than the word mentioned in regard of this man, but you get the idea of the voice connected with John's sheep; and you get the idea of the voice in regard of the dead. It is not so much the word spoken, but the voice -- the voice of the Son of God.
Ques. How is that distinction between the word and the voice realised now?
J.T. The word conveys the mind, also authority, without carrying so much the thought of His affections, what Christ is personally. The voice is the Person
{50}
more than what is said. A person is known by his voice.
P.L. So that in Revelation you have the "Word of God" and then "I Jesus".
J.T. Just so. The latter is the Person. In chapter 1, John turns "to see the voice", but afterwards we get what the Lord said.
D.L.H. What would you say of the voice of the prophets?
J.T. That is in the sense of testimony. And of course there would be what the prophets are. The prophets were distinctive; so that Peter tells us what kind of men they were: "Holy men of God spake under the power of the Holy Spirit" (@2 Peter 1:21). That is what the prophets are, and the voice would be a testimony from *such*  persons.
D.L.H. It seems like one voice; it is not the voices of the prophets, but the voice of the prophets.
J.T. That is important; it is their combined testimony. You get the voice from heaven too, in Revelation, without any mention of persons, but when you get the voice of the person distinctively mentioned, it is to call attention to the person.
E.S.H. When the Lord returns it is with voice of archangel; what is your thought as to that?
J.T. It is characteristic; it is *supreme*  authority in Christ, not exactly an archangel speaking.
E.J.McB. The man, in this case, hears the Lord's word. He had the word of Jesus, but he did not know it. The idea of hearing His voice would be that he would know it.
J.T. That is the idea, and it comes out more fully in chapter 10, because the sheep know His voice, and follow Him on account of it.
P.L. The expression of John, to which you referred, in Revelation, "I turned back to see the voice", (@Revelation 1:12) would suggest the Person?
J.T. No doubt he had the Person in mind.
{51}
Rem. The expression in the Song of Songs answers to it: "The companions hearken to thy voice, let me hear it" (chapter 8:13).
M.W.B. It is interesting that Saul speaks of the voice, and also Ananias: "To see the just one, and to hear a voice out of his mouth" @Acts 22:14.
J.T. That supports what we are saying. It is very precious that the Lord's voice is known, but here it is the *power*  that is in Him. It is that Person's voice, the voice of the Son of God.
I think we might see in our enquiry this morning the great bearing of the operations of divine Persons that comes out in the Lord working and Jesus saying, "My Father worketh hitherto". He might have said, Jehovah hath worked, but it is "My Father worketh hitherto and I work". He is bringing in, in the most positive way, the nature of the relations between Himself and His Father in their operations. The passage brings out the equality of the Son, as Man with the Father; but He has assumed a relatively inferior position. I think the chapter is intended to regulate our minds in regard to divine Persons, in the mediatorial position into which They have come. "My Father worketh hitherto"; that is how this thing is going on; the Father works too. We have love in activity in the Father, but the Father is not presented to us as One remaining in the dignity and majesty of deity only, but as hitherto operating, and now the Son operates. "I work", He says. It is the beautiful relations between Them in Their work. The Jews understood fully what the Lord meant, and I think that is the thing the Lord would help us in, to see the meaning of things, to think as Scripture thinks. The Jews understood that what the Lord was saying implied that He was equal with God. He says, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work", and they say in effect, You are making yourself equal with God, and the Lord does not deny it. It is absolutely true. We can come into the knowledge of divine
{52}
things, especially in relation to divine Persons, only by *thinking in the terms of Scripture*.
H.F.N. You referred last night to the Lord ascending up far above all heavens. Would you mind saying how that relates to what you are speaking of this morning? What is the relation of that, to the mediatorial sphere that is opened up here?
J.T. It serves to emphasise what is brought out here. It is equality between divine Persons. The Person who has taken the lowly place, goes above all heavens, that is, beyond the created sphere. The mediatorial service of Jesus obviously has allusion to the created sphere; He has come into it mediatorially. Outside of that we cannot follow Him, and Ephesians clearly intimates that He has gone beyond that, "ascended up above all the heavens", @Ephesians 4:10. If we think in the terms of Scripture, we see that that means deity; it means a Person who has the right to go there, but what He is there, we cannot see. The Person is there, but we are limited. We must keep the word *'inscrutable'*  before us in dealing with these great matters.
H.D'A.C. That is beyond the creature.
Eu.R. Would you distinguish between that and what we have in @John 20:17 "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God"?
J.T. I would, for there the ascension is in relation to us, it is to His Father and our Father.
P.L. Would not the expression, "If then ye see the Son of man ascending up where he was before"(@John 6:62) connect with deity, as distinct from "I ascend to my Father and your Father"?(@John 20:17) I was thinking that the former goes beyond the mediatorial sphere.
J.T. You cannot limit that, I am sure, but I think the point of view there is, that having come down out of heaven. He goes up to heaven, but we cannot follow Him beyond the created sphere. We have to accept our limitations. Nor can we be too positive or too negative as to what is in that realm.
{53}
A.S.L. Is it not good to see also that, as you have just said, it is impossible for us to follow Him where He has gone far above all heavens, and it is equally impossible for us to know anything save what is declared, about what was before He came?
J.T. Exactly; the things revealed are for us, and not any more. I cannot even understand how the Lord moved about in the forty days after He rose. He was only occasionally manifested to His own. We have just to bow and say that while we do not understand fully, we worship the wonderful Person that could move about in that inscrutable way.
W.C.G. "I go to prepare a place for you";(@John 14:2) would that refer to the new created sphere?
J.T. Yes. There is a new heaven and a new earth, but His going there has really prepared the place; there is a footing for men there; we have liberty as He has.
H.M.S. Would you help us a little more as to verse 17? We have thought when the Lord Jesus said, "My Father worketh hitherto", that He is referring to the past eternity.
J.T. I do not think that is the allusion, but to the breaking of the sabbath. That is, the rest of God was broken in upon by sin, and there had been no rest since, until Christ became Man. The first use of the word sabbath is in @Exodus 16, linked with the manna, which is the idea of Christ as Man here. There was really no sabbath after sin came in until Christ came.
G.W.W. Is the thought that what we may know lies between the two points, when He came into the created sphere, and when He left it?
J.T. Yes.
G.W.W. You cannot travel back beyond the point where He came in and you cannot follow beyond the point where He went out.
Rem. Would that be qualified by what the Lord may be pleased to reveal or declare? One quite follows what was said, but then He has declared certain things.
{54}
J.T. Surely; what He has declared, existed before; but it is brought in in relation to the creation, and in Himself as in the likeness of flesh of sin, in the form of man, in such wise as to be intelligible to the creature. I think that is most important, because it shuts out the idea that we can look into what is there. It is the thing brought out so as to be intelligible to us, and that in a Man, "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father", @John 1:18. In saying that what is declared existed before, I do not, of course, include the relations taken in order that there should be a declaration.
A.F.M. Would it include the glory that the Lord asks to be glorified with in chapter 17:5?
J.T. That is beyond the created sphere. Evidently it is so, because it was before the world, and so we have to leave it there. We know it is there, and He goes there, but we can say no more as far as I can see.
H.D'A.C. Why does it say He is "higher than the heavens"?
J.T. I think to show that He can go beyond the created sphere. How great He is!
H.D'A.C. I do not see how we come in there.
J.T. I think it is to show that our Priest is a divine Person, but a divine Person in humanity. The Son is our Priest, and so Melchisedec is assimilated to Him. God had in His mind a certain order of priest, and He brings a personage on the scene and mentions things about him which could only apply to a divine Person. "Consider how great this personage was", @Hebrews 7:4.
Ques. Are there not certain features about the uncreated sphere that we are to understand, and which call for worship? I was thinking of glory and affection and equality.
J.T. We understand that *they are there*,  as the divine Persons are, but what more can we say? What may be understood has come into our view in one of the divine Persons, *in incarnation*. I do not think we can speak of understanding anything else; the glory
{55}
which He had with the Father is spoken of as existing before the world was, but the Lord does not ask that His own should see it.
Rem. I only meant in reference to understanding that they were there, and that knowledge would enter into the spirit of worship.
J.T. Quite so. That is to say, the inscrutable is there, and the very idea produces worship; but I must worship intelligently, and if I do that, I worship in relation to a God that is known to me. That is to say, He is brought within our understanding, in Christ as Man. I do not think the uncreated sphere enters into our worship beyond what we know is there. We are dealing with what we understand and so the worshippers are intelligent. We worship the Father in spirit and truth; that is, God, come within our range in a known way. We must ever bear in mind "Whom no man has seen, nor is able to see", @1 Timothy 6:16.
W.C.G. Does that lead us to honour the Son as the Father is honoured?
J.T. It does; that He can go beyond what is created. It is more than the liberty of the house (chapter 8:35). The Son abides in the house for ever, that is where we are; but that He can go beyond the created sphere implies that He is on equality with God, and that is what this chapter stresses; although it stresses also, that He is subject and does not do anything of Himself, save whatever He sees the Father doing. Yet the spirit of the whole chapter is equality between divine Persons, and yet subjection in One of Them as Man.
G.W.W. So would it be right to say there was a moment when the Lord passed again into that which is inscrutable? We are confronted with the word 'inscrutability', as you said, and we cannot pass beyond it.
J.T. Undoubtedly, and we instinctively understand it must be so. We cannot restrict Him to limitations that He takes upon Himself. He may speak of Himself, as He does in the Psalms, in a way in which we could
{56}
not possibly speak of Him; we have to leave that with Himself. If He says to Jehovah, "Take me not away in the midst of my days",(@Psalm 102:24) and speaks in the most abject terms of Himself, the answer is, "Thou art the Same, and thy years shall have no end" (@Psalm 102:27). He made the heavens and all things; there is perfect balance in thinking of the Lord Jesus in that way. But we must not impose as obligatory on Him, what He takes on Himself; and when He humbles Himself in that way, as in the Psalm mentioned, God says, "Thy years are from generation to generation, of old hast thou founded the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands ... thou art the Same", @Psalm 102:24,25,27.
S.J.B.C. F.E.R. once said that we cannot think of Christ as God and Man at the same time.
J.T. That was a very good remark and has helped me. I cannot apply to Him, from the point of view of His deity, that He is a Bondman. He has come out *from*  God and He *is*  God: "Over all, God blessed for ever", @Romans 9:5. That is one thing. Then I look at Him in manhood, under God's eye, and I understand something of His bondmanship there. He has taken a Bondman's form in emptying Himself.
F.S.M. Is there blessing in accepting the limitations as suggested in @Deuteronomy 29:29 "The hidden things belong to Jehovah our God; but the revealed things are ours"? And then @1 Corinthians 2:10 "The Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God" We receive the Spirit that we may know the things freely given to us of God. There are things beyond us, but there are things given to us.
J.T. Quite so. The "depths of God" would be the sense in which He is known. But it has to be understood that the Spirit too, whilst a divine Person, has come from Jesus, received from the Father and shed forth. His operations are in that connection, so that we understand the things of God *by*  Him, and He searches the depths of God. The Holy Spirit does not bring out
{57}
to us the nature of the eternal relations of Jesus; He brings out what is intelligible to us. We are not fit to receive more. I am not able to take in the creation, much less the Creator!
Ques. What is the glory which He says we shall behold?
J.T. "The glory which thou hast given me";(@John 17:22) I apprehend that is the glory that He has come into as a Man. There are glories attaching to Him as Man, which are intelligible to us.
J.J. Do you think the thought of quickening coming in here is absolutely necessary to the understanding of these things?
J.T. I am sure it is; by the "voice of the Son of God". So what would this man understand in whom the sign was wrought? He might become a theologian. I mean, if he were affected by the word of Christ, there was much that he might go in for, had he ability, but evidently he was not quickened in a spiritual sense. Quickening brings us into the realm of life.
The man heard the word, but his affections were not touched. Quickening involves my being taken out of death, but it involves I am alive in my affections and intelligence, which is very wonderful. It enters into Colossians, where we are about to enter Canaan, where we begin to see divine Persons in the sphere in which They are, in relation to eternal purpose.
J.J. Is the thought of quickening in this chapter the continuation of what you said yesterday as to new birth in chapter 4?
J.T. They are distinct ideas, as already indicated. Quickening has a state of death in view.
W.C.G. Would you tell us the relation between what you have said, and verse 24, that is the development of eternal life in the saints?
J.T. What you get in these verses, where the Lord speaks of the Father's working and the Son's working, has in mind the work of God in us. It is the work of
{58}
God in us now that is in view. This man is not in that. Divine Persons have to proceed, and they are proceeding on lines that will result in something for God, so that, "He that hears my word, and believes him that has sent me, has life eternal". That person is a characteristic believer; not like the man raised up. The Lord is contemplating persons characterised by hearing His word and believing on Him that sent Him; meaning that you are recognising the economy of this book, the Father and the Son, and the Son coming as 'sent'. There is a moral work in the soul, and you, as believing, have eternal life; it is characteristic. It does not mean the person who is listening to you preaching the gospel, it means a person who hears characteristically. As it says, "Verily, verily ..." Those "verilys" are landmarks in the book, and severally indicate some point the Lord would emphasise. So He says, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that he that hears my word, and believes him that has sent me, has life eternal"; it is characteristic; he hears Christ's word and believes on the One who sent Him. It is characteristic; I am in the full light of the economy of the book, the Father and the Son, and my portion is eternal life.
E.J.McB. The man that was thoroughly well might afterwards hear the voice of one who came in his own name and be carried away by it, but the one that comes under the operations of the Father and the Son will abide for ever.
J.T. He is a characteristic hearer and believer.
A.S.L. Do you think there is a distinction to be seen and made between *My*  Father and *the*  Father?
J.T. Yes; My Father is the Father related to the Son.
A.S.L. "My Father" is the word He uses when we come into view. He does not say, I ascend to *the*  Father, but *My*  Father.
J.T. You do not get the Father named as our Father, except once in the whole gospel; that is in
{59}
chapter 20. It is always the Father, or My Father. The Father is that Person, God acting in grace.
S.J.B.C. Do you think the Father, in the abstract, always refers to the revelation of God as the Father?
J.T. It is generally that Person in the deity. In John's gospel it is never your Father except in chapter 20, but in Matthew it is constantly that. John brings into evidence that God has taken up the attitude of grace expressed in that name; it is formally stated in this chapter that the Father judges no one. So we understand that it is grace; we are brought into an economy of grace. The Father dominates it, and the Son tells us here that He is not doing anything save what the Father does. Think of the marvellous sphere of things into which we are brought where the grace of the Father dominates and where there is all this blessed activity. The Father raises the dead and quickens them, and so does the Son, and we are brought into that realm as recipients of the grace of God.
Eu.R. Would you say one word on the verse in Corinthians, where it says, "To us there is one God the Father" (@1 Corinthians 8:6)?
J.T. That is how we stand publicly, which 1 Corinthians treats of: "... there are gods many, and lords many, yet to us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and we for Him" (@1 Corinthians 8:6). That is to say, God, in that Person, remains in the position of deity, being the Father. Then, everything proceeds from Him and everything is for Him. "And one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by Him", showing that the title "Lord Jesus Christ" may be used to designate the Lord in the past, for it is by Him all things are made. I think it is the public position of Christianity in 1 Corinthians, in contrast to heathendom and Judaism. The Jews would say Jehovah, but the Christian says, "To us there is one God, the Father"; it is God revealed in grace; "And one Lord, Jesus
{60}
Christ" who brings everything into existence, "and we by Him", @1 Corinthians 8:6.
A.J.H.B. In @John 16:27 you have, "The Father himself loveth you", which is very significant. Do you not think there it is the thought of the love of God coming out to us? It is the Father as that Person.
J.T. It is the Father Himself; the Father is emphasised.
G.W.W. Does not that word "My" in chapter 20 assume the fact that the Lord has assumed a position where He can definitely associate us with Himself? Does not that give special character and emphasis to that word "My" in chapter 20 which would not be present perhaps on other occasions?
J.T. I think that is important, because when He says "My Father" earlier, it is a question of divine Persons.
G.W.W. And that word has distinctly in view the thought of association in chapter 20.
J.T. It brings us in.
{61}
THE GLORY OF THE SON OF GOD (4)
@John 6:1 - 21
J.T. The bearing of chapter 5 upon the end is of great moment, showing what the public profession is going on to. Divine Persons are seen as operating, incidentally bringing out the equality of the Son with the Father; and then that the operations of the Son go on to the final judgment, the resurrection of those who believe and those who are lost; and then the solemn fact that the one who is coming in his own name will be believed, which indicates the great importance of a clear testimony as to the Person of Christ in view of Antichrist. "The Father", He says, "... has borne witness concerning me", @John 5:37. He receives not witness from man, but He recognises John; and the chapter shows at the end, the testimony of Scripture, and the validity of the writings of Moses as equal to the Lord's words. The enemy is especially endeavouring to set aside Moses testimony; "But if ye do not believe his writings, how shall ye believe my words?" (@John 5:47).
Now chapter 6 contemplates a service in which the Lord includes His disciples. Chapter 5 is at Jerusalem and gives the general view of the public position, divine Persons operating to the end, and the public body becoming apostate; but chapter 6 is in *Galilee*,  so that the position is changed and the disciples are associated with the Lord in this sign. It is a question of food; and the Lord may show us in our consideration of the chapter, that we have a part in the supply of food. The bearing of it is towards all; whatever we have in the way of food is for all. It says, "After these things Jesus went away beyond the sea of Galilee, or of Tiberias, and a great crowd followed him, because they saw the signs which he wrought upon the sick". That is, we
{62}
are away now from the scene of religious power and officialism, and special opposition to Christ, so that there is some interest; and interest even of this kind is not to be despised, even if occasioned by the signs. It is God approaching the profession from the standpoint of a remnant under reproach, but *with food*. It is not on the level of current religion, for the Lord goes up, as verse 3 says, "into the mountain, and there sat with His disciples". The Jewish passover was near, but He was going on with His disciples in moral elevation, so that a new position is taken up and food is supplied, having a bearing towards all. The things said about spiritual food, are said in Capernaum, which is especially the sphere of testimony, and links on with the religious opposition. (Compare @Matthew 11:23).
H.E.S. Are you calling special attention to the fact that nothing is said about the disciples in the previous incident, but they are specially mentioned in this one?
J.T. Yes. Chapter 5 contemplates an act of the Lord by Himself. It is a movement, as you might say, in Christendom, in the very heart of the system, and those in high places were reached. God began to move; it was not done in a corner, but in the very heart of the religious system. But there was no permanent result. But divine Persons go on, and now a new position is taken up in the place of reproach "away beyond the sea of Galilee", but the bearing of it is towards the whole profession, and the disciples are associated with Him in it.
D.L.H. Why is the "passover, the feast of the Jews", referred to here at the outset, because the Lord was in Galilee with His disciples?
J.T. I thought it was just to denote that the current religious procedure goes on uninterruptedly, but He was going on too; as if we have to leave the fact that such religious procedure goes on, and not be hindered by it.
{63}
A.F.M. In this scripture we have the disciples, as you were saying, and then at the end we have the twelve baskets gathered up. Is there a connection between the two thoughts of administration?
J.T. I think that is what we shall come to. The twelve baskets bring in the thought of the administration of food, and then, at the end, the Lord speaks to "the twelve" without saying more than that, as if the idea of administration is now coming into evidence. But if we have part with the Lord in this service from this moral elevation in the despised place, He will draw us on to His own side; there is obligation attaching to it. The number would denote that it is obligatory upon us, and that the service is to be carried on according to divine manipulation, each having his appointed part. It is very precious to be drawn to the Lord's side, to sit down with Him; to start on this line and come into the idea of the twelve, which will go on into the heavenly city. Because there is nothing less before us now, and the great culmination of the administrative idea in the number twelve is in the new Jerusalem. The Lord, in referring to the apostles, does not go beyond "the twelve", giving the idea that it may be taken up at any time. Where love is amongst the brethren, you come to recognise divine appointment, not perhaps exactly official, but nevertheless there is the recognition of divine appointment and ordering.
Ques. Would that have an application in connection with the preaching, and the preachers of the gospel in a locality?
J.T. Well, somewhat, if we are dextrous enough to avoid officialism, to have the thing without the official garb. I think the word "twelve" just saves us from that. It is a select number, and the administrative idea is in it, so that the preaching of the gospel in our rooms partakes of this idea. Then that introduces another thing, that is, first principles in levitical service. We are told that Peter stood up "with the
{64}
eleven". Not only did he recognise that he was one of the twelve, not only did he look to them as supporters, but he owned, in that he stood up with them -- not they with him -- that there were others, that they also could preach. That would make room for *all*  in the principle of it. If one stands up to preach he recognises that others can and do preach.
Ques. You say if we are dextrous enough to avoid the official garb; do you think we are liable to fall into the danger of the official garb?
J.T. Yes. The number twelve has in mind that love exists underneath. If a new meeting is formed, there is the appointment of certain persons to look after different services. There is great danger of becoming official, whereas it is simply that the work has to be done, and the principle is that I am available and the brethren allow me to do it. But the Lord greatly modifies the use of the disciples here, because, according to the better rendering. He hands the food to the people Himself; He keeps us more or less out of view, and yet we are in view, because He speaks to Philip first about it, and says to him, "Whence shall we buy loaves that these may eat?" It is as if the Lord would say. Now I give you the opportunity, what will you do about this? He does not put any obligation upon Philip to provide, but it is simply to bring out where he was, which is an important and exercising thing.
S.J.B.C. Philip was occupied with what was needed, and Andrew was occupied with what they had, but neither of them seemed to have grasped the great truth of the sufficiency of Christ.
J.T. It is an important thing to have our weakness exposed. It is a source of strength just to know how weak and ignorant we are.
Ques. Would not the fact of this being a little boy and the meagreness of the supply, encourage us in whatever conditions we may be found in a day of confusion
{65}
and weakness like this? The Lord is always competent to take up what there is if it is taken up with Him. Is there that thought in it?
J.T. Quite so. He "knew what he was going to do", and it would be done. Thank God for that! Things are going to be done, but what about those of us who are allowed of the Lord to take part in the service? The Lord would disclose to us just where we are.
A.F.M. There is a suggestion here of two hundred denarii. Is it not better to own that we have nothing, in order that the Lord may come in for us?
J.T. This calculation of two hundred denarii worth is a question of mathematics; there is no spiritual touch in it at all. That is how things come out. However clever he may have been in calculating, there is the absence of a spiritual touch with Philip.
Ques. Does the Lord expose the position in order that He may use what is there?
J.T. Exactly, so that we are discovered; and only He can disclose just how ignorant and weak we are. When that is done, the precious fact is present that *"he*  knew what he was going to do", but in doing it, He would have them with Him intelligently. If we are to be with Him intelligently He must disclose to us just how ignorant and weak we are.
E.J.McB. Do you think in the unspiritual view that Philip took of it, the Lord would indicate to us that when a new move is being made, you want to confine your exercises to what is spiritual, rather than view the situation from the wealth of the people in actual money? Is that in your mind?
J.T. Yes, because if we are not spiritual we shall come forward with our mathematics, or something else like it, mere knowledge that can be acquired according to man. It did not take a converted man to calculate as Philip did; it was not even levitical.
P.L. Does not John close his gospel with the suggestion that mathematics fail in the presence of this
{66}
glorious Person? "I suppose that not even the world itself would contain the books written", @John 21:25.
J.T. Very good. A scientific man would scoff at it, and say it is absurd that the world could not contain the books, but it is a spiritual thing. We get mathematics in John in the Revelation, wonderful measurements governed by the number twelve, in the city, which are absurd to the natural mind, but we have to learn to think spiritually.
Ques. What is the import of the Lord's question, "Whence shall we buy loaves"? It seems to take in the idea that they had not bread, but of the possibility of buying it.
J.T. It was to bring out what was going on in Philip's mind: "But this he said trying him". If I have a mathematical mind, or a mind only able to compute on natural lines, when I should think spiritually, the Lord knows how to expose it. It was a matter of exposure. "He knew what he was going to do", and He knew what was going on in Philip's mind.
H.D'A.C. A mathematician cannot deal with what is infinite. Christ was there, and what was infinite was there in Him, so there is no limit to His resources.
J.T. Exactly. Of course a mathematician could deal with the number of persons present, and that is how Philip calculated. But it is the absence of a spiritual touch that we should notice. If Philip had been spiritual at that moment, he would have turned to the Lord and said. You are the One to answer that question. But his answer indicated that he had no true sense of the greatness of the Person who was speaking.
P.L. Is there a contrast at the end of this chapter between the cold mathematician Judas, who reasoned in figures in chapter 12, and Peter's love for Christ: "Lord, to whom shall we go" (@John 6:68)?
J.T. Quite so; the end of the chapter brings out that the Lord was making headway with His disciples, but *not*  with the public; it says that many were going
{67}
away from Him in spite of the signs. They wanted to make Him a king; that was the effect upon them, because He could feed them. There is the absence of a spiritual touch on their side all through. But when you come to Peter's reply, you have a spiritual touch.
Ques. I suppose we may have to learn that what is committed to a few, will prove to be sufficient to fill a universe?
J.T. Quite so, if it is connected with Christ; a spiritual link is the solution. So that Philip makes his statement, and then, "One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother", speaks. Notice those two men, because of what is said of them elsewhere. They are the two that tell the Lord when the Greeks come up; they represent a certain element in this gospel. Both of them are soul-finders. Philip was a soul-finder, and so was Andrew; they were both worthy men according to chapter 1, but they miss this. They are brethren who serve well, but miss at a critical time. They miss the spiritual touch, they do not make allowance for the presence of Christ and what He can do; so that Philip magnifies the need, and Andrew minimises the supply.
H.E.S. Is the teaching of John that every fact and circumstance that comes before us is to teach us some spiritual lesson?
J.T. Yes. The great objective is @John 20, where we are brought into the spiritual realm, and all this instruction is to lead up to that. But it has a special application at the present time: that if the Lord gives us anything in the way of food, the bearing of it is general. However little it is, if it is connected with Christ it will be enough. So that it says, "One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, says to him, There is a little boy here who has five barley loaves and two small fishes; but this, what is it for so many?" Before you have the actual food supply brought forward, there is exposure, and one feels the importance of it.
{68}
The Lord alone can expose us to ourselves; and how ignorant and unbelieving we are after all.
E.R. I thought the reason why Philip was selected was because of what he confessed in chapter 1: "We have found him of whom Moses wrote",(@John 1:45) but he was not true to what he knew.
J.T. He had a good start; he found Nathanael, and knew just what to say to him, and brought him to Jesus, but he is defective here.
A.F.M. Would you mind indicating to us how it is that we may miss the point at such a valuable moment?
J.T. It is a question of state, which is the most difficult thing to discern. What can you say about a man's state? You can only go by what comes out. But it is a question of state in relation to Christ. The Lord probes us in this way; He is going to do a wonderful thing and He wants us with Him in it, but He will have us with Him thoroughly probed and exposed, so that we know just where we are as to intelligence and faith.
Ques. Why is he called Simon Peter's brother?
J.T. I suppose to bring out who the person was; there was to be no doubt as to this. He would be a very weak link in the chain if he were not exposed; and we want to be quite sure who he is. He has an important place, because he was the one who brought Simon to the Lord. You might think he would never do any thing wrong, but we want to be on our guard. However distinguished a man may be, whatever weakness there may be in him must be exposed, at least to himself.
W.C.G. A past act of faith does not prove that a man is in faith *now*.
J.T. That is true; it must be continuous.
H.M.S. Do you attach any importance to the fact that this long chapter is largely answers to unbelieving questions, until you come to Simon's great question at the end: "Lord, to whom shall we go?"(@John 6:68)
{69}
J.T. I think that helps to the understanding of it. Peter is the great result in the chapter. I think he is a son of light in relation to the *testimony*,  he is true to his position as one of *the twelve*. I suppose we find all these questions in our own histories. The chapter helps us as to what the flesh is in its many forms. It must have been very refreshing to the Lord to find one man right: "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal", @John 6:68.
H.D'A.C. Andrew little knew that there was One there who could feed a starving world.
J.T. The Lord would bring us into this at the present time, that this food, though it may seem very small, is to be linked up with Him, and hence the importance of chapter 5, to build us up in the knowledge of His Person. Here it is not so much the Son of God, as the Son of man, as He tells us, "Work not for the food which perishes, but for the food which abides unto life eternal, which the Son of man shall give to you; for him has the Father sealed, even God", verse 27.
M.W.B. Do you think they were truly followers here? They were not delivered from circumstances as is suggested in the previous chapter.
J.T. That suggestion is very good. The man who is able to carry his bed, ought to be able to carry these circumstances. Every emergency that arises is met as we understand the Person of Christ. He takes them up to the mountain, and they sit down with Him. What a wonderful position after all the light of chapter 5! You feel as you are sitting down with Him, that you would like to listen as He would disclose to you about Himself and about His Father. Philip and Andrew show that they had missed all that.
J.J. Does verse 9 suggest that the Lord was looking beyond the supply from the twelve to Paul's day?
J.T. Just so. It is some one who has very little distinction. Andrew minimises him and calls him a "little boy", some one of no consequence, but still he
{70}
has got something. That is the next point. Possibly it may make room for Paul and all his ministry, but the moral idea of the teaching is he is some one of no consequence but he has got something, small though it be: "There is a little boy here who has five barley loaves and two small fishes". I think the effect of chapter 5 is to make you very small. If you think of the greatness of the Person who is operating, you feel very small, however great you may be really. It came out in the apostle Paul: "who also is Paul",(@Acts 13:9) which means small, but he had something. The moral teaching is that we should be on the look-out for persons who have something.
A.F.M. Is that not where the substance is, in one who is small enough to take in all the great thoughts of God, as exemplified in Paul?
J.T. Yes. As you dwell upon the greatness of Christ, it tends to make you little in your own eyes; people do not regard you as a person who is very great and consequential. But keep your eye on the man that has something of value. It was to Andrew's credit that he knew the boy had it, and just what he had. To apply it, he must have heard him give 'a word' in a meeting, or pray; he knew that little boy's measure, but he did not think he was equal to the emergency. Andrew would not think this little boy could 'give an address' or 'take a reading', but he knew he had some food.
J.J. So that the Lord could say. He is "an elect vessel to me"(@Acts 9:15), when Paul was in view. It says, "*he*  knew what he was going to do".
J.T. That helps us as to the application of it as to Paul, because the Lord must have taken counsel, so to say, in regard to him: he is "an elect vessel to me"; he had been in the Lord's mind and He knew what He was going to do with him.
Ques. Would the little boy normally develop into the grown man at the end of the chapter?
{71}
J.T. I do not think he was morally little. He was a bigger man than Andrew. That was Andrew's estimate of him. The truly spiritual man is little; he does not think of himself in any other way, and so he does not give out that he is some great one. Very often people who do are taken on their own valuation, whereas people may not think much of one who has a small estimate of himself. It very often takes the Lord to value us rightly. Andrew would never forget this, nor would any of the disciples present, I am sure, forget it.
J.J. Would Andrew be something like Barnabas going to seek out Saul?
J.T. Well, you are putting him in good company, because Barnabas understood thoroughly. He did not minimise; he knew that Saul was the man for the work at Antioch, and he brought him there. They worked together for a year, and there was a wonderful result at Antioch.
Ques. Is there anything special in their being barley loaves?
J.T. I think the barley was not very valuable. It has another meaning, it is the first-fruits of the harvest, but I doubt if that is the force of it here. It was rather to minimise what was there, that it was not wheat; it would have been more valuable if it had been wheat. It was a common cereal, and, I believe, the cheapest kind of bread you could get.
M.W.B. Rather like the barley loaf that tumbled into the camp of Midian, @Judges 7.
H.M.S. Do you think this little boy was just the right vessel for the moment, just as the little maid in 2 Kings?
J.T. Just so. Also like Jonathan and Ahimaaz in David's day when he was fleeing from Absalom, and the maid that carried to them the news. She was a link in the chain.
H.F.N. What would be the contrast between the little boy here and the man from Baal-shalishah who
{72}
brought to the man of God "bread of the first-fruits, twenty loaves of barley, and fresh ears of corn in his sack", @2 Kings 4:42?
J.T. That is a very interesting comparison. In the first place he is a man; and he comes from a certain place, the name of which signifies that it was ruled by a lord, and then he has a large supply. I understand he represents one from heaven, as it were, with the full knowledge of what was needed at the moment. The supply of food was brought to the man of God, and according to the word of Jehovah through him, there was enough and to spare.
Rem. Perhaps like John himself, coming at the end of everything with his gospel, and epistles, and Revelation.
J.T. Well, just so, coming in on the heavenly side.
H.F.N. I only wanted to get a little help as to the difference between the thought of the boy, and the way the man comes into view.
J.T. I think Ephesians brings out the latter, the apostle is in full keeping with what he is presenting. He would have them to understand *his*  knowledge of the mystery, and what he has in the way of intelligence.
H.F.N. I had in mind what you said, that Ephesians contemplates the full grown man. The word 'boy' is used several times in the New Testament. You have the reference to it in Matthew, and then you have the Lord Himself so designated in Luke, then Eutychus in @Acts 20, and here you have John's boy. Would there be any teaching in regard of it? Matthew is the only one who says the boy was demon possessed (chapter 17). Then in connection with Eutychus when Paul embraced him it is said, "they brought away the boy alive";(@Acts 20:12) and then you have the holy "boy Jesus", @Luke 2:43.
J.T. If you take the "boy Jesus", it is the Spirit of God speaking of Him in that way; that is to say, He was perfectly normal. I think the one here is just a boy in the mind of Andrew -- insignificant.
{73}
Ques. Would he suggest some one who had an apprehension in measure of what came out in the Lord's Person in the previous chapter?
J.T. I think that is the meaning of it. He is a sort of product of what had gone on. *He*  was not minimising what he had; he *had*  some food. Then as to Eutychus, he is called a "youth" at the first, which is more undefined, but at the end it says, "they brought away the boy alive", @Acts 20:12. I think the spiritual meaning is, that Eutychus was a *potential man*. But that is not the case here; it is that Andrew was minimising what was there. The "boy Jesus" is the normality of His growth as in incarnation.
H.D'A.C. Was not the little boy a pattern to the whole company? He had brought enough food for them, and if each of them had brought as much, the need for the miracle would not have been so great.
Rem. As regards Eutychus, the passage in @Acts 20 says the saints "were not a little comforted", verse 12.
J.T. If you have a potential man there will be comfort. Eutychus would be this, through the extraordinary experience he had.
F.S.M. Would there be a willingness on the part of the boy to surrender what he had into the hand of Jesus so that there might be wealth for the company? I was thinking of the way the true Joseph is seen here. Pharaoh recognised the greatness of Joseph and said, "there is none so discreet and wise as thou", @Genesis 41:39. I wondered whether if they had recognised the greatness of Christ here, that would have been their answer: "there is none so discreet and wise as thou", @Genesis 41:39.
J.T. Exactly; whereas the cup-bearer of Pharaoh minimised Joseph; he referred to him as a Hebrew servant in the prison, but if he had profited spiritually by what had passed before his eyes in Joseph, he would never have alluded to him in that way. He never met a man like him, even Pharaoh was not his equal, but he minimised Joseph in his mind, which is very often the
{74}
case with ourselves. Pharaoh never minimised Joseph; he always speaks of him according to what he is.
H.E.S. Was it a calculation of an unspiritual mind in regard to this little boy?
J.T. I think Andrew's calculation is unspiritual.
Rem. It is singular for he had abode with the Lord "that day", (@John 1:39).
H.F.N. Does what you have been referring to in connection with an unspiritual touch, raise the whole question of the chapter as to our spiritual constitution, and food forming it? Is that really what will bring about the spiritual touch?
J.T. Exactly; you must have a constitution in keeping with the light you are brought into. What is remarkable in the history of Israel is, that when they arrive at the Jordan they are to provide themselves victuals. God had been doing that for them in the wilderness for forty years. In John it is a question of passing out of death into life, as we get in chapter 5; and chapter 6 is the food that is necessary for that. It is a question of the supply which arises whether you have it or not; this little boy had it.
J.H.T. Why does the Lord pass over the disciples in verse 11, in the distribution of the food?
J.T. I think they had disqualified themselves; He still has to go on doing the needful things Himself. We may think we are doing a good deal, but the Lord gives us to understand that He is doing the work.
D.L.H. Does that not correspond with the Psalm which says, "I will satisfy her needy ones with bread", @Psalm 132:15?
J.T. I think it does. He is doing that here, and He *would*  take us on in it. In the other gospels He does use them, but not here; nor does He use them to find the ass in this gospel; He finds it Himself. Well, I think all that is to remind us how weak things are, so that we should think soberly so as to be wise. So that if the Lord does the thing Himself when He might
{75}
have used them, why is it? It was surely a challenge to them.
A.F.M. The only part they have in this is to gather up the fragments; is there some point in that?
J.T. Yes. He says to His disciples, "Gather together the fragments which are over and above, that nothing may be lost". That surely is an important service showing that we should value *all*  the Lord gives. Nothing should be lost. The idea is that it is to be kept for administrative purposes; the time will come when it will be needed. If we undervalue or discredit what the Lord gives so bountifully, the supply may slacken or cease entirely.
P.L. Would that be like Joseph during the seven lean years when the food was stored up in the cities?
J.T. Very much.
Ques. Do you think our brethren in the time to come will profit by the ministry that is carried over?
J.T. I doubt if they will understand it; the setting of things is so different.
A.F.M. Would the value of gathering up the fragments be that we may have it now in the form of written ministry, in a permanent form, to be used at times when oral ministry is not so abundant?
J.T. There is the principle here of food being kept. I think the primary thought of the faith was what was kept in the *hearts*  of the saints. Writing seems to have come in later. Baskets are vessels in which things are preserved and carried. Written ministry may be included here, but the truth must be held in faith if it is to be handed on.
J.O.S. Why is it men? "Make the men sit down". In the other gospels it is *them*.
J.T. They would be the more responsible. There were women and children, as we learn elsewhere, so I suppose men would be the responsible element.
Ques. In regard of the baskets and the gathering up, would it be what was said of Mary the mother of
{76}
the Lord, that she "kept all these things in her mind, pondering them in her heart"?(@Luke 2:19) Would that be similar?
J.T. That was the principle. There is the idea of preserving and carrying things forward, that nothing of previous ministry is lost.
P.L. I wondered if John himself, writing so many years later, did not represent the fragments gathered up.
J.T. It is very interesting to think of how matured he must have been in writing of these things, as an old brother and apostle. I suppose the Lord took him up specially and prepared him to deal with these weighty matters.
F.W.W. Do you look at the second sign in this chapter as the complement of the first?
J.T. The first is food by which the constitution of the believer is built up, and the second is the Lord's supremacy as outside of and above all evil here. It says, "But when evening was come, his disciples went down to the sea, and having gone on board ship, they went over the sea to Capernaum". Capernaum in this chapter is a special place of testimony. I think the second sign is the complement of the first. They went across the sea to Capernaum. It is a question of leading on in the education of the disciples. In the first sign they were exposed and humbled, although allowed to gather up the fragments. I apprehend the presence of the fragments would be a rebuke to their unbelief; but now they are to have a further lesson.
We must notice Capernaum, for what the Lord said later was in the synagogue in Capernaum (verse 59), and His references to Capernaum elsewhere -- the mighty works done there -- would show it was a special place of testimony. He is going to call it to account presently, and He would have before us the importance of testimony, as He said to the cleansed leper, "... for a testimony to them", @Luke 5:14. However small it may be, testimony is of immense importance. It says, "And it had already become dark, and Jesus had not
{77}
come to them, and the sea was agitated by a strong wind blowing. Having rowed then about twenty-five or thirty stadia, they see Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the ship; and they were frightened. But he says to them. It is I: be not afraid. They were willing therefore to receive him into the ship; and immediately the ship was at the land to which they went". This is an important sign. The sign in chapter 5 would enable us to carry our circumstances, that they should not carry us; but here we have the Lord walking on the water -- and agitated water -- that is to say, it is a situation directly affected by Satan. Can I walk on *that* ? That is the next lesson. But as soon as they receive Him into the ship they are at the land, which I think means solid and known ground; we know where we are. This, added to the first sign in the chapter, would greatly enhance the Lord's greatness in the minds of the disciples. There is no need to fear any more with a Person who can do these things. It says, "They were willing therefore to receive him into the ship".
Rem. This is another side to @Matthew 14.
J.T. I have no doubt it is the same incident, but another aspect of it; Peter is not seen walking on the water here. It is rather reserved for the end of the chapter to tell us of Peter's progress: "thou hast words of life eternal", @John 6:68. This, in a way, is more than walking on the water.
H.M.S. Referring to the first sign in the chapter, they recognise Jesus as the prophet, but why do they wish to make Him king?
J.T. Is it not the disposition of men to appropriate Christ in relation to their needs here? The whole of Christendom has done that; it is not a question with them of going outside the world; and so, when they come to make Him king, the Lord said it was because they had eaten of the loaves and the fishes; but they were totally blind to the position. Christendom even in its most
{78}
favourable aspect, is blind to the moral import of what is professed. The Lord says, "Work not for the food which perishes, but for the food which abides unto life eternal, which the Son of man shall give to you; for him has the Father sealed, even God", @John 6:27. That is, they would make Him king, but He would bring in the economy of grace, which is a much greater thing. Then He said, "It is not Moses that has given you the bread out of heaven; but my Father". @John 6:32
H.E.S. Is your thought that in chapter 5 the gain of His being present was not received, but His activities in this chapter bring gain to the disciples?
J.T. There is gain and much greater general interest, which is in keeping with Galilee. Even interest in the crowds is not to be despised. But it is an interest that tends to appropriate Christ in relation to this world, and for material gain, which is utter darkness to the position; and so He brings in the sealing of Himself as the Son of man by His Father, even God, and then He says, "It is not Moses that has given you the bread out of heaven; but my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven. For the bread of God is he who comes down out of heaven and gives life to the world". @John 6:32,33. He brings us into the economy of Christianity, and presents the food afforded there.
A.F.M. I suppose it would change all their thoughts if they had "eaten the flesh of the Son of man, and drunk his blood";(@John 6:53) they would not have aspired to make Jesus king in this world.
J.T. Showing that eternal life stands outside the realm of nature, not only outside the realm of this world in its bad sense, but the whole realm of flesh and blood. It is a dead Christ that is food for eternal life, a Christ whose blood is separate from His body -- that is, the end of human conditions as they are now. He that eats His flesh and drinks His blood has eternal life. One may seek to appropriate Christ for material gain, whereas eternal life is outside of that altogether;
{79}
and the food for it is a *dead*  Christ in that sense. As having given His flesh for the life of the world His blood is separate from His body, and that is the end of human condition in flesh and blood; a lesson perhaps of which we know little. I confess I know very little of @John 6, but I see that the food is the flesh of Christ, and the drink is the blood of Christ. Eating is a figure used for appropriation. Eating is appropriation, in the power of the Spirit, of the great fact that Christ as here in flesh and blood is here no longer. He has died, it is the end of all flesh and blood conditions.
W.C.G. Does it correspond with the quickening of the Spirit in verse 63?
J.T. That helps as to this chapter -- the spirit of it. The Spirit quickens; we have to understand that the Lord is not thinking of actual flesh and blood; it is spiritual. He wants us to understand what is signified in appropriating Him as dead, that it is the end of flesh and blood conditions. But there is the eating of Himself as He is now, as it is said in verse 57: "*he*  also who eats me shall live also on account of me".
Ques. Could you help us as to the different ways in which the Lord speaks of Himself in this chapter, such as the "bread of life"?
J.T. "The bread of God is he who comes down out of heaven" (verse 33). That is its source; it is coming down, not simply come down from heaven, but coming down. Then, the "bread of life" (verse 49) is the bread which sustains life.
S.J.B.C. What is the distinction between the bread of life and the manna?
J.T. The manna is a living Christ here on earth in everyday life; the Lord was in ordinary circumstances as we are; manna is how He acted in those circumstances. That is, I think, what the manna means. It came down from heaven too; it was rained down.
S.J.B.C. Are the living bread and the manna synonymous?
{80}
J.T. I do not think so at all. The manna was for sustenance in the wilderness; this food is for going over Jordan. It is very like the 'victuals' that were required in @Joshua 1: "Prepare yourselves victuals". The word denotes strong meat; it is stronger meat than the manna. So it does not appear they go over Jordan in the power of the manna merely, although it did not cease till after they went over. Evidently there was *other*  food required. It is another word, something taken in hunting, something strong, needed for the passage over Jordan.
H.W.S. Is there a difference between eating His flesh and drinking His blood, and what is said in verse 57, "*he*  also who eats me"? Is that a further thought?
J.T. It is appropriating Him as He is now.
G.W.W. Does not the suggestion that they would come by force and make Him king, indicate that they had no true sense of who they were, nor of who He was, but for the believer the feeding produces moral suitability in the soul for association with Christ?
J.T. That is right; so that we go over Jordan in the power of this food. 'Victuals' denote strong meat, something to build up a constitution equal to the crossing of the Jordan. For, after all, if it be the article of death, perhaps if we challenge ourselves we are not ready to face it, but it is a question of being fed to face it, so that it is no surprise to us when it comes.
J.J. What is the reason for the change in the title? It is the Son of God in chapter 5 and the Son of man in chapter 6.
J.T. The Son of God is generally what He is on God's side towards us; but this is a lowly Man coming down here, giving His flesh and blood for the life of the world. It is Christ on our side, and He goes up on our side -- the Son of man going up where He was before. It is wonderful to travel the road indicated here and see Him go up, so to speak, for it is the building
{81}
up of a spiritual constitution in us, culminating in Peter's remark. In answer to the Lord's question, "Simon Peter answered him. Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God", @John 6:68,69. It is what they *had believed and known*. It is not a revelation from the Father here. The point is to show that there was development, that some one is getting on, and that is our salvation in the testimony. If some one gets on, others will follow. Peter is the leader in this confession. He speaks for the others, but obviously the light he conveys is in his soul. There is somebody getting on, and so he says, "we have believed and known". The faith and knowledge extend back, and are continuous, and there is this beautiful speech: "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God", @John 6:68,69.
D.L.H. Is it not important to notice that the eating in this chapter is connected with eternal life, whereas the eating of the manna is never so connected?
J.T. Never; the manna is to sustain us here in our life of flesh and blood.
Ques. What is the significance of the expression, four times repeated, "I will raise him up at the last day", @John 6:40?
J.T. That is very comforting as to the resurrection. The "last day" *is*  the last day, and so the victory is sure; whatever happens in the interval does not affect it.
H.D'A.C. Why does Peter say, "the holy one of God"? It seems rather disappointing. You would have thought he might have used a greater term like "the Son of the living God".
J.T. That is what some theologians thought he should have said. The Textus Receptus has these very words, but the New Translation has the former.
H.D'A.C. It seems to be somewhat of a drop.
J.T. It is a drop; but I think the point is that Peter says just what he believes. He has reached a
{82}
very important point as knowing that Jesus is "the holy one of God".
S.J.B.C. He does not go beyond his measure.
J.T. No. @Matthew 16 is, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God",(verse 16) but that is revelation. This is distinct progress founded upon what he had observed in Christ, because he says, "we have believed and known", @John 6:69.
Ques. Does the first epistle of Peter work this out experimentally? "To whom coming, a living stone, cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious, yourselves also, as living stones ...", @1 Peter 2:4,5.
J.T. That is right. It is growth, constituting believers living stones, so that they come to Christ as the Living Stone. He could speak of it feelingly, for that is what is indicated here. Jesus had words of eternal life, and He was the Christ, "the holy one of God". The thought of holiness at this juncture is most significant.
{83}
THE GLORY OF THE SON OF GOD (5)
@John 9:1 - 41; @John 11:32 - 44
J.T. It will be necessary to touch briefly on chapters 7 and 8, so as to get the link of the instruction between chapters 6 and 9. What was before us yesterday afternoon has special importance as bearing on the present time, the Galilean position, and the food furnished there in relation to the disciples. It is food, as the chapter signifies, "which abides unto life eternal" (verse 27), that is, food to give a constitution for entering into life eternal. The result of the instruction, in Peter as representing the twelve, has a great bearing on the present moment, raising the question with us as to how we are progressing in relation to what the Lord has given in our times. Peter denotes by his answer to the Lord, that he and the others had found that there was no one to go to but Christ, for He had "words of life eternal", @John 6:68. That is, all that may be known of it is in Him, not only in a general way, but in the details of it, in the *words*  of it. And then he adds that they had believed and known that He was the Christ "the holy one of God",(@John 6:69) the basis thus being laid in his soul for the priestly system in holiness. The Lord, in order to make the position clear, calls attention to the fact that He had chosen the twelve, but that one of them was a devil, so that, whilst progress is being made in the knowledge of the Lord generally in the twelve, the enemy was working, which is a solemn fact.
Then chapters 7 and 8 suggest what is current abroad in Christendom, the current opinions, *pros*  and *cons*  in regard of Jesus, but the testimony and true conflict move on in triumph, so that we are brought into the light of the glory; and that, not only as a matter of light, but in tangibleness in the Spirit received, which
{84}
is a very real thing. "Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" -- (@John 7:38) that is, out of a believer on Jesus. What was in mind was not merely individual, but the Spirit that they should receive, should be received collectively, but its effect should be seen in individuals.
Then chapter 8 opens with the position of the Lord, the manner of His life, not His life as represented in the manna, but His own personal associations on the mount of Olives, which has its place now; the public position being in the temple, and the chapter presenting Him as the "light of the world"; so that he who followed Him should have "the light of life". Chapter 8 brings out the actual presence of life here. Of course it was in Himself, but the coming of the Spirit made it a fact in the saints; and it is a question now of whether it exists practically amongst the people of God, so that there should be "the light of life", which is an excellent guide for believers, who seek a living state of things. Then we have the great immutable truth of the Lord's Person. His entering into the house as formed spiritually here on earth, had a beginning; but His Person had no beginning. He abides in the house for ever, that is to say, from a given time on; but "Before Abraham was, I am", (@John 8:58) has no beginning and no end. So that we are on solid ground at the end of chapter 8, immutable ground, in the Lord's assertion and the consciousness, as one might say, of His eternal personality: "Before Abraham was, I am", @John 8:58. This great truth is the determining test for all, for the Lord says, "unless ye shall believe that I am [he], ye shall die in your sins", @John 8:24.
M.W.B. With regard to your remarks in reference to the Holy Spirit in chapter 7, would you say a word as to the place the Holy Spirit takes in the mediatorial system? As a divine Person one would suppose there was an initial act of His own, apart from being sent, as with the Lord in @Philippians 2, there was an act of His own. He "emptied himself". In what way did the Spirit come into the mediatorial system?
{85}
J.T. As acting, I think He is always seen in a mediatorial capacity, but this must anticipate the incarnation. The mediatorial service, whether in the Spirit or in Jesus, links on with the incarnation, and not only so, but also with ascension as regards the Spirit's presence here, Christ being in heaven as chapter 7 clearly states: "The Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified",(@John 7:39) as if to call attention to the fact that what we now have, was not yet. It does not refer to the eternal personality of the Spirit, but to the form in which He is here now, that He has come from heaven, as received from the Father, and shed forth. His activities in the creation and in the Old Testament, are of course mediatorial; but I think all must be linked on with the great mediatorial movement in one of the Persons of the deity becoming a Man. It is only thus the creature can understand.
Eu.R. Would you say a word as to chapter 15:26, which reads, "The Spirit of truth who goes forth from with the Father"?
J.T. Well, it is to call attention to the fact that He was with the Father, and thus had a perfect first-hand knowledge (I use that expression for convenience) of the Father's thoughts of Christ; for that is what was in view in His coming -- to bear witness of Jesus. The form of the statement, especially as given by J.N.D., is to assure faith of the Spirit's competency to bear witness of Jesus. He goes forth *from with*  the Father.
A.M.H. Is there any thought in the Spirit descending upon the Lord, of an initial act of His own, prior to His being sent forth by the Lord or given by the Father to us?
J.T. I think the facts presented indicate that the action was sovereign, but in perfect keeping with the Father's announcement accompanying it.
Ques. In the same way in @Luke 1:35 as to the birth of the Lord: "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee". Would that be in the nature of an initial act?
{86}
J.T. I have no doubt it would, but it has to be borne in mind that the Spirit is the Spirit *of God* ; under this title He is seen in @Genesis 1:2; while His attitude there is sovereign, it seems to convey representation.
Ques. Does not "by the Holy Spirit" involve what was mediatorial?
J.T. It does and so God garnished the heavens by His Spirit. The Persons we know as the Son and the Spirit were active in the creation. God created in that way, this involves mediatorship; but They were acting as God, not in a relatively inferior position.
M.W.B. In @Acts 10:38 we read, "How God anointed him with the Holy Spirit", as if it were God's act.
J.T. I think, as I remarked, all the activities of the Spirit are on the mediatorial principle, and all hinge on the incarnation, whether anticipatively, or actually afterwards.
G.W.W. So that you would make a good deal of difference between what we read about the Spirit in the Old Testament, and what we read concerning Him subsequent to the incarnation.
J.T. I should; only I have thought all the Old Testament and creational activities anticipate Christ's mediatorship as Man. It is intelligible to me that the mediatorial actions of Christ in the creation, and in the Old Testament, anticipate His incarnation; but it has to be remembered too, that the mediatorial service does not *necessarily*  imply inferiority. One can be a mediator of another as on equal terms. We know that the Spirit spoke and otherwise acted as the Spirit of Christ in Old Testament times, and this shows that He took a mediatorial position in view of incarnation. Compare @1 Peter 1.
H.D'A.C. What makes you say that He acted mediatorially before He became Man?
J.T. He acted thus in the creation. "By whom also he made the worlds" (@Hebrews 1:2). On the other hand,
{87}
@John 1: 3 and @Colossians 1:16 show that all was effected *by Him*  -- without reference to God using Him.
A.M.H. As to sending, could it be said that one divine Person would send Another unless there were some movement first on the part of the divine Person?
J.T. I think the idea of one divine Person sending Another would be subsequent to the Second moving of *Himself*,  and that is clearly intimated in @Philippians 2:6. The action is the Lord's. "Who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form"; the emptying synchronised with the bondman's form. It was all His own action, and never afterwards obligatory on Him, save by Himself, as far as I see. He has taken it and acts in it, but things are never fixed on Him; the position of a bondman is not fixed on Him as exclusive of other features. He has taken it Himself, and we have to leave it there. I think all the statements in @Philippians 2 help as to the Spirit. He is not personally a subject of revelation exactly, as the other Persons are, although He is seen in revelation in the baptismal form, as in relation to the other Persons; but as far as I see, Scripture presents Him as always acting mediatorially. But the Spirit of God is really God, but now taking a lowly place in order to serve, and this is most touching as apprehended.
E.J.McB. With regard to a mediator not necessarily being on a lower platform than the One He mediates with, are we right in connecting the thought of "Let us make man" (@Genesis 1:26)?
J.T. You mean that the word is plural. What have you in mind?
E.J.McB. Do you think it refers to the thought of equality between the Persons referred to?
J.T. No doubt. God, in Genesis, is generally in the plural, indicating supremacy; and I think the idea of the plural formally mentioned in the passage you refer to, is to show the importance of the transaction
{88}
in view. The plural used thus, is to call attention to the importance of the matter in hand; it was a prime matter with God, especially the creation of man. That is how I understand it. I doubt if you can make very much as to the plural beyond that; all that God is, entered into it, the matter was so important. From the New Testament we know definitely that three Persons were there.
D.L.H. Might we say that the "us" is a plural of dignity?
J.T. Yes. You get it also in wisdom in the book of Proverbs in certain connections. For instance, in chapter 9:1, it is in the plural because the matter is so important. "Wisdom hath built her house" is in the plural, and so in one or two other instances, as if to emphasise them. All that wisdom is, entered into that transaction, for it was a great transaction to build her house. The creation was a prime transaction with God, especially the formation of man.
G.W.W. In referring to those verses in @Genesis 1, must we not bear in mind that the One who uses the plural form, and of whom it is used, is the One of whom we are speaking as the Son?
J.T. Quite so; all the actual transactions were by Him, and that is why I think we should regard the mediatorial service as not necessarily a bondman's service. It is seen in Him as in human form, but it was there before; that is, it is the Person who in the creation acted in His own power, and not only for God instrumentally. But He was used by God to make the worlds, @Hebrews 1:2.
W.R.P. What about @Colossians 1?
J.T. Well, it works out there; you have Him acting in His own power in that chapter, and then you have Him acting instrumentally as well, that is, acting for Another. I think you will see that if you look at the passage, verses 16 - 20.
{89}
H.M.S. In reference to @Philippians 2 do you consider the bondman's form is what has been called an excess of grace?
J.T. It is to indicate the stoop as an example for us. It was not imposed upon Him, or He could be no model. It was His own mind. Acting in obedience is another thing.
Ques. What He voluntarily assumed?
J.T. The "mind that was in Christ Jesus".
Ques. In Genesis the Spirit of God is mentioned as brooding over the face of the deep; would that be His own act?
J.T. It is the Spirit of *God*  there as already mentioned. If the Spirit of God is acting, God is acting, but it is God in relation with His creation -- as it were, *feeling*  what had come to pass in it.
Ques. Has it in view all that follows in connection with the mediatorial system?
J.T. It has undoubtedly. It is brooding or hovering over. It is God taking account of the chaos, and that in a first-hand way, not merely at a distance. Because Genesis brings that out, that whilst God, of course, knows all things perfectly in Himself, yet He would show us that He has first-hand knowledge of things. So He came down at Babel, and came down to see what Sodom was; and so, the Spirit of God "hovering over the face of the deep"(@Genesis 1:2) was that God was taking account of the thing feelingly, in order to bring order out of the chaos.
Eu.R. If we hold carefully in our hearts and minds what you have been saying as to the stoop being entirely His own act, would it not guard us against speaking of limitations upon Him in any way?
J.T. That is what I believe should be observed. He takes up the position Himself, but to impose it upon Him and to limit Him to it, is another matter. In fact, we cannot limit Him to it, because if we look at it from
{90}
the divine side, we cannot introduce the thought of bondman.
J.J. Do you think the passage in @1 Timothy 2:5 where the Mediator is referred to, is to put Him on the same equality as God? It says, "God is one, and the mediator of God and men one".
J.T. That is a question of the mediatorial service in regard of men, but His mediatorial service is wider than that; it existed before men existed.
J.J. Only it says that He is one; the word "one" is used twice.
J.T. No doubt it involves His equality. He could not be Mediator on God's part save as equal with God; but He must also be Man to be Mediator in relation to men.
H.E.S. Is there any connection between the thoughts in Genesis of the darkness on the face of the deep, and the condition of this man in @John 9?
J.T. I think there is.
G.W.W. Is your thought that every activity of divine Persons as to which we are instructed in Scripture, had in view this movement in incarnation; that that was in prospect in every activity?
J.T. That is what I understand. Wisdom takes us back. I do not think we go back any further than @Proverbs 8 indicates. We can travel back with wisdom. And we have to use terms of time; we cannot think otherwise, and so we speak of a time or period in which the necessity for wisdom arose, that is, when the counsels of God in regard of the creation began to take form. Then wisdom came into evidence; it was "brought forth". We can travel back there, and see in wisdom's remarks in @Proverbs 8:31, that man was in view. That is the great central thought: "My delights were with the sons of men". Therefore it seems to me, that mediatorial service extending back as far as that, had the incarnation in view. The sons of men would be sons developed in that relation. It helps us as to viewing the matter of
{91}
mediatorial service, that there were divine operations from the outset, but their end, and the great central thought, was the incarnation. Everything hinges on that. There would be nothing really to hold the heart of God, apart from His great thought of sonship in a divine Person. That is to say, the centre of the whole created sphere is a divine Person in sonship here, and sons with Him. So the operations before and after are seen there, and the operations of the Spirit are included in that.
W.C.G. In the reference in Joshua to God hearkening to the voice of a man, does that refer to the operations of the Spirit in relation to the mediatorial system?
J.T. I think so; that is typically Christ.
Ques. When it says, "Let us make man in our image",(@Genesis 1:26) was it not divine Persons taking counsel as to the form the Son should take in incarnation?
J.T. That was in mind. Adam was the figure of Him that was to come. As I was saying, what would there be in the creation apart from a divine Person becoming Man? There is nothing in it great enough for God. But the creation is held in relation to a divine Person in manhood; the whole moral system, and the physical creation with it, is held in connection with a divine Person in manhood, as the Son.
H.D'A.C. I am not very clear as to that verse "Let us make man". Does it indicate the three Persons in the Godhead or not, and if it is not, what Person does it mean?
J.T. No doubt we would have to put the idea into it, but the plural in such a connection does not *necessarily*  imply more than one Person, especially if it be a question of emphasising the greatness of the thing that is in hand.
H.D'A.C. But with the light we now have we should say so.
J.T. Of course, it was the God now made known in three Persons. The transaction was very great, one
{92}
of the divine Persons being in view, as becoming Man, according to eternal purpose.
P.L. In Isaiah we have, "Have ye not understood from the foundation of the earth?"(@Isaiah 40:21) and then it says, "It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth", @Isaiah 40:22. You were saying that the foundations of the earth had that Person in view.
J.T. Exactly: "He that sitteth upon the circle of the earth". (@Isaiah 40:22) The circle may be any extent but there He is. That is the idea. The Holy Spirit would engage us with the grandeur of the thought of a divine Person in the Godhead, known as the Son, as the centre of everything.
Rem. In the chapter we are considering it says, "Since time was, it has not been heard that any one opened the eyes of one born blind" (verse 32), as if that One is now coming into view.
J.T. Yes. This is in time; the Lord has been known in time as the Son. The Lord would engage us in this section with the carrying forward of the thought of disciples. They are exposed in chapter 6, and then they shine in the end of that chapter in Peter's confession; and carrying them forward, I think we arrive in chapter 9, at formal relations in a *locality*,  which corresponds with Corinthians; and in the section this afternoon, the Lord may help us to arrive at formal relations in their *universal*  bearing, our heavenly status. So that you have here the *neighbours*,  and in the opening of the man's eyes the sign involves obedience. It is a question of obedience and one being sent, and the neighbours enquire as to it. The bearing of the sign is towards the locality, and it runs on to the beginning of chapter 12, where "Jesus ... six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where was the dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead", @John 12:1. The passage shows that the Lord came back to the place where the glory of God, and the glory of the Son of God had shone, and found conditions corresponding to the
{93}
great light and grace and affection that had been manifested there. That, I think, is what the Lord would bring us to. It is a circle in which the Lord is entertained and yet not a word is spoken as far as the record shows; but there is evidence of great spiritual power and affection, at the beginning of @John 12. The silence is broken by Judas, and then the Lord speaks; aside from that there is not a word. It is a question of the saints understanding a realm of spiritual power in silence. If we have that before us, I think what intervenes from chapter 9 will become intelligible.
M.W.B. In what way do you link the family relations with the epistle to the Corinthians? Is it because of the local setting, the place being mentioned?
J.T. Well, I am speaking of what should underlie the external forms in any locality, what should underlie the symbols of the Lord's Supper and all the public aspect of things; to make it what it should be -- to make it a matter of spirituality, and not merely external form. That is to say, the power to sit, for instance, as the bread is passed round -- sometimes taking a considerable time -- and the cup and the box; the ability to sit bodywise, to sit in relation to one another, and not simply waiting patiently for the time to pass. There is a great difference. I use the word "body" because it is used in Corinthians, and I think @John 10 helps greatly, the saints being seen there as brought into "one flock".
M.W.B. Therefore behind the external order of Corinthians we are to suppose the spiritual elements of @John 12.
J.T. Yes. You would agree with that?
M.W.B. I think it is very helpful; it gives substance to the form.
J.T. It gives substance and power to what is done. We are not simply waiting for the time to pass. The outward form is gone through, but we are able to sit
{94}
in spiritual silence, without a word spoken. Thus place is given to the Lord as Head in the assembly.
Ques. Might I ask whether we take sufficient notice of the *feeding*  in the Supper, whether we are in the enjoyment of what is set before us in the way of eating and drinking?
J.T. I think that is a very good suggestion. There is an additional thought to the memorial. It is for a memorial, but then there is the eating and drinking, which necessarily would be enjoyment, and also afford strength.
Rem. I thought that would give us power in respect to the silence, that is to say, you are in the appropriation and the enjoyment of that which is beyond any telling.
J.T. And then, as I was saying, we sit together "bodywise", for @1 Corinthians 10:17, says "we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf". There is such a sense of being in the body, of being so vitally linked up by the Spirit, baptised in the power of one Spirit into one body, and then being made to drink into one Spirit, that it makes the position enjoyable. The links are in power and we are sitting in silence not simply waiting for the time to pass, but in spiritual enjoyment.
Ques. So in a way you are eating with the others; it is all one body?
J.T. Quite so; it is the "bread which we break" and the "cup of blessing which we bless",(@1 Corinthians 10:16) and so we are all being made to drink into one Spirit.
Ques. Would the sense we have in that connection bring about the spirit of reverence?
J.T. I am sure it would. It would indicate the spiritual relations in which we are set, and the spiritual enjoyment that we have, so whether it be the announcements, or the giving of thanks, or the passing of the bread and the cup and the box, all is in the power of a current of spiritual links and affections.
{95}
E.J.McB. Does the thing hang on the two thoughts, of the believer being cast out of the world on account of his links with Christ, and being brought out of death into the life of Christ? Would they make the conditions for public silence?
J.T. Just so; I think those two things are necessary for assembly formation and service. Chapter 9 is the moral fibre of the saints, like the acacia wood, and fits in with 1 Corinthians. The man proceeds on moral lines. The Lord leaves him and does not give him any instruction as to what to say. It all comes out as the effect of the process in his soul, so that he is able to answer himself. He tells the neighbours what he did, and says, "I saw". He uses the past tense, just acquainting them with the fact, but in dealing with the Pharisees, he says, "I see". It is important as in the assembly that we see, that we have moral perception. "I see", he says, and then he is able to converse with the Pharisees and the Jews, and get the mastery of them. I doubt if any one is rightly in fellowship who has not the mastery in dealing with the Pharisees and the Jews.
Ques. How would you detect that now?
J.T. You are able to give an account intelligently of your position. The man ends up in the most eloquent way. A man that had no previous education and never saw anything, is now on more than equal terms with them, and says, "Since time was, it has not been heard that any one opened the eyes of one born blind". He is reasoning on moral lines, and that is what enters into 1 Corinthians, into the public setting of a local company -- that we can give an account of our position and why we are there. "And they cast him out". He challenges them and says, "do ye also wish to become his disciples?" It is very fine; you can see that he is really in the power of the truth.
J.J. Does the thought of "sent" refer to the Lord only, or does it include the man?
{96}
J.T. The man is brought into accord with Christ, who was here on that principle. It is like the boards of the tabernacle brought into accord with the ark, the same kind of material.
P.L. Would you connect the showing forth of His death, as flowing out of the testimony of the blind man; and the memorial more with the fruit of what Lazarus passes through, his relation to Christ in life?
J.T. I think Lazarus brings us on to Colossians. Chapters 11 and 12 point to our being risen with Christ, but I do not think it is as risen with Christ that we remember Him. It is more on the moral line as with the man in chapter 9. 1 Corinthians is more on the moral line, and how can we be here in the presence of these terrible worldly conditions, save as formed morally and able to answer, and not only to answer, but to go forward and establish the truth, that the ground taken is of God. "If this man were not of God he would be able to do nothing". It is the truth reasoned out on moral lines that cannot be gainsaid. But chapters 11 and 12 mean that we are in association with Christ, that we are risen with Him. It is more Colossian ground.
A.F.M. Does the incident of the blind man in this chapter link at all with chapter 4? The Lord reveals Himself to the woman as the Christ, but in this incident as the Son of God, which seems to be the great end of this gospel: "that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God", @John 20:31.
J.T. Quite so. I was going to remark that the blind man is cast out, and that is what makes him interesting to the Lord. Of course He is always interested, but the Lord makes no overture until He hears that he is cast out, showing the basis of the public assembly. It is on the principle either of being cast out, or of having left what is opposed to Christ, and when the Lord hears about that in any locality, then He finds us, and raises the question as to His sonship. It is not only that He is to be known as Son, as a question
{97}
of His Person -- that is already dealt with in chapters 1 to 5 -- but the point is, that this being known, becomes effective in a believer. That is the great result, and then as it becomes effective in the believer another world is opened up to him, because really this man is without a country, without a home, without a religion; he is a pariah. Well, the Son of God is the portal by which he enters into another world.
W.C. Would that correspond with the Lord coming in in relation to the Supper?
J.T. Somewhat; where the suitable state exists. The state existed with this man: "Jesus heard that they had cast him out". That means he is just like the Lord in the judgment of the world -- worthless.
W.C. The Lord being absent in that way. He comes in in relation to what is coming to light in the man.
J.T. The Lord comes in to associate Himself with what is in accord with Himself. That is the idea. He was rejected, and the man was rejected, so he is fit material for God's world.
H.E.S. Is this what you said at the outset, that it is only as cast out or leaving the sphere of worldly religion that you are brought into the realm of the Son of God?
J.T. You are fit for it. That is involved in the Corinthian position; you can stand your ground. Whether having to do with Jew or gentile you can hold your ground. That is what the man indicates here. So now he is taken on. It is a question of the works of God. That is what we have to see, not the work of God simply, but the works of God: and then, he is to come under the gracious care of the Son of God, who is going to put him somewhere else. He is to learn that the Son of God is the Shepherd. He has the heart of a shepherd, with the most tender consideration for us as His sheep, and He puts us into a flock. That is the teaching, and it links on with the body. It has often been pointed out, but it is very practical, that the Son
{98}
of God becomes the Shepherd, meaning that He has tender feelings and consideration for the saints.
H.M.S. Is this on the line of the epistle? "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" (@1 John 5:5).
J.T. Exactly. He is cast out. Could he stand his ground as cast out and isolated? He was able to hold his own with the Jews and the Pharisees, but definite isolation is a further experience. We need company and care, and that is what chapter 10 provides. There is the care of the Shepherd and companionship in the "one flock". Here we know the Lord as the Father knows Him and He knows the Father.
H.F.N. Would Paul's preaching of the Son of God refer to the public position?
J.T. It would as a testimony. You can understand how this man would come into that in due course. He corresponds very much with Saul of Tarsus in @Acts 9.
Ques. Would you distinguish between the work of God and the works of God?
J.T. Certainly, the works of God are what are mentioned here. The work of God would be conversion or new birth, but much more has to be done, and the point is that these works should be manifested in this man.
J.J. You have connected the man in chapter 9 with 1 Corinthians. How would he come into 2 Timothy in these days?
J.T. Well, it is the same idea. Instead of being cast out, in @2 Timothy 2:19 you leave what is evil: "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". It is the same kind of moral fibre that enables you to do that.
Ques. Is it in the apprehension of the greatness of the Person with whom he is having dealings, that this man becomes a worshipper?
J.T. Quite so. As soon as the Son of God comes before him he is ready to own Him. The Lord says,
{99}
"dost thou believe on the Son of God?" and he says, "And who is he Lord, that I may believe on him? And Jesus said to him. Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is *he"*,  meaning that the man had really come into contact with Him before, but was not intelligent as to it. But now he worships Him.
Rem. Would you say that he is in correspondence with the Lord at the beginning on the line of obedience, and he comes into correspondence with Him also on the line of solitariness, and then he is as the solitary one set in the family? The Lord opens to him the wealth of the family, and divine affections.
J.T. That is very good. So the idea of the flock in the next chapter, is to emphasise the care indicated in the Shepherd, so as to lead up to the family in chapter 11. But this terrible fact should be noted that there is a murderous spirit in Jerusalem against Christ, which is seen right through these chapters, and in chapter 10 they surround Him, meaning that His way among them is entirely shut up now. That is the end of His relations with them; and hence He leaves them and goes to where John baptised at the first.
He is now going back to first principles with a view to the family; and goes thence to Bethany, but with calculations of love. The members of the family at Bethany are given, and Jesus loved each of them. He loved the family, and they loved and honoured Him; that is what comes out in the second visit. The position in chapter 11 is the family, but in a locality. It is what was at Bethany, and the Lord comes in due course to the place, and Martha met Him and she gets light, saying, "I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who should come into the world", @John 11:27. She gets light as to the "resurrection and the life", and then she goes off and calls Mary secretly, saying, "The teacher is come and calls thee",(@John 11:28) showing how sisterly she has become. As soon as Mary hears that, she goes to Jesus, but she has to go to the place where Martha met Him.
{100}
The teaching is, that those in a locality who may be regarded as unspiritual and to some extent ignorant, are brought into evidence as typified in Martha. She was surely very poorly instructed when she met the Lord, but we can never tell what may happen overnight in a brother. We must not be too fixed in our thoughts about brothers, because sometimes changes take place very quickly, and we ought to expect that. So as she met the Lord she was full of orthodox thoughts, and there are many like that. We cannot ignore them for they are brethren, and they may get light. She went to meet the Lord, and said, "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died". She believed He would have kept him alive, but that was not the point at all. The point in Christianity is not to keep people alive in the flesh. That is a poor thing as compared with resurrection, so He says, "Thy brother shall rise again". She says to Him, "I know that he will rise again in the resurrection in the last day. Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that believes on me, though he have died, shall live; and every one who lives and believes on me shall never die. Believest thou this? She says to him. Yea, Lord; I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who should come into the world".
Now she is illuminated, and no longer merely an orthodox sister; she believes the testimony presented to her. Christ is now before her as "the resurrection and the life", the Son of God. Orthodoxy is really a barren thing by itself. Christianity is a question of the Person of Christ; and it is as coming into contact with the Person, that we get light in our souls and see everything clearly. She says, "I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who should come into the world", @John 11:27. Now her soul is full of light and she goes off to her sister; her sister has a new place with her. "The teacher is come and calls thee. She, when she heard that, rises up quickly, and comes to him", @John 11:28,29. But the Lord did not
{101}
go to where *she*  was; she had to go to where *He*  was, meaning that He honoured Martha. When brethren get clear of mere orthodoxy, the Lord would have us to understand what they are. They are valuable in His eyes, and they are to be respected, so He stays where Martha met Him, and Mary has to go there. That is a new experience for her. But there is a great difference in the general influence of the two women. When Mary moves, the *Jews move*. Not one of them moved when Martha moved, meaning that she had no spiritual influence. It is really a comfort that orthodox people have not much influence, and it works out that way; the Lord sees to that.
Now, when Mary goes the Jews move, and she arrives at the Lord and casts herself before Him, and says, "Lord; if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died". "Jesus therefore, when he saw her weeping, and the Jews who came with her weeping" -- that is, the persons she influenced -- He "was deeply moved in spirit". That is one of the finest things in Scripture, a spiritual person actually affecting Christ, because it was when "he saw her weeping, and the Jews who came with her weeping" that He was "deeply moved in spirit, and was troubled, and said. Where have ye put him? They say to him. Lord, come and see. Jesus wept". There is no equal to this in the Scriptures, and it shows what spirituality is, how the Lord regards it in a locality. Now, these are the circumstances under which the sign took place; that is to say, it is a sign in the presence of spirituality, of spiritual feelings; it is the greatest of the signs, until we come to the Lord's own resurrection.
Ques. Would you say what is the difference between what we have here and Joseph and his brethren as they wept together?
J.T. That was the weeping of joy; it was the feelings of joy and affection that were aroused by the disclosure of who he was. The weeping there is not for sorrow;
{102}
but here, it is sorrow.
Ques. Is this not different from the weeping over Jerusalem? This is the silent shedding of tears, not lamenting.
J.T. No, it would not be lamenting. The Lord was deeply moved, and it is said that He "groaned in spirit". He had the feeling too of resentment against death, because of its power over the family of those whom He loved.
H.E.S. Are you suggesting that these wonderful works of God are to be manifested locally, before what is universal is known?
J.T. Yes. The effect of all this manifestation of the glory of God, and the glory of the Son of God, in this wonderful way in the locality, brings about a state of spirituality that may exist in silence. It may speak and express itself, but its power is of such a character, that it is there in volume silently. That is what the early verses of chapter 12 show. The Lord came to Bethany in relation to Lazarus, and immediately it says, "There therefore they made him a supper", @John 12:2. It was a golden occasion. Then you have the persons who sat with Him at table, and Martha's serving, and Mary's ointment.
A.F.M. Would that be the merging into one family? You said earlier that He loved them each but now it is the family.
J.T. It is collective.
M.W.B. You referred just now to the state of spirituality that gave room for the sign to take place; would you say how that works out practically? Do you take the raising of Lazarus to be a further thought?
J.T. It is. It would be to enhance the spirituality that was there; and so Martha has to be regulated. She says that he was dead four days. She still needs regulation, and so the Lord said, "Did I not say to thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?" He insists on faith if we are to see
{103}
the glory of God. Then He comes to the tomb, and "lifted up his eyes on high" -- that is the way it should read -- something that comes into this sign. "Jesus lifted up his eyes on high and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me; but I knew that thou always hearest me; but on account of the crowd who stand around I have said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me". That is the point, that we should come into the gain of what is presented, and then He said, "Lazarus, come forth". "And the dead came forth, bound feet and hands with grave-clothes, and his face was bound round with a handkerchief". The effect of this would remain in Bethany while this family was there.
Ques. What is the bearing on us of His concern as to their hearing?
J.T. That we should come into the full gain of what happens. In chapter 20 the signs are said to be in the presence of His disciples, and they are written "that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name".
M.W.B. Do you regard progress in spirituality in the way you have brought things before us, first, in chapter 4 as to a person's body, and then spirituality as necessary to a man's house, and then to circumstances, and then the spiritual house of chapter 8? Is there a development in this way?
J.T. There is, indeed. Here we have a house filled with the odour: "The house was filled with the odour of the ointment", @John 12:3. It is to bring out the greatness of the result of the signs in Bethany. What odour? The odour of the ointment that was put upon Jesus. I suppose you have that in mind?
M.W.B. Yes, I was wondering whether there was this lying behind your remarks that there must be a recognition of what is spiritual and giving place to the Spirit, before there would be the consciousness by us of passing over into that which this sign sets forth, as
{104}
risen with Christ?
J.T. I think so. It is a Colossian scene that is before us. I suppose the face being mentioned means the countenance. It is what we are as viewed in that light as risen; the beauty of what we are in our countenances. And then the silence, as being able to sit in silence in the power of spirituality, so that the Lord has His place and the others have their places with Him at the table, then the service and worship.
Ques. Would you say a word as to the part taken by each of them?
J.T. Lazarus represents the *dignity*  of the position: "Lazarus was one of those at table with him". "And Martha served",(@John 12:2) which has its meaning spiritually; and "Mary therefore, having taken a pound of ointment of pure nard of great price, anointed the feet of Jesus", @John 12:3. Each has its own significance.
H.E.S. Are we now brought to the point where we reach not only the thought of spirituality but the region of spiritual dignity?
J.T. Yes. It lays the basis for chapter 20.
{105}
THE GLORY OF THE SON OF GOD (6)
@John 20:1 - 31
J.T. In order to link up this chapter with what we have had, it may be said that chapter 12 closes the case against the Jews, and they are convicted as reprobate. It says, "But though he had done so many signs before them, they believed not on him, that the word of the prophet Esaias which he said might be fulfilled", @John 12:37,38. Isaiah is quoted twice; it says, "Esaias said again. He has blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that they may not see with their eyes and understand with their heart", @John 12:39,40. They are blinded judicially, which corresponds with current conditions, and then the Lord, after the case is closed, so to speak, against the Jews, they being exposed, "cried and said. He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me; and he that beholds me, beholds him that sent me. I am come into the world as light, that every one that believes on me may not abide in darkness; and if any one hear my words and do not keep them, I judge him not, for I am not come that I might judge the world, but that I might save the world. He that rejects me and does not receive my words, has him who judges him: the word which I have spoken, that shall judge him in the last day. For I have not spoken from myself, but the Father who sent me has himself given me commandment what I should say and what I should speak; and I know that his commandment is life eternal. What therefore I speak, as the Father has said to me, so I speak", @John 12:44 - 50. That is added to the condemnation of the Jews to emphasise the gracious activities of divine Persons and the Lord's words, that they themselves should be the judges of them. It is worth our while to note this, as pointing to the end of the dispensation
{106}
judicially, and how the divine presence is there. I have no doubt the Lord is emphasising the truth relative to His Person with this end in view.
H.D'A.C. I am not quite clear as to the distinction you made in chapter 1: "we have contemplated his glory, a glory, as of an only-begotten with a father",(@John 1:14) and "the only-begotten son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him"(@John 1:18). Would you mind giving another statement as to those two scriptures? How far does the mediatorial system go? I have understood through these meetings that it was before the incarnation, in order that the creation should be brought about.
J.T. It is of the last moment that these things should be clear, in so far as we can understand them, but no doubt we all have to own that we understand but very little. But it is clear that as the time for the creation of the physical universe drew nigh, the mediatorial thought came into evidence, and so wisdom came into prominence.
H.D'A.C. And the church and what we have in Christ: men were really in those thoughts even in the creation. For instance, "Let us make man". God certainly had another Man in His mind.
J.T. Yes. It is obvious that man was to be the centre of the creation, but then, what man? Not a man made of clay; he could not sustain the things God had in mind. So that Adam was "the figure of him that was to come", @Romans 5:14. That was in the mind of God as ever present.
Ques. "Having made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself for the administration of the fulness of times; to head up all things in the Christ" (@Ephesians 1:9,10). Would that indicate it?
J.T. Just so; "all things". God always had these things in His mind, and in the carrying out of them concretely, the mediatorial idea necessarily comes into view, so that it is seen in the creation, and it is seen in
{107}
Israel, and now it has taken positive form in the incarnation. The incarnation was not an afterthought; it was the first thought; it was what was in the mind of God, and all that preceded led up to it. Then in the Word becoming flesh, there was glory, but it had reference to the relations and affections existing between God as Father and the Only-begotten.
H.D'A.C. And those relations would have existed in one way before, though they could not be spoken of quite as we now do in revelation; I mean, the Father and the Son. You were pointing out that the thought of Son had rather an inferior meaning, but He was surely always the object of love to the Father, and all divine Persons must have been in love together. Is that right?
J.T. They were. The Lord expressly says that the One He addressed as Father loved Him "before the foundation of the world",(@John 17:24) but to apply the Only-begotten thus is another matter. We cannot exclude the Spirit from the divine circle of affection and make one Person the Only-begotten of Another, when All are in the inscrutableness of absolute deity.
H.D'A.C. The word Only-begotten has always baffled the saints because of the word "begotten".
J.T. Now that attention has been called to it, and the truth made clear, I do not think it baffles spiritual persons.
H.D'A.C. Through the help the Lord has given difficulties disappear.
J.T. They do. An "only-begotten" necessitates a father, and a certain relative inferiority in the person who is designated as the only-begotten. Then verse 18, as you rightly say, is to bring God out, which is the public thing. Verse 14 is more private; it is what is contemplated by certain ones.
H.D'A.C. John was one of them. Verse 18 is more public.
{108}
J.T. It is a public thing, but it does not say to any persons in particular: "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him", @John 1:18. It is the general public position.
H.D'A.C. It is open to all to get the good of it if they will.
J.T. Quite so; it stands. So that, in this very passage I have called attention to, the Lord says, "He that beholds me, beholds him that sent me", @John 12:45. That is public, and His words in the same way are the words of Him that sent Him. So that the position, whilst it is mediatorial clearly in the word "sent", and in a Person who takes a relatively lower position, yet those who see that Person see the One who sent Him. It is not simply that He carried the message or conveyed the mind of God, but God was there Himself, and there so as to be seen. But that does not conflict with the statement in chapter 1, which says, "No one has seen God at any time", verse 18. It *cannot*  conflict with it, hence that verse alludes to the Deity in Its absoluteness, in Its own form, which no one has seen nor can see. That is the inscrutable, which we must recognise; and yet the Lord can say here, "He that beholds me, beholds him that sent me", and then in chapter 14, "He that has seen me has seen the Father", verse 9.
H.D'A.C. You must have anointed eyes for that.
J.T. But then the thing was there; it was there in testimony. The man whose eyes had been opened had seen the Son of God. He did not know it, but still he had seen Him; and so the Lord says, "He that has seen me has seen the Father", @John 14:9.
Ques. Did you say the end of this chapter closes the public position?
J.T. It closes the public position in so far as the Lord's testimony to the Jews is concerned. The close of the public position is on the cross.
{109}
M.W.B. I should like to get a little more clear as to the distinction between the thought of declaration and light.
J.T. In declaration God is brought out, but then that becomes light. God is light; as declared. He is light; so that Jesus said that He was the "light of the world".
M.W.B. I understood in the first reading that the thought of declaration went rather further than that of light.
J.T. Well, it does. The sun in itself is greater than its rays. Light is a relative thing, but God Himself is brought out in Christ. And that is what the Lord means in the end of chapter 12. It was a testimony; it was not a question of who understood, but it was there as testimony: "He that beholds me, beholds him that sent me". (Verse 45) The idea of "sent" in the end of chapter 12 as applied to the Lord Himself and involving the divine Persons, is carried forward into chapter 13, which I think we ought to notice. The case as to the Jews is closed, and chapter 13 takes up the disciples in the most formal way, not simply as disciples, but as "his own". They are viewed now in a new light; they are His own: "Jesus ... having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end", @John 13:1. So that now it is a question of the disciples viewed in this light, and the Lord introduces the idea of being sent in saying, "He who receives whomsoever I shall send receives me; and he that receives me receives him who has sent me", @John 13:20. It seems as if the defection of Judas, which was already in evidence here, might be thought to invalidate the testimony of the twelve, and I think the Lord is concerned that the validity of the testimony of the twelve as "sent" should stand notwithstanding the defection of Judas. I mean, it deals with the position of the ground of Christianity on that principle of being sent, and the testimony is valid thus. Although things
{110}
may have come to us through questionable persons, the validity of the testimony stands.
J.J. Does the thought of "sent" involve the deity of the Lord?
J.T. The idea in itself does not, because it attaches to us also. The idea itself is a subordinate one; it involves subordination and subjection.
J.J. It is not like "Jesus Christ come in flesh" exactly.
J.T. Not quite. I think it is a further thought than @Philippians 2, which is that He came down as emptying Himself, taking a bondman's form. I think the actual sending of Christ must begin there, not exactly in heaven, as in the form of God, but as in humanity. Compare J.N.D.s letter, vol. 3, pp. 468 to 469 (new edition, pp. 168 - 9).
Ques. When it comes to others the Lord says, "as the Father sent me forth, I also send you" (@John 20:21). Would that not express what is characteristic in the sending?
J.T. Well, quite so.
D.L.H. It says, "There was a man sent from God, his name John", @John 1:6. Obviously the thought refers to John as on earth.
J.T. That helps; he was sent *from God*.
W.C. In chapter 10 it speaks of His being sanctified and sent; does that date from the descent of the Spirit upon Him?
J.T. Evidently. I doubt that it can be shown from Scripture that the sending of Christ preceded His incarnation. He came Himself; it was His mind, but the emptying of Himself is seen in His taking a bondman's form.
J.J. What would you say about @Isaiah 6? How does the expression there apply? "Here am I, send me", verse 8.
J.T. That is Isaiah himself, but his position was in keeping with the Lord's at His baptism. The Lord's place as Jehovah's servant has prominence in Isaiah.
{111}
Ques. What about the Father sending the Son to be the Saviour of the world?
J.T. What we have said would include that. The sanctification obviously alludes to Him as Man and it precedes His being sent. What I think is very weakly understood, is the incarnation itself, and what existed between the Son and the Father at the outset of His place in humanity, that is, the time preceding His baptism. Scripture says comparatively little about it, but it says enough to show that wonderful things went on between Them; and in the coming down of the Spirit, and its abiding upon Him in a bodily form, and the voice from heaven, I think we have the starting-point of the divine operations mediatorially in Christ as Man; so that the idea of sanctification and sending begins there.
E.J.McB. Do I understand you, that being in human form He was available to be sent?
J.T. That is a good way of putting it.
E.J.McB. Otherwise we should not have been able to apprehend or compass it.
J.T. Quite so, and moreover He was on equality in every sense as in deity. As a divine Person His was to command, not to obey; but obedience marks Him as Man.
H.D'A.C. He takes the place of the sent One in @Luke 4. He was not only anointed to preach, but sent, which supports what you said about His being looked at as the sent One from His baptism, when the Holy Spirit came upon Him.
J.T. I do not know of any Scripture that says He was sent down from heaven. Scripture says that He *came*  down from heaven, but it is said that the Holy Spirit was sent down from heaven, and I believe the background to that is that Christ as Man is in heaven. The centre of all these things is Christ as Man.
Ques. Does the verse in chapter 20 bear on it, "as the Father sent me forth, I also send you"?
{112}
J.T. Well, it does, showing it is the same idea. The disciples were not sent from heaven; they were sent out on earth, just as He had been.
Ques. "Herein as to us has been manifested the love of God, that God has sent his only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him" (@1 John 4:9). Would what was observed as to a man being sent from God refer to all such scriptures as that?
J.T. I think so. Sending into the world is also applied to the disciples. "As thou hast sent me into the world, I also have sent them into the world", (@John 17:18).
Rem. I think it is the biggest readjustment of thought that many of us have had in the last few years.
J.T. I think things are taking form rightly in our minds. They had this form in Scripture always, but in our minds they are taking a form that is practically and morally right -- that the idea of obedience, as regards Christ, belongs to Him in Manhood. The idea attaches to Him there, and so the sending began with His position here as Man on earth, and properly as the Holy Spirit came upon Him.
H.D'A.C. It would be in His mind before Christ became Man.
J.T. In a moral sense. But even that well-known passage in @Psalm 40, "In the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God", is preceded by "mine ears hast thou opened"(@Psalm 40:6), so that it belongs properly to Him in the body. "Ears hast thou digged", would mean that He was now ready to listen to commands. *Learning*  obedience (@Hebrews 5) implies that He was now in the position to which it applies.
Rem. Does it help to see, not so much the place that you are sent from, but the Person who sends you? I was thinking the Lord chose twelve that they might be *with Him*  and that He might send them out.
{113}
J.T. Yes; that is in Mark, and so in the end of that gospel His final charge is, "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation"(@Mark 16:15). Well, where were they before? Literally they were here, but the word is, "Go into all the world".
Ques. In @Philippians 2 it says that He emptied Himself and took a bondman's form; is there anything to show that they were simultaneous?
J.T. I think the emptying synchronised with the taking of a bondman's form. He "emptied Himself taking a bondman's form, taking His place in the likeness of men", @Philippians 2:7. The statements run on without a conjunction.
A.F.M. Would you mind telling us what you understand by the bondman's form?
J.T. Well, the form He took in becoming Man. "taking his place", it goes on to say, "in the likeness of men". It is to be noted, however, that man's form primarily did not imply bondmanship, so that the latter implies something more; attitude is included. This is seen in "Lo, I come to do, O God, thy will", @Hebrews 10:9.
A.F.M. Does the thought of being "sent" come in in connection with the bondman's form?
J.T. That is where it *begins*.
H.E.S. Are you suggesting that before incarnation the movements are spoken of as His own, but afterwards they are spoken of as subject movements?
J.T. That is what I see, as far as I understand Scripture.
Ques. Do you think the bondman's form is in contrast to being in the form of God?
J.T. Yes.
H.D'A.C. Is He now in the bondman's form?
J.T. If we speak in the terms of Scripture, the fact that He took a bondman's form does not mean that that must always be obligatory upon Him, that He must not be anything else. A person of high degree can easily
{114}
take a lowly place, and we speak of it in that way, but it does not imply that he must be always that.
H.D'A.C. And all the time He was here He was more than a bondman.
J.T. As we were saying this morning, you cannot take in the deity of Christ and the humanity of Christ at one time; we are not equal to that.
H.D'A.C. I thought the word "form" involving more than external appearance was wisely chosen, so that it could go into eternity.
J.T. Of Moses it is said, "the form of Jehovah shall he behold", @Numbers 12:8. That would be in a very modified way. What he saw we cannot say. It is said that "they saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire";(@Exodus 24:10) and then in @Revelation 4 we see One who sits on the throne who is no less than God, but then it is a form that is obviously human, that can be apprehended. I doubt if it is within our range to see anything beyond that. Certainly it is formally stated that "no one has seen God at any time", @John 1:18.
S.J.B.C. Do you think it means simply appearance? The Greek word occurs again in Mark where it says that He appeared unto them in another form, chapter 16:12.
J.T. It means more than appearance. There is the idea of God appearing to men, but "being in the form of God" is a very different idea, belonging properly to deity; and before creation, when there were none to whom the idea of appearance could apply. The word 'status' has been used. J.N.D. uses it, meaning state in its primary meaning in Latin, but it has come now to mean rank or position as well. I think the word 'status' in the sense of condition or state, may serve to express the idea of the form of God. I do not see why we should alter what we have in the best authorities, that the word means 'form' in this sense, and that Christ was in that form. He "emptied himself, taking a bondman's
{115}
form",(@Philippians 2:7) meaning another form in which He undertook to do the will of God.
H.P.W. Is the form of a bondman, as connected with the Lord a thought that is carried over into eternity, or is it confined to the days of His flesh?
J.T. It is very difficult to say that it is not carried over, because the type of it in Exodus says that He remains a bondman for ever, but then you would have it in a very limited way. Scripture says. He "will come forth and serve them" (@Luke 12:37), and we may as well leave it in its scriptural setting, for as soon as we go beyond that, we are like the theologians who try to make divine things fit into the natural mind.
Ques. Does it not suggest the service perpetuated in love? "I love my master, my wife and my children", @Exodus 21:5. So it is understandable that it is carried over.
J.T. It is something that Scripture touches very lightly and it can only apply to Him viewed as Man Godward. Towards man He is God, as we have it in Thomas's remark, "My Lord and my God". You cannot introduce the thought of bondmanship there. I think we have to confine ourselves to the terms of Scripture, and if Scripture touches the thought lightly it is well for us to touch it lightly. @Exodus 21 and @Luke 12 show that the Lord takes up the attitude of servant towards God, and towards His own in eternity, but this cannot enter into His position as "over all, God blessed for ever", @Romans 9:5.
A.M.H. Would the Scripture in 1 Corinthians help at all? After the millennium it says, "The Son also himself shall be placed in subjection", @1 Corinthians 15:28. Would that suggest a continuance of the bondman's form?
J.T. It would. It seems to me these varied features of Christ are like beautiful hues. Each has its place in the glory of His Person, but if any particular feature is touched lightly it is well to leave it there, and not make it cover all.
{116}
D.L.H. When it says, "that God may be all in all", you cannot exclude the blessed Lord Jesus from that.
J.T. You cannot, but it is just as doubtful to say that He resumes the form of God as to say that He does not. If we think in the terms of Scripture, as this gospel teaches us, we say that we do not know. That is one of the features of this gospel, that one says just what he knows. If Peter does *not*  say, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God" as he does in @Matthew 16:16, it means that he said just what he *knew*  (@John 6: 69). The transfiguration of Christ on the holy mount, and "another form", spoken of in @Mark 16, remind us of what is *possible*  as to His Person, so that the inscrutable is always present. But at the same time, the tenor of Scripture, especially @1 Corinthians 15:28, leaves us in no doubt that, in a general way. He retains His humanity eternally.
M.W.B. Your remarks yesterday in drawing attention to the Lord as ascended up "far above all heavens" make one feel that He has a region to which our minds can never have access.
P.L. Elihu in the book of Job helps us: "Lo, God is great, and we comprehend him not, neither can the number of his years be searched out", chapter 36:26.
Eu.R. With regard to @John 20, we sometimes speak of the privilege as going to heaven. Is that form of expression justified? You have referred to it as the spiritual sphere.
J.T. Well, I think Ephesians warrants it. He "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together, in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2:6. That is our status there; it is ground you can take up in the assembly; you are heavenly.
I think we might touch a little on chapter 13, as we have had the thought of disciples running through these chapters in one way or another. The Spirit of God portrays them before our eyes, so that we might be on our guard against what is exposed in the flesh, and
{117}
that we might stimulate what is spiritual as seen in Peter as one of the twelve, and as thus connected with the service of love. I think the idea of the twelve is that love is most available in that relation. We are to stand in relation to one another so that the best possible results accrue. "Have not I chosen you the twelve?"(@John 6:70) If we allow the Lord His sovereign right to use us in relation to one another, then you may be sure we shall get the best results; and I think that is what is meant in the use of the word "twelve". Having reached the family circle, and the body of spirituality in the light of the glory that shone in the raising of Lazarus, we have the disciples called "his own". It is one of the most precious things, "having loved his own who were in the world, [he] loved them to the end", @John 13:1. So that now, in the following chapters, 13 to 17, we are inside. Instead of a few remarks relative to the public position seen in the Lord's Supper, as in the synoptic gospels, we have these rich unfoldings of divine affections and thoughts, and then the place we have in His heart as before God, in chapter 17. All this, I think, is necessary in the last days to our entrance into chapter 20. It is a question of extended communications on the part of the Lord, so that we may be prepared in intelligence and regulated affections, for the great time of the first day of the week. It corresponds to Acts 20, where as they were assembled to break bread, Paul discoursed until midnight, as if to say. Before you partake of the Supper, although you are come together for it, if Paul has anything to say let him say it. We are not told what he said. We are told what he said in @1 Corinthians 11, of what relates to the public service; but we are not told what he said at Troas. It was a long discourse, but I think it would correspond with these wonderful communications of Christ in chapters 13 to 16, so that we might really partake of the Supper and enter into assembly privileges, not only in affection such as Mary Magdalene had, but with intelligence, and hence when
{118}
the Lord takes His place in the assembly, we know what to do in relation to Him.
Ques. Ought we to look for a word of ministry on the Lord's day at the breaking of bread?
J.T. I think so. If we got a word early in the meeting from the Lord as Head, we should have a better meeting. I think it has been a mistake to assume that a word should be left to the last, that it should be the close of the meeting. It ought rather to enhance and stimulate what there is present in the way of spiritual intelligence and power. Of course we must wait on the Lord's guidance in what we do, but if a word is to promote worship in the meeting in which it is given, it should be given early.
Ques. You mean after the breaking of bread?
J.T. Yes.
A.F.M. Would that not give a very high tone and character so as to advance the worship?
J.T. Quite so. If we have arrived at Peter's confession in John, "the holy one of God", it will qualify us for part in the assembly; because it is in that relation the service of the sanctuary opens up. What you find here in chapter 20 is that Mary Magdalene is there early. She has the affection and goes to the tomb, we are told, and she sees the stone rolled away from the tomb, but she does not look into it, whereas the other two do, and they not only look in, but go in. Whilst making full allowance for Mary here -- and she is the principal figure in the picture next to the Lord Himself -- we ought to note the superior intelligence of the two, because it enters into assembly service. It is said of them, "Simon Peter therefore comes, following him, and entered into the tomb, and sees the linen cloths lying, and the handkerchief which was upon his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but folded up in a distinct place by itself. Then entered in therefore the other disciple also who came first to the tomb, and he saw and believed". I think, while making due allowance for affection in Mary, we ought to
{119}
make allowance too for the action of those two brothers. That is to say, they went the whole way in examination, because it is a question of *what happened*,  the resurrection of Christ is a question of a great spiritual transaction, and it is intended to enter into the fibre of Christianity. It stands by itself; and the cloths are brought into evidence in that these two take notice of what was inside the tomb.
H.E.S. Are you suggesting that all the divine activities in John are to the end that there may be not only spiritual affections but also spiritual intelligence?
J.T. Clearly. I think the Lord is helping us in regard to His Person, but what He is as the Minister of the sanctuary and what the sanctuary is, is what is not understood. I think this chapter is to show that full appraisement is made of the affections of the saints, that full value is attached to them, but that they must be accompanied by *intelligence*.
A.F.M. Is that the reason why Mary addresses the Lord in Hebrew, saying, 'Rabboni'? Would that show where she lacked?
J.T. It shows that she had come to the point wherein she felt the need of instruction: 'My teacher'.
H.M.S. Will you tell us about the grave clothes and the handkerchief about the head?
J.T. It is very important, because it is a question of intelligence taking note of an extraordinary matter -- that the linen cloths clearly lay there as they were around the Lord's body, and the handkerchief separately folded.
A.F.M. Why was it separately folded?
J.T. I think to call attention to headship, for that is the important initial point in the assembly. But then that is balanced in the position of the angels, whom the two disciples did not see. They saw the cloths and the handkerchief folded, but they did not see the angels. Now the position of the angels is to remind us of the headship of Christ, and that the feet of Christ were perfectly in accord with his head: "one at the head
{120}
and one at the feet". It is the perfection of headship and the feet in relation to it.
E.R. I suppose it gives the idea of angelic repose. Instead of standing ready to obey, here they are sitting.
J.T. It is a remarkable thing that they are there; "one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain".
Ques. What is the importance of the feet in relation to the head?
J.T. Going back to chapter 12, Mary understood that His feet were carrying Him to death. Now where are they carrying Him? It is not said in John that He was "carried up into heaven" as in Luke, but He goes up. I think we are reminded that He is not only Head, but that He moves, and the assembly is the place of His movements, as well as of His wisdom. Whilst the angels are sitting, which would point to their restfulness in what had happened. He is seen as standing Himself after He comes into the midst. He "stood in the midst".
H.F.N. Would you say a word in regard to Luke where the Lord showed them His feet, but in John it is His hands and His side?
J.T. The position of the angel at His feet suffices, that they are in perfect keeping with His head, and I think it would mean that if we are not with the Lord as Head, we will not be with Him in His movements. The side would call attention to His love. I think the allusion is to Eve, as taken out of the side of Adam.
Ques. Would you mind saying a little more as to the impressions that the two had of the linen cloths that Mary missed? Was there something built into their spiritual constitution as the result of what they saw?
J.T. The impression was that the transaction was spiritual and not physical in the sense of being effected by material things. We are brought into a spiritual realm, and the foundation of it is in the resurrection of Christ. It is a great spiritual transaction. The cloths
{121}
remaining as they were, would indicate there was no physical struggle at all.
Rem. Mary only saw the stone rolled away, which was physical.
J.T. Surely; therefore she was wanting in intelligence. But now we are told, "she stooped down into the tomb, and beholds two angels sitting in white garments", which I suppose is needed by her, as part of the adjustment in connection with purity.
Ques. What is conveyed by the two running together and John running faster and reaching the tomb first, but waiting until Peter had been in and then following him in afterwards?
J.T. I think John represents the energy of life. We may have brethren more energetic in the way of life than others, whereas the others may have more intelligence. I think Peter stands for this. The point is, that whilst energy led in the running, intelligence is the final thing, for Peter becomes the leader afterwards. Intelligence is what tells. Life of course, and the energy of life, but the regulation of headship is what tells, and gives you the lead.
H.M.S. Has it any relation to the ministry of those two apostles?
J.T. I think John is put in his place; he is after Peter. It is always "Peter and John". It would be amplified by the position of the elders in Revelation; they are first in chapter 4 but they come in second in chapter 5, meaning that when it is a question of intelligence and experience they are first, that is, the elder brethren, those who have had experience with God necessarily have the lead. But when it comes to action, requiring the energy of life, the living creatures are mentioned first. Chapter 5 is a chapter of action, corresponding with the power of the Lamb. That is, the younger brothers come into evidence, those who have energy, under certain circumstances, and it is the
{122}
wisdom of the elders to let them have the first place.
D.L.H. What about going to their own home? "The disciples therefore went away again to their own home". It has been viewed as indicating that they had not spiritual response but that their intelligence had been affected.
J.T. I think that is right. That is to say, one with intelligence may take in thoughts more quickly than persons who are more spiritual, and go home with them; but I think affection would lead you to stay where those things are. While Mary did not take any notice of the cloths yet she stayed around. If we do not get the whole matter, and linger near, we shall get more even than those who are more intelligent.
Ques. Did you say she came into adjustment through the angels being in white?
J.T. Yes. White garments as a requirement refer to us all, but especially to her, considering her history. For, after all, reminiscences are terrible things; she would have to own that seven demons had gone out of her.
Ques. Does not Mary, having affection, become intelligent in carrying the message?
J.T. Yes. She says, "Rabboni"; she owns she had been learning. The others did not say that.
Ques. So she is in advance of the twelve in that way?
J.T. She is. That is the point in the last days. It is a question of affection after all, and it is seen in her waiting about. There is something here supremely interesting. I may not be taking in much, but I linger where the truth is and so I do not miss it.
H.M.S. Like Proverbs: "watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors", chapter 8:34.
J.T. Mary is detained by her affection, and so looking into the tomb, she sees two angels sitting, and they speak to her, and then she turns, as you will observe: "Having said these things she turned backward
{123}
and beholds Jesus standing there, and knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus says to her. Woman, why dost thou weep? Whom seekest thou? She, supposing that it was the gardener, says to him, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away. Jesus says to her, Mary. She, turning round, says to him in Hebrew, Rabboni, which means Teacher". At first she turns *backward*,  but now at His voice she turns *round*  -- the movements are typically spiritual.
Ques. What would be the import of the Lord standing in the midst? Would it be that He might wait upon us to conduct us into the spiritual sphere?
J.T. Linking it up with the angel at His feet, the feet in relation to His head, it is that He moves in relation to His headship, and obviously we are to move with Him. Now Mary is to move with Him. One great feature in these chapters is to bring us into correspondence with the Lord, and if He has entered into a spiritual condition and realm. He wants to bring us into correspondence, and that is what is evidenced in her remark 'Rabboni' in Hebrew.
J.J. Why does the Lord use the two expressions, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God".
J.T. The one gives us our place in the family, and the other gives us our place in the race, the new order of man. The two things run together. In the family Christ is Son, Firstborn among many brethren. He is also 'Leader of a chosen race'.
Eu.R. Is this the fulfilment of the last verse of chapter 17?
J.T. I think so.
Eu.R. Is it complete, or is there any sense in which the Lord does it now?
J.T. It is contemplated as complete: "will make it known". The message here involves that.
{124}
H.M.S. Would you just tell us what is in your mind briefly as to the remainder of the chapter? We do not want to lose that.
J.T. The great objective one had in mind was that we might reach the spiritual realm, otherwise we shall not be in the assembly according to God, nor shall we enter into service Godward. The education that precedes our entrance into it is seen in the verses we have been considering; the intelligence in the two, and Mary being brought to it as patiently and affectionately waiting where it is to be found. For after all, it takes us a long time to get the truth, but it is an important matter to know where it is to be found. She says, 'Rabboni', as if she said. *You*  are my Teacher. He calls her by name, and she turns round. There is the idea of movement. The Spirit of God tells us what Rabboni means; we are thus to understand that instruction from Him is the point. Then the Lord, so as to finish our education, says, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". The links are to be entirely spiritual. Now she comes to the disciples, we are told, and tells them that "she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her". Then, following on that, on the first day of the week, "Jesus came and stood in the midst", where the disciples were, the doors being shut, and says to them, "Peace be to you". So that now they have Him by themselves and in a spiritual way, because He has come in in spite of the doors being shut. It is a spiritual matter, as we have seen.
J.H.T. In Ephesians, chapter 1, the apostle prays that the eyes of their heart might be enlightened. Would that combine intelligence with affection? Then in chapter 3 "might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God",(verse 10) and then the great objective at the close of that chapter, that there might be glory to God "in the assembly in Christ Jesus
{125}
unto all generations of the age of ages", @Ephesians 3:21. Would that be the line here?
J.T. Exactly. There is a further thought in chapter 3 that we might well finish with. The apostle says: "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named, in order that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man" (@Ephesians 3: 14 - 16). I think that that, added to chapter 1, which deals with the eyes of our heart, constitutes us qualified for part in the assembly, so that there is glory to God in it.
{126}
AFFECTION FOR THE HOUSE OF GOD
@Ephesians 2:18 - 22, @1 Chronicles 29:3 - 5
It is before me, dear brethren, to speak about the house -- the house of God, bearing in mind that the apostle in his first letter to Timothy specially speaks about it, and of the behaviour that is suitable in it, saying, that thou mayest "know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth" (@1 Timothy 3:15). The order therefore is "the house", "the assembly", and "the pillar and base". The house involves enjoyment; it involves, of course, that in which God shows Himself in His affections, and in which His order is seen, but it is a place of holy, spiritual enjoyment. The house being said to be the assembly, conveys the idea of intelligent counsel and administrative action, resulting in public support for the truth, this latter involving conflict. I wish to confine my remarks to the house, as such, and in this respect I have also specially in mind the statement of king David as to his *affection*  for it. The word that one would bear in mind as to oneself, and one hopes that all will take notice of it, is the peculiar expression, "affection for the house of my God". Those of you who are conversant with 1 Chronicles will have noticed that David speaks in chapter 22 of preparing for the house in immense wealth out of his *affliction* ;whereas here in chapter 29 it is in his *affection*. The comparison of these two words in relation to the house, will help in the understanding of my remarks, for as combined, they present to us Christ, in His affliction and then in His affection.
Before coming to Ephesians, I would remark that the gospels in their four different features present David and Solomon typically, and particularly Matthew, so that you find Christ in the exercise of His service, and
{127}
indeed in His whole sojourn here, peculiarly in *houses*  in Matthew. He is indeed presented to us in that gospel, as in a house, in His childhood. Luke presents Him in a manger, but Matthew presents Him in a house, as sought out by the wise men of the East. We are told that the star "came and stood over the place where the little child was" (@Matthew 2: 9). The place is a larger idea than the house; indeed, that is confirmed in 1 Chronicles in chapter 21:25 where king David buys "the place" in which the house is to be. Now the wise men came to the place as guided by the star. It was the star of "the king of the Jews", Him they sought, showing how they were in accord with the mind of God, being free from national prejudice. No one can reach the house otherwise; so long as national prejudice is in our minds we shall never really reach the house. They came seeking "the king of the Jews", implying that they were to be subservient, that they were recognising the priority of the Jews. The Lord, indeed, insisted on this in talking to the woman at Sychar, and the Samaritans themselves later, had to learn that the Spirit should come through the apostles that were sent from Jerusalem.
So the wise men came to the place under the guidance of heaven. They were deflected in going to Jerusalem, but finally the star directed them "to the place where the little child was" -- a very interesting and touching consideration -- but the star did no more than that. Being at the place, they entered into the house. I would suggest that there is something to be learnt in that, for many are content with the vicinity in which Christ may be, -- but *they*  entered into the house; they entered into the house where the little child was. He was under care; He was with the one who would care for Him best under God at that time, as is always so where the need of care exists. Where could care be found to equal that with the parent in the house, for God has provided in the house such care as all stages of His family require. That is how matters stand in
{128}
Matthew: they entered into the house, and they find the child under care. They saw "the little child with his mother" and they worshipped.
So throughout Matthew we find the Lord signalising certain features of the truth as being "in the house", characteristically. To illustrate this, in chapter 13, He entered into a house, and His disciples followed Him. That is another thing. He takes up a position in the house, and persons who are followers understand, and they follow Him there. It becomes a place of exposition and of wonderful disclosures. No one can afford to miss these, the holy expositions of Scripture and of the parables and types in the house; and then the disclosures of hidden things, things that were in the Lord's heart, with regard to the assembly.
Then we find later (chapter 17) the Lord in the house, and Peter would have reduced Him to the level of an ordinary temple taxpayer. Unless we frequent the house in which He is, we shall have wrong thoughts of Him, and shall reduce Him in our thoughts, and words, and ways, to the level of ordinary persons, which the Holy Spirit greatly resents. So that Peter said, his Master certainly paid tribute. But as he came into the house the Lord anticipated him and adjusted him, and brought out the blessed fact that the position was that of sons. "Then are the sons free" (@Matthew 17:26). Thus in that house the truth of sonship came out. And so throughout Matthew's gospel in which also and only there, you get the word 'householder' (chapter 13:52). All is to prepare us for the great leading thought, the assembly; that we might be in the world assemblywise. In order to be here in this way we must be in the good of, and enter into the spiritual buoyancy and enjoyment of the house.
So you find the Lord in the house of "Simon the leper", meaning that the public position may be one of reproach, but He is there nevertheless. Many would avoid being in that house; but if He takes up a position
{129}
subject to reproach and you avoid it because of that, you will miss the blessing attached to it. You find there the full appreciation of Christ's dignity and service; a woman anointed His head there.
Then later in Matthew, the Lord sends His disciples, as they enquire where He would eat the passover, to a certain one. He says, "Go into the city to such an one" (chapter 26:18), saying nothing about the man with a pitcher of water, or the upper room, as in Mark or Luke, but simply sending them to convey to the man, that He would eat the passover in his house. The proposal indicated that the Lord would be free in that house, that He could eat the passover there with His disciples in liberty and dignity in the house -- not, in Matthew, in the upper room.
Now all that bears on what I have in mind; it prepares us for Paul; indeed, all the evangelists stress the idea of the house. Luke presents it to us in the most attractive way, and I speak now to the young people, because Luke has a peculiar way of gauging the necessities of souls, and he knows that young people love enjoyment. The world knows it too, and strains every nerve to supply the need. So Luke presents the house in chapter 14 as that which is to be filled -- "that my house may be filled" (verse 23); but in chapter 15, as the place of enjoyment; figuratively the most delightful things are going on there -- "music and dancing"; what is presented in the way of music, what is spoken of in regard to Christ, is so delightful, is presented so perfectly, and with such charm, that everyone dances, everyone moves in response. The elder brother had no interest in it at all.
Then John presents the house as the place in which the Son abides; the Son abides in the house for ever. He abides there. He abides in the house for ever; we shall never be without Him, and there we shall be truly free -- a very great fact, especially at the present time.
{130}
Then John goes on later to tell us that the house was full of precious odour -- "the house", without saying whose house it was: "The house was filled with the odour of the ointment" (chapter 12:3). The sense of smell is delightfully ministered to in that house; there is nothing corrupt there. You will have noticed that the ointment which Mary used, was not in an alabaster box in John. The alabaster box would allude to the care with which the ointment was preserved from taint, but there is no need of that in John; it is to render tribute to Mary of Bethany, who loved our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption. That is what you will find in the house in which Jesus is ministered to.
Now all these remarks will help us as to Ephesians, because Ephesians presents things in their fulness; not in a hard forced kind of way, but one thing growing out of another, and all coming out of a heart full, by the power of the Spirit. That is what marks Ephesians. The apostle's heart was simply full, and words are employed to denote the excessive excellency and greatness of the divine things presented. So Paul speaking about both Jew and gentile having access through Christ "by one Spirit to the Father", opens up his heart to these gentile believers, as indeed towards all. "No more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God". What a word for us! Some of us have been speaking about the blind man whose eyes were opened (@John 9), that he was cast out -- a man without a country, without a family, without a religion; as we might say, even his parents undertaking nothing for him. What is he coming into? He is coming into all this of which I have been speaking. The Lord enquires of him, "dost thou believe on the Son of God?" (@John 9:35). The Son of God will give him a country, a family, so that he is no longer a stranger and foreigner, but a "fellow-citizen of the saints, and of the household of God" -- marvellous statement!
{131}
Now the passage goes on to show what this is, because we need to understand what the house is. And so the apostle says that it is "built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone". Now look at that, dear brethren. You say the "foundation of the apostles and prophets", are they in the foundations? Well, according to @Revelation 21 they are, every one of them, for there were twelve foundations, and on each the name of an apostle of the Lamb -- twelve names. The reference is to the quality of the apostles work in founding Christianity. I am not speaking so much of the foundation itself as the foundation of God; that is not exactly what is in view here -- that is stated in 2 Timothy, where it is necessary to state it, because things are slipping away; but in Ephesians the apostle is speaking in love, his heart engrossed with the greatness of the divine things into which we are brought; he would convey that the very best is there; you cannot admit of anything better than "the apostles and prophets". It is the quality here, not only the sureness of the foundation.
Then, after the foundation, he speaks of the topstone, as if the apostles and prophets were so in keeping with Christ in the laying of the foundation that He becomes the topstone of what they lay. So the structure is bound up with the very best in the apostles and prophets, and then the ornamentation and binding influence of the glorious Person of Christ, the head of the corner! Such is the house as Ephesians presents it, and what a place! How one seeks enlargement of heart to take it in, and to have a part in it, for Ephesians is the excellence of the thing, even from the foundation; and then the ornamentation and the binding influence of the glorious Person of Christ as the Head of the corner. The next thing the apostle says is, that it "increases to a holy temple in the Lord". Though it has the form of a house now, a place of enjoyment for us -- "a habitation of God in the Spirit" -- it also *increases*,  that
{132}
is, it looks on to the time when the Lord will be supreme; it increases to a holy temple in the Lord. When He takes up the reins of government in the world, that which we have part in now will be the means in His hands of making His rule *intelligible*  to all, for His reign will not be arbitrary; of course it will be absolute, but it is such a rule as will be intelligible, and acceptable to all. Thus I apprehend the idea of the building increasing to a holy temple in the Lord. When the Lord reigns by and by, He will rule in power, but all will be made intelligible in the temple.
I refer now a little to Chronicles, and what I would draw attention to is the king's words, "in my affection for the house of my God". I want to arouse affection in each of us, dear brethren, for the house; it is such a great commanding thought with God that He would have us not only to seek it as a place of enjoyment, but to have affection for it, and, as having affection for it, to come forward, and to make it as joyful and as glorious in a holy sense as we may. So, as I have said already, we have to distinguish between David's *affliction*  and David's *affection*,  what he provided in his affliction I apprehend to be according to his might, what he had as king, as he tells us elsewhere. As he commanded the resources of his empire he provided in abundance everything that was necessary to the house. And so, as afflicted, he sets forth, typically, Christ in the gospels. But then in chapter 22, in which he tells us that he provided all these things, mentioning the enormous sum of one hundred thousand talents of gold, and one thousand thousand talents of silver, and iron and brass and wood, and everything that was needed in abundance -- in that very chapter you have Solomon. I wish to point out, dear brethren, hoping that the Lord will use it for our instruction, that Solomon in this chapter is Christ as Son as seen in the gospels. It is Christ as the suffering, afflicted David, but He is nevertheless the Son -- "young and tender" it may be. I do
{133}
not mean that Christ was that personally, but it is the way in which the idea of sonship is introduced for our apprehension. We have to learn things from the beginning; and so in chapter 22 David, having reached, not the foundation, but the place, which he purchased, begins to tell us what he had provided for the house, and then immediately you have Solomon. That is a matter that deserves our attention, that an afflicted David and a tender Solomon, his son, combined, is the Christ of the gospels. There is no change in the Person, but you have the combination of suffering and sonship -- sonship in its tenderness, but nevertheless sonship. And so the wisdom and the provision and the ordering and the pattern all emanate from David. He represents the suffering Christ, the afflicted Christ. How that touches our heart! We are never to lose sight of that; but then the house is not built under those circumstances; the house is not built by a suffering Christ, an afflicted Christ; for the house was not built until David died. But the two things run together -- the afflicted David and the tender son, Solomon, until they are both reigning together, a very remarkable thing; yet there is no foundation of the house laid under those circumstances: the element of war, the element of affliction, the element of suffering, these do not properly belong to the house. The house is a place of holy enjoyment. I am endeavouring to make it attractive to every one here, and specially to the young people. So when coming to the actual structure, and when Solomon acts by himself after David's death, he represents the *glorified*  Christ. The house is built or constructed, by a glorified Christ -- a Son -- but the Son in heaven. Think of the Son in heaven! You say, 'It is the same Person who was on earth'. Of course it is; as to His Person He is "the same yesterday, and today, and for ever";(@Hebrews 13:8) there can be no change in His Person; but a Christ in heaven, is different from a Christ on earth; the Son of God in heaven is different from the Son of
{134}
God on earth. You understand what I mean by the word 'different'; the Christ that is in heaven, as raised from the dead went about among His people forty days. Where was He when He was not with them? Who can tell? We are in the presence of His inscrutability when we come to this. We must never reduce Christ in heaven to mere theological terms -- never! We have to apprehend the Person of Christ in heavenly circumstances -- what He is there, but the inscrutable always attaches to Him. He has gone up far above all the heavens, beyond the created worlds. Who can follow Him there? We cannot follow Him there, but He has gone there. He is Christ in heaven, nevertheless; and as the Christ in heaven He appears as the great builder of the church, the assembly. Paul says, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me" (@Galatians 1:15,16). What a Son is the glorified Christ! Think of the enjoyment going on between the Father and the Son! How He loved to dwell upon the fact, that He was going to His Father. He sends the message to His disciples: "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God" (@John 20:17). So, He is up there in all the unalloyed enjoyment of the affection of the Father. Their reciprocated affections are enjoyed in their own sphere. Now all that enters into the formation of the house, as in Ephesians "through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father". So then ye are no longer strangers and foreigners. That is the idea, dear brethren.
When you come to 1 Kings, David is a weak, old man; he thus ceases really to be a type of Christ. The point in Chronicles is to bring out the greatness of Christ in the time of His sufferings, and as He is now in heaven. So the Holy Spirit dwells with great delight typically on the greatness of the provision for the house and its anticipated grandeur.
Coming back to this question of affection. Is it not attractive, this thought of the house? This place of
{135}
holy, spiritual enjoyment to which we are called as sons. David says, "In my affection for the house of my God, I have given of my own property" -- "my own property". It was no longer a question of what belonged to him, as the monarch of the empire, in great volume, but it is a question of *quality*  coming out of affection: "three thousand talents of the gold of Ophir" of his "own property", it was that to which he had perfect personal right, his "own property". What this is in the antitype I would leave you to explore; what this gold of Ophir is. As we come to the closing moments of our Lord's life, and His great affection -- and then how it is expressed to us through Paul, His chosen vessel -- and his great affection, it is no longer a question of volume, but of something very special -- "gold, of the gold of Ophir" -- of His own property. Think of what Jesus has in this sense, and how He devotes it to the house! And then the silver: Solomon does not make much of silver in the structure, but David does, and I apprehend that it grows out of the death of Jesus. We must ever come back to that. All consideration of special devotedness, of special service, must come back to the love that devoted itself unto death, in view of all this. So there was the "gold of Ophir" -- what was so special -- but there was also the silver -- the "seven thousand talents of refined silver" -- referring, I apprehend, primarily to the love of Christ in redemption, and how all has been secured on that principle. So that we have the most delightful dwelling-place as the result of *the special devotedness*  of Christ. He loved Israel, but there is something distinctive here, in the special devoting of what was His *own*  property, in securing the thought of God. It is the best kind of gold and the refined silver. It has the church in view.
Then we have the appeal (@1 Chronicles 29:5) which I hope will not be in vain, dear brethren. It is to whoever is ready to come forward for the work. The Lord has led the way for us, and we see in Ephesians how the
{136}
one specially selected for these things followed Him in devoted energy. In His ministry we get what is special, answering to the gold of Ophir, which David gave. Paul, under the Lord, leads the way for us, in provision and care for the house. So that where God dwells in holy love -- "a habitation of God in the Spirit", is a place of spiritual joy for us.
May the appeal, dear brethren, come home to us so that we may not be wanting in affection for the house.
{137}
Pages 137 - 256 "Fixed Principles" Addresses, Britain, U.S.A., Canada, 1932 - 1933 (Volume 114).
FIXED PRINCIPLES
@Hebrews 11:30; @Genesis 21:8; @Acts 2:41; @Acts 9:31
These Scriptures are familiar to most of us, if not to all, but what I have to advance on them may not be familiar. And so I ask the brethren to follow patiently as I seek to show that what I have read sets out fixed principles.
In moving about amongst brethren, I see the need of observing, recognising, and maintaining fixed principles, in a practical way. If we understand aright that there are such, corresponding in a way with what exists in the physical system, we shall see that the testimony will go on; for principles do not die with people, and although leaders, those whom we have loved and whose memories we cherish may go, the testimony will go on. It is right that young believers should regard their shepherds and teachers, and love and revere them; but then the Lord is pleased to call one and another to Himself, as He did Paul, Peter and many others, but the principles remain and will remain. They may at times be ignored, but in due course they will assert themselves; and it is well for young ones to become acquainted with them and to look for them as knowing them, and to regard all that militates against them as opposition to God. In this respect it is important for us to accustom ourselves to naming things.
Names of things usually arise from experience of them, acquaintance with them. The idea is brought in early, in that God brought the animals which He had created to Adam to see what he would call them. In like manner He would bring principles to our attention to see how we name them, and it is important that we
{138}
should give them right names. As an illustration, we have a fixed order of things after the deluge; it is stated that, while the earth remained certain things should continue, "seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat", and then we have the idea that I suggested in "summer and winter", @Genesis 8:22. That is to say, summer is a name given to heat by experience; so that we have something fixed and a name attached to it. Correspondingly, as we become accustomed to the principles that were introduced by the Lord and by His apostles, and which found scope at the outset and acquired a place in the hearts of believers and which they valued, we have things fixed and names attached to them.
The first of these principles with which I propose to deal is in the first scripture that I read. There are many others throughout Scripture, but I speak of salient ones and the first is *faith*. I selected this verse out of many that speak of faith in this remarkable chapter, because the quality is introduced impersonally. That is to say, it is not attributed to any person or persons. Throughout the chapter you find it *is*  attributed to persons in a wonderful and constructive way, a way calculated to induce admiration in us as we look at what is called the "cloud of witnesses" surrounding us, and the intent is that we should admire and emulate and imitate, so as to "run with patience", as enjoined, "the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God", (@Hebrews 12:1 - 2).
Now this verse 30, as I said, introduces faith in an impersonal way, which proves that the thing is established as known amongst the saints. It comes in after the passage of the Red Sea, as you will all notice -- an act of faith attributed to the children of Israel; it is the only one that is attributed to *them*,  they crossed the sea by faith. It is well that this is recorded, for it saves
{139}
the people from the ignominy of being without faith -- it accredits it to them. The Egyptians, as set over against them, essay to do the same thing -- as may be constantly noted, people of no faith attempt that which belongs alone to faith, and the consequences are disastrous. The passage of the Red Sea therefore, that is to say, the exodus by us out of the world, establishes in a manifest way the existence of faith amongst us. It is a known thing. Nothing is said of it for forty years. Through all the vicissitudes of the wilderness not a word is said about its existence in the people, but faith was there, and as having crossed the Jordan into the land, the record is that the walls of Jericho fell by faith.
I wish to dwell on this particular point, because it is fundamental. Without faith we must be outside the divine realm in the state of our souls, for "he that cometh to God must believe that he is", (@Hebrews 11:6). Without faith we are outside the dispensation of God, which we are told "is in faith", (@1 Timothy 1:4), without it indeed we have no part or lot in the matter -- a most solemn position. There are those who pose among the people of God as having faith, like Simon Magus, but the testimony is that he had "neither part nor lot in this matter". (Acts 8:21), a very solemn thing to be said of anyone numbered among the people of God. To have a part is important, but to have a *lot*  is more important, a lot is fixed.
The testimony, as I said, is summarised in this verse, "By faith the walls of Jericho fell, having been encircled for seven days". I think it will appeal to you, that this encircling is the evidence of faith in these circumstances. If one has faith he must have part in the encircling, for the encircling of Jericho signifies that the world is overcome -- escape is impossible. "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" (@1 John 5:5). One who believes that Jesus is the Son of God has part in the encircling. Now this encircling or encompassing for
{140}
seven days would seem to the ordinary military eye an unheard of procedure, but then, those who are doing it have the mastery. No one interfered with their encircling the city morning by morning for six days, and no one interfered with their encircling the city seven times on the seventh day; the king of Jericho could not hinder it. It was a peculiar military procedure, but it implied mastery, and it continued to the appointed time, ending in the complete overthrow of Jericho.
I have no doubt it invited scorn from the Jerichoites, just as the saints today in their ways appear peculiar to the world, and incur the scorn and ridicule of the world, yet these ways that seem so peculiar and unmeaning, are victory in themselves. They spell victory to faith, to the spiritual eye, in large letters, and I would invite the young people to consider this; for as older ones are being removed, the responsibility of this encircling will fall upon you, and you are to do it gracefully and in power. We must be prepared for the scorn of the world in our methods. They are very simple methods. The ordinary procedure of spiritual Christians is very simple, but then it denotes that they have the mastery; they *can do*  these things. A mighty hand has moved in order that we should do these things. The door has been opened, and the encircling goes on and the walls of the world come down. There is no power that can interfere with the working of spiritual principles. They are old but ever new. They wear, they stand the test of time, they will go through, and come out victoriously in a public way by and by, but already they are victorious in a moral sense.
I want everyone to let these thoughts sink down into their hearts; because, as I said, the responsibility of this encompassing will come to us if we have not already taken it up. It is a matter of faith, and not faith in any given persons here. It is important to notice that, because we are apt to turn our eyes specially to this one and that one -- not that we should not regard each one
{141}
for his works sake; we should be discerning and measure our leaders if we follow them. It is their faith that we are to follow, as those "who have spoken unto you the word of God", (@Hebrews 13:7). The present leaders we are to obey as it says, "Obey your leaders, and be submissive", (@Hebrews 13:17). But then it says, "considering the end of their conversation. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever"(@Hebrews 13:7,8). So that the encircling, the overthrow of Jericho is not by any *special*  person or persons having faith, it is the thing itself existent, and no one can afford to be out of it; of course it is in the saints, but I speak of its presentation in the scripture before us.
They went round in the most orderly way. First, the general idea was conveyed to Joshua, then the thing is opened up by him; pointing to the importance of ministry. There is what the Lord says to the assemblies, @Revelation 2 and 3, which as to words, is in small compass, but the Spirit opens it up to us as needed. So what was spoken by the Lord to Joshua in chapter 6 of his book, is opened up by Him and applied, so that the encircling took a practical form and the result was triumphant; the walls came down.
Now, dear brethren, I repeat, it is a question of the saints in possession of faith, being already victorious. We could not encompass Jericho were it not that we are victorious already. Time was when the world encompassed our Lord Jesus. It could not do so aside from divine permission, but it says, "the Jews therefore surrounded Him", (@John 10:24) -- a most solemn matter. When the Jews surrounded Him, for the moment the world had control, and the result was manifest, the Lord was put to death. Primarily, as they surrounded Him, He left them "and went away beyond Jordan into the place where John at first baptised"(@John 10:40), and there it was that He was recognised as doing many miracles, "and many believed on him there", (verse 42). That is. He went back to first principles,
{142}
and although the world surrounded Him, morally He had victory, for He said, "Now is the judgment of this world";(@John 12:31) and as risen and glorified He surrounded it. That is what the surrounding of Jericho means. Pentecost shows the victory, the Lord is in control now. Jericho is surrounded, *and*  for those in whom faith is, it has fallen. "By faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they were compassed about seven days". Not six days but seven, and seven times on the seventh day. I apprehend that implies that there is no slackening of energy. You know there is constant danger of the slackening of energy, whereas Israel was more energetic on the seventh day: "It came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early about the dawning of the day", (@Joshua 6:15). That is what the Lord is aiming at, beloved brethren, to induce increased energy amongst us, that there be no slackening. The testimony is to go on and there is to be a triumphant end. It is most stimulating! And then after the encircling comes the "great shout!" One idea of a shout is vigour, it is strength, denoting that there is no slackening of energy. The Lord Jesus was marked by it on the cross; it says He cried with a loud voice. We need not in this sense talk in whispers; the sense of victory enables us to lift up our heads and to confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, and that with a loud voice. The shout of Israel at the end brought down the walls. That sets out a principle that everyone ought to understand, not simply those who are in the lead, for faith marks all. It is a principle already known and established and acted on as if it were the air we breathe.
The next principle that I think is important is *weaning*. And I might have read scriptures that speak of weaning as effected by a person, but the way it is put in this scripture denotes that it was there as a principle. No doubt Sarah weaned Isaac, but it does not say so here. What it says is that he *was*  weaned. Now this weaning will fit in, I am sure, with most of
{143}
us here today. It fits in immediately after the principle I have been speaking of, that is to say, we have to learn how to do without the natural. Each has to learn how to stand, as it were, on his own feet. We have to learn to draw from other than natural sources. In other words, we are to learn how to live by the Spirit. "If we live by the Spirit, let us walk also by the Spirit", (@Galatians 5:25). This is seen in this second scripture.
It was an auspicious day, and the Scripture says that Isaac "was weaned". There is no explanation as to what the weaning means, it is viewed as a known principle, as I said, a known thing in Abraham's house, in the house of faith. Abraham's house represents the household of faith and there are principles in it, and amongst them is this one. It does not need to be explained. Those who are not weaned, cannot be regarded as standing upon their own feet, they cannot be regarded in their individuality. We must arrive at the sense of individuality and the epistle to the Romans helps us as to this, indeed it is the epistle that propounds and applies this great principle of faith. It is in that epistle we get the remarkable expression, *"on the principle of faith"* ; it is the translation of the preposition "from", in chapter 1:17. I would every one would take in that expression, "on the principle of faith". It works out in the believer coming to himself. You will all remember how it is said of the prodigal that "he came to himself", (@Luke 15:17). That is to say, one reaches experimentally his own individuality, and that individuality is to be regulated by the law of God. Hence the writer of the epistle to the Romans says "I myself". You see, he has come to himself.
I wonder if every young one here has come to himself. You may say, I thought I was to come to Christ; but you must come to yourself if you are to be of any use in the things of God. You must get a name, you must stand out in your own individuality, there is not to be another like you in the whole universe. That is a fine
{144}
thought! and so the apostle says, "I myself", He is not content with the pronoun "I", it is "I myself with the mind serve God's law", @Romans 7:25. Such an one gets the Spirit, and he no longer draws from the flesh, but will rely on the Spirit of God; he is indeed, born of the Spirit; his nature is spiritual. Isaac was born after the Spirit. No doubt he is a type of Christ, but he is also a type of every true believer. I come to this experimentally, that I have another birth, that the roots of my being are in the Spirit, thus all my instincts become spiritual, and I learn to disallow the flesh, and to live in the Spirit, and to walk in the Spirit, and by the Spirit to await the hope of righteousness on the principle of faith. That is the effect of the truth of Romans. It leads to the realm of spirituality, where I breathe my native air in my own distinctive individuality, and through self-analysis spiritually know myself as having part and lot in the great spiritual system that God has introduced.
Romans thus lays the foundation, and every young believer needs to understand it, to come to himself and to be rooted in his own native soil, that he is not in flesh but in Spirit; he is born of the Spirit. Ishmael was born after the flesh, and Isaac was born after the Spirit. We read that "he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit"(@Galatians 4:29), and at this point, beloved young people, you will meet persecution, you will get it from those nearest and dearest to you in the flesh, it may be. It is no longer Jerichoites, or the like, but those who are born after the flesh -- the flesh, in those nearest to me naturally, may become my persecutor. The nature of the flesh is to persecute what is of the Spirit, and hence there is continuous conflict. But then I have an individuality that is to stand, I have a name in heaven, I am in the Book of Life, I have a name that no one else will have, I am to stand out in that individuality, and in it, I drink into one Spirit with the brethren, and I am able to merge with them; I am
{145}
living by the Spirit.
The principle in our chapter is that Isaac was weaned, and on the day he was weaned Abraham made a feast; but although he made a feast in celebration of the occasion, he introduced mixed principles -- a most dangerous thing! Nothing is more destructive than mixed principles amongst us, and they may come from the best of us, the most honoured of us. No one was more honoured than Abraham, and yet he introduced and maintained in principle, on this occasion, the elements of the flesh. And hence, what says the Scripture? "Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac", (@Genesis 21:10).
After the two first principles are clearly apprehended God can *add*,  there will be addition; that is the next principle. I should not pray for addition aside from these two first features. The idea is that the barren woman keeps house, and keeping house involves these two great principles -- faith and the Spirit. Then the next thing is children, to be a joyful mother of children: that is what Sarah was. It is very fine to be joyful spiritually, as we see the increase, children after the Spirit not after the flesh, *see*  @Psalm 113:9. So that @Acts 2:41, supplies the next thing, for you will observe it has the same characteristic as faith has and as weaning has, in the other scriptures -- it is impersonal. It is not said that they were added by anybody to anybody, but just that they were *added*  on that day. Now I understand the force of the words as they are set, is that the principle of adding is amongst the saints: it is part of the position, it is a condition amongst us, and we are aiming at it and keeping out of the way of everything that interferes with it. In that day they were added, but who are they? First of all it says they were baptised. And again there is nothing said as to who baptised them. The principle was there. Peter had said that they should be, but then it goes on to say that they
{146}
*were*  baptised -- the thing was done. What I mean to convey is that if *I*  cannot do it, somebody will do it, the thing *has to be*  done, it is a fixed necessity.
This word "added" has a unique place in the Acts, and it was befitting, it was the adding time; but this was not before the conditions for it were present. And that is what I plead for -- for the conditions of which I have been speaking -- so that the adding may go on; and that if anything comes forward of an extraneous character there may be that discerning, that "porter" quality, that will say, "Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter", @Acts 8:21. The point in the chapter is that what is added should be in keeping with what is there.
One could speak at length of the conditions that were there, as chapter 1 illustrates, but I wish to refer to that remarkable statement of David to Solomon, "thou shalt add to it"(@1 Chronicles 22:14). Acts is, in a sense, Solomon's book; it is Christ in glory setting up the great spiritual system here, and surely adding should have its place there, and should ever have its place. Christ is in heaven and the Spirit is down here and the operations are being carried on in conditions of faith. This ensures addition according to God.
David says of the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, "This is the house of Jehovah Elohim, and this is the altar of burnt offering for Israel", (@1 Chronicles 22:1). Then the Spirit of God goes on to tell us that David speaks of Solomon being young and tender, and he recounts how Jehovah had denied him the privilege of building, but that Solomon who should be Jehovah's son was to build; and he says to Solomon, "in my affliction I have prepared for the house of Jehovah a hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver", and all kinds of materials that were needed he prepared in abundance, but he says, "and thou shalt add to it" ( *see*  @1 Chronicles 22:14,15). By Solomon there was to be *addition*. Now that answers
{147}
to the book of Acts. I believe there is great instruction in reading the book of Acts from that point of view, and moreover it sets you thinking as to what *you*  are doing: "thou shalt add to it". There can be no doubt that each of us adds something, but we may bring in, as I said, what is extraneous, and has to be rejected, as we read in Corinthians, "wood, hay, stubble", therefore "Let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon", @1 Corinthians 3:10,12. The assumption is that he is to build, but let him take heed how he builds, that what he builds survives the fire.
Our scripture says there were 3,000 added on that day. The great principle of adding became effective and it continues. Later, we read of the Lord adding. I do not speak of that, but in chapter 5 we have a special touch. The numbers are given in chapter 4 -- increased numbers; but in chapter 5 we have *multitudes*  added. The Spirit of God says that "believers were more than ever added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women", @Acts 5:14. The assembly requires both men and women. The continuance of it, the maintenance of it, the glory of it and the service of it, require that in its public setting today it should be composed of men and women; that is the divine thought. We must not neglect the "women". We find them in the upper room, and they are to be in the upper room to the end. Multitudes, we are told, were added to the *Lord*. What women they must have been! 'Added to the Lord' implies the kingdom, that there is subjection. The Lord will not have anything added to Him that is not subject. There must be subjection. He can make something out of us if we are subject, nothing if we are not; and so multitudes of believers both of men and women were added to the Lord, so that there was increase in the material that the Lord requires for the assembly.
Luke in his gospel enforces all this in regard of sisters. Whilst they are mentioned in Peter's ministry they do not get their place with him as they do under
{148}
Paul. Yet some say that Paul was very severe on the sisters. Paul regarded them rightly and he would give them every advantage, and so he speaks in the plainest terms as to sisters and how they are to be of use in the house of God. They are to be of use, but I do not dwell upon it, only to mention it. It is very beautiful how Paul speaks for instance, of Lydia, how the Lord had as it were, given him that sister; the Lord opened her heart, it says, "to attend to the things spoken by Paul", @Acts 16:14. If Paul said, "I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man"(@1 Timothy 2:12), Lydia would say, 'Amen', and she would mean it. If Lydia put a covering on her head she would mean it, to her it would mean subjection. She had listened to Paul. If she did not listen to Paul she would have no place in the assembly practically. Luke brings sisters forward from the very outset in a most beautiful way, to show their place in the assembly. I speak at length of this point because the sisters are not functioning among the brethren as they should. You find in Luke how a sister like Mary, the Lord's mother, was able, so to speak, to *analyse*  herself inwardly; she said "My *soul*  doth magnify the Lord, and my *spirit*  hath rejoiced in God my Saviour"(@Luke 1:46,47); she discerned between her soul and spirit, she was introspective in that way, so that she discovered herself, so to speak. Then later, she wondered at the things that were presented to her concerning Him -- hearing also that a sword was to pierce her own soul. How it penetrated -- but what a sister she was! She was committed to John. John took her to his own home, not as the Lord's mother, but as his *own*  mother. In the Lord saying to her, "Woman, behold thy son"(@John 19:26). He is referring to John, He is pointing to John the trusted one -- and He delivers her over to him; she was to be John's mother, she was to be in John's house in that relation. What an advantage he would have thus. But Mary was a sister and she is mentioned in Acts 1 as in the upper room.
{149}
Well, the last scripture I read speaks of increase. That is the last principle that I wish to dwell upon, and of course it is of a piece with the adding, but the word is not added, but increase or multiplication. It comes in in a very remarkable setting, because the assembly had already become militant and victorious. The Lord had intervened on her behalf. You might say the first great conflicts had been won. The early chapters show us how the enemy attacked, and that the Lord gave the victory to His people. Then in a great champion the enemy attacks "the disciples of the Lord", for he is very bold. We are not to be ignorant of his devices, or his boldness. Sometimes things happen amongst us that cause amazement, the boldest efforts of the devil are put forth in some terrible happening amongst the people of God; it is well to be on our guard lest the enemy should get in thus.
Well, here he attacked the disciples of the Lord through Saul, so that he entered into houses and dragged forth both men and women. What sisters he found, what brothers he found, as he dragged them before the tribunals! They were "Jesus", the Lord speaks of them as Himself; they were characteristically members of His body, and He recognised them as Himself, "why persecutest thou *me* ?"(@Acts 9:4) He said to Saul. What an honour for us to be spoken of thus! Well, all this went on; but it was a question of the *Lord*  and what He would do. I would remind you of the Lord as seen in @Acts 9, of the power that is His: He can bring down the mightiest foe, and bring him down in perfect keeping with the dispensation, so as to make him His mightiest servant. And it says. @Acts 9:31, "Then had the churches rest". They had rest, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, "were increased". This is another side to adding. It is not only now a question of persons added, but the idea is of increase through certain conditions existing, conditions of peace prevailing after a storm, after a great harrowing
{150}
conflict. Some of us have had to do in a little way with that in the history of the assembly. How blessed the thought of peace as nestling under the mighty protection of the Lord, and walking in His fear! There is no room for fleshly feelings in that peace, the walk is to be in the fear of the Lord. And then there is the comfort of the Holy Spirit.
One is moved in thinking of the Holy Spirit in this connection, because the word comfort here stands related to the word "Comforter" in @John 14. The blessed Holy Spirit is here present, continuing with us, continuing alongside of us, so as to minister to our souls and pour into them His own comfort. Thus there is increase according to God. The thought of this increase was fixed in the assemblies. It was a present principle, and we must see that it exists.
The Lord is giving us a fine opportunity. He has cleared the air for the moment of certain clouds that had hung over us, and He would have the brethren to take heart, to take courage and go forward in these principles. They will stand. If one is taken and another is taken, still the principles stand. We are to be walking in them, working in them, breathing in them as we breathe the air -- thus nothing can overthrow us!
May the Lord use these thoughts, dear brethren, for blessing.
{151}
THE MORNING AND EVENING LAMBS
@Ephesians 5:18 - 19; @Numbers 28:1 - 8; @John 20:19 - 22
It will be observed from the first passage read, that I have in mind to dwell upon the subject of spirituality, implying that we are to be filled with the Spirit. The other scriptures illustrate how this may be maintained, for it is a daily experience representing how our years are to be filled up, and that if the evening is not equal to the morning there is sure to be decline until perhaps there is no morning at all. So I had in mind that we might be helped in considering the morning and evening lambs, the evening lamb being equal to the morning lamb. That is to say, our lives being made up of days we maintain the spiritual level that is proper to Christians in seeing to it that the evening is not less than the morning.
The idea of the day, as you will all remember, came in in Genesis 1, God having worked by the day -- a very touching suggestion. You will remember how Job cursed his day, as if others did not have to do with it, as if God did not work on that day, but He was working then as He is now every day. The Lord said, "My Father worketh hitherto"(@John 5:17), not at certain times only, but always, for we cannot think of God being inactive in the presence of sin in this world. Job disregarded that fact as we are all likely to do in our narrowness and pettiness, but Job's folly could not interfere with God's activities.
We have an allusion to His activities in grace in His word to Noah. He says, "My spirit shall not always plead with Man; for he indeed is flesh; but his days shall be a hundred and twenty years". @Genesis 6:3. How full those days would be from God's side, every day of those hundred and twenty years; and with no result in the way of conversions as far as we know!
{152}
There was *testimony*  -- an important matter. It was not simply the handing out of tracts and the like, but appeals and strivings every day. Man's thoughts were only evil every day, but that did not interfere with God's thoughts nor His activities. They were all God's days and He showed they were His days when striving with men in them, even although there was no result.
Another idea of work on God's part is in Noah sending out the dove. He sent out a raven but it does not say he sent it out *from*  him, but he sent out the dove *from him*. It is a type of the Spirit, not now as striving, but under the emblem of a dove; well known to some of us, for the Spirit of God came down from heaven as a dove on the Lord Jesus. Matthew tells us the Lord saw the Spirit as a dove descending on Him, and Mark says the same, but John says that John the baptist saw the Spirit coming down as a dove, and Luke says that He came down in bodily shape as a dove, so that there should be no doubt as to what the dove means. But I speak of it now because of its relation to the day. The raven did not return to Noah; but the dove did return "to him". It came to him and he took it in "to him", such were the typically precious relations, as we may say, between the Father and the Spirit, between divine Persons. There was nothing about a day in the first sending out, but at the second sending out it reads "the dove came back at eventide"; that is to say, there was a day's work, but not a fruitless one, pointing to our own times. She brought back in her beak an olive-leaf plucked off, typical of life out of death. Death was still there, the waters had not quite dried up, but there was life as symbolised in the olive-leaf. That is our position as far as I understand. The Holy Spirit today is working by the day, bringing in these results for God, not a floating olive-leaf, but one plucked off, showing that it was connected with its source when the dove found it, and she brought it back at eventide; it was a fruitful day's work; it represented
{153}
typically something for God. There was no suggestion of fatigue, but energy, as if the dove would spend the day fully and bring back some result.
In keeping with all that, I want to show from @Numbers 28 how God looks for this very thing in the continual burnt-offering. He provides food for us in abundance, and these chapters -- 28 and 29 -- which run together, deal with what he expects -- daily, and weekly, and monthly, and yearly. That is how the matter stands. The last great offering is the feast of tabernacles, which diminishes in the number of bullocks from thirteen down to seven, but not below that. That is to say, the millennial state of things implies that God will have His portion although it may diminish. It is a sorrowful thing to have to admit diminution in our givings God-ward, but God bears with it provided it does not go below the spiritual thought of seven, provided it does not go below what is the outcome of perfect exercise. All above that is excess which God delights in, but I am speaking only of the daily, because if the daily experience be not maintained, the weekly will drop, and the monthly will drop, and the yearly will drop, and in all probability we shall lose our mornings, we shall become darkened. As Peter says, "But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins", 2 Peter 1:9. It was because of that very thing, not attending to the daily sacrifices.
So we have a yearling lamb, a beautiful type of Christ. A yearling lamb is not just a little lamb. There are two words for "lamb" in the New Testament, the one indicating a full-grown creature, and the other a tiny thought. It is the former that is in view in the yearling, so that God's offerings contemplate maturity and not infancy. Scripture makes provision for infancy, for God takes care of the infants; the Lord Jesus took infants into His arms, but you can hardly expect an infant to make a daily offering; it has to be cared for.
{154}
Offering to God is priestly; it contemplates a certain maturity, and so there are the two yearling lambs, one in the morning and the other in the evening.
Now, dear brethren, this is intensely practical, because unless we attend to it our special convocations must be impoverished and God denied His part. "Will a man rob God?" it says in Malachi, which is, as you might say, the evening book of the Old Testament. It is a challenge. It is a sorrowful thing to be classified with robbers. "Will a man rob God?" "Wherein do we rob thee?" "In tithes and heave-offerings", (@Malachi 3:8) is the answer. We do not want to be classified thus. To meet that situation God urges them to bring the tithes into the treasure house and He would open the windows of heaven and pour out a blessing that they could not contain. It is contingent on bringing the tithes, so that we may not be found robbers of God. We may not think of it as serious, but it is equally serious to robbing men, for God has rights, and His rights surely come first. So that the morning lamb denotes how we begin the day. I desire to be simple, because what I have in mind is that we should be filled with the Spirit, and that this should be maintained, and if it be maintained, the evening lamb will be equal to the morning lamb. As I said, God requires a yearling lamb, with a meat-offering mingled with beaten oil, and in addition to that a drink-offering. The word "strong drink" is found in this passage. How do I begin my day therefore? What have I, to speak reverently, to stimulate the heart of God? This is what is meant by strong drink. It was not for man; it was for God, and it was to be poured out in the sanctuary. If we go back to @Exodus 25:29, we will find that the table was furnished with vessels with which to pour out. The believer has something for God in the morning; he has his lamb and what accompanies it, denoting that he is appreciating the Lord Jesus.
{155}
One could say much about that. It is not simply a living creature, but the kind of humanity as indicated in the oblation -- fine flour measured. We are far too loose in our relations with God and with one another, as if any measure will do, but God requires a certain measure. What we get here is that everything is to be in proportion, that it is not simply a matter of light, not simply a question of what Christ is objectively as offered up in death for me, but the kind of humanity, which is of course what *I*  should have. The relation between the lamb and the fine flour is what Christ is as offering Himself in death, and what He is in the holy nature of His humanity in which believers partake. It is of the divine nature, as seen in Christ that we partake. Then the oil is in proper measure, that is to say, the recognition of the Spirit; all to show that I am spiritually proportionate, and then the strong drink which means that if God is to be affected I am to be affected. Think of God being affected by my being affected, that my attitude of heart in regard of Christ affects God!
To illustrate what I am saying, I might refer to Mary of Bethany. You will remember the difference between her and Martha. We often compare them, but in @John 11 they are brought near together spiritually. Martha met the Lord outside the town; she went out to meet Him, but she did not move anybody. Nobody wondered where she went. An unspiritual person is not likely to influence people Godward or Christward. Yet she was going out to meet the Lord, and she did meet Him and she got light from Him. She said, "Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who should come into the world"(@John 11:27). She got that light from the Lord, and immediately she goes off to her sister. She was affected; her spiritual stature had increased, and as our spiritual stature increases through our acquaintance with Christ this will be manifest to the brethren. She went off to her sister; but there is no
{156}
idea with her of assuming to know more than Mary. The measure of my stature is seen in the way I regard the brethren. She went to her sister secretly and said, "The teacher is come and calls thee"(@John 11:28). That is very beautiful in Martha's case. She grew rapidly; she is not complaining now; had she been fleshly she would have said, I am more ardent than Mary; I came out to meet you, she did not. But, no, she went *off*  and told her sister secretly, and said, "The teacher is come and calls thee". Scripture does not say the Lord told her to say that, but she did. Then Mary moves, and those that were present move too. They said, "She goes to the tomb that she may weep there"(@John 11:31), and they went after her. That shows the influence that a spiritual person has; but what I am coming to is this, that when she came to where the Lord was -- and He remained where Martha met Him -- she fell at His feet, and said partly what Martha said, but she wept, and the Jews wept, and when the Lord saw her weeping and the Jews weeping. He wept. Now that illustrates what I was saying, that God is affected as I am affected. If Christ commands my heart so that like Himself I rejoice in spirit, that affects God too.
That is what I understand to be the typical meaning of strong drink; it is what affects God, His people are so affected that He is affected. Can any one doubt it? His delight and our delight is in His beloved Son! That is what He is looking for. He has brought His Son in here, and He has indicated from heaven His pleasure in Him, and now He is waiting for us to indicate ours. That is what is going on, the Holy Spirit bringing us to the appreciation of the Lord Jesus so that we are affected. One could illustrate it in many ways, how people came to the Lord throughout the gospels and were affected, and every time they were affected God was affected. God is delighted with our delight in Christ and that is what goes on normally in the assembly.
{157}
So that there is to be strong drink in the morning, and I would suggest, dear brethren, that our morning family readings require these things, that they are not mere routine or perfunctory matters, but that Christ comes before us so that we are affected. God is pleased with that. We begin the day thus; we are yielding to God, for God has His part in it if we have ours. It is intended to yield to God. But how often the wear and tear of the household duties and the business -- I need not enumerate them -- tend to diminish, or it may be, to efface altogether the impressions of the morning, and that is where the enemy works; if possible he will catch away every impression that strengthened you and made you happy. The drink-offering is to be poured out, it says, in the sanctuary. @Numbers 28:7. This is priestly service. It is not fleshly effervescence but holy appreciation of Christ, and God accepts it. It is part of His day. God enters into the days, but what is seen here involves the assembly.
Well, as I said, the wear and tear of the day's work are sure to affect us, and the point is, can I maintain my spirituality in spite of these adverse things? God has provided that I may. That would lead me into other channels of truth, but in the wondrous system into which we are brought we are baptised to the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and divine Persons are active on our behalf, and that activity extends throughout the whole day. The provision is that the spiritual level should be maintained until the evening, that there should be no diminution. It may be that something happens to disturb you and affect your conscience. Some things do happen and you are not released of them until the evening: "He shall be unclean until the evening" (compare @Leviticus 11). That is, you have to go through the remaining part of the day in a certain sense of bitterness, but there is relief in the evening. The allowance of the flesh involves that you go through a certain process for cleansing, but in
{158}
the wondrous system into which we are introduced there is relief; there is the water of purification, there is the Priest, there is the confessional (compare @1 John 1:9 and 2:1). There is nothing lacking that is requisite for our maintenance spiritually. Everything is available so that the spiritual level should not be dropped, and when I come to the evening I offer to God what I offered in the morning, the same yearling lamb, the same oblation with the oil, and the same drink-offering. The level is maintained, and if that level be maintained during the six days, you may depend that on the first day of the following week there will be wealth. Mark that in making the weekly and monthly offerings, we are never to omit those two offerings. It means that I keep up the level of spiritual power in all circumstances. So that we are to be "filled with the Spirit", as the scripture which I read says, "speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and chanting with your heart to the Lord; giving thanks at all times for all things to him who is God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ", @Ephesians 5:19 - 20.
In closing I want to draw your attention to the evening of @John 20. It is a special record; it is not a repetition of any of the others. It is by itself, and it stresses what happened in the evening, and the word is said to mean that it was late in the evening, that is, when we might be worn out or fatigued. I want to show how the Lord sets the example here of the maintenance of spiritual vigour. It was a busy day, but a wonderful day for the Lord -- the first day of the week. It is mentioned twice in the chapter. It was the day on which the Lord rose, the day of the "hind of the morning". That is the heading of @Psalm 22 as you will know. It is a feminine idea, so that it was not only Christ's activity but the activity of those who loved Him. Of course He was active, but it is to bring out the activity of His lovers; that is, it is for us. Mary
{159}
Magdalene is the example; she is very early there and she *runs*,  but the chapter is to show that on that day which began with the "hind of the morning" the activity of the morning is there in the evening.
What I think the chapter indicates among many other things is that it was a heavy day's work for the Lord -- for I may so speak of Him -- and certainly a heavy day's work for the disciples, for events that affect our minds tax us as manual labour does. It was a day of great events. Peter and John had run to the tomb, as you know. It was a long day because the movements began very early, and now it is late in the evening. I am seeking to show you that the chapter confirms all I have been saying, that the evening is in keeping with the morning; the "hind of the morning" is the hind of the evening, that is, the agility and the energy are still there. There is no criticism, not a word of reproach in the narrative as regards the disciples although Thomas was absent. In this section it is a question of the saints being looked at as spiritual. There is no reference to Simon's sin here; it is the disciples and where they were. It is a question of what they are to Jesus, and He came in, the doors being shut where they were, and stood in the midst and spake peace to them, and they were glad. They were not drooping; they were not depressed; they were not perturbed; there is nothing of that kind in this record. It is an abstract view, no doubt, but it brings out *what is possible*,  and what God looks for, that the evening is equal to the morning. It is not here an individual matter, but an assembly matter, and one may go so far as to apply it to the evening of the dispensation, that God will bring out the vitality and the energy, however obscure, that marked the morning. I believe He will. I believe He is doing it, and we do not want to be out of it, and if we are to be in it there must be the maintenance of the daily sacrifices, as I have been saying. The morning family reading and prayer and what may
{160}
come in in the evening to correspond are of the greatest importance, because if we neglect these things we shall be impoverished in the special convocations. But if we do not neglect them, when we come to the sabbath and the other feasts, speaking anti-typically, we shall be enriched and have all that is required for the service of God.
That is what I had on my heart. I believe you will recognise its importance, and it is very beautiful in this section of John to notice that the Lord said, "Peace be to you" twice, and they are glad when they see Him. The spirit of holy buoyancy marks this occasion; they are all awake and on the alert, and ready for what the Lord brought in. The conditions were so suitable that He could speak peace twice; for after they rejoiced He says, "Peace be to you" again, and He has such confidence in them that He says, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you", @John 20:21.
He cannot trust us if we are not spiritual; there is no one really reliable who is not spiritual, and alas! We have to admit that all are not. The apostle says to the Galatians, "Ye that are spiritual ...", which plainly intimates that some are not spiritual. The Corinthians were not spiritual. It is the spiritual that are reliable, and so the thought of the Lamb's wife refers to what is spiritual. She is His wife; it is the evidence that she is trustworthy: "The heart of her husband confideth in her", (@Proverbs 31:11). The Lord here says, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you"(@John 20:21), and then He breathes on them and says, "Receive the Holy Spirit"; thus they were rendered trustworthy in view of the great service committed to them.
Well, that is what is needed. If there is to be a representation of Christ it is a question of spirituality, and that maintained. May God help us as to all this!
{161}
CONFORMATION TO CHRIST
@Romans 8:29; @Romans 12:2; @2 Corinthians 3:18
You can see, dear brethren, from the first Scripture which I have read, that I purpose to say something about conformation to Christ, the fact implying that God's Son is the divine Model for all those who are the called according to purpose; He represents, in that sense, the end in view in regard to the divine formation of believers. There are two ideas brought before us: formation and conformation; they are of course, allied thoughts, but conformation lies in full accordance to the Model. It is thus stated that we are to be conformed to the image of God's Son, that He should be the firstborn among many brethren.
His foreknowledge enters into this -- "because whom he has foreknown, he has also predestinated to be conformed to the image of his Son". Foreknowledge alludes to a time prior to the formation of the world, showing indeed, how important believers are in God's mind -- they were there before the foundation of the world. Christ as Man was in the divine mind, for it is to Him that we are to be conformed. He, a divine Person becoming Man and known as the Son, is the Pattern for the "many brethren". This verse therefore, is on the platform of eternal counsel, in which man had part and place. @Ephesians 1:11.
God, in the course of the creation had man in view. I am not now speaking of the six days of @Genesis 1, but of verse 1: "In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth" -- that is beyond our computation as to time. Scientific men seek to probe into the mysteries of the creation, but there can be no finality in their conclusions. Scripture gives no clue as to the length of time since "the beginning" spoken of in @Genesis 1:1. It states only, that "In the beginning
{162}
God created". Then we are further told that chaos ensued, and then that the Spirit was brooding over the face of the deep, evidently intent upon bringing order out of chaos, so that the scene should be prepared for the habitation of man. Then finally man is created who was a "figure of him that was to come"(@Romans 5:14), showing that Christ was in the mind of God before Adam. It is not that Adam was a pattern for Christ, but that Christ was the pattern for Adam.
In @John 1, we read of "The Word", who *was*  "In the beginning", and that the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He existed as one of the divine Persons in the deity, yet He was *in counsel*  as a Man, so that He existed before Adam in every way; as John the baptist said in that same chapter, "he that comes after me is preferred before me; for he was before me", @John 1:15. He is always first! Again in relation to Melchisedec, the "priest of the Most High God" -- he is brought before us as "assimilated to the Son of God"(@Hebrews 7:3), that is, he is patterned from that glorious Person. Then later, in Exodus, we have the well-known pattern of the tabernacle given to Moses, again reminding us of the divine idea as being always in the mind of God. The only man who saw the pattern was Moses, and the only one who could construct the tabernacle, was the one who had seen the pattern. So important was this point, that he was instructed to see that everything was made according, to the pattern showed him in the mount; the whole structure in every part of it was to be according to the divine pattern.
We can see, as having these facts brought to our attention, that God has been working all the time with Christ in His mind, and further, that He has taken us up, in that connection, that He might bring about in us, conformity to Christ. He will keep on in His patient way with each of us, in view of bringing about perfect conformity with His own Son. One of the greatest features in Scripture with regard to God,
{163}
is His patience; but in waiting on us, if our wills are at work, and we do not submit to His way with us, we shall not have a happy time, for He will never give up *His*  will. Happy that man who sees it at the beginning and places himself in the hands of the divine Potter. No need of the rod then; he will have a joyous time as in the hands of God for His will, that there should be in him conformity to Christ.
You will remember that Moses as having been in the mount with God, coming down with the tables of the covenant in his hands, finds the people already given up to idolatry, and he casts the tables down and breaks them. But God never gave up His thought as to the tabernacle as shown in the pattern, neither did Moses, but before it can be set up the most painful experiences had to be gone through in the camp. Moses cried, "Who is on the Lord's side?" "And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him. And he said unto them. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side", (@Exodus 32:26 - 27). And the levites went through the camp with the sword, and three thousand were slain. After this Moses takes the tent and pitches it outside the camp, and it becomes a question for all who are on the Lord's side, of going out to Him there.
This question is raised for us individually in @Romans 7, and we find it there worked out as an inward process -- a process requiring spiritual discernment and discovery. So that at the end of the process we say, "I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, good does not dwell",(@Romans 7:18) -- *that*  flesh has been discovered in its true character, *it*  is *not*  on the Lord's side. It is a most humbling discovery, arrived at by the most minute analysis of what is within. Well if that is the true character of my flesh, is it to continue active? No, for by that same process of analysis, I have discovered something else, and that is, "I myself", and I determine that I shall "with the mind serve God's law", @Romans 7:25. Thus I am "on the Lord's
{164}
side". What about the flesh then? Chapter 8 of Romans teaches us that God supplies me with a power by which that flesh can be kept inactive. I have come to the knowledge of Christ as my Deliverer for I can say, "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord"(@Romans 7:25); my conscience no longer condemns me, for I can say, "There is then now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and death. For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us who do not walk according to flesh, but according to Spirit"(@Romans 8:1 - 4).
Now you see I am free in my conscience and have power to serve God's law. It is not anything I have done, God has done it to His own glory in the cross of Christ, so that this new power enables me to fulfil the righteous requirement of the law, and I prove myself "on the Lord's side". I am prepared to use my sword. The levites girded every man his sword upon his thigh, they rallied to the Lord's name, and consecrated themselves to the Lord that day even though it was by every man slaying his brother, his companion, and his neighbour; Moses said to them, "bring on yourselves a blessing today". (@Exodus 32:29). God's word to us is, "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not what is unclean, and *I*  will receive you; and I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters"(@2 Corinthians 6:17,18). Unless there is this subjecting of the will to God, I shall know nothing of this blessing.
All this being true in us, God's work of formation and of conformation proceeds. He is appealing to us to submit ourselves in His hands, so that He can make something of us. He had it in mind for us before the foundation of the world. He had the most glorious
{165}
Model before Him -- the Son of God -- and He is going to conform us all to His image. We cannot afford to be out of this! When we are young, as the Lord said to Peter, we gird ourselves and go whithersoever we will, and He says to him further, "but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not"(@John 21:18). This speaks of resignation to the will of another. Let us resign ourselves therefore to the will of God that we may become subjects of His blessed work of conformation to Christ. Jeremiah in chapter 18, speaks of a vessel which was "marred" in the hands of the potter, and then of his making another vessel "as seemed good" to him -- it is a vessel formed after Christ which pleases God, a vessel according to the counsels of God. Let me appeal to you, beloved brethren, for this resignation to the will of God.
In chapter 12 of Romans and in verse 2 the apostle entreats believers not to be "conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind". If this world is before the heart, and a man desires to shine in it, he is not in a position to prove the will of God. The world has its ideals, it makes its appeal, and so the apostle warns us here, "be not conformed to this world". We are told elsewhere that the world "that then was" -- in the days of Noah -- perished, being overflowed of water; and again, there is the world that is now which is reserved unto fire awaiting the judgment; but then there is the world which is to come -- "that world", as the Lord calls it -- and in view of our part in it we must be "transformed by the renewing of the mind". This goes further than a resolve of mind to serve the law of God (@Romans 7:25); this verse serves to assist us as to the use of our minds; and here in regard to them we have this significant word "renewal". This word expresses what is common to this epistle, for we have the same idea in "newness of life" and "newness of spirit" -- it means an entirely
{166}
different thing from that which is current; so that by the renewal of our minds we begin to think differently from other men. You do not get this from reading a novel, however "innocent" -- none of them is innocent -- neither do you get renewal of mind from reading what may be regarded as legitimate in connection with ordinary affairs.
This is to be understood spiritually; so we read in @1 Corinthians 2:12, "We have received ... the Spirit which is of God, that we may know the things which have been freely given to us of God". Believers have the Holy Spirit, who instructs us in regard to all things. In @Isaiah 28, we read of the farmer, that "his God doth instruct him" -- If God will thus instruct a farmer in his work, will He not instruct us as to the renewing of the mind? Let us therefore ask the Lord for this knowledge: speak to Him about this renewing of the mind, and He will show us what He means by it: indeed we are told that the Lord will give us understanding in *all*  things. This renewing relates to another world -- it is looking on to the world in which Christ is everything and which had its conception before the foundation of this world.
The school of God is the oldest school in the universe; it has turned out the greatest men that have ever been -- the deepest thinkers, and it will abide when all the other universities, colleges and schools of this world are passed away. In His school we learn to "prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God".
Then chapter 3 of the second epistle to the Corinthians gives us another feature: "we all looking on the glory of the Lord with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". The word "changed" in the authorised version is really "transformed" -- that is, metamorphosed, as often remarked; that is, it is changed, not merely externally, but completely. We have the
{167}
same idea applied to the Lord Jesus Himself; it is a complete change; not that the word in itself always connotes that what you are changed from is something less worthy, but whatever you are, as transformed, you become something entirely different. It is a question of what God has in His mind. In relation to the Lord on the mount of transfiguration, Matthew and Mark say that He was "transfigured" -- but Luke says that He "became different" -- here we are in the presence of what is inscrutable. We are to be "like him" when we see Him as He is, and that is enough for us. We have it in expectation as to the manifestation, but this transformation here is to go on *now*. The apostle is speaking to the Corinthians of the new covenant, and showing that their hearts were the tables on which God was writing Christ; he is treating of the new in contrast to the old; he speaks of it as "not of letter, but of spirit". (@2 Corinthians 3:6) It is typified in the second giving of the Law to Moses; for although this was literally a renewal of the first, we may use it as figurative of the new covenant of which Paul was an "able minister".
When Moses came down from the mount and had broken the first tables, and after all the painful process of dealing with the camp had been gone through, he entreats to be allowed to see God's glory and God accedes to his wish in the most tender gracious way. He says, "I will do this thing also that thou hast said"(@Exodus 33:17), and from this point Moses becomes more expressly typical of Christ as the Mediator -- more like Jesus. God has taught him more of Himself, and so He directs him to go up to the mountain again; and the terms on which Moses is to be there show that he is more than ever pleasing to God, as more like that One of whom God can say, "Thou art my beloved Son in whom I have found my delight"(@Mark 1:11). So here He says to Moses, *You*  make the tables -- "Hew for thyself two tables of stone like the first",(@Exodus 34:1) -- and bring them up in your own hands, and Deuteronomy adds a further word, that he
{168}
should make an ark of wood, speaking of Christ Himself in manhood -- the Conservator of every thought of God. God said to Moses as it were, *I*  will do the writing; *you*  bring up the tables. So here in 2 Corinthians, the Lord has brought these refractory Corinthians back to Himself; they have humbled themselves; they have regarded the words of the apostle in the first epistle as the "commandment of the Lord", and now here they are found as suited writing material for the Spirit of God. The Lord has brought it about: He has got the saints in His hands for the impressions which the Spirit of the living God makes. Paul himself was a "competent" new covenant minister; he was in keeping with Christ, his competency being of God.
So Moses went up the mount a second time. @Exodus 34, and God came down and stood beside him there. Then it says that "Jehovah passed by before his face"(@Exodus 34:6) think what an impression of God that would make upon him! What follows is that God tells him that "after the tenor of these words"(verse 27) He has made a covenant with the people; that is what we have here: "The Lord the Spirit", -- it is not the covenant in letter, but in Spirit. That is Christianity. It is impressions of God in Christ. The Lord Jesus has His people in His hands here; He enforces the love of God in our hearts. He instructs us in it. What a service! We can understand the expression in verse 10, "the glory that excelleth"; it refers to this wonderful ministration of the new covenant, so that we take on divine impressions. We leave none out of this blessed ministry; all believers have their part in it. Those who have necessarily taken a separate path are often spoken of as narrow and sectarian, but in truth they are broader than any people in the world, for in their affections they take in all saints. So here it says, "*we*  all" with unveiled face looking on the glory of the Lord; it is *all*  -- no Christians are left out. The face of the Lord Jesus is not veiled, it is to be looked at by those who have the Spirit. If you
{169}
do not know what it means, ask the Lord to teach you; we have to learn what it is from Himself. And so "we are transformed ... from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". It does not say that we *should*  be changed, but that those who look at the glory of the Lord *are*  changed; the process is going on, and no Christian can afford to be out of it. Beholding the glory of the Lord we are changed; what is in the heart of God for us is that there should be a real, substantial, and complete change in us, so that there might conformation to the image of His Son.
{170}
DIVINE APPEARINGS, BEARING ON SERVICE
@Acts 26:16 - 18; @Acts 22:17 - 18; @Acts 16:9 - 10; @Acts 27:22 - 26
These Scriptures speak of divine appearings which bear on service. The first divine appearing spoken of in Scripture, having in view the disposition of the world, was to Abraham. He was to be impressed with what should fill the world, for the world should be filled with God's glory. Thus, "The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia", (@Acts 7:2).
The glory of this world fades and disappears, but God had in mind that there should be a world filled with *His*  glory, and so we have that remarkable expression in @Revelation 11:15, "The kingdom of the world of our Lord and of his Christ is come". The kingdom of it will guarantee the subjection, or removal, of all that would interfere with the spread and display of the glory of God. Abraham was to be impressed with it: not indeed, that the glory shone, it does not say that, but the "God of glory appeared", which is greater. We have also the expressions the *Father*  of glory, and the *Lord*  of glory; whether it be by God as such, or by the Father, or by the Lord, the glory will be caused to shine and to fill all things. I mention all this at the beginning of what I have to say, that our hearts may be *attuned*  to it. As unconverted, we have no response at all in our hearts toward God. As born again and as having the Holy Spirit, as redeemed, there is that which answers to God; and so the thought of divine appearings will appeal to us.
From Abraham's time onwards, the great thought that there was glory which belonged to God, filled the mind of faith. All else fades, but the glory of God is fadeless. It shines now in the face of Jesus; it is intended
{171}
to be perfectly intelligible to us in the face of Jesus. It is brought within that compass, and so it says of believers: "we all, looking on the glory of the Lord with unveiled face", (@2 Corinthians 3:18). We "all" -- that is a very inclusive word but also an exclusive one; we Christians -- all true believers characteristically -- look on the face of Jesus. I wonder whether we have all looked at the face of Jesus; there is nothing repellent about it; it is most attractive. All that God is in love towards us, dear brethren, shines there.
Paul tells us in the passages I read of appearings to himself, and I wish to speak of him in this connection in order to set out what I have in mind with regard to service. Having spoken much of the sufferings that he endured in his service, he says, "I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord", (@2 Corinthians 12:1). How full his heart would be as he wrote those words! Dear brethren, let them not be altogether foreign to us! If we have not already done so, let us begin to think of the possibility of getting into the realm of revelation. Amongst the records of Solomon are "the visions of Iddo",(@2 Chronicles 9:29). These would bear on the glory of Solomon in a peculiar way, as "visions and revelations of the Lord" bear on the glory of Christ. It is needful for us, dear brethren, to pay attention to this because we are so prone to live and move and have our being in relation to what is material: is it not so? The famines of which we have spoken, having their reflection in what is current today, would bring out where the people of God are, and how affected we are by what is material; whereas God would use what seems to be very adverse, to direct us to the sphere of revelation.
The apostle says, "I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows;)"(@2 Corinthians 12:1,2) It was no dream; it was nothing imaginary; it was a reality, the experience not simply of an apostle, but of a *man in Christ*,  which
{172}
term applies to every true Christian. In religious circles, people speak of seeing this and that -- sometimes the very worst suggestions of links with the devil; but they are not visions and revelations of the Lord. Unless we can bring the Lord into the things we see -- or fancy we see -- they are of no value whatever; they should be renounced as evil.
In order to amplify what I am saying, I would refer to Paul's list of those to whom the Lord appeared after He arose; and I would direct your view, beloved, to the forty days of the Lord's sojourn here after He arose. It is inscrutable, but full of spiritual instruction. Unless we understand something of those days, we are scarcely equal to the assembly or to its privileges. The apostle, in bringing forward this list, was endeavouring to allure the Corinthians on to spiritual lines; and that is what I have in mind, dear brethren, that there is a spiritual realm -- a realm of visions and revelations. The Lord "appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. Then he appeared to about five hundred brethren at once, ... Then he appeared to James; then to all the apostles; and last of all, as to an abortion, he appeared to me also", (@1 Corinthians 15:5 - 9). And then with what beautiful humility he speaks! "For *I*  am the least of the apostles, who am not fit to be called apostle", verse 9. That would never be my judgment of him; but *he*  said it, and this sets before us a truly humble person. He said, "*I*  am the least of the apostles"; and not only does he say this, but also, I am "less than the least of all saints", (@Ephesians 3:8). This corresponds with @Psalm 16, in which our Lord in spirit expresses His lowly mind here: "My goodness extendeth not to thee", verse 2. We bow as marvelling at such words, but He uttered them, and they are surely intended to imbue our minds with the humility seen in the service and testimony of our Lord. The Lord Jesus said further, "To the saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent thou hast said. In them is all my delight"(@Psalm 16:3),
{173}
That is how He spoke, and so the apostle speaks of being the least of the apostles -- not fit to be called apostle, "because", he says, "I have persecuted the assembly of God", (@1 Corinthians 15:9); but yet he says, "he appeared to *me*  also", verse 8.
I go on to the passage which records this appearing in his own words -- in the apostle's speech before Agrippa and Festus in Caesarea. It is in the presence of "great pomp"; for we are told that the king, Bernice, Festus and the great ones of Caesarea were there. How wretched that show of worldly glory must have been to Paul! Not that he despised official dignity, for he addressed them with respect -- "most noble Festus", and "king Agrippa". That is an important matter too, for the powers that be are ordained of God; but mere worldly show was nothing to Paul. His eyes had seen the King, the Lord of hosts, and one view of that glory dissipates all this world's glory. And that is what the Lord would bring us to, dear brethren -- to view the glory of this world, as Paul did. The Lord would bring us down; in fact, He is doing it now through reduction in our circumstances -- little by little; but this makes for inward expansion; and the Lord would take us aside and give us a view of His glory.
In Paul's account of the first appearing, he tells us that the Lord said to him, "stand on thy feet". (@Acts 26:16). That is a significant word. He had fallen to the ground, which was right in its place; but the Lord says, "stand on thy feet; for for this purpose have I appeared to thee". I urge upon all, especially those who are serving, to get some idea of an appearing -- if not an appearing, some direct contact with the Lord with regard to our responsibility here in the service to which we may be called. He is available. He said to Paul, "stand on thy feet". That expression is used several times in Scripture, and it means that one stands up in the sense of responsibility, and in the sense of
{174}
power too; and it also implies balance, that one does not need to lean upon another. One great idea seen in the levite is that he stands on his own feet. In Mark's gospel, which is the servant's gospel, in chapter 3 you will find that the list of apostles is not made up of 'twos', but that they are listed singly. Now that is a matter of importance. I do not deny that two are better than one, and that Matthew lists them in twos, but Mark would put upon each servant the responsibility to stand on his own feet; then there is the thought of a special impression made on him by an appearing; and then that he is to be sent. Look at the Lord's own words to Paul, which he cites here: "for, for this purpose have I appeared to thee, to appoint thee to be a servant and a witness both of what thou hast seen, and of what I shall appear to thee in", verse 16. There are to be further appearings; one will not suffice as the Lord said -- "and of what I shall appear to thee in". The Lord intimates to him that the gain of the first appearing is to be sustained. The Lord sustains, and a sustained person maintains himself; that brings in his responsibility.
We find here that the apostle is delivered from the people and from the nations. The Lord knew how strong the pull of national feeling was with this great servant. He loved Israel, and could say that he had wished he could be accursed from Christ for Israel, @Romans 9:3. That is an extraordinary thing to me; but Paul speaks in the past tense, thus the wish to be accursed from Christ was not continuous with him; but what he says brings out the strength of his affection for Israel. Too much of it, as we see elsewhere, would hinder him in his service; so that the Lord said, "taking thee out from among the people, and the nations, to whom *I*  send thee". (@Acts 26:17), implying that if we are to be able to serve people, we must be delivered from them. If people influence me by natural things, I cannot serve them truly or effectually; I must be
{175}
delivered: and then I am sent to people from whom I am delivered; thus, I am free. Paul asserted that he was the servant of all. "For if I announce the glad tidings, I have nothing to boast of; for a necessity is laid upon me; for it is woe to me if I should not announce the glad tidings", (@1 Corinthians 9:16). "For being free from all, I have made myself bondman to all, that I might gain the most possible", verse 19. "To all I have become all things, in order that at all events I might save some", verse 22. That is how the matter stood.
I read the passage in @Acts 22 to show how all this was amplified later. The apostle is now speaking to his own people in Jerusalem, and he says, after recording the first great appearing to him, "when I had returned to Jerusalem, and as I was praying in the temple", verse 17. Now that is a fine thing -- *praying in the temple*. That is how he speaks about himself to the Jews in Jerusalem. The first commendation that occurs about him is, "behold, he is praying". (@Acts 9:11). I should like to be able to say that of every young woman and of every young man here -- "behold, he is praying". Is it so? I believe the leading feature of Paul's whole life and the secret of his success -- both as a Christian and a servant -- was that he *prayed*. He says, "as I was praying in the temple, that I became in ecstasy". Maybe some of us have never thought of that word "ecstasy" which is one that stands out in the vocabulary of Scripture. It is not mentioned as something that is unobtainable, but as something that is. "I became in ecstasy, and saw him saying to me. Make haste and go quickly out of Jerusalem, for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me". Now you see the bearing of what I have said -- "taking thee out from among the people, and the nations". If I am held by national feeling, I shall never be able to serve according to God. I must be wholly free from all that, for God has given it up; although He will return to it
{176}
by and by. It is in His purpose with regard to the earth, to have a nation; and that is coming in presently, but not now. The assembly cannot be made to fit into any nation; it is a universal thought; accordingly, brethren, if I am to serve effectually, I must know something of this experience of prayer and ecstasy, and of the Lord's saying in effect. Leave your national setting -- do not halt any longer; they will not hear you. How well the Lord knew; they did not even hear *Him*,  but said, "Away with this man". That was their judgment -- the judgment of the most favoured, the most religiously cultured nation the earth has had. Today apostasy is fast laying hold on all the so-called Christian nations. They are turning away from Jesus and are looking for another, whom they will get. *All*  these nations will be in it -- let us not be deceived. They will all acclaim that man and wonder after him -- the beast. See @Revelation 13:8.
With reference to the third scripture, while it is not an appearing of Christ, it is a divinely ordered vision. It is the impersonation of a Macedonian man in a vision, which is an action of heaven. The servant is not now in Jerusalem; he is away, near to Europe; and he is not sure as to his course; but he is a dependent servant. What a model he is! -- so near to Christ that the Spirit of Jesus could say to him. Do not go that way. The Spirit of Jesus forbade them to speak the word in Asia; where then was Paul to go? The true servant asks. What am I to do now? where am I to serve next? This, dear brethren, applies to the smallest bit of service. Isaiah stands out in this respect. In answer to the divine enquiry, "Whom shall I send?" he says, "Here am I" (@Isaiah. 6:8). That is the attitude of a waiting servant -- one ready for orders. He will be directed, for the work is very extensive; servants are needed in all directions. The nearer we get to the Lord, the more we shall discover how great the need is. I believe that voice "Whom shall I send?" is to be
{177}
heard all the time. The answer is, "Here am I". It was from Isaiah. He had just seen the glory. "In the year of the death of king Uzziah, I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up; and his train filled the temple" (@Isaiah 6:1). John refers to it later: "These things said Esaias because he saw his glory and spoke of him", @John 12:41. That is the clue. It is the man who says, "Here am I, send me"(@Isaiah 6:8) that was sent. I am persuaded of this, that servants are not taken on save as they see the glory. How can we serve effectually save as we see the glory?
Paul saw this vision "by night". I do not know just what this may mean; although you get it several times. I suppose there is a stillness and hence opportunity for abstraction in the night, and the Lord takes advantage of this. In the vision of which I am speaking the man of Macedonia says, "Come over ... and help us" -- what an appeal that is! Selfish considerations must not intrude in the presence of it. That man was thinking not of himself alone, but of the Macedonians. There are many such calls, and the Lord will stand by everyone who really serves Him in answering to them. Paul answered immediately, and went into Macedonia, but, oh, what suffering this service entailed! At Philippi he was thrust into that inner prison and scourged, and his feet made fast in the stocks. All that lay between the vision and the man of Macedonia, but he reached the man; that is the point. A true servant will never stop short; he goes forward and reaches his objective. The jailer, you may say, was the man; and he asked for *lights*. We have now to do with very hard soil. People come to our meetings and listen to the truth, and you wonder why they are so unimpressionable; but this man was impressionable, although he must have been a hard kind of man, for he was a Roman jailer. But now he is respectful and hospitable to the Lord's servants, showing tender-heartedness and impressionableness. He is manifestly a subject of the work of
{178}
God. He is material for the assembly -- a man who asks for lights wants the *whole*  truth.
Passing on to the last scripture, I want to show you how the servant comes in for an appearing in times of great doubt. The ship was about to be broken up, and Paul was on it. Dark days, when neither the sun nor the stars appeared, preceded this incident, and the ship was rocked by the waves; there was every evidence of the ship's foundering, but he said, "And now I exhort you to be of good courage, for there shall be no loss at all of life of any of you, only of the ship. For an angel of the God, whose I am and whom I serve, stood by me". (@Acts 27:22 - 23). I would that I could use that language as he did! "Whose I am" brings in the divine right to us; no one can be independent. Paul belonged to God; he was a levite of God. "Whose I am and whom I serve". There is nothing said of Paul's actual service as on the ship, for he, as a prisoner, was on a ship bound for Rome from Caesarea, and there is nothing said as to what he may have done on the way, but you may be sure that his hands were not idle. How much he could have done. Some of us know how much can be done aboard ship. There is no need for idling at any time, and no true servant of God will idle. Time is relatively one of the scarcest things I know of; and you may be sure that the apostle used the time profitably. He does not say, Whose I am and whom I *have*  served, but "whom I *serve"*,  and we may be sure during those dark days on the Mediterranean, he spent a great deal of his time in prayer, and the angel stood by him.
You may ask why it is an angel, for this is the only recorded occasion of angelic relations with him. Distance is implied as under the extraordinary circumstances; it refers to the history of the church. It is a prophetic position; defection had already set in; the ship -- the external church, as we say, was breaking up; God was not pleased, but He continued to care for
{179}
His people and His servant, and He sent His angel. As of old, when the angel of Jehovah left Gilgal and went to Bochim, that meant a change in the state of the people; and so, in these circumstances, prophetically, at least, there was a change. It was "an angel of God", who was in full sympathy with heaven and in sympathy with Paul, and he stood by him that night. What a cheer it must have been to the apostle to have an angel standing by him speaking to him! We must not think, dear brethren, that the angels are far away from us. I do not wish to be visionary in the ordinary sense, but spiritually so. They are not far away from us; they are ministering spirits sent out to minister on account of us; they are active agents here. They are "sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation", (@Hebrews 1:14). Paul says, "And now I exhort you to be of good courage, for there shall be no loss at all of life of any of you, only of the ship. For an angel of the God whose I am and whom I serve stood by me this night, saying. Fear not Paul; thou must stand before Caesar; and behold, God has granted to thee all those that sail with thee. Wherefore be of good courage, men, for I believe God that thus it shall be, as it has been said to me". (@Acts 27:22 - 26).
As I close, I want you to ponder this position -- a servant standing up in such circumstances in the sense of having been spoken to that very night by an angel from heaven. What freshness and power there would be! He was not speaking of something that happened years before. He was speaking on the deck of a sinking ship, not in platitudes, but in the freshness of a very recent experience with God. "Fear not, Paul; thou must stand before Caesar, and behold, God has granted to thee all those that sail with thee", verse 24. Why should that be said to Paul? -- because he was a feeling man -- he was a man of affections. He did not wish one on that ship to be lost, and the angel assured him that nothing should be lost, save the ship. He would feel the loss
{180}
of the ship, as understanding its significance, but what we are concerned about now is not any more the salvation of the public body; we accept sorrowfully the loss of that, we are concerned about the safety of the members of Christ, that if the church in its public character is lost, it stands in the counsel of God; for the heavenly city remains and will come down from God out of heaven. Nothing will be lost; it will come out, having the glory of God. John supplies all that. John, therefore, so to speak, stands in the outward ruins of Paul's structure, and presents what cannot be ruined; he presents the heavenly city coming down from God out of heaven, having the glory of God. That is what John sets before us, an angel having shown it to him. @Revelation 22.
Paul said that all the passengers would be saved, and it is put most beautifully: "all those that sail with thee". I want you to take that in, beloved; it is a question of *sailing with Paul*  -- all that sailed with him were given to him. I often think of this passage, believing that if we really value the saints, in spite of the public breakdown, the Lord says, I will give them to you. Every person that sailed on that boat arrived on the land safe. All that is prophetic. There is much instruction in this chapter, and in the next one, as to church history, but the point now is that there is a man serving under these circumstances to whom an angel speaks, and who speaks immediately in the power of it, and his word has effect. He really became master of the ship. There is power with him.
Well, what I have presented has in view that we might become spiritually acquainted, in our service, with the realm of revelation.
{181}
UNITY THE BASIS OF GOD DWELLING WITH MEN
@Psalm 133: @Psalm 68:15,18; @Exodus 3:1 - 6; @Exodus 34:29 - 30
I have before me to speak about unity and the divine dwelling, and I wish to connect what I have to say with the idea of a *mountain*. This idea in Scripture is largely symbolic, mountains being a feature in the creation, like many others, that God designed to use in this way as a language. They represent conspicuousness, but conspicuousness in stability and power. To be conspicuous aside from power is mere show. I mean, power in a good sense, for mountains are also used in Scripture to symbolise power in a bad sense. Conspicuousness in power is indicated in the initial epistle with which indeed we all need to be conversant if we are to be here in the fibre that is according to God; that is Romans. The literal term "mountain" is but little used in the epistles, for they deal not with symbols, but speak in the direct language of the Spirit, "communicating", as Paul says, "spiritual things by spiritual means", @1 Corinthians 2:13. Mountains are scarcely mentioned at all save in the Jewish epistles, but what they convey spiritually is touched largely. In Romans you have it contemplated, as the result of the gospel, that is, power here in believers -- power in the sense of good by which evil is overcome. That is what I have in mind.
Anyone essaying to be conspicuous aside from these features is sure to meet with a fall, and the higher we go without these features the greater the fall. Satan had the idea in leading the Lord up the mountain -- the first mountain in Matthew. Matthew is the great mountain gospel indeed, because of the place designed for the assembly here -- not in the future, but in this world now as a witness. He led the Lord up there,
{182}
and then he led Him too to the pinnacle of the temple. Satan will promote that sort of elevation, and this involves serious danger for us. The Lord allowed it to happen for a testimony, but we have to be on our guard against such dizzy heights; they are dangerous. Over against this, what God has in mind is moral power, power great and conspicuous in *that*  sense; by it there is the overcoming of evil with *good*. Now the Psalms bring out the truth from the experimental side, as I suppose we all know more or less, and that is what I want to lead up to, for aside from what is experimental, divine things must be distant, whereas, as the corresponding state is promoted they become nearer and nearer; there is thus agreement between what is presented objectively and what is wrought in the believer, so that he expresses in himself the divine thought conveyed in a mountain. In the Psalms we have this latter, as I hope to show, but the first mountain in Exodus is more the abstract idea. It is "the mountain *of God"*,  Horeb. The moral element is there, presented from the divine side; it is the mountain of God I am brought to here. It is to Moses credit that he *came*  to it. Romans, as I said, is the principle of it. God shines out in that relation.
We have three mountains mentioned in connection with the shining out of God in Deuteronomy. We are told, "Jehovah came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; He shone forth from mount Paran", (@Deuteronomy 33:2). These are great spiritual thoughts; they are not material. God shines out in relation to His *rights*  over us, and His rights over us now are based on redemption; they are the rights of love. Sinai represents God's rights, the rights of His love in the death of Jesus. Then He arises from mount Seir; He arises from that direction unto us, as if He were to say, The land which I designed in love for you, is not far away, only eleven days journey. In that very passage we are told He loved the people: "Yea, he loveth the
{183}
peoples", @Deuteronomy 33:3. Let no believers doubt this, for it is infinitely attested, and nothing can "separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus", (@Romans 8:35 - 38). In @Deuteronomy 33 we have reached the end of the wilderness journey; and thinking of God according to what He has been to us, we can say this, "Yea, he loveth the peoples". Then Paran is on the way; whatever the wilderness may be in that short period of eleven days, it is to be illumined with the love of God; He shines there.
Well, that is the mountain setting at the end -- how God comes to us in relation to the ideas conveyed. But we have to begin in Exodus. The difficulty with most of us is, in our not going back to the beginning of things, but making a short cut without the moral element entering into the roots of our being. @Exodus 3 presents a lone man in the wilderness looking after sheep. They were not his own; he was looking after them unselfishly, a fine touch for young believers. He *led*  them, we are told. Eliab said to David, "with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart"(@1 Samuel 17:28). Moses had no such thought, nor did David have any such thought; it was the imputation of a jealous man. We may be sure that if we attribute naughtiness to the heart of a devoted follower of Christ, it is in our own hearts. Moses had no such motives. Had he desires of seeking great things in this world he would not have led the sheep to the backside of the desert. He would have kept near the town where he could see something of the world. The seaside affords much for the gratification of the flesh, and we have to be on our guard as to this. Spiritual instincts will not lead us in the direction of the world; they lead us to the backside of the desert; but the mount of God is there, in later years renowned for the divine disclosures made there, renowned for the covenant, and the general testimony to the love of God -- the well-known Horeb. Moses found himself
{184}
there, and he learns at this mountain that God has a great power in this world; it is *His*  mountain, there is none like it. As we read in @Psalm 68, "As mount Bashan is the mount of God, a many-peaked mountain, as mount Bashan". It is a great thought. God would impress upon us at the very beginning that He has something in the way of power here that is beyond anything of this world.
There is no ascension on it yet, nor does God appear on it. There is no thought of ascension, it is rather God coming down, for there can be no ascension till God comes down. There must be the descending first; so He says, "I have come down"; it is the touch of love: "I am come down to deliver"(@Exodus 3:8); but then, what Moses saw was a thorn-bush, an insignificant bush as regards human thoughts, but it was burning; the fire was in the bush. It is a most important lesson if we are ever to go to the mountain of God, where the idea of ascension is found, where Jesus ascended on high, that this great idea should be here upon earth; we have to learn the coming down into this smallness. Moses turned aside to see. That is the first thing to notice on his side in connection with this subject; he turned aside to see. What did he see? It is not a question of the height of the mountain here, but what was there in a thorn-bush -- extreme lowliness. This is never to be forgotten. This great appearing to Moses is to enter into the fibre of his being, in the very roots of it, and never to be lost. It is He that *descended*,  and there is the fire. Moses turned aside to see that, and God indicates that there is virtue in that movement, when He saw that Moses turned aside. He honoured him by calling his name twice.
This is the beginning of his instruction and experience in regard to the mountain of God. He has to learn much here. He has to take off his shoes from his feet, to learn that even the precincts of the divine appearance are holy. That is an important lesson. Then another
{185}
thing that comes out here -- there are many things, but I cannot touch on them all -- God says, "I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob". This seems a very simple thing, but the Lord Jesus refers to these words, @Luke 20:37 - 38, and we get the true import of them from Him. They refer to the resurrection; God is not the God of the dead; He is the God of the living. All live unto Him. As having to do with God we are to be impressed with this. We are to be among the living. These are great thoughts, seen at the beginning; thoughts that we have to be brought back to in the experience of our souls. At the outset I have the light of them. What a volume of instruction enters into this incident! The Lord said, "Moses showed in the section of the bush"(@Luke 20:37) -- one of the finest sections of Scripture. What occurred was small outwardly, but it stands out in connection with the revelation of God as He who raises the dead.
Now I want to show how the idea of a mountain is developed in Exodus, so that we may understand it as in the Psalms. I may say here that the Psalms comprise five books, undoubtedly corresponding in some sense with the Pentateuch. The Psalms present the experience of the saints, and the Pentateuch God's side. The latter is the great objective idea in these mountains. Whether it be in connection with Moses as a believer, or Moses as mediator, a type of Christ, the great idea of the mountain is developed here in Exodus, and also in the other books of the Pentateuch. The principle is followed up in the Psalms, on our side, and it results in practical unity among the saints and a dwelling place for God. These are two great thoughts, and the more we take them in, the more we shall seek to correspond.
The next thing that I would notice is that the mountain of God denotes *resources*,  it is the place of divine provision. That is what the believer needs to understand, following on the earlier features, that God has
{186}
that here in which there is provision. The great principle is laid down in connection with Abraham, that is, when Christ arose typically, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided". (@Genesis 22:14). And now Exodus is to show it, and the first great provision of the mount is a *brother*. You can see at once that it is not the literal idea of a mountain; it is the spiritual one. What a great support a true brother is! He is said to be born for adversity. The Lord Jesus sets out this great thought above all. Not that we call Him brother -- no reverential person will do that -- but He acts the part of one and calls us brethren. Moses, you will remember, said that he could not speak, and Jehovah says to him, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?"(@Exodus 4:14) It is a great matter to have a brother, but especially if he is a levite. He is called "*the*  Levite", as if he represented that thought, and Jehovah said, "he cometh forth to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart". (@Exodus 4:14). That is very precious. Where did he meet him? He "met him in the mount of God"(@Exodus 4:27).
Moses would understand -- if not then, in later years -- how beautifully this meeting with Aaron fitted in with the mount of God. We cannot do without the brethren. If there is anyone here who has any thought of independency, any thought or suggestion in his heart that he can get along without the brethren, he is mistaken. We cannot get along without the brethren; they are a provision. Aaron represents this. A true brother comes to meet us, and when he sees us he is glad in his heart. Love is in him; he makes no demands; he brings love with him when I may not have much. What is the use of assuming to be a brother if I cannot bring love as I go to see a brother? When Aaron saw Moses he was glad in his heart, and he met him in the mount of God.
Well, as we all know, the people of Israel were led to mount Sinai. It is an immense subject, but I only want to touch on the points in Exodus. Whilst Moses
{187}
is alluded to as going up earlier, he goes up definitely in chapter 24, but he does not go up alone. When the Lord ascended up into heaven, in principle. He took the brethren with Him, He ascended to His Father and their Father. Ephesians teaches that as quickened with Christ, we are raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Him. The saints go up together. I should not like to go without the brethren, if you understand me. I am not speaking now of departing to be with Christ which is far better than present conditions here; I am speaking of the purpose and work of God, as seen in Ephesians, and also of the rapture as seen in 1 Thessalonians. All go up together; love in Christ and in us will have it so. The Lord went up in relation to the brethren, and He will come again and receive us to Himself. "I ascend". He says, "unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", @John 20:17. That is the connection in which He went up. This is an immense thought and it enters into the idea of conspicuousness of which we are speaking. The heavenly is to enter into everything here; so that in @Exodus 24:1, God says to Moses, "Come up unto the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel", that is to say, the saints go up. You can understand how Moses would regard the people as thus to ascend with him. Not only am I to have brethren here, but I am to have them *there*. The Lord will have them there; He is to be the Firstborn among many brethren. Thus Moses is to go up with the representatives of the people. They all went up in the light and power of the covenant, Moses, and Aaron, and Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel.
One loves to think of the brethren going up. It is Ephesians *now*  -- the rapture as in Thessalonians *presently*  -- for Ephesians says that we are raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies, chapter 2:6. This is a source of unity and strength
{188}
down here. How different the brethren become in my eyes, to what they may seem outwardly, when I view them thus! I am to live eternally with them, and I should not be at home without them. We shall all be there, like Christ, He the Firstborn among us.
At Sinai they went up, and they "saw the God of Israel", it says, and "upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand"(@Exodus 24:9,11). They are up there as nobles. Social conditions up there are very different from what they are down here. The nobility up there is not the nobility in the world's esteem at all, and it is what is up there that is to remain. "On the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not His hand"(@Exodus 24:11). God is going to lay His hand presently on this world with all its graded greatness; He will lay His hand upon it in the most drastic way, but not on the nobles of Israel; they have a place with God. But I am speaking of the brethren, and as I get a view of them according to Ephesians, I see that they are worth loving; they are worth living with.
Well, that is the position in @Exodus 24, but then the mediator must be distinguished. The Lord associates us with Himself as His brethren, but He must always be pre-eminent. Moses goes higher than the people. It alludes to the pre-eminence of Christ. He has gone up in His own way. We do not go just that way; we are caught up; He *ascended*  up in His own right and power, and so Moses is displayed before the eyes of Israel in the presence of the glory. The glory of Jehovah was like a consuming fire on the top of Sinai, and Moses went into that in their sight. Christ was received up in glory; He has entered heaven having a personal right there, but He has also gone in as representing His people. There is precious teaching in this chapter in regard to the assembly; it is to build up in our souls the idea of greatness involved in our place in heaven, coming out here on earth in conspicuousness in power for good.
{189}
What comes out in chapter 34 is that Christ becomes clearer to us. You know, we are very vague in our thoughts of Christ, even viewing Him as the Mediator. The normal instruction in the book of Exodus from our side ends in chapter 24. All that follows has to do with the tabernacle, the dwelling of God and the service in it. Terrible breakdown came in as recorded in chapters 32 and 33, which we do well to take to heart, but through the faithfulness of God it worked out in material for His dwelling. One result was that Moses became greater. As we truly judge ourselves, as sin occurs, Christ will become greater in our eyes. That is as sure as anything can be. So it comes out here that as Moses comes down the calf is being worshipped, and he goes up to God and says, "if thou wilt forgive their sin -- but if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book"(@Exodus 32:32). That is the spirit of Christ; that is the Mediator going into death in principle. It is only a shadow, but it is there, and Moses, from that point, rises in the estimation of God. In chapter 34 He directs Moses to hew two tables of stone and go up with them to the mountain -- he is to go *alone*. The Mediator thus stands out in increased vividness before us. Jehovah says, "Hew thee two tables of stone ... and I will write upon these tables"(@Exodus 34:1). It is Christ bringing us with Him; that is the principle. He brings us up, as it were with "fleshy tables of the heart". In this He becomes more and more glorious, so that when Moses comes down his face shines. Jehovah came down and stood with him on the mount, and then passed by in covenant glory. The covenant is not now a question of what is literal, but "after the tenor of these words", (@Exodus 34:27). It points to the new covenant in which there is liberty, and in which we "looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", (@2 Corinthians 3:18). That is what is going on. Are we in the Lord's hands in this sense? There can be no practical
{190}
unity without this. It involves the bringing in of the love of God into our hearts by the Mediator and the glory that goes with that, the ministration of the Spirit, so that we look at it. It is the glory of the Lord.
In @Psalm 133 we have all this brought down to practical results: "Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity". It is a challenge to every heart. At times we thrust in before God what we know is not suitable. Abraham said, "O that Ishmael might live before thee!"(@Genesis 17:18) He would thrust Ishmael in before God. A disunited meeting does not suit God, although He bears long with us. "How good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity". That is what heaven looks for. A meeting in practical unity is a pleasing sight for heaven; it is "good" and "pleasant". We are told what it is like in the psalm. It is not a human arrangement, such as agreement to differ. It is not that. It is "like the precious ointment" -- note that word "precious" -- "upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard". It is Christ in heaven. The allusion to the beard is personal adornment. It was plucked off down here, but it is His beauty. The ointment "ran down to the hem of his garments". It is a *finished*  matter. This would be implied in the *hem*. Every garment should be finished. There is nothing loose, no world borderings. This precious ointment, coming down on the beard, flows down the garments to the *hem*,  but not beyond that.
Then it is like the "dew of Hermon". Hermon is a high mountain, and I suppose the idea is that it penetrates the clouds and catches all that comes down from heaven. No doubt, it is a type of Christ in His personal greatness and dignity. He reaches up into heaven. Indeed, He said when here, "The Son of man who is in heaven", @John 3:13. It is inscrutable, but we can understand how all the personal greatness implied in this enters into His mediatorial position, and this affects the unity of the saints. Unity among brethren corresponds
{191}
with this great thought. Then it says, "there the Lord commanded the blessing" -- that is, there are conditions here to which a divine command can apply as bearing on the world in testimony -- eternal life.
I pass on to @Psalm 68 to show that the divine thought of selection enters into this subject. The hill of God is "a many-peaked mountain, as mount Bashan", and it is envied. You may be sure we shall be envied in these circumstances, but then we are protected in spite of the envy in this world. The next verse says, "The chariots of God are twenty thousand, thousands upon thousands, the Lord is among them"(@Psalm 68:17). Who can touch us, those chariots being available? And then: "Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive". You see power thus in Christ. And "thou hast received gifts in Man". That is how it should read. He has received gifts in Man, that is, a Man in heaven, and He gives them down here, and "even for the rebellious". What for? That the Lord God might dwell among us. That is the idea.
It is not a mere provision here; it is the place of power, and conspicuous too, but conspicuous as the habitation of God by the Spirit. And so the gifts are here. From the twelve, down to the present moment, every gift has come down from Christ in heaven, and what for? To make a dwelling place for God in that holy mount which He has chosen to dwell in.
May God help us in seeking to enter into these great things.
{192}
A MANIFESTATION OF JESUS
@John 21:1 - 19
I hope I shall be able to speak briefly and concisely, having in mind to show that the Lord Jesus always reserves to Himself the mastery of every set of circumstances in which the testimony may be, or in which His people may be, and shows that in crises it is not simply that He comes in for deliverance -- He does, but it is not simply that; He shows also that He has a positive end in view in what happens; blessing is always in view in what He does.
You will observe here that the passage begins with a suggestion of a *manifestation*,  not simply an intervention. If we get the thought of a manifestation of Christ into our souls, we shall think it worth while to go through certain exercises and processes and sufferings, so that it may be a verity to us. How great is a manifestation of Jesus! A manifestation is not simply that one passes before you; but it is intentional. In Canticles the Lord is presented as showing Himself by certain movements that would make Him attractive, "shewing himself through the lattice"(@Song of Songs 2:9), behind which was His lover, but whose love was somewhat cold and uncertain. There was a movement to attract her attention so that she might move from where she was and come to Him. The Lord shows Himself through the lattice, that is in spite of something that is between your soul and Him. Very easily we allow some such thing, but in spite of it He would manifest Himself to us.
Manifestation stands at the head of this passage, not merely at the end, though it is there too: "This is already the third time that Jesus had been manifested to the disciples, being risen from among the dead", verse 14. He might have been seen by anyone on the
{193}
street before He died; as He walked through Judaea and Galilee anyone might have seen Him. He assumed no special garb. Scripture says He took His place "in the likeness of *men"*  -- not any special class. That is to say. He was ordinary *outwardly*. If He were in this city He would hire a house or stay with a saint, taking His place in outward humility and simplicity. He left Nazareth and went and abode at Capernaum; so that you might have been His neighbour. You might have seen Him go in and out of the house in which He lived every day. That would not be a manifestation. Some saw more than others, of course, as John says, "we have contemplated his glory", @John 1:14. There were those who watched more closely and saw beneath the exterior. They "contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth"(@John 1:14). But here in @John 21 it is a manifestation. He would have them to see it. That is what heads the account: "After these things Jesus manifested himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias. And he manifested himself thus".
Now we come to the dark shadows of the picture. There were together seven disciples, more or less in unbelief, but they are *called*  disciples. They are dignified in that sense in spite of the sequel about to be related. There were there Peter and Thomas. Peter is usually linked with James and John, but Thomas is put first here after Peter. And then there were the two sons of Zebedee, and Nathanael of Cana of Galilee, and two others whose names are not given. Now these seven disciples are mentioned here but not as in the full expression of discipleship. They are not in the world either. They are in territory well known, hallowed by the footsteps of Jesus, by the sea of Galilee, but they are not in the circumstances of discipleship. One says, "I go to fish"; the others say, "We also come with thee". It is leadership, but leadership misused. Peter was a leader, we learn this in Matthew, who greatly
{194}
enlarges on Peter: "first Peter". He is the leader not merely by appointment but in fact. A man is what he *is*,  not only by official appointment, but characteristically. In God's ordering official position is sustained by moral worth. Here Peter has turned aside from this principle, but the Lord soon brought him back to it.
This little bit of precious divine history has this heading -- it is a manifestation of Jesus. That is in view. If it were to be entitled, coming in as it does as a kind of appendix, that would be the heading. It would not be Peter's failure. The title is a manifestation of Jesus; this begins and ends the narrative of the fishing expedition. Peter's failure comes in between two manifestations. The first manifestation is in verse nineteen of chapter twenty, the second is eight days after, and the third is here. These manifestations are spiritual history, because they came in after Jesus rose from among the dead. Think of what spiritual impressions were imparted! Think of a risen Man showing Himself in His own divine way, so that the word manifestation applies! The point is, dear brethren, that the Lord is supreme in every set of circumstances or every circumstance in which His testimony or people may be found. It is as if He said, 'I am taking advantage of this sorrow; terrible as it may seem to you, terrible as the storm may be, I am in charge. It is my affair, and I am going to bring out something for myself and for you greater than you could have calculated'.
These disciples go a-fishing; they have a leader and they follow him. You can see that he is a leader, so he says, "I go" and they say, "We also come with thee". They did it immediately. That is proper in its own place; if we are taught in the Lord's school of discipleship, we shall do things at once if they are to be done. The word immediately is a characteristic word in Mark. "Cursed be he that doeth the work of Jehovah negligently" (@Jeremiah 48:10). That is a solemn word, but then we may act disobediently also in a
{195}
hurry, and that is what they did here. There is no hesitation whatever in the decision to go with Simon.
Well, they got nothing that night. You can understand the Lord had the manifestation in His mind; His heart was full of it. He wanted to show Himself to these who were really His lovers and whom He loved. He would say, as it were, 'I intend to show Myself to them as they never saw Me before'. It is a new thing altogether and it comes in at the end when you might have thought the Lord had finished, but it brings out a new feature, which shows what the whole dispensation is. It is a dispensation of variety. There is no limit to what the Lord can be to us. There is no lessening in the power or in the variety of His service. Indeed there is more care expended on this, more design, than in any of the manifestations in this gospel.
In the morning they had nothing. That is a solemn matter; they had nothing. It is a *night*  matter, a sleepless matter; there was toil in this expedition. Peter was a man who liked his rest; he went to sleep on the mount and in Gethsemane. He was a fisherman, and fishermen usually like their rest; but this was evidently a sleepless enterprise. Although there were no fish caught, the morning brought out the great and glorious fact that Christ was on the shore, on sure ground, as supreme as in the first verse in the Bible where it is Elohim, the Supreme. @Genesis 1 presents a dark picture as to the earth; there was no footing for a creature. It says, "In the beginning Elohim created the heavens and the earth. And the earth was waste and empty, and darkness was on the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters"(@Genesis 1:1,2). There was no solid ground, for the earth was evidently submerged, but the Spirit of God was there, doubtless feeling deeply as to the chaotic conditions, and also as to the possibilities of the scene. So here, it is the Son of God, One not less in Person than the Spirit of God, -- there is the night of nothingness and nakedness, but Jesus
{196}
is on the shore. Beloved, the Lord would bring Himself into our souls in the supremacy which is His, as Ephesians presents Him -- gone beyond all the heavens. Who can tell about the uncreated sphere? No creature can go there, Jesus has gone there and from thence He fills all things; He is supreme. That is His position, and He would assure us that He is thinking of us. Indeed that very passage in Ephesians says, "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men ... who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things; and *he*  has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ"(@Ephesians 4:8,10 - 12). In His exaltation up there He thus cares for His own; He provides for us, as in the scene of the wind and the waves, as He says to His Father, "I am no longer in the world, and these are in the world ... . I do not demand that thou shouldest take them out of the world ...", @John 17:11,15. It is enemy's territory, but the Lord is supreme; He is on the shore, as it were, and furnishes us, so that we should correspond with Himself.
Now who is going to be the next leader? Peter was the leader, but for a little while it is to be John, the disciple whom Jesus loved. He comes into it through greater spirituality. John says, "It is the Lord". Peter is second now. John is first; not that John retained that place; he is generally second, and in this he is an admirable example for us of one who happily and efficiently takes the second place. Unless one can serve after another he cannot succeed in the Lord's work. The man who says, "I will be king" meets with God's stern resistance, but John comes into the lead here as recognising the Lord before Peter, and Peter takes his place and moves in the light flowing from his brother's discernment. That is a principle in the assembly. It is the prerogative of the Spirit of God
{197}
to put another forward at any time. For instance, if I am speaking in the assembly and a revelation is given to another sitting by, I sit down, @1 Corinthians 14:30. Why did the Holy Spirit pass me by? It is His prerogative, and I bow to it; and in this way the Holy Spirit maintains balance in the assembly. Peter moves in the light John furnishes here, raising no question. In this way we are on the line of recovery, Christ coming into view as on the shore.
Peter casts his fisher's coat about him and casts himself into the sea. He is leading again, for John does not do that. I do not say that was his motive, however. "Simon Peter therefore, having heard that it was the Lord, girded his overcoat on him (for he was naked), and cast himself into the sea". What for? To get to Jesus. How affecting is recovery in a believer who has strayed! It is here the effect of Christ manifesting Himself.
The disciples reach the land and now what appears is that the Lord has been doing something. There is "a fire of coals and fish laid thereon and bread". How simple divine Persons are in their relations with us! How we do feel the chill occasioned by our own wills! I may have been naughty; but there is the fire and food on it. Was Gabriel or some other angel there? There is no evidence. This was the Lord's own service. How touching that He thus provides for us even in our waywardness! I believe the Lord Jesus in the days of His flesh, did the most menial things among His disciples. He says, "*I*  am in the midst of you as the one that serves"(@Luke 22:27). There is no limitation. He would do anything for their comfort, as He does now spiritually for us. There was "fish laid thereon and bread". It was the Lord's doing. Then He says, "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken" -- as though He would say. In all this you have been doing something after all. "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken". How did they take them? At his direction.
{198}
He is supreme over the fish. He is the Creator. The fish of the sea are put under Him as the Son of man. But He is the Creator. It is not here a question of the "deep", as in @Luke 5. It is a question of the *right*  side of the ship. Why should not the fish be on the left side? The principle of the right side is power. Jesus is not at God's left hand. He is at His right hand. Thus the Lord said, "Cast the net at the right side of the ship and ye will find". Power was needed -- "cast". When Peter was directed earlier as to his nets it was to *let them down*. This would be by gravity, but here it is a question of power: "Cast the net at the right side of the ship and ye will find". What did they find? Of great fishes, a hundred and fifty-three. And the net did not break. The Lord is now risen, and so there is no breakage.
The Lord regards the disciples as having caught the fish. I think it is wonderful grace that the Lord accredits them with this catch of great fishes. It is not merely a large number, but individually great persons, in keeping with John. "Bring of the fish which ye have now taken". They are now looked at as in service, they have part in what He is doing. He had fish already, but now they are to bring of what they had just taken. What have I that I can bring? What He is doing as the supreme One He would bring us all into. "Bring of the fish which ye" (the seven of you) "have now taken". Then He says, "Come and dine". One has often dwelt on this word "dine". Why did the Lord use it here? They are cold and hungry. Would "eat" not be more appropriate? Ordinarily it would, for hungry fishermen take food without much ceremony. The Creator says, "Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it"(@Psalm 81:10). What volume of food of every description there is today! The great bounty of God is seen in this, although poor human administration prevents it reaching all. The word here is not something to eat; the disciples are asked to dine. They are to eat in dignity. They have part in all this
{199}
now on the land. "Come and dine". The word children here is in keeping with this. They are regarded as in the family. They are not mere needy ones; they are the Lord's dignified companions in spite of what has happened. After all this, the passage says, "This is already the third time that Jesus had been manifested to the disciples, being risen from among the dead". They never had a manifestation like this. It is an entirely new chapter in their histories. The Lord would lift them out of the feeling of shame and smallness occasioned by their conduct, in thus preparing for them and inviting them to *dine*.
Then the Holy Spirit goes on to say, "When therefore they had dined Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?" Has anyone here been comparing himself with others, assuming to have exceeded them in love for Christ? I have heard questions in that form which were really intended to convey the thoughts of the person asking them. But the Lord meant Peter to answer all His questions, and a conclusion is reached. The first time Peter answers, "Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I am attached to thee"; the second time, "Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I am attached to thee"; the third time he says, "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I am attached to thee". According to the New Translation the word "knowest" in each statement except the last refers to what is called conscious knowledge. Peter appealed to the Lord's conscious knowledge. 'You are conscious that I love thee'. But in the last case the original word conveys objective knowledge; it evidently implies that in Peter's mind there was something in him which the Lord could see that showed that he loved Him. This conveys an important principle -- that one who has to commend himself should not appeal to divine knowledge as such only, but also to the evidence of the work of God in him; something, in his movements and words, that shows there is love. And the Lord does
{200}
not deny Peter's intimation. There must have been something in his words or manner that showed that he was after all a true lover of Jesus, and the presence of Jesus was bringing that out. What else could be the result of such a contact between Jesus and Peter, but to bring out what was in Peter? One has often heard from persons under a cloud, 'The Lord knows'. Surely He knows, but if there is something in me evidencing the work of God I can let it speak for itself. It is pure gold, which normally the brethren will recognise. In Peter's case it might have been just a movement of the eye, a gesture or an emphasis on a sentence, but something that could be seen; that is testimony; that is treasure, and the Lord did not deny it.
There is a gradual establishment of confidence on the part of the Lord with Peter. He says, "Feed my lambs". The Lord could not have given anything more precious than what He committed to Peter at that time -- His sheep and lambs. It is a question of the establishment of confidence, Peter's answers entering into this. Jesus had already expressed His confidence in John. On the cross, as He saw His mother standing by. He said to her, "Woman, behold thy son. Then he said unto the disciple. Behold thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home"(@John 19:26,27). How is she to be in his home? Doubtless many of you have thought of John, the disciple whom Jesus loved, taking the Lord's mother to his own home. But in what relation? As the mother of Jesus? No, as *his own*  mother. The relations would be those of a mother and son. What holy converse they must have had! What that mother could have told him about Jesus! Can we doubt that the wonderful worth of John's ministry is due somewhat to the holy converse of the mother of Jesus with John in his own home? No one else could have told John what she could of Jesus, and the Lord constituted that relation which in itself gave to the loved disciple an advantage which no one had but he.
{201}
Peter has the lambs and sheep to feed. The way he distinguishes between young and old believers in his ministry is beautiful. "Feed my lambs ... . Shepherd my sheep", the Lord says. It might be asked, Can sheep not take care of themselves? No! they go astray. Peter himself was an example. The lambs follow the old ones. If we can keep the old ones right, the young ones will be right. First it is, "Feed my lambs"; then, "Shepherd my sheep", and then, "Feed my sheep". Can any charge be greater than that?
What I have said, dear brethren, is to show how the Lord is supreme in all circumstances, and how thus the desired end is reached. The closing verses show the perfect result in Peter, which would take years. The Lord says, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou desiredst"; that is what marks young people, *will*,  "but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and bring thee where thou dost not desire". What was the Lord alluding to? The scripture says "he said this signifying by what death he should glorify God". What a fine result! We have the whole picture of Peter and that he would pass out of this world in perfect abandonment of his own will for the will of God. He would pass out glorifying God, in a death that glorified God.
{202}
DIVINE FEELING
@Matthew 27:45 - 50; @John 11:43 - 44; @John 7:37
These scriptures are, doubtless, familiar to us all. I have put them together in order to speak of *feeling*  -- feeling as it expresses itself in Christ -- having in mind that the people of God are very lacking in it. We are callous with regard to what causes God to feel things, as expressed in Jesus. This feature in God came out early. The early Scriptures speak of the Spirit of God hovering over the face of the waters. "And the earth was waste and empty, and darkness was on the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters". (@Genesis 1:2). Before there were any men to feel the result of sin, the Spirit of God *felt*  it. He was hovering over, ready to come in as the time arrived; for everything was timed by God. Yet before the intervention, there was, obviously, feeling -- the Spirit of God was there. The Spirit of God is a divine Person, but He is the Spirit of *God*,  and brings in here divine feelings. He is God Himself come near, so we find in the scriptures, that the Spirit is near-by, being in a position to acquire, so to speak, first-hand knowledge of things; so He felt the chaos that came in, and hovered over the face of the waters. The "face of the waters", as covering the earth, was not what God had in His mind in the creation; but He was hovering there: He felt the condition that had come in.
As man fell and developed sinful ways, in the antediluvian times, it *grieved*  God that He had made man. It says, "it grieved him in his heart". @Genesis 6:6 -- so familiarly is He presented to us; and our God would not have this affecting feature eliminated from our knowledge of Him. Being His "offspring", as it says in @Acts 17:29, we should understand that He feels
{203}
things, in a certain sense, as we do. God was capable of being *grieved*  in His heart, and in that grief, as we may say. His Spirit came near -- so near as to *strive*  with men as indicated in @Genesis 6:3. Striving cannot be at a distance, but implies nearness; as in the case of the wrestling of Jacob; but God would impress us with the idea that He *feels*  things; and so, throughout the scriptures, there were those who, in sympathy with Him, had feeling. We should be a *feeling*  people. If one hears of a sorrow among the saints, and turns away as if it were an ordinary item of news, he is unfeeling, and not with God; for God feels all these things. The Spirit of God is extremely sensitive, as represented in the dove; and so may be grieved. If there be occasions of grief. He feels them; and if I am in the Spirit, I feel them, too. Sometimes, feeling unto tears pleases God -- He has a bottle for such tears!
As I said, the men of faith were always marked by right feeling, and thus reflected God, and set an example for us. You will find weeping in both Genesis and Exodus. In the Old Testament, the man who had most to do with divine service and administration, wept, as a babe. There are special features spoken of as in babes, especially of Jacob, Moses, Solomon, and John the baptist. It is not recorded of Moses without intent that "the boy wept". (@Exodus 2:6), and it gives character to his ministry. He could never have acquired the place he did, in the house of God, were he not a *feeling*  man. God could say: "Not so my servant Moses: he is faithful in all my house", @Numbers 12:7; he would enjoin us as to *all*  God's house. In men with faith, such as Timothy, you find "genuine feeling" and care as to how the saints get on. If he heard of any sorrow -- any outbreak of sin -- any worldly things among the saints -- Timothy would *feel*  it. He would feel it even to tears: for the apostle says, "remembering thy tears", @2 Timothy 1:4. Timothy's tears were treasured by the apostle -- treasured in heaven, too, for God put such
{204}
tears into His bottle. The apostle shed tears also; he says, I "tell you even weeping", @Philippians 3:18.
Throughout the New Testament, we have the thought of feeling, especially in the Lord Himself. At the end of His ministry as our Lord drew near Jerusalem and looked upon that city. He *wept*  over it. How touching! It knew not the day of His visitation as the Lord said, (@Luke 19:44), and *He felt*  it. The Lord would have us think of things in that feeling way, when looking abroad upon Christendom as having now taken on the garb of apostasy; for that is the garb it wears. We cannot but feel this, if we are with God.
Now with regard to this family at Bethany, the power of death was over it; but how the Lord was moved by what He saw! Such is His wonderful humanity that He could be influenced by the tears of another. He saw Mary weeping, and *He*  wept; but more than that. He groaned, and was troubled in His spirit.
The fact that He *cried*,  is to be noted. He cried on several occasions; the first one to which I refer, is related by Matthew. Only Matthew and Mark speak of the Lord being forsaken. Mark reiterates what Matthew says in this connection, and they both give the profoundest expression of feeling. There could be no greater depth. It is immeasurable -- the depth of feeling that lay behind this cry of Jesus. "Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour; but about the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?" @Matthew 27:45 - 46. I want to enlist your sympathies as to this. These are the very words uttered by our Saviour; their meaning is given here, but they are the original words He used. The Holy Spirit would put the feelings of Jesus into our hearts in the very words employed by Him. Let us open our hearts to let in those feelings! Those words, as you know, are a quotation from @Psalm 22. That Psalm
{205}
is the greatest suffering psalm; and, yet, a remarkable thing about it is that it has a feminine heading -- not a masculine one -- "Upon Aijeleth-Shahar" meaning 'according to the *hind*  of the morning'; that is to say, the Lord in the depths of His suffering had in mind the feminine result. It ought to touch our hearts. This thought is seen in Mary Magdalene; she represents the *feeling*  side, over against Peter and John, who were *intelligent*  men. They saw, by the position of the clothes in the sepulchre, that the resurrection had happened, and believed; but Mary felt things. The more feeling we have, the more light we get. Mary received the Lord's message for the disciples; and she was the "hind of the morning", we may say: she *ran*.
This remarkable incident is not forgotten in heaven, that a woman had *run*  to bring the disciples word. God is seeking to promote in us an ever deepening sense that what is ministered, is not to be merely a "lovely song", *see*  @Ezekiel 33:32, but something from Himself that is received and treasured. So that the Lord's utterance on the cross, given to us first in the suffering psalm, is expressive of the depth of the Lord's feelings as forsaken of God, when having to do with sin. He had to do with it from the outset of His creation, but never as He had now to do with it -- as on the cross. No one ever had to do with it in this way but He, and He never had to do with it in this way before. The experience was new, and it was no feigned experience. It was His actual experience here; that He was the Sin-bearer, and that God turned away His face from Him. That was certainly new, and was felt; and was expressed in the utterance, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" It is still "my God", although the holy Sufferer was forsaken; but never was that word "why" used with such power before. "Why hast thou forsaken me?" Surely, dear brethren, the Lord would bring us into the understanding of this, to deepen the sense that we may have as to sin -- what it is
{206}
in this world. The Lord had knowledge of it, of course, but never before was He in a position like this. He was being *made*  sin. Think of the feeling that went with that! All this feeling entered into @Psalm 22, which He quotes: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Some, who stood by, thought He called on Elias; such was the poor hearing around; there was no sympathy in that. The Lord would remind us of the need of hearing, when such wonderful thoughts are brought before us. Those who heard Him were callous and ignorant, thinking that "Eli, Eli" was *Elias*,  but the words are not the same. It was the hearing of the flippant, persecuting, natural heart. We need good hearing. Then the Lord cried again, and delivered up His spirit; that is to say. He left the scene in power -- feeling things, but in power. Well, that is the first cry. We can get nothing, dear brethren, more profound than that, in the way of feeling -- it was infinitely real. Now, the Christian, as having to do with sin, should see it as it is before God; and what it is in himself, and should deal with it with authority, for he has the right to. Having the Holy Spirit, we can put to death the deeds of the body.
The next cry is with regard to the resurrection of the saints -- surely, a matter of great import. Martha spoke of the resurrection as a sort of doctrine -- an orthodox item of faith; but there was no feeling in that. "I know that he will rise again in the resurrection in the last day", (@John 11:24) -- she put it off. She was not a Sadducee, but a believer in the resurrection as a doctrine; yet without sensibility as to it; whereas, the Lord has feeling with regard to our resurrection. Is it nothing to Him that myriads of His own lie under the ground? It is a great deal to Him. He is sensitive as to what affects them. Is it nothing to Him when we bury our dead out of our sight, as Abraham did? We may have wet eyes, but the burial of a saint is much more to Jesus than it is to the nearest relative on earth.
{207}
He says, "Lazarus, our *friend"*,  he was one of His friends; and the Lord also loved the other two of the family -- Mary and Martha. First, we read that Lazarus was sick; and then the Lord said that he had fallen asleep; and, finally, "Lazarus has died". There is nothing unreal about that. It was a reality to Jesus; He looked at things as they *were*. It was something to Him, that Lazarus had *died*. And when He had arrived, both Martha and Mary said: "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died", verses 21 and 32; but the brother *had*  died. The Lord had also said, "Lazarus, our friend, is fallen asleep" @John 11:11; viewed thus, a saint is unconscious as to current events here. The Lord inquired, "Where have ye put him?" verse 34. It was something to Him; but Martha again intruded, saying, "Lord, he stinks already, for he is four days there", verse 39. The Lord said, "Did I not say to thee?" verse 40. How quickly we forget what is said to us! I own that, beloved brethren, because I find that things slip away so quickly. A most important statement evidently had slipped away from Martha. "Did I not say to thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?"(@John 11:40) The Lord said, "Where have ye put him?" verse 34. He was in a tomb, and the Lord felt it. He saw Mary weeping, and He saw the Jews weeping. It does not say that Martha wept; but the Jews wept, and He regarded *their*  tears, too. They were influenced by Mary. "Jesus, therefore, when he saw her weeping, and the Jews who came with her weeping, was deeply moved in spirit, and was troubled, and said. Where have ye put him? They say to him, Lord, come and see. Jesus wept", verses 33 - 35.
That is what you get here, dear brethren. It is a well-known scripture, and one that always yields. When He came to the place, it says, "And Jesus lifted up His eyes on high", verse 41. The Lord would direct our eyes, in that way, on high. There is hope up there, and He says to the Father, "but I knew that thou
{208}
always hearest me", verse 42. How beautiful that is! -- an unbroken communion existed between the Father and the Son; as down here, the Father always heard Him; but He says, "on account of the crowd who stand around I have said it", verse 42. Are we not among those that "stand by"? The Lord does things because of those that stand by. In Zechariah, we have persons given honour to walk amongst them who stand by, *see*  @Zechariah 3:7. Is there anyone here, who is a mere spectator, casually listening to the word of God? Or are you standing by what God is doing, knowing that He is about to unfold His glory? It is wonderful to have part in this. It was the Lord's thought that those who "stand by" should believe. He says, "that they may believe", @John 11:42. John, in his record, always presses home the idea of faith -- that we should be believers.
And then it says, "he *cried*  with a loud voice", verse 43. His holy sympathies entered into that cry. The saints are in His mind, and in His heart. In the apostle Paul's letter to the Thessalonians, we have: "for the Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first", (@1 Thessalonians 4:16). How much holy feeling there will be in this shout! When that moment comes, the Lord will come exultingly to raise the sleeping saints, and change the living ones. I am speaking especially of the resurrection of the saints -- a wonderful and glorious transaction -- "the first resurrection". This, of course, is only a sample; but it indicates how the Lord's feelings enter into the resurrection of those He loves. It is said, "Blessed and holy he who has part in the first resurrection", (@Revelation 20:6). The Lord Himself descends from heaven with an assembling shout, and the dead in Christ shall rise first; and then we are told, "then we, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet
{209}
the Lord in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord", (@1 Thessalonians 4:17). I want to press what the resurrection is to *Him*. He "cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. And the dead came forth", (@John 11:43).
The third cry I wish to speak of is in @John 7. Without what is involved in this cry, the others must be unintelligible to us. We must have the Holy Spirit. There is hardly any truth less understood, or less accepted practically, than the truth of the Spirit of God as present here now. That is what this chapter deals with, and it says "the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified", @John 7:39. It refers to the wonderful day of the Spirit here on earth. Did that not occasion feeling? Yes! He looked forward to that day, the like of which never had existed, and I may add, never will again exist; for the millennium is not equal to this. The Holy Spirit will not be here then, as He is now. This is a peculiar time, and it is a matter of deep feeling to Jesus. Is it this to us? The Lord would raise the question with us, as to whether we have the Holy Spirit? as to whether any of us thirsts? There is a great deal of thirst. So that in the last day of the feast -- the great day -- it is very evident there was thirst. The Lord knew it. On the last day, the greatest day. He stood and cried. How He felt the need! -- as He saw the Jews from all parts of Palestine, and the provinces of the Empire, congregated there to celebrate the feast of tabernacles. It was a feast that was intended by God to be the expression of love for brethren, dwelling in nearness to one another in booths. It is a question of being near one another. There was nothing there then of this holy joy of dwelling together in divine love, and the Lord knew it. He saw the thirst that was there -- it prevailed about Jerusalem that day, as it prevails about this city today; but the Lord is inviting: "If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink", chapter 7:37. With a feeling voice. He invited His hearers to
{210}
come and drink; and the same sympathies are here now.
Let us not think that these things are in the distance, that these people are dead and gone, Jerusalem having been laid in ruins for centuries. The invitation is the same today -- Jesus cries and says to us, "If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink" @John 7:37. He gives the living water. He fills the unsatisfied hearts of men in this world; and He would have us join with Him in it, as having drunk ourselves. We shall never be evangelical unless we have sympathetic hearts. And then the passage goes on to speak of the magnitude of the thing -- that it should be in the belly of the believer, flowing out as rivers of living water, verse 38. A wonderful thought! No one, who has not the Spirit, can understand it. The magnificence of the thing is stressed -- rivers of living water flowing out of a believer in Christ. Then it adds: "But this he said concerning the Spirit, which they that believed on him were about to receive; for the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified", verse 39. Well, that is the third cry. It is regarding the Holy Spirit, without whom all that goes into the first two must be a dead letter to us; because it is only by the Spirit of God that we enter into these things. Christian knowledge is only by the Spirit of God. Mere 'theology' is truth made to fit into man's mind; and so, however well meant, it cannot rightly convey divine thoughts. "For who of men hath known the things of a man except the spirit of the man which is in him? thus also the things of God knows no one except the Spirit of God", (@1 Corinthians 2:11).
There are two other scriptures of which I could have spoken: one of them is in this chapter (@John 7), which gives us the pros and cons of the world in regard to Jesus -- what this one says, and what that one says; and it corresponds with the present world where modernism prevails. What do you say about Jesus? There are some voices lifted up more or less favourably, but
{211}
one says: "But as to this man we know whence he is. Now as to the Christ, when he comes, no one knows whence he is", verse 27; and when the Lord heard that. He *cried*. Does the Lord *not feel*  this modernism; about all these things that men are saying? Yes, He does, and He would have us feel it. He says: "Ye both know me and ye know whence I am; and I am not come of myself, but he that sent me is true, whom ye do not know", verse 28. This is the antidote to the current of modernism. He is One sent by God; and whatever they may say, and pretend to say or believe, down in the bottom of their hearts the leaders are conscious of the power of Christianity, and that Christ is a divine Person, come from God.
Then in chapter 12, where the public testimony is over -- the testimony to the Jews -- the Lord cites from @Isaiah 53: "who has believed our report", verse 38, and then He says, "On this account ... Esaias said again. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart", verses 39 - 40. After that, the Lord cries and says: "He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me; and he that beholds me, beholds him that sent me", verses 44,45. It is to bring out the greatness of the testimony. What are people rejecting? They are rejecting God! "He ... that beholds me, beholds him that sent me", @John 12:44,45. He is no less than God. He is divine, and the Father was there in Him doing the works. It is wonderful how the holy Trinity is combined in the operations of Jesus. By the Spirit, He cast out demons, and as He said, "the Father who abides in me, he does the works", @John 14:10. It is a perfect unity. He says. What are you rejecting? What you are rejecting is God Himself. "He that believes on me believes ... on him that sent me; and he that beholds me, beholds him that sent me", (@John 12:44); and He closes the chapter by saying that the Father's *commandment*  is life everlasting. God in grace is *commanding*  the great blessing of eternal life, and men are rejecting it!
{212}
Well, may God help us, dear brethren, to right feelings about these things! God is giving us a wonderful opportunity now to finish up the history of the assembly here, and He would have us to be *feeling*. As affected thus in a spiritual way. He can employ us to express Himself.
{213}
THE DIVINE CIRCLE
@Mark 3:34 - 35; @1 Samuel 7:15 - 17; @Acts 14:19 - 20
I was thinking, dear brethren, of the idea of a *circle*. As employed in Scripture it has a spiritual significance. It has a great place in scientific matters, and rightly; for it marks, to a very large extent, the physical creation and it has also a place in spiritual things. Scripture alludes to it in this way, but with spiritual intent. It involves a centre, whether this be theoretical or actual, also influence according to the proportion given by the God of measure. So that if we regard Christ as the centre, the circumference must be proportionate, the idea of "the God of measure" entering into His position, so that the circumference of that which is influenced by Christ is commensurate with His Person. It must be; and when we apply this to persons we can see at once how inclusive this influence is; and, I may say exclusive, for there is the idea of throwing off matter in the creation, and certainly in what is moral there is the idea of throwing off by influence what is extraneous. There is also the idea of holding what is according to Himself; as He says, "I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me", @John 12:32. Nothing foreign is drawn: only what is according to Himself.
So, to apply what I have remarked to @Mark 3, the meaning is obvious, and applies widely, and also in detail to a meeting like the present. However general and wide spiritual thoughts may be in their bearing, they have always a local application; and the application of @Mark 3 to a meeting like this is, I believe, obvious and encouraging. The chapter contemplates the crisis in the Lord's ministry. The great good that was being done, which was undeniable, was attributed to Beelzebub. Such is the capability of the religious mind when
{214}
tested by Christ: such are the extremes to which it will go. Think, dear brethren, of what it was to heaven that such a thing should be alleged against Jesus! The Lord deals with the charge as a word spoken against the Holy Spirit. It was against Him, but He regards it as against the Holy Spirit, for which He says there is no forgiveness.
The line is thus drawn between Christ and the world in the sharpest manner, and it remains so drawn; there is really no change. Even His relatives, whilst not going so far as to attribute the power of Beelzebub to Christ in His work, said that He was out of His mind -- a most cutting thing! The allegation that persons are out of their mind is not uncommon; a similar charge was made at Pentecost, and it was reiterated by Festus at Caesarea against Paul: "much learning doth make thee mad", he said. @Acts 26:24. So that the brethren of Christ according to the flesh were not far away from those who alleged that the power of Beelzebub was operating in Him.
We do well to take account of our surroundings, and to see whether -- though we may shelter ourselves under moderation -- we are allied against Christ, although assuming to be His brethren, "his relatives", (@Mark 3:21). The difference is not very great, dear brethren: it is just gradation of opposition. *It is opposition*. Whether we really join with those who say the Lord or His followers are out of their minds, or whether we say that they are actuated by the power of the devil, we are in bad company, however moderate we may claim to be. Indeed, latitudinarianism is one of the worst things: it is a subtle thing. It is a leaven that is destructive; God abhors it. We are either for Christ or against Him. So when His mother and His brethren came and stood without, asking to see Him, He has a cool answer for them; He makes no move towards them. Let no one assume that his mere apparent moderation commends him! It is a question of the *side*  you are on.
{215}
So that the Lord makes no move towards His natural relatives here.
Happily, at the moment, there was a crowd sitting around Him. It was no accident; it fitted exactly with what was required. There was a concrete expression of what was in the Lord's mind as replacing the opposition, as replacing the system that had come under the power of the enemy. The crowd was sitting around *Him*. This circumstance was divinely ordered. So the Spirit of God records with emphasis the idea of a circle; it says that the Lord looked "around *in a circuit*  at those that were sitting around him" -- as the passage in @Mark 3 should be translated. You say, 'They were inactive. Why were they not active? There was plenty to be done'. But the most important thing, beloved brethren, is to sit around Jesus with listening ears and understanding hearts. As He said elsewhere: "This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom *he*  hath sent", @John 6:29. Him whom the Father had sanctified and sent into the world. The will of God entered into that. The greatest activity, and the greatest sacrifice, are of no value at all apart from this. So that He looked round in a circuit at those who were sitting around Him and said, "Behold ... my brethren!" How precious it is to have the Lord so regard any of us, or all of us! And then He gives His reason, saying, "for whosoever shall do the will of God the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother". There was moral history behind this: those sitting around are not merely curious; they are *doing the will of God*.
John supplies the secret; he tells us that Jesus said, "No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him", (@John 6:44). The drawing power was there; and that works out in the doing of the will of God. Matthew in the same connection says, "the will of my Father who is in the heavens" chapter 12:50, shutting out all modernism, branding as contrary to God all that is marked by the will of
{216}
man here on earth. It is a question of the will of the Father who is in heaven. The guiding power and the will are somewhere else, not here in men. It is not unionism, nor communism; the will is where it *must*  be, that is in the Father who is *in the heavens*.
So that, dear brethren, you can see how pleased the Lord is with those who sit around as at meetings of the saints. The word "crowd" is used, for it is not a question of assembly order, but of a number of persons, not in disorder, surely, but simply marked as sitting around Jesus. He is delighted with that. One is greatly encouraged in the increasing number of these gatherings, and the attention -- they are pleasing to heaven. The Lord has in them a concrete example of the mind of heaven, which is no small matter; for one great principle in Scripture is the exemplification of divine ideas, and the meetings I refer to are the exemplification of a great principle set out on the mount of transfiguration: "This is my beloved Son; *hear him*", (@Mark 9:7). In this passage in @Mark 3 it is a question of "sitting *around him*", a position of quietness and restfulness. He being the centre for all.
To proceed to Samuel: I want to show that the idea of a circuit involves the Lord's actual movements, following the assertion that Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life; that is to say, there will be no relaxing of the Lord's service as Judge during this dispensation, whatever men may do; however loud and blatant modern communism may be, the Lord Jesus will judge for His people during the whole period; and that is a great comfort to every subject person. It is in keeping with His position as seen in Matthew, where in chapter 28, verse 20, He says, "I am with you all the days, until the completion of the age" -- every day! How we prove it, dear brethren! But then He moves about in judgment -- not in punitive judgment; that is not the point in Samuel's ministry, although the basis of such judgment was there. God will judge according to the
{217}
judgment arrived at by His saints, as we learn in @Revelation 18:20: "God has judged your judgment upon her". In these visits of our Lord, typified in Samuel, we learn how to judge with discrimination; a very important matter, because we all admit our great poverty in the way of judicial discrimination. It was lacking at Corinth; it is always lacking in unspiritual conditions. There is inability to judge, and so we often call evil good, and good evil. There is much of that kind of thing, but that is not the kind of judgment you would get at Bethel and Gilgal and Mizpah and Ramah in the days of Samuel; it is not the kind of judgment you will get where the Lord Jesus is in the midst of the "two or three" gathered to His name. You get righteous judgment where He is; as He says in the presence of the Jews: "Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment", @John 7:24.
According to @John 18, in the presence of the high priest Christ was smitten on the cheek; another than "the Judge of Israel" was on the judgment seat, and he called good evil, and evil good. We are come "to God", we are told, "the judge of all", (@Hebrews 12:23), and we are to learn how to judge from Him. That judgment is put into the hands of the Son of man; all judgment is in His hands, meaning, as I apprehend, that it is carried out in sympathy. We read of the vintage being *fully ripe*  before the judgment is executed in @Revelation 14:18, meaning that God is *slow*  to wrath, slow to execute punitive judgment; but then He is not slow to bring out the facts; there should be no delay in the bringing out of the facts of any matter requiring judgment. Let them stand, and have their voice before action is taken! So the Lord, as typified in Samuel, judges in Bethel. I am speaking now of a passage well known to most of us; but it is important at the present moment. If the Lord moves around, so to speak, and judges at Bethel, it refers to His judicial service in relation to the *house of God*. The truth of
{218}
the house of God had been lost for centuries. Christendom became divided up into dioceses and parishes, and so forth; one great see -- Rome, indeed, dominating all. The Lord came in to deal with all that; it was a travesty of the house of God; it cut across the whole truth of the house of God.
In view of this the Lord addresses the angel of the assembly in Thyatira and presents Himself as the Son of God. He is over the house as Son. He is sitting in judgment in Bethel, as it were. This continued for centuries, but more recently the truth of the house of God has been opened up; and in our own times we are reminded of it constantly. He orders it so. Whether it be in ministry or conversation, whatever the Holy Spirit says reminds us of that, and we must never lose sight of it. The house of God is a universal thought; you never get Scripture speaking about two houses of God. There are many assemblies, but one house of God; and the Lord is constantly asserting this so that the brethren should be universal in their thoughts and affections, and not be too local. We should be local, surely; but the Lord would, as He sits, so to speak, in Bethel, impress upon us the universality of the house of God, and that it requires largeness of heart and an enlargement of the area covered by our prayers at our meetings for prayer or elsewhere. The work of God goes on as one piece, and wherever God is working, however diverse nationalities may be, the work of God is the same; it always can be linked on with what God has been doing; if any movement professing to be a work of God cannot be linked with what He has been doing, or is doing, it discredits itself and becomes questionable.
The next place at which Samuel judges is Gilgal. Gilgal is well known to us, it is the place of circumcision the *second*  time. When we have a thing a second time, the Spirit of God is impressing upon us how important it is -- that it has already been proved to be effective;
{219}
let it be proved again; let it be re-asserted! That is one idea connected with Gilgal; a great principle is applied a second time. So you have sharp knives -- much is made of the ordinance, and finally God says, "This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you", (@Joshua 5:9). God has done it. It is Colossian ground in @Joshua 5, but involving Ephesians; it is the Canaan side of Jordan. It should stir our hearts as the word "Canaan" is mentioned in this connection. It is divine territory, and God is asserting what is suitable to it; it is *His*  land. Amongst the things that come out here, one is that He makes His people weak lest there might be any assertion of their *natural*  strength in the territory of God. So we have not only the actual fact of circumcision, but the people were to remain there at Gilgal until they were whole; figuratively, until we are set up in a spiritual constitution; that is to say, we are "buried with him (Christ) in baptism" according to @Colossians 2, and "raised with him through faith of the working of God" -- the *faith*  of it. All this alludes to *state*  in us. The "faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", (verse 12). Then added to that, we are quickened together with Christ, suggesting that we are made whole thus. No one is made whole from circumcision until quickened with Christ -- not healed simply, but made *whole*. We are made to live in Another, as apart from the flesh. Living according to the flesh is done with in circumcision, as it is said, "in the circumcision of the Christ", (verse 11). The reproach of Egypt is rolled away by God. He has done it Himself; He assumes we wish Him to do it; that we are not now hankering after Egypt; so He Himself helps us to get rid of the flesh, but in a way that is humbling and painful. So that we are to be made whole before we move. We move in a new power, quickened together with Christ. Ephesians goes further; there it says that God "has raised us up together and has made us sit down together in the
{220}
heavenlies in Christ Jesus", (chapter 2:6). God sets us down in heaven in a new state altogether, in love; He sets us down in heaven, in *Christ Jesus*. How beautifully and effectively is the reproach of Egypt rolled away! and we see that God has done it.
Mizpah comes next, which is, I suppose, to be taken to mean what is said of it as first introduced in Scripture; "The Lord watch", says Laban, "between me and thee", (@Genesis 31:49). The meaning of it is "watch-tower", suggesting, obviously, the idea of watching. That word "watch" has a great place in Matthew and Mark: "What I say to you, I say to all, watch", (@Mark 13:37). The idea enters into Gethsemane. The Lord as in Gethsemane was facing the enemy in all his power. It touches the heart, dear brethren! The word "Gethsemane" is used only by Matthew and Mark -- the gospels which speak of the forsaking of God. The Lord says to some of His disciples, "Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder", @Matthew 26:36. How touching that is! And then He takes three with Him, and they are to watch; but He has to say to them, "Could ye not watch with me one hour?"(@Matthew 26:40) If the Lord moves to Mizpah, we cannot but be impressed with this, that there is need for watching -- watching, surely, for the Lord's coming; but it is also a question of keeping a sharp look-out for the enemy's workings; watching for the souls of the saints, too. These places of judgment therefore refer to certain features of our position which the Lord would stress *as needed*,  and it is quite clear, dear brethren, that we are to be on the alert if He is stressing any of these features, that we be not careless or indifferent to what He is saying; if we are, we shall miss His mind, and the visit to Mizpah is lost as far, at least, as we are concerned. We cannot afford to lose anything the Lord is stressing at any given time.
Ramah comes next; it is at the end of the circuit. The idea of Samuel's *return*  is connected with it; "his
{221}
return was to Ramah". As one returns from a mission, or a service, his countenance or attitude will indicate his success or otherwise, and so it is with the Lord's return as to Ramah; it suggests elevation. We have the idea of persons returning after services in Scripture. No doubt in the case of Paul and Barnabas returning from their first missionary journey to Antioch, the countenances of these dear men would bespeak their blessed and triumphant experience. They were full of it; they brought the assembly together and related to them "all that God had done with them". (@Acts 14:27). They merged with the brethren, but their hearts and minds were full of the work of God; and as they went up to Jerusalem later, passing through Phoenicia and Samaria they related the conversion of those of the nations. "And they caused great joy to all the brethren", @Acts 15:3. And at Jerusalem great attention was given to them as they told of "all the signs and wonders that God had wrought among the nations by them"(@Acts 15:12). As the Lord (in type seen in Samuel) returns from these circuits. He is pleased as He sees results -- brethren getting on a little here and there as to things which He is pressing upon them. You may be sure He is watching with the greatest vigilance for any little move as to what is progressing in our souls, and He is pleased after any little bit of service here, if He sees brethren coming to it, making headway. All this, I believe, enters into the return to Ramah.
But then, the service of judgment goes on; there is no cessation of it. He judged Israel *there*,  it says, as if that was a very advantageous place; and what can we deduce from that? As far as I can see, it suggests that the Lord would impress the idea of *moral elevation*  upon the brethren. Without that I do not see how we shall get on; we shall gradually sink and sink and sink, and merge into what He spues out of His mouth, unless this principle of moral elevation is maintained; that is, withdrawal in mind and heart from what is current
{222}
religiously. "There was his house", we are told. One comes thus near to where the Lord lives; as was enquired of Him by the two disciples in @John 1: "where dwellest thou?" We come near to it in a moral way, as following this circuit, and learn the kind of circumstances and surroundings of His abode. Where He lives is where He is free -- where His affections can go out. Might I remind the brethren how practical all this is? It is a question of conditions into which the Lord can come and be free, and in which His affections can go out freely.
Then what follows upon that is the *altar*,  as if the Lord were to say that the worship of God can be maintained here. Brethren have spoken together profitably about the service of God, but here we have the altar, as if He would say that conditions here warrant the setting up of the worship of God. That is the idea of it -- over against the dishonour of the service of God abroad in Christendom. Is that not a great matter? The idea of the altar is that the service of God is to be maintained, and that is what the Lord is bent upon. In that service He is known as the "minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man", (@Hebrews 8:2). We may now go on to @Acts 14; there is in that chapter what, I believe, should touch us; that is the encircling by the disciples, of the servant, the sufferer, the martyr. There may be no martyrdom today in the ordinary sense, but in Scripture the word alludes to suffering for the testimony; and may I not say there is such a thing as that today -- suffering for the testimony? Would not any one of us be ashamed if he did not have some little part in that? It is our privilege; everyone of us may come into the suffering for the testimony. Paul was suffering for it here in a very extreme way. The chapter affords the circumstances which lead up to this incident; but he was drawn *out of the city*  as dead. What a triumph the enemy thought he had
{223}
secured! We are not to ignore that word 'city', for the city is pre-eminently that in which God's testimony is rendered; "do ye remain in the city", the Lord said to His disciples, "till ye be clothed with power from on high", @Luke 24:49. So as He went up to heaven they went into the city, and there they testified, and there they suffered. When Paul was dragged out as dead, the enemy would think he had triumphed, but the testimony was to go on in the city, and Satan cannot set aside what God is intent upon, not even as to *where*  the testimony is to be rendered; so that the apostle is encircled by the brethren.
I would especially appeal to the brethren as to this. It is a time of suffering, and we should value, as Peter and Paul did, the privilege of suffering for the testimony. The disciples encircled the apostle, we are told, and he rose up. You might inquire. What will he do if he rises up? Will he not greet every brother standing around? It does not say that; Scripture is always accurate, not only in its words, but also as to what is suitable in any given circumstances. The point is that the testimony is to go on, and so the apostle went into the city, meaning that however severe the sufferings, when the Lord comes in and releases us from any pressure, let us resume our service. Service is in view here. There are no broken ends; but the link is held, even where there seemed to be victory for the enemy. The apostle entered into the city, and so the position is held. After that, he goes with Barnabas to other cities. It is a great triumph for God.
I am speaking, dear brethren, of the encircling -- how the Lord would call our affections into the sufferings of those who testify for Him. How He values "the disciples" as encircling the martyr! Their encircling became the occasion of his resuscitation to life; he rose up, and entered into the city. Would these disciples ever forget this? They would not, I am sure. It would be a reminder to them not to forget to encircle every
{224}
one suffering for the truth. It is a great matter to encircle the servants -- especially those who are serving and suffering. Whether we do it in our affections, our prayers, or otherwise, God uses it. So that the apostle resumed his service, entering into the city, and then going to other cities. He went with Barnabas to Derbe and preached the gospel "to that city". Then they returned to Lystra, Iconium and Antioch, establishing the souls of the disciples there. They ordained elders in every assembly; and having prayed with fastings they committed them to the Lord, on whom they had believed. Then having spoken the word in Perga, they came down to Attalia; and thence they sailed away to Antioch, from which city "they had been recommended to the grace of God for the work which they fulfilled"(@Acts 14:26). We can thus see, dear brethren, how the fulfilment of the work of the great apostle involved the encircling by the disciples of the worker as he suffered.
The Lord will, I am sure, use these suggestions as to the thought of a circuit and encircling, to sober and stimulate us all as to His present movements and services, and the services and sufferings of His workers.
{225}
FRESHNESS
@2 Kings 4:42 - 44
I have in mind, dear brethren, to speak a word about *freshness*. Whilst God in the creation preserves the element of continual freshness, staleness and old age marks all human institutions -- not to say anything of the evil. In the creation around, especially the vegetable kingdom at this time of the year, we see freshness, delightful to the eye, and intended by God to be so. Sameness marks heavenly bodies, sameness and regularity, but there is a continuous freshness on the earth, and this was so intended. As we are constituted naturally we need it, and so it is a divine provision. The first mention of it is the green grass.
In the animal realm as well as in the vegetable, we have freshness -- *in young*  creatures constantly coming in; and so, as applied to the believer in a spiritual sense, it is to mark him at the beginning; the flesh of the believer, however worn out in its natural relations, becomes fresh as a child, and the divine intent is that it should not be otherwise, but that it should continue fresh.
To this end, oil is used as a figure in Scripture, for however surely the light of Christ may appear to come into our souls in the gospel, however our countenances may be changed, the light by *itself*  will fail us; we shall grow old if relying on it alone. As in the types, Miriam, who sang as Israel crossed the sea, died in the wilderness. This fact has a typical meaning: the Holy Spirit had not been recognised. She died before that time *when Israel sang unto the well*. It is one thing to sing to Jehovah as light comes into the soul -- and a beautiful thing too, everyone should -- but it is another to sing unto the well; "sing ye unto *it*", (@Numbers 21:17). We have to understand that Miriam is just a type of one
{226}
phase of the believer's history. The light by which she sang at the banks of the Red Sea did not carry her into Canaan; if we are to go into Canaan, we are to go in, not as people worn out with the cares of the desert; no, we are to go in in the energy of life, of freshness, for naught else is suitable there. You may say. There was old corn there. True, but it is a mistake to assume that it was old in the sense in which I am now speaking of the word. It means there was plenty of corn; there is no famine there; there is some to *carry over*. It was "store corn".
The bride of Christ -- in which we all have our part -- after a thousand years of benign service towards this earth comes down from heaven *new*. She is not old after a thousand years. She is said to be the "new Jerusalem". She is still a bride, and there is not a mark in her of staleness or wrinkle or old age, but the opposite. We have to understand these things, dear brethren. It is in the power of the Spirit that this freshness is preserved. It is in the power of the Spirit that we enter Canaan. I do not mean that we are translated to heaven by Him. We are translated to heaven by the Lord Jesus Himself *coming for us*. The Holy Spirit gives us present entrance into our heavenly portion, and maintains us in the freshness that is proper to the assembly so that the Spirit and the bride say, Come, and "the Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord", (@1 Thessalonians 4:16 - 17). That is the prospect. It is an act of the Lord's, but in which the Holy Spirit will have His part, and it is in His power that we shall be in heaven eternally. Let us then become acquainted with the Spirit.
I am afraid there is very little acquaintance with the
{227}
Spirit. There is much theoretic knowledge, but the Holy Spirit is a real Person here upon the earth -- our Paraclete; that is to say. He is *beside*  us here. We read of the comfort of the Spirit, the fellowship of the Spirit, the voice of the Spirit, the love of the Spirit. Let no believer be oblivious to these things. They are great facts to be understood and realised. The Holy Spirit is a living divine Person, leading the assembly to meet the Lord. All the heavenly stateliness, answering to what is in Christ, which the Spirit can give, is to be seen in her. So that, dear brethren, freshness is a question of the Spirit; as the psalmist says, being "anointed with *fresh*  oil". There is the living water within and the anointing without, so that the freshness of the child, with which we begin, is maintained right through, and it appears, as I said, in the assembly as it comes down from heaven, the "new Jerusalem".
Now, I want to connect that thought with food, such as the man brings from Baal-shalishah. This passage comes in at the close of a most remarkable chapter in the second book of Kings. A chapter that every young believer, and of course all of us, should study in relation to the work of God as depicted in the three great constructive letters of Paul -- Romans, Colossians and Ephesians; there are corrective epistles, but these are the great constructive ones, and the believer will be woefully wanting and impoverished who does not look into them and compare himself with them and see how he is progressing according to them. They are, as it were, the barometer of God, and they have to be looked into if we are to keep pace with them, and as I said, if we do not we are stunted, and hence unfit for assembly service.
The chapter is specially marked by the idea of "the man of God". Indeed it finds, I believe, more place in this book than in the whole of Scripture besides, and nearly all the references are to this servant of God, Elisha. The title 'man of God' is scarcely found in the
{228}
New Testament, but we must not conclude that the New Testament does not contemplate men of God, nor that there are any fewer in our dispensation than of old. On the contrary, the types forecast what there is today. There are only two passages that directly mention such, as far as I know, in the New Testament, one being in the first epistle to Timothy and the other in the second epistle to Timothy. In the first the designation is applied to Timothy, showing that he was one, and in the second it is in the abstract, "*the*  man of God", showing that the apostle contemplated that there would be men of God. Thank God we know of them; we know there have been, are, and will be men of God. "The man of God" is to be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, (@2 Timothy 3:17). He is a man who in everything considers for God; who maintains at all cost the rights of God and the things of God; without him we need not look for much in a practical way.
I have no doubt that in this chapter the idea is more a principle, although, of course, seen in a person. It is a principle that comes into the believer's circumstances, a principle that is ever insistent as to what is due to God, and will not be satisfied unless the rights of God are recognised. So we find in this chapter a widow who is in need -- a well-known figure -- typically a person who, as not using the Holy Spirit, is unable to meet his moral obligations; there are many such. She comes into contact with the man of God, and he directs her what to do. It is a question, I would say to the young people, of recognising that you yourself are an institution. The widow and her sons are one idea, and the believer viewed in this way fits in with Romans. The believer, after he knows righteousness is ready in regard of God to reckon himself dead to sin and alive in Christ Jesus, "alive to *God*", that is the idea; but he finds himself in chapter 7 in sore straits because of certain occupants in the house so to speak,
{229}
and he learns by the process of introspection, how to make an analysis of himself -- a most important matter. He thus gradually arrives at a definite sense of responsibility. "*I myself*  with the mind serve God's law", @Romans 7:25. He is on his feet now; he knows where he is, and the evil elements inside are put in their places. That, dear brethren, is what you get in the early part of this chapter; the idea of shutting the door, having to do with God secretly in yourself. It is your own affair; it is your own instruction -- between you and God. It is imperative that we all should understand this feature of the truth. We shall thus see that we can live by the Spirit, and by Him discharge all our moral obligations. Every vessel is filled, as if the believer were to say. There is no room for anything but the Spirit. It is a source of weakness with us that we do provide for other things, but here every vessel is filled with the oil. It is a secret thing, and through the process indicated, one acquires the means of livelihood spiritually and pays his debts also.
Then follows the well-known woman called the Shunammite. In her we have a continuation of the thought; the man of God continues to come into your circumstances. Is this kind of man to come in or not? Well, he passes by her house. What is he occupied in? He is a man of affairs. What is he passing by for? Did you ever stop to think? He is not going to a place of amusement, nor is he occupying himself with holidays; he is concerned about *God*. This woman constrained him to eat bread. "And so it was, that as oft as he passed by he turned in thither to eat bread", @2 Kings 4:8. Let every one here question himself as to how much place the man of God has with him.
Presently she speaks to her husband; this is the first mention of the Shunammite's husband, and the references to her husband throughout the chapter denote that she was weak in regard, to headship. He is an old man, and hence weak, but that applies to her
{230}
in a spiritual sense. We cannot apply these things to Christ. However, she recognises him, and she says to her husband, "Behold now, I perceive that this is a holy man of God, who passes by us continually. Let us make, I pray thee, a small upper chamber with walls"(@2 Kings 4:9,10). Did it ever occur to you that there are in this world holy men, looking after the rights of God? What room do you give them? He had been eating bread with her, but now, "this is a holy man of God", she says, "Let us make ... a small upper chamber with walls"(@2 Kings 4:9,10) for him. The Authorised Version reads '*on*  the wall', but apparently it is 'with walls' -- a very significant matter, for what is of God should not be exposed in the believer's house. It is a chamber with walls. I wonder how many of us have chambers with walls in our institutions! These are spiritual matters. It is a question of at least one chamber in the house secured against evil. The whole institution is to be secured, but it is well to begin with one chamber. "If Christ be in you": I believe it leads on to that. "If Christ be *in*  you ... the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness", (@Romans 8:10). That is the way the truth develops.
The man of God has come right into the midst of her circumstances. She little knew what was to come; but the Lord says, "What I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter"(@John 13:7). Doubtless this woman did not expect to have a son, but the holy man of God coming into her circumstances meant increase. The institution is not to stop with a woman and an old husband, and both soon to die; that will not do for God. Spiritually we are to live for ever; there is no question of growing old and dying. In Colossians believers are risen with Christ and quickened with Him. The man of God said, "At this appointed time ... thou shalt embrace a son"(@2 Kings 4:16).
What a change there is going to be in the institution! It is no longer an old husband and a barren wife, but
{231}
new life in the house -- a son. The son comes -- and he *dies*. You say, What exercises! Yes, beloved brethren, what exercises! That is the order of the day with Christians -- exercises and sorrows. It is as we go through these things we are of use to God in His service and testimony. There is no short road to divine results. We have here a living child, and then a dead one, and then a journey to mount Carmel by the Shunammite and her servant, to the man of God. He is the solution of everything. What untold sorrow she had in the loss of that child. Her husband had no means of helping the Shunammite; no doubt he had feeling, but no power of life in him. It all points to the weakness of headship in the house. "Carry him to his mother",(@2 Kings 4:19) the father says. He was taken to his mother and he died at noon. When he should have been at his best, he dies. These are solemn lessons, but it is that he may live according to God, that is, life on a new pattern, and what is the pattern? The man of God is the pattern. He sends his staff, but life is not in the staff. He reaches the house, and the child is on his bed, but life is not there. Spiritually, these are most solemn experiences, but life is in view. The Holy Spirit is gradually leading us on to value the life that is in Christ. The pattern has to be used to show us, so that Elisha has to stretch himself on the child, put his mouth on his mouth, and his eyes on his eyes; and the child waxed warm. And he walks up and down, and stretches himself on him again, and the child sneezed seven times -- it is new life. It is a subjective matter. It is life in the power of the Spirit. It is life in relation to the one who stretched himself on him. As quickened together with Christ, we live in His life. It says the child "opened his eyes"; he would now look at everything in a new way. What will his prospects be now? What will the outlook be? The believer, viewed typically here, is on entirely new ground. The mother takes the child and goes out. She now has a child, not on the ground of natural birth,
{232}
but as out of death. He is delivered to his mother, and she takes him and goes out. The mother represents the affection and care needed at this juncture. That is the position in this chapter.
Then Elisha comes to Gilgal. That is the next thing, the life we have been considering has to be maintained. Elisha goes to Gilgal; every man of God goes there. It is the place of mortification of the flesh; the flesh has to be dealt with, and that constantly, or the new life will not develop. And then the "great pot" is put on but death comes in through some wild element introduced. This may be through the natural mind working in ministry. There is a danger of speculation in what is ministered -- wild gourds gathered out in the field. The great pot is like the fellowship into which we are brought. In principle it belongs to all; that out of which all are to eat, but if there is death in it the man of God is ever ready. He says, "bring meal". That is, the humanity of the Lord Jesus: not bread, but meal. Something which by its essential power nullifies the poison. It is a great matter to have this meal, dear brethren, for in our fellowship these wild gourds are constantly coming up, but they are dealt with by what we have in the way of meal. The man of God understands. Here it is not a question of cutting off; the evil is rendered null by the meal, by the spirit of Christ, being brought in. We are in the presence of the great pot of pottage, set on under the directions of the man of God; not very refined, but still *food*. It was a time of famine, and pottage would keep the prophets alive. It was what was available. It suggests an occasion in which we are moving on together, and many things arise and have to be met in power. It is a question of bringing in Christ. There is, of course, judgment, for we have to execute judgment when unjudged sin exists, but this was simply wild gourds brought in, not known by the person who brought them, and therefore it was dealt with in the way mentioned,
{233}
no one being incriminated. How can we go on otherwise? We shall soon disintegrate altogether unless we understand how to meet these things with what is good, with the power of Christ. If unjudged sin exists, it has to be dealt with, but there is the constant bringing in of these wild gourds, without intention it may be. There is not the slightest suggestion that the man who brought in this meant to poison the others, but the poison was there nevertheless, and had to be dealt with, for a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
At the close of the chapter we have something brought in from *another land*. Heaven is now in view. I should not like to be one second in this world unless conscious that heaven was pleased with me. Jesus was conscious of this: how delightful to heaven He was! He saw the heavens part asunder, He *saw*  it, and then there was the voice that came out of the heavens: "Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight", @Mark 1:11. Has God any other thought than this for the assembly? No, His thought is that the assembly should be a continuation of Jesus here, that we should be pleasing to heaven. Is the gathering I am connected with pleasing to heaven? There must be one spot on earth pleasing to the eye of God; *the green*,  the freshness of the Spirit in the saints for the eye of God. And this is what comes out here -- "a man from Baal-shalishah". The link is the man of God; here he represents those who conserve things for God, who consider for God; those who can nullify the poison in the great pot. Heaven is pleased with such. The assembly is marked by its relation with heaven, and here there is typically a supply from there; not pottage now, but what is in keeping with heaven: bread of the firstfruits and fresh ears of corn. The barley is a type of Christ, as first-fruits. Barley is not always a type of the Lord; sometimes it represents inferior food, but according to Exodus it is the first-fruits, and it is so alluded to here -- "bread of the first-fruits, twenty loaves of barley".
{234}
Shalishah is mentioned elsewhere by itself, but the prefix "Baal" refers to *lordship*. I look at that pot and see a young man putting wild gourds into it; well, he has not been consulting the Lord; he has been consulting himself, and he has brought in poison. This is a challenge to one's own heart, because we are all liable to these things. It is a question of the lordship of Christ. "The Lord will give thee understanding in all things", @2 Timothy 2:7. Why then did this poison come? The Lord had not been consulted, clearly. Now here is a man from a country where the Lord is dominant; very much like the school of Tyrannus in @Acts 19 -- the school where we learn the things of heaven. The things of God are not optional; they are imperative. You say, You apply that to divine things! Certainly I do. There is nothing more necessary at times than dominance, the dominant One being absolutely good. This man has come from a land where there is authority; *he*  has not brought in poison; he brought twenty loaves of barley, bread of the first-fruits -- something that speaks of the Lord Jesus risen from the dead and in heaven. And then we have fresh ears of corn -- another feature of Christ. These are alluded to in the meat offering in Leviticus. Here they are not said to be roasted. How precious to have Christ thus brought in! There is no exercise in this, as in the procuring of the wild gourd; this food comes without solicitation. In Matthew you have to go to Galilee to get things, in Luke you stay in the city until you are endued with power from on high. The bounty of heaven comes down. It comes as conditions are suitable. There are certain conditions to which heaven can attach itself, especially so in the assembly in its normal state. The man from Baal-shalishah brought these twenty loaves of barley, bread of the first-fruits, and fresh ears of corn in his sack. He brought these things to the man of God, and what will the man of God do with them? Feed the people. They are for the saints; love will do its best, dear
{235}
brethren, but how much service is needed to bring the gatherings of the saints into accord with heaven! The food brought did not seem to be enough; the servant thought so, but the man of God said, "Give the people that they may eat; for thus saith Jehovah: They shall eat, and shall have to spare". There were a hundred men: a goodly number. I suppose a meeting may go to that size and be respected by heaven. There is enough and to spare for this number here. It is a question of the word of God, not simply that there should be One dominant, but "thus saith Jehovah", verse 43. His word is that there should be plenty of this heavenly food for His people. The line to pursue is that everything is to be regulated by the mind of God. The chapter finishes with the word of Jehovah. "And he set it before them, and they ate and left thereof, according to the word of Jehovah".
{236}
HOW TO ADDRESS THE FATHER
@John 16:27; @John 17:1; @Luke 11:1, 2; @1 Corinthians 4:15; @Genesis 17:1 - 6
I have in mind to speak about the Father as the Lord may help, to show how believers are led on to use the appellation "Father" intelligently and feelingly, with the affection proper to the relation; and, first, I may remark, dear brethren, that we have to learn everything from Christ, even to the smallest detail of our Christian knowledge, but especially how to speak to the Father. The Lord teaches us how to learn. He says in spirit by the prophet, that the Lord God had given him "the tongue of the instructed", (@Isaiah 50:4), which means the tongue of one learning, the tongue of a disciple, as you will see by the marginal reference in the chapter to which I refer. We are looked upon very much as learners. As believers we are regarded as instructed, not only as having acquired knowledge, but as having intuitive ability to learn; an important matter, because the natural mind is quite incapable of divine instruction.
In the work of God in a man or woman at conversion, there is introduced an element capable of instruction. The Lord said, "Ye must be born again", @John 3:7, that is, born anew *throughout* , so that an element is introduced, among many others, of ability to learn. Without this we may study and labour to learn, but we shall miss what is spiritual, and be obliged to have recourse to creeds and catechisms and formulas of service, which are devoid of life. It is the living that praise God, as Hezekiah learned: "The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day", @Isaiah 38:19. They have ability to take part in divine service, knowing how to speak to God feelingly and yet intelligently, in the energy of love. They have learned from Christ. Here I may note that while the disciples called
{237}
the Lord Jesus "the Teacher and the Lord", @John 13:13, *He*  said, "the Lord and the Teacher", (verse 14). He transposed the words, for aside from the recognition of the lordship of Christ, His *authority*,  we do not come in for the teaching. It is subject ones who are taught; as Paul says to the Romans, "ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed", (chapter 6:17). They obeyed not only the teaching substantially, but the form in which it was presented. We have to learn everything from Christ; and we learn now through the Spirit, and this involves even the "form" of teaching. Creeds do not follow those lines however well meant. The apostle Paul directed his son Timothy to have an outline of sound words, such as he had heard from him, and they were to be held in faith and love; not in mere routine, but "in faith and love", (@2 Timothy 1:13); thus we are instructed.
I stress this, because of the importance of teaching, not only as to what is essentially right, but what is right in form. Indeed, it was said approvingly of believers in the days of the apostles that "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles", (@Acts 2:42). There was an authority that was not to be questioned in the apostles doctrine, and they persevered in it. The use of the word "persevered" would indicate what great opposition there was, for the Sadducees, Pharisees, and learned men, would seek to turn the disciples away from what the apostles taught -- but there was perseverance in it; and there is need of perseverance today, so that the teaching may be preserved as it has been delivered to us.
As I said, we have to learn from Christ how to speak to the Father. We have to learn everything from Him. Much that you find in Scripture, especially in Matthew, would lead us on the line of persistence and perseverance against opposition. The Lord went up to the mountain and sat down, and His disciples came to Him up on the mount. That implies that there was definite purpose
{238}
to learn, and readiness to sacrifice to do it. "And he opened his mouth and taught", @Matthew 5:2. *He*  taught: I do not know anything of much more importance, specially to young ones, than that we should understand that in the things of God, it is imperative to learn everything from Christ.
The apostles rightly called Him "Teacher". Indeed, I think they called Him "Teacher" much more frequently than they called Him "Lord", which would indicate that they were more apt to learn, than they were to be subject; but subjection must precede the spirit of learning. If I am not subject, I may be learning here and there, but I am missing much for I am not in the right spirit. They called Him "the Teacher and the Lord", whereas He said "the Lord and the Teacher".
Coming back to the thought of instruction, I wish briefly to suggest that we have in the two men of whom I have read -- Abraham and Paul -- the manner and principles that mark fatherhood; this is in view of our saying "Father" to Him who is supreme. If I grasp the thought of fatherhood, I shall then know how to address Him who is God and Father. You all remember that in @1 Corinthians 15:28 it is said that "when all things shall have been brought into subjection to him, then the Son also himself shall be placed in subjection to him who put all things in subjection to him, that God may be all in all". The thought of subjection has been fully set out and it remains; the Lord Jesus will hold that position in grace. We see it throughout from the moment He became man; it was ever there in perfection; but we shall see it at the end without anything to dim our vision, a *Man*  as he should be before God, and we shall see a *Son*  as he is before God.
In Abraham we have two thoughts as to fatherhood; the first as set forth in his primary name which is *Abram*,  signifying "high father" or "father of elevation". That word elevation is an important word amongst Christians if they consider the meaning of it in a moral
{239}
sense. It can only be found today where the Spirit of God is owned. There is no moral elevation elsewhere on earth. It emanates from God. He is the Most High -- that is one of His names; it is a relative name like all the other names of God in Scripture; "Most High" implies *great*  elevation. So in Luke we have "Glory to God in the highest"(@Luke 2:14). The word "highest" there is plural, denoting the fulness of the thought, and possible varieties in it; but "Glory to God in the highest"(@Luke 2:14). Is what the multitude of angels who appeared to the shepherds said. They were thinking of elevation; and so, throughout Luke you have this thought of "the highest". We read of the *multitude*  of the disciples speaking thus also; showing how they were learning.
In @Luke 19 we have a multitude -- not of angels but of men -- celebrating the King who rode upon the colt into Jerusalem. It was an auspicious moment, and, as ever, opposition was there, for the Pharisees said, "Master, rebuke thy disciples". Will the Lord rebuke His disciples at the behest of these opposers? No, He says, "If these shall be silent, the stones will cry out!"(@Luke 19:39,40) It was not such praise as a crowd ordinarily would give, but in *intelligence*,  for they were celebrating peace in *heaven*,  and glory in the highest; they did not say peace on earth, as the angels did, they had come under the teaching of the Lord. Peace on earth was deferred, Christ being rejected; this the disciples evidently understood, and so they say "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest!"(@Luke 19:38) In chapter 24, the Lord says to them -- "tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on *high*", @Luke 24:49.
I refer to all that because of the name Abram as so given at the first; there was in it the idea of moral elevation, and you cannot really have "Abraham" until you have "Abram"; that is to say, he is only thus morally suitable to increase the stock, for degradation must follow the introduction or bringing in of children, unless the moral elevation is already present. I speak
{240}
practically; it is essential in fathers that there should be moral elevation, or their offspring will be degraded; not indeed such elevation as men claim in the social scale, but elevation according to God. It came out in the patriarch, and so God appeared to him when he was "ninety years old and nine". @Genesis 17. It will be noted that he had been fully tested, and God regards him according to His own knowledge of him, as He said later, "For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him". (@Genesis 18:19). He was ninety years old and nine when the Lord appeared to him. One is assured there are fathers here; one has been speaking to mothers lately for there is great need of mothering, but there is also great need of fathering. If moral elevation is in evidence, there will be a divine appearing, or something akin to it, for God loves to confirm the fruits of His work in us, and to enlarge us. Indeed, Abraham signifies enlargement.
In this appearing God says to him "It is I", @Genesis 17:4. How condescending in the blessed God to come down and say to you or to me "It is I!" So in the passage in @John 16, the Lord says, "The Father himself loveth you". He would impress this upon us, that it is not only a question of sovereign love, but of qualities in us, for God loves to honour those qualities. We are loved because of the love that is begotten in our hearts by Jesus -- "for the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me". So God could say to Abram "It is I". In the same chapter we have the account that the Lord left off speaking with Abraham and went up from him, verse 22. In the next chapter we are told that the conversation ended, and Jehovah went His way, and Abraham returned to his place; but in chapter 17, this chapter of elevation and increase, Jehovah went *up*. That is the principle, it is going up; it is a question of what is up there. What an impression that would have left on Abraham, as Jehovah ceased to speak! And then what you find is that Abraham carried
{241}
out to the letter the divine will. I speak of it because it enters very much into fatherhood as in the saints, and into how this is apprehended in God. All the men in His house were circumcised *the selfsame day*. Thus God left him and went up, leaving the great thought of moral elevation and multiplication, all to be based on the setting aside of the flesh and the recognition of the Spirit. There can be nothing for God apart from the Spirit. Circumcision has no force save in the presence of the almightiness of God, which is stressed in our chapter, and the almightiness of God for us is in the Spirit now. God down here in the Spirit is the power that worketh in us. So that as the will of God is carried out in circumcision, there will be fruitfulness for God, through the mighty power of His Spirit.
In chapter 18, Jehovah comes back in that beautiful and touching scene at Mamre. You see how the principle of fatherhood was working out, and how in due course the son came -- Isaac came -- God infallibly fulfilling His promise, and now Abraham is viewed as a father according to the mind of God, one who will "command his children and his household after him", (verse 19).
In Paul we have the same thought carried out. It is a question of the will of God. There could be no fatherhood apart from God, apart from the maintenance of the will of God; so the apostle says "For though ye have ten thousand instructors" -- Christendom is full of these. I have no doubt prophetically the allusion is to the multitude of so-called teachers that has marked the general profession -- persons known reverentially as such. But what about the fathers? There are many fathers too, by *name*. The Lord would keep these things in their proper relation when He said "Call no man your father upon the earth"(@Matthew 23:9) and even as to teaching they were not to be called Rabbi, for "one is your instructor, and all ye are brethren" (@Matthew 23:8). He would thus keep the thought within its limits. But the fatherly quality is to be among us.
{242}
The Corinthians were laying themselves out for multiplicity of teachers. There was a great scramble for the title in those days evidently, as there is now. We have to be on our guard against it, dear brethren. "All ye are brethren", @Matthew 23:8. Of course a man is what he is, and if God gives him ability, the brethren will own it, but the relation of brother is greater than that of teacher. The brother will remain, but the teacher will end. So the apostle says, "though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you". You see how the thought was there, authoritativeness bound up with the affections of a father. Authority is most easily accepted when it is in a father, and that is where God has placed it. I mean that is where He has placed authority, for the thing was seen in Paul's ministry and believers came under his influence in this way -- he was a father. So he says, "O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged", (@2 Corinthians 6:11). "I speak as unto my children", @2 Corinthians 6:13. That is what they were, they could not deny it, they were his children in the faith. "Now for a recompense in the same ... be ye also enlarged. Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers", (verses 13 - 14). What counsel from a father! It is a word for fathers as to how to instruct their children lest they place them alongside unbelievers to their hurt. So he proceeds to point out what is destructive to Christians, and hence what a father in the true sense would prevent in the saints -- evil association, alliances with the world in whatever form. Hence, he ends up the passage "Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty", (verses 17 - 18). You see how Paul transfers the thought from himself to God. I cannot transpose a thought from myself to God, save as I have already
{243}
obtained it from God. What goes back to God must emanate from God. Paul's fatherhood amongst the saints emanated from God, and it went back to God.
That is the principle of circulation. From God to me and from me to God, so that the saints are marked by holiness and enlargement, separation marking them in their refusal of unholy alliances, and thus we come in for the Fatherhood of God even as to our circumstances down here. "I ... will be a Father unto you and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty", @2 Corinthians 6:18. What could we wish more, even in our ordinary affairs, than the Fatherhood of such a God, Jehovah Almighty!
Now I shall revert to what I was saying as to learning from Christ. In these two men, Abraham and Paul, I believe, we have set out the true principle of fatherhood, in moral elevation and authority in love. Then we are led on as the instructed, we are led on to speak to God as Father. And so in Luke, we have the idea of form, of *how*  things should be done. The Lord was praying, we are told, "in a certain place", showing that the idea of *place*  enters it. One might say, What does that matter, but Luke by the Spirit says, "In a certain place". I have to ask myself as to whether He could come to pray where *I*  am specially responsible? And then I should enquire *how*  He would do it. The Lord would have in mind the place and the manner in which we would pray. I have to think of that. The disciple said, "Lord, teach us to pray". I mention this, though well known to most of us, because it enters into this stage of learning -- how to speak to God as Father. This disciple evidently heard the Lord speaking, or saw Him -- both things I suppose enter into this scripture; and one pauses here to consider the holiness of the ground occupied by this disciple at this time. The Lord is never said to have prayed *with*  the disciples; He prayed by Himself and He also prayed within their vision and hearing, so that they might see Him or hear
{244}
Him; and I believe if each of us were to see and hear what this disciple saw and heard at this particular place, we would also say "Lord, teach us to pray". With no exception, we should feel that after all our prayers are very poor; the words may be suitable enough, but the manner, the feeling, the liberty that belonged to the Son of God here -- we should feel that our prayers are very small indeed in the presence of it. I am not speaking for others only, I am speaking for myself also -- as one thinks of all that was there, as John says, "we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father", @John 1:14. Viewed thus He is ever alone, but He is ever to be contemplated and learned from.
The Lord immediately answers the disciple's question, "When ye pray say. Father, thy name be hallowed" -- that is to say, let it be detached from all things that would defile or detract from it. How important that is! "Thy name be hallowed", and so in @John 17, the Lord was labouring, as shown in @John 13 to 17, to lead the disciples into the current of His mind. He was going to the Father, and He would lead them in that direction, even going as far as to say, "And in that day ye shall demand nothing of me", (chapter 16:23). You will begin your conversation or your prayer with "Father"! You will ask Him direct. They were very slow, I believe, in getting on to that line, and we are slow too. So He goes on to say, "for the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me". Now that is to set your hearts -- that is our hearts -- free with His Father Himself. He loves us because we love Jesus, because we love the Son; "because". He says, "ye have loved me and have believed that I came out from God", (chapter 16:27). Apparently He could say this now; they were gradually coming to it, that He had come out from the Father. He had earlier said, "none of you asketh me. Whither goest thou", (chapter 16:5). They were not thinking in that
{245}
current. He had said, "If ye loved me ye would rejoice because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is greater than I", (@John 14:28). He was so insistent to lead them on to the line He was on, as going out of the world to the Father, and that they should have part with him there. "His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speakest thou plainly", (@John 16:29), but that was because their minds were becoming cleared. That was the secret of it.
What an unfolding there was on that great occasion! The full knowledge of the Father was being unfolded to them. He says, "Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then. Show us the Father?" (@John 14:9). The Father was there. It was not a question of His inscrutable form and essence, but of what He was in character as revealed in the Son before the eyes of the disciples.
That is the line at the moment -- to lead us into the Way -- the manner in which He said all these things; and now He lifts His eyes to heaven and says "Father"! Would Peter and John ever forget that? They would never forget the way the Lord said "Father", and the way in which the Lord lifted up His eyes to heaven. That is what I had in mind, that we might see how He would lead us on to the Father, so as to know how to speak to Him. It is a question of instruction. It is true the Spirit in us cries "Abba, Father", (@Galatians 4:6). In Galatians you get the most initial thought, and in @Romans 8 *we*  cry "Abba, Father" *by*  the Spirit, (verse 15); but all these instructions I am speaking of necessarily enter into it, so that we might have a right understanding of the Father, and a right way of speaking to Him.
I do not go on to chapter 20 of John because it is not necessary to go further in regard to what has been before us at this time. What I have sought to show is the way in which we are led on in the knowledge of
{246}
the Father, as following in the current of the Lord's own instructions to His own at the last Supper, according to John's account: as Himself departing out of the world to the Father, He would lead them out of the world in their minds and affections to the Father.
You can understand how they would, after all the instruction He gave them, be affected as they saw Him lift up His eyes to heaven and speak to the Father. "Jesus spoke, and lifted up his eyes to heaven and said. Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee: as thou hast given him authority over all flesh, that as to all that thou hast given to him, he should give them life eternal. And this is the eternal life, that they should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". And again He goes on to say: "And now glorify *me, thou*  Father, along with thyself, with the glory which I had along with thee before the world was", @John 17:1 - 3,5. What words these are! How they conduct us, as we are capable of being conducted, into that realm where He is, and where the Father is known!
{247}
THE SERVICE OF MAN AND WOMAN IN THE ASSEMBLY
@1 Corinthians 11:11 - 12; @Romans 16:3 - 4; @Luke 2:25 - 38
These scriptures treat of "the man" and "the woman", and that is why I have read them, wishing to show the relative positions and functions of the sexes in the assembly; and not only to apply these scriptures in a literal sense, but also to enlarge a little on what is conveyed spiritually in the man and in the woman respectively. The first scripture is selected from a chapter which treats somewhat fully of the relative positions of the man and the woman, and it is not without signification that the chapter also introduces and develops the assembly in the exercise of its functions in a locality, which, rightly understood, makes room for Christ as the full representation of the man, as the assembly is the full representation of the woman; and makes room also for the universal position of the assembly as the one great thought and idea and object of Christ in the current dispensation. That is to say, the chapter in introducing the Lord's supper prefaces it by instruction that leads on to the apprehension of the Lord Jesus as Head of the assembly.
I make a few remarks first as to what belongs to the man, introducing them from the reference to Christ in @Revelation 12 as the "man child". The better translation gives, "a male son", which seems tautological, but spiritually is full of meaning. A son of course would be a male, but the additional word "male" calls attention to the idea, as absolutely presented in Christ in relation to rule, for it goes on immediately to say, "who shall shepherd all the nations with an iron rod"(@Revelation 12:5); that is to say, it is to be rule in an absolute sense. He "shall shepherd all the nations", and shepherding is ruling
{248}
with skill and with feeling, not arbitrarily, but it is in the "male son" -- the word is "*son"*  not "child". The idea as seen in Christ is necessarily to be taken on in all relations in which rule or government is required.
In @Judges 4 we have a woman taking the lead in the service of God in relation to a man: Deborah being the woman, and Barak the man. We are told in a footnote, that Deborah is said to be "a woman prophetess". Of course, the word "prophetess" means that she is a woman who prophesied, but in the original the feminine idea is stressed. So that if circumstances amongst the people of God require a sister to take any kind of prominence in the testimony, she never loses her feminineness, she is always a woman; she never takes on the masculine character; wherever that appears, you may be sure the flesh is active. But if weak conditions require that a sister should become prominent, she never loses her sisterly character; she always has "power" on her head, as the chapter I read from in 1 Corinthians teaches; and that goes forward into the assembly normally; she never loses her relative position and function, she is always herself.
Now in speaking thus, I may say that I am impressed that sisters are not functioning as the Lord would have them to, and correspondingly the meetings are wanting in increase. It is no question of alleging that of this meeting, or of any particular meeting, but generally. I believe the Lord would call upon the sisters amongst the people of God to take *their*  part, and as they do, the idea of the assembly will come more into evidence. I believe the idea of the assembly coming into evidence, not theoretically or doctrinally, but practically, is largely dependent on the sisters functioning according to their true relations; and, if they do, the brothers will not be eclipsed or detracted from in any way, they will the rather be enhanced. Deborah never lost her relative position, she calls upon Barak to act, but the Spirit of God makes it plain that the initiative was with her.
{249}
And she evidently discerned, what perhaps we should not have known, were it not that the Holy Spirit tells us hundreds of years later, that Barak had faith. The Spirit of God in @Hebrews 11, calls attention to the faith of Barak and says nothing about Deborah. She would, I am sure, accept that as right: she would say, 'I have more prominence than I should have had. Had Barak more energy, I should have less prominence, and that would not have grieved me at all'.
From these remarks you will see why I read the two verses in the first scripture, which say, "For man is not of woman, but woman of man. For also man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man". But then, it goes on, "However, neither is woman without man, nor man without woman, in the Lord. For as the woman is of the man, so also is the man by the woman, but all things of God". So that we have set out in the chapter a beautiful order of things. God is regarded as the supreme Head, an appellation first ascribed to Him by David. David says, "Jehovah ... thou art exalted as Head above all", @1 Chronicles 29:11. It awaited the Lord Jesus to come in to set out this wonderful truth, for in Him, in Jesus, it is not only that He said things, but He exemplified them. One who contents himself with merely saying things will never be a model: if I *show*  a thing, it is established in the mind. The Lord Jesus set out this great principle of God-Headship, as I might call it, in His life here -- "The head of Christ is God", and "Christ is the head of every man, but woman's head is the man", "but all things of God". There is a beautiful position set out for us in the passage, which is to be seen in every phase of life, in the household, and everywhere; wherever men and women are together according to God, this great truth will be seen, and God is pleased and glorified in it. If there is one thing one cherishes more than another, it is to afford a little bit of pleasure for God. In the life of Jesus it was
{250}
constant, and now in the assembly this great thought of graded headship set out in any way is highly pleasing to God. It is the order that He has ordained and it is pleasing to Him as He sees it; and the angels see it too, it is a spectacle for heaven, leading to that remarkable statement in Ephesians, that "the all-various wisdom of God" is to be seen now in the assembly by the "principalities and authorities in the heavenlies"(@Ephesians 3:10). What moral victory there is for God in His people as His thoughts are in any little way expressed in them!
I wish now to show how it is worked out in a man and his wife, for scripture affords us concrete examples of its teaching. As I said, things are not only told to us, but *shown*  to us. Here we have it in a man and his wife, Aquila and Priscilla: this couple has a unique place in scripture in several respects, but in particular, that they are never mentioned apart, they are always seen together. I need not say that there is *some*  suggestion of Christ and the assembly in that: were we to understand the position we should see that Christ, normally being its Head is always seen in relation to the assembly. Of course He has His place and glories as in the Deity in which the creature can have no part, but as Man in heaven, having effected redemption, the assembly is His body, His wife indeed, and in this sense He and she are inseparable. This marks the present time and gives a special character to the dispensation. In the future too it will appear. Aquila and Priscilla are mentioned six times, always together. The suggestion fits in with Paul's ministry, this man and his wife being specially identified with the apostle. First of all, they are introduced to us as in Corinth, they were of a certain craft; apparently both occupied in the same craft -- tent makers. It seems that they worked together, and Paul joined them -- not because they were Christians, it does not say that; but "because they were of the same craft"(@Acts 18:3). All this comes in where the great thought of the assembly is worked out locally, that is Corinth.
{251}
Aquila and Priscilla are mentioned three times together in @Acts 18. The idea of wisdom would be there; the first epistle to the Corinthians shows that the idea of divine wisdom was prominent in Paul's service there, and Priscilla would not fail to suggest that "the wisdom of women buildeth their house", (@Proverbs 14:1). Wisdom is a feminine word; the feminine idea in this sense leads to the assembly. "The wisdom of women buildeth their house; but folly plucketh it down with her hands", @Proverbs 14:1. So that you can understand how that thought would be present, at least to the mind of Paul, as to Priscilla -- what a fine sister she was! Now I am speaking of her because of the way she is mentioned in these different references. Her name appears first as *often*  as Aquila's does. You will find, "Aquila and Priscilla", and then "Priscilla and Aquila", and then you find "Aquila and Priscilla", and then again "Priscilla and Aquila"; is that accidental? No, it is educational: that is to call attention to what is *possible*,  and what is possible should always be aimed at; it should never be regarded as impossible. If it were possible in these two, it is possible in any two, and it is possible in Christ and in the assembly as His body. So that we find these two, as I said, interchangeably having precedence one of the other. Not that Priscilla would ever *take*  precedence of her husband: were we to enter their house -- and we are told that there was an assembly in their house -- that assembly would be adorned, as I may say, by the seemliness and the grace of this sister, Priscilla. She would never becloud, she would never stand in the light of her husband: he would the rather shine in her graces, for the woman is *of*  the man.
That great principle is set out in @Genesis 2: how often it is spoken of at our marriage meetings, and rightly! I do not say Adam suffered, but certainly he had an extraordinary experience, and that is a deep sleep, not an ordinary sleep, but a *deep*  one; the allusion,
{252}
of course, is to the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Jehovah takes a rib, and out of that rib He builds a woman. That word "built" is a remarkable word, it is the first time it is used in scripture. It is not applied to the universe; the word "framed" is used there. Building implies special skill, and belongs to the woman. This was one of the items of the work of the sixth day, the greatest work-day of all -- and God presents her to the man. What will the man say about it? He was asleep when it was done apparently, but he *knew*,  he could name all the other creatures, and he named this one. And there it is: as one remarked elsewhere, 'He lost a rib, but it is given back to him a thousandfold'; he lost nothing, he gained. But then, this gain should not be merely theoretical, it should be practical in the assembly -- in the household, of course, in every sphere of life, but in the assembly. In the highest thought of it, it is a question of what the assembly is to Christ, but then it should be seen surely in the practical working out of the assembly, in the sisters in relation to the brothers.
Now I want to show briefly how all this is foreseen in the gospels, for the gospels are generally to support what we have in the Acts and the epistles. So Luke gives us two at the beginning; as the Lord Jesus is brought to Jerusalem to the temple, these two persons are there. The early chapters in this gospel should be studied in relation to our subject. Luke, only, mentions these two persons, and I believe no brother is in the assembly save as he understands what is presented in Simeon, and that no sister is in the assembly save as she understands and moves according to what is seen in Anna -- they are models. First of all, as regards Simeon, you have the word "Behold" -- "Behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon". He is not an ordinary man, but one distinguished as spiritual. He looked for Christ, he was a man of *hope*,  a man who counted on what God had said; he expected
{253}
God to do what He had said. But then he was a man *in Jerusalem* : now that is not an ordinary circumstance; the preposition "in" there means more than simply circumstance; it is characteristic, and it enters into the position of the brothers in the assembly. He is not only local. Of course Jerusalem is a locality, but it had a place that no other earthly city ever had or ever will have; it had a metropolitan position, it was the divine centre. "A man in Jerusalem" was in the very centre of what God was doing -- that is the point. The facts mentioned show it applied characteristically. I speak thus, dear brethren, so that we might become less local and more general. That is, that we may be in the very centre of things, our position is there; we are concerned about everything that concerns God, whether it be general or local, whether it be fifteen thousand miles away or local -- we are in the centre of things. There is very little of this attitude amongst us. Were there more of it, we should support what is general in every way we may.
I need not now enter into the many ways in which we may support what God is doing, say in China or in New Zealand or Australia; for China is not in principle anymore to God than New Zealand is -- let us not forget that; God is no respecter of persons. He never intends the promotion of what is popularly called "missionary". What is missionary *properly*  means persons sent out by the Holy Spirit on whom the hands of the assembly are placed; they are released, let go by the saints, and they are "sent forth by the Holy Spirit", and then they go. It does not say where they were sent; what follows in @Acts 13 is the record of where they *went*,  they went down to Cyprus, through the island, etc., etc. I say that by the way, that we may not take on the characteristics of what is around us, that we may be able to stand against what is current religiously. We are so prone to take it on. There are those who would give a hundred pounds with a view to
{254}
Chinamen being converted, who would not give a cent for the conversion of Englishmen! I say that advisedly. I would desire to be in full sympathy with all that God is doing: a man in Jerusalem is concerned about what God is doing *wherever*  it is.
To return to Simeon a certain thing was revealed to him "by the Spirit"; that is to say, he recognised the Spirit; he is dependent on the Spirit for his understanding of things. "It was divinely communicated to him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not see death before he should see the Lord's Christ": until he had seen the Man who should do everything for God: he was expecting Him, and he went by the Spirit into the temple, and the Child is brought in and he takes Him in his arms. The facts are known to us: l am only referring to them now to draw attention to this brother brought forward by Luke, as I verily believe, to show us that our setting is not simply in our houses or our businesses, but, so to speak, *in Jerusalem*,  it is a spiritual position. I am in it spiritually, and I come into the temple spiritually, and in the temple I receive Christ. His being brought is characteristic; there is always someone to bring Him in. The thought is, of course, that *I*  should bring Him in. Here He was brought in by His parents, which, of course, is literal and historical. It may be that a brother just converted has some little thought of Christ, and a spiritual man takes this little thought -- I say "little" because the Lord Jesus here is just a babe -- and magnifies it, he makes it of use universally. What a service that is! And how beautifully he speaks: he says, "Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go, according to thy word" -- He is regulated by the word: it is no mere sentimental thought, as often expressed by people who say they want to die, and the like: it is a question of the word of God, the mind of God for each of us -- "for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples; a light for revelation of the gentiles and
{255}
the glory of thy people Israel". That is the brother! He is able to take up any thought of Christ that comes into the assembly by whosoever, and give it its proper setting, give it, perhaps, a universal bearing; here it is a question of the light of God concerning the gentiles, and the glory of His people Israel. How the whole scene was lit up with Simeon's remarks! There never was such a time before in the temple as that.
Then, without going into detail: Anna came in at the same hour, that is to say, the sister is not absent, she is there, and this has the significance of being an example for us. How beautifully Anna comes in and shines! She does not take the Child in her arms, that had already been done. Hers is another part in the service. He is in the proper position in the arms of Simeon. She comes in at the same hour: she praises God. The Spirit of God does not give us Simeon's age, but He gives us a clue as to Anna's age, and I do not think any of us will lose anything if we try to work out how old she was. Every moment of this woman's life is spiritually interesting. I should like to be such as that, that the brethren, if they have to talk of me at all, can talk of me from the beginnings of my history. What can they say about the beginnings? And then the middle life? and the late life? When God writes up His people. He goes back to their birth. @Psalm 87. Anna "lived with her husband seven years from her virginity" and she was "a widow up to eighty-four years". If the Spirit of God wished us to know definitely how old she was to the minute, as we say. He could have told us how old she was, but He wishes us to have an insight of her whole life. She might have been 106 -- one might figure it out that way: but every moment of that woman's life was spiritually interesting. And now at the end she does not miss the greatest privilege that the temple of God had afforded, nor can any one of us afford to miss it. One great secret of the spiritual poverty amongst us is that
{256}
we do miss such occasions, and we do not feel we miss them. We cannot afford to miss what goes on in the assembly. The assembly is a place of wonders; the Spirit of God is in it. If we have spiritual eyes to see and ears to hear we shall see and hear wondrous things, as Manoah and his wife saw the angel do wondrously, @Judges 13. Anna did not miss the presence of Christ in the temple, she came in then and she "gave praise to the Lord"; and the Spirit of God tells us she did not depart from the temple, serving night and day with fastings and prayers. And now, when the great moment arrives, she is present and makes the most of it, adds to it, and "spoke of Him to all those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem". Jerusalem, as I said, represents the centre of the whole realm of God's interests. How wide her outlook was! We are told whose daughter she was, she was the daughter of Phanuel, and to what tribe of Israel she belonged, that is Asher. These are points of great interest. Asher was to be possessed of sons: although she was a daughter she was spiritually a son; she was marked by the dignity and liberty spiritually that belongs to sonship. His bolts were to be iron and brass -- there was strength and compactness about her, and her feet were dipped in oil, @Deuteronomy 33:24 - 25. We have often heard these things, but they are very apropos to what is before us now -- that the sisters should be marked by the features seen in Anna. She came in contact in some way with all those who looked for redemption in Jerusalem. She spake of *Him*  -- she was no gossip, no idler; she was a son of Asher engaged in the temple service and in speaking of Christ to all who looked for redemption in Jerusalem.
May God bless the word.
{257}
Pages 257 - 291 "Authority in Doctrine and Fellowship", Readings, Birmingham 1933 (Volume 115).
AUTHORITY IN DOCTRINE AND FELLOWSHIP (1)
@Acts 2: 42; @2 Timothy 3: 10 - 17
J.T. This chapter, which records the inauguration of the assembly, furnishes many principles that go through to the end of the dispensation. Indeed, all divine principles go through, and one especially is that of authority -- authority in teaching or doctrine, and authority in fellowship. It seems as if the Lord, whilst ministering to His people freely, would stress from time to time, that the teaching He furnishes has authority in it, and that the fellowship bound up with it also involves authority. The section shows that the apostles were not simply appointed as persons selected by the Lord, but that they had a moral history behind, entering into the authority that should mark their teaching and fellowship. Peter's remarks as to the apostle to be appointed to take the place of Judas, suggest that a moral history necessarily precedes public ministry, so that he says, "It is necessary therefore that of the men who have assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us, one of these should be a witness with us of His resurrection", @Acts 1:21, 22. What that remark conveys enters into the ministry; it shows the need for experience with the Lord, and not only with the Lord but with His people, as assembling with them "all the time", as it says, "in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us".
{258}
The history of the apostle Paul, too, bears this out. He, as converted, was directed by the Lord to go into the city to be told what to do, and as told what to do he obeys, and remains with the disciples certain days, and then preached; then he went to Arabia, and later to Jerusalem to make acquaintance with Peter; and then went to his own place Tarsus, and was finally sought out by Barnabas for the ministry and was a year at Antioch, before he was formally called by the Spirit. These facts remind us of the need of experience with the Lord in relation to His people so that ministry or teaching should be authoritative.
H.M.S. Is it also expressed in the apostle's word to Timothy: "knowing of whom thou hast learned them", @2 Timothy 3:14?
J.T. Yes. We shall see that the personal feature is suggested in Paul. As he says to Timothy, "Have an outline of sound words, which words thou hast heard of me", @2 Timothy 1:13, and so here, "thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith", and so on; but the personal side, that is to say, what is particularly heavenly and personal, attaches to Paul as an apostle: "*my*  teaching", he says.
Ques. Would you say that the word of the apostles would have authority as taking character from *the*  Apostle? "Consider the Apostle", (@Hebrews 3:1).
J.T. I think that is right: "the Apostle and High Priest of our confession", alluding of course to Moses and Aaron as jointly a type of Christ. Moses received communications directly from Jehovah at the bush, and he was to act as God to Aaron. Aaron was to be his prophet; that is, Aaron represented the brotherly side, the manner of speech, the grace in which the thing should be ministered, but Moses represented the authority; in this sense no less a thought attached to him than that of God Himself. So that the word of God is God Himself: "the word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and
{259}
penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do", (@Hebrews 4:12, 13). Through whomsoever it may be ministered, it comes to us as God's word.
A.S. In what way do you connect authority with fellowship?
J.T. It enters into the fellowship. We shall see later that fellowship is presented elsewhere in another way, but it is called the *apostles*  fellowship here.
Ques. Have you in mind that this authority is liable to be called in question, that other kinds of teaching may be put on the same level?
J.T. Yes. The most effective way to set aside the truth is to bring in something else that tends to undermine the truth and to make it collateral as though it were the truth. There is nothing more undermining than something brought in collaterally with the truth, and yet not the truth, aiming to undermine it, as in Galatia. It was something different, but not directly or formally opposed.
Ques. Would tradition do that in contrast to the commandments of God?
J.T. That is exactly what the Lord said: "ye have made void the commandment of God on account of your traditional teaching" (@Matthew 15:6). That has been very effective in the history of the assembly, culminating in current public Christianity; it is simply something else, different from that which the apostles taught, and it has subverted it.
J.R.S. Do you consider that the scriptures might be used to that purpose?
J.T. Well, they are perverted sometimes. The leading Christian denomination maintains the Bible, as we know, in its creed, but effectively sets it aside in
{260}
almost every point. It is the introduction of something else without openly assuming to be opposed.
Eu.R. Is this element of authority suggested in @Luke 12:42? "Who then is the faithful and prudent steward, whom his lord will set over his household?" It may be said that the household is greater than the bondman, but it is said that the Lord has set the bondman over the household to give food in season, and that has to be maintained.
J.T. He is a bondman, but also a steward, having, as it were, charge of the food supply. He is set over the household in this sense, and of course has authority. I think we might pay special attention to the antecedent history here, so that the word goes out, "knowing of whom thou hast learned them". Those through whom truth comes are to be accredited. In connection with our subject, the first thing to understand is, *what constituted the apostles*,  because personality has so much to do with Christianity, whether it be persons who are spiritually attractive so as to be lovable, or persons with moral history involving weight. The Spirit of God makes a great deal of persons; and the Lord, of course, is the great model of all the personnel of the assembly; whether we be viewed as attractive or as having experience. The Lord's thirty years of private life were not merely accidental, nor simply that He should wait until He was thirty before He preaches; there was moral history in them which the voice from heaven recognised.
H.E.S. Is the perfect pattern set forth in the Lord Himself when He said He was "Altogether that which I also say to you", @John 8:25?
J.T. Exactly; that is the ground of ministry -- that one is all that one says. And so in @Acts 1 it is "all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach", verse 1. The *doing*  comes first.
F.I. So that before we receive doctrine without reserve, we should be sure of the antecedents of those who give it?
{261}
J.T. Yes; and so the *history*  of the apostles enters into their service. Peter shows in his first remarks among the brethren in chapter 1 how he had learned even before the Holy Spirit came. He knew what to say, and he linked on what he had to say with what existed. That is one feature of the testimony of God; it links on, it is one whole. So that he is able to cite the Psalms, and then to bring forward what was needed in an apostle, namely, that he must be one who had assembled with the others during all the time the Lord had gone in and out among them, from the baptism of John until He was received up. What was needed for apostleship is stressed. There was no discrepancy between them as seen at the end of the Lord's life before the cross, and at His resurrection; they are all there (Judas treachery being fully owned), as the list given to us in @Acts 1 shows. Mark specially stresses that they were to be *with*  the Lord: He "appointed twelve that they might be with him, and that he might send them to preach", chapter 3:14; and so in chapter 16, when the light of the resurrection is brought, it is brought to "those that had been with Him"; and @Acts 1 shows that they are the very same persons, and they are in the upper room. They are seen as fully answering to the bearing of the Lord's instruction. They are in the upper room, that is to say, they are withdrawn from ordinary religious currents; they are not to be affected by worldly religious influence. We are very easily affected by what is current, not only in the normal worship of God, but in our service. They are mentioned, not as in the temple in chapter 1, but in the upper room, and there is room there with them for all that might have been gathered up in the Lord's life before He was owned from heaven, that is, Mary His mother is there. All that might have been gathered up from the Lord before and after His anointing is there.
Eu.R. So would the "crowd of names" there imply personality?
{262}
J.T. Yes, "name" implies personal distinctness. Here it would indicate that the one hundred and twenty had been formed by the Lord's ministry and influence. He had gone up; they saw Him go up, and they went to the upper room. They are not there just temporarily, they are staying there; it marks them; and Mary is there and other women, and the brethren of the Lord. Then, when Peter stands up to preach, instead of saying. Listen to the word of God, he says, "give heed to *my*  words"; that is, *personal authority*  is asserted. Then, when the converts want to know further what they are to do, it says, "they ... said to Peter *and the other apostles*  ..." (@Acts 2:37) showing that the idea of apostleship even entered into the minds of the converts -- that it was not a one-man affair. Christianity is not that in its administration here; it is authority vested, not in one person, but in persons. Hence the Lord has it everywhere. Where His people are in subjection, the principle of authority is available to us; whether in China or India or anywhere in the western hemisphere, the authority is available.
P.L. It says. He gave them "*the*  authority", @Mark 13:34.
J.T. That confirms what we are saying; it involves the *whole*  idea of it.
H.E.S. Is your thought that authority from God can only be connected with suitable moral conditions?
J.T. That is what comes out, so that we have to consider the antecedents of any who minister. "Knowing of whom thou hast learned them", the apostle says.
Rem. That is why the word is, "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God; and considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith", (@Hebrews 13:7).
M.W.B. Would you say a word as to how we can now discern this authority, because there is great pretension to authority in Christendom, and many young ones are deceived by the feigned authority in so many?
{263}
J.T. We cannot conceive that the Lord would leave His people here without the means of discerning what is of Himself. So there are the letters to the assemblies -- seven in number, which would mean that the whole assembly is addressed, not only at that time, but throughout its whole history on earth, and it implies that there is a word from the Lord governing every stage of the assembly's history. Then the next thing is that the *Spirit*  speaks, and he that has an ear to hear will say that that speaking, through whomsoever it may be, is authoritative: "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies", @Revelation 2:7. Any such ear will discern that it is the Spirit, and hence has authority; it has double authority, because what the Spirit says is just the unfolding of what the Lord says. The Lord says very little to the assemblies; the seven addresses are in two comparatively short chapters in Revelation, but the ministry of the Spirit unfolding them extends over centuries. We can read the actual words of the Lord in the addresses, and they have authority; they can be appealed to at any time. They are ground for action, and so also is 2 Timothy in our times; but the ministry of the Spirit, which amplifies the Lord's direct words, is discerned by those who have ears to hear. Later on, God will speak in thunder (@Revelation 10); but now the Spirit speaks in intelligible ministry, but it is authoritative. The work of God is implied in those who have ears to hear. If there be no ears to hear, the testimony God presents must be ineffective; but from the outset God worked in men in relation to what He set before them; and therefore the Scripture is a record of what God has said, but also that there were those that were hearing.
W.R.P. What about that word, "ye have the unction from the holy one, and ye know all things", (@1 John 2:20)?
J.T. That fits in. It refers to the Spirit "the same unction teaches you as to all things, and is true", so
{264}
that "ye have not need that any one should teach you", (verse 27). In fact, what we are saying raises the whole question as to whether the Spirit of truth is ministering to the people of God, and whether His voice is heard; whether there is a possibility of knowing the truth, or whether we are always in the stage of enquiry. The Lord's remarks, as well as those of His apostles, show that we may know the truth. He says, "ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free", (@John 8:32). Well, if we are to know the truth, something must come to us in the way of authority. The Scriptures are formal authority, but the Spirit of God ministering impresses the ear that can hear, so that it discerns that it is the voice of the Spirit.
Ques. Is it not remarkable that in the address to Thyatira the Lord says, "But to you I say, the rest who are in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine ...",(@Revelation 2:24) as if the Lord could count on the remnant discerning and refusing the evil doctrine then current, and maintaining the pure doctrine of the apostles?
J.T. Exactly. Up to Thyatira the Lord contemplates that there is an ear to hear without an overcomer, but from Thyatira on, the ear to hear is dependent upon an overcomer. Where there is an overcomer there is an ear to hear, and where there is an ear to hear there is the recognition of authority; and the voice of the Spirit has authority, as we have said. But what the Spirit says is always in agreement with the Scripture; and that is why I thought we might read the verses in 2 Timothy, because they run on to the Scriptures.
Ques. Do you suggest there is a moral reason where this authority cannot be discerned by persons?
J.T. Yes. If I do not hear the voice of the Spirit, there is a moral reason -- *I am not overcoming*.
W.C.G. Does the hearing ear develop from, "If any man will do his will"? There is the purpose of
{265}
heart to do His will and the hearing ear is the fruit of that, and so it is, "he shall know".
J.T. "If any one desire to practise his will, he shall know concerning the doctrine, whether it is of God", (@John 7:17).
W.C.G. A person morally right is doing the will of God.
Ques. Is there a great deal in recognising where the authority is? The note to verse 10 says, "thou hast followed up", that is, persevered in Paul's doctrine.
J.T. What ought to be clearly before us is "the apostles", *who*  they were, and *what*  they were. The high priesthood at Jerusalem, or the Pharisees, would not discern them, but then those in whom God works owned them. We must keep in mind that there is the subjective work of God going on, and we are exposed as to whether we are the subjects of it or not, by the presentation of what is of God objectively. The leading apostles were fishermen from Galilee, and their speech indicated that they were not learned men; they were not men of Jerusalem; they were regarded as unlettered. Who will recognise them? Well, there were three thousand people converted by the preaching of one of them; and notice that he stood up with the eleven, because that is the point -- not with the hundred and twenty, but with the eleven. *Authority*  is thus stressed. The eleven are in evidence alongside Peter, and Peter is preaching. Now, if it be merely that three thousand people are swayed by oratory or human influence of any kind, the man who influences them will be their leader, they will look to him for everything. But it is not so here. The converts recognised all those in whom the authority was. They "said to Peter *and the other apostles*. What shall we do, brethren?" -- showing that the subjects of a work of God discern those in whom His authority is. That ought to be specially observed, because the subjective work of God in men and women
{266}
and children will show itself in the recognition of what is of God presented objectively in whomsoever it may be, whether it be in Galilean fishermen or in educated men like Paul. The work of God will show itself in the recognition of divine authority. I think the brethren will bear with me in pressing that point, because it brings into proper relation the presentation of the testimony in chosen vessels, and the subjective operations of God. Those two things must run together.
M.W.B. Then would you say there are really the three things necessary -- the ear to hear; and then the discernment that the persons speaking possess certain qualities that give them the right to speak; and then, thirdly, what they say is in keeping with God's revealed mind?
J.T. That is the way the truth stands, so when Paul went to Thessalonica it says that he went in among them, and opened up and laid down the truth concerning Christ that He must suffer and rise from the dead, and certain believed; @Acts 17:2 - 4. There was a mixed result, and then in Berea he ministered, and they searched the Scriptures. "These were more noble than those in Thessalonica", (@Acts 17:11) it says. It was the same minister, but those at Berea searched the Scriptures to see "if these things were so". That sets out how the matter stands. The greatest of ministers is ministering, and those who are the subjects of the work of God pay attention, but they search the Scriptures. They are more noble than the Thessalonians, in that sense. So we do not want to be behind. There is a thought that runs through in relation to Paul's ministry of what is "more excellent", and the Bereans were more noble in the sense that they appealed to the Scriptures: we have the Scriptures, and it is for us to prove what is ministered by them.
H.M.S. Do we have the same process in the mind of Timothy? There is first of all the unfeigned faith in his grandmother Lois, and then in his mother
{267}
Eunice, and then this child knows the Holy Scriptures, and has faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
J.T. Exactly; and Paul says to him, "thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching". The three thousand converted at Pentecost discerned that the ability to help was not only in Peter but in the others, and then they persevered, we are told, in the teaching, not of Peter alone, but of the apostles; this is evidently mentioned to bring out that the whole idea of divine authority is recognised in whomsoever it may be, by those who are the subjects of the work of God.
H.E.S. That principle is set forth in @1 Corinthians 2 -- the spiritual discerns all things.
C.C.E. Do you think that the enormous defection that has come in, is really due to the fact that the subjective work of God has been deficient?
J.T. That is the thing to notice. We should move in relation to what God is doing in a subjective way, that is, by the power of the Holy Spirit here on earth. We have the suggestion in the very first verses of the Bible: "the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters". (@Genesis 1:2) That is an idea that must run through; and the next reference we get is that He is striving with men, chapter 6:3. What is presented of God objectively will be recognised by the effect of the Spirit here, and where there is disregard of what is manifestly of God, the work of God is either stopped or is not there at all.
Eu.R. What relation is there between this thought of authority connected with doctrine, and authority as connected with eldership?
J.T. Eldership came out later. The apostles Barnabas and Paul appointed elders in each assembly. @Acts 14, and then Titus is directed to appoint elders in every city. In either case (Titus being an apostolic delegate) they have the character of apostolic authority, but then the appointment of elders is always founded on moral qualities. You never get one elder in a city or assembly;
{268}
it is always elders; there is no idea of a bishop of a city. It is a question of the distribution of authority in vessels suited for it and that authority is recognised wherever God is working.
Eu.R. It should be a concern that there might be those conditions in each locality so that there might be something the Lord could add to.
J.T. For instance, in @Acts 14, in Lystra, where you have the man lame from infancy, it is said that he "heard Paul speaking". Now it is not simply what Paul *said*,  but Paul *speaking*. That is, he had an ear for that kind of speaking, and Paul discerned in him "that he had faith to be healed"(@Acts 14:9). That is how the facts are stated. There was the recognition of *that kind*  of speaking. The speaking was from heaven, and this man heard it. Others doubtless heard it with their natural ears, but the Holy Spirit pays no attention to that. Paul discerned in the man that he had faith. There was no act of faith outwardly in him, but that he heard Paul speaking, and Paul discerned that he had faith to be healed. God was working in the man. Then Paul spake with a loud voice, as if to aid his hearing, "Rise up straight upon thy feet; and he sprang up and walked"(@Acts 14:10).
Ques. Would that be the Lord encouraging the spirit of subjection in the man? There is the objective and the subjective together.
J.T. I think so. The loud voice of Paul would make the testimony enter more clearly into his ears, and he responds at once; he springs up. In that man you have the idea of intelligence, a man that discerns that kind of speaking; and then there is power to stand on his feet. He is material for the assembly; and what is seen in him must run through the dispensation. So in that chapter the apostles appointed elders in each assembly, which would mean that there would be intelligent authority there, and withal that the assemblies would be furnished; they would stand, each one on its own feet.
{269}
F.F. So Paul encourages Timothy not to be "ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner" -- does that come into what you are saying?
J.T. Yes, the testimony of our Lord would convey His authority, and Paul being a prisoner would convey the reproach attached to it; and Timothy was to be in full accord with those two things.
F.S.M. Would the thought of authority be connected with a four-fold basis? First of all, the authority of the Lord recognised; secondly, the power of the Holy Spirit present; thirdly, the inspiration of the Holy Scriptures bowed to; and fourthly, the work of God in the soul -- if those four bases were recognised there would be unquestionable authority.
J.T. Yes. There is, in @2 Timothy 3:10, a remarkable grouping of what we are speaking about, "thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching". The Lord would direct our thoughts to Paul's teaching, that we should be conversant with it; and 2 Timothy is clearly for the last days. Indeed, it speaks of them in this chapter, and that ought to appeal to every one of us, especially young men in the ministry, that there should be a full acquaintance with it, and one may say too with all that helps as to it. In the Old Testament you have the idea of books that are not now extant, but were then, and any increased interest that one might have in any subject, in a king's life, etc., might be further gratified by appealing to a certain book, the name of which would be given. Whether it be the narrative of Gad, or the narrative of Nathan, you are directed to that book. If one is in the spirit of 1 and 2 Chronicles, for instance, one would look up everything that referred to David and his life. His own life was so important, was so full, that anyone concerned about the life of David, if God was working in his soul, would say: I must get that book, that book is worth reading. And so, today, God has graciously provided for us,
{270}
especially in the Collected Writings and other writings of the great servants that were used to recover the truth, particularly Paul's doctrine; and we cannot do without them. If we want to follow up Paul's doctrine, we must not lose sight of any aid that God has given as to it.
H.M.S. With regard to your reference to "thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching", supposing I find difficulty in receiving certain ministry, it may possibly be because I am not sufficiently acquainted with Paul's teaching, and I need to learn that before I can understand what troubles me.
J.T. Just so. I am afraid many of us have neglected the curriculum. We have in connection with Paul's doctrine the school of Tyrannus, and that name is mentioned for a specific reason. He is a school-master, not in the sense that the law is, but in the sense of one who knew how to teach with authority, a most important thing; he would require the young disciple to look into Romans, to see to that, to get grounded so that he can take root downwards. Brethren who do not go through Romans carefully do not take root downwards. We are said there to be planted in the likeness of Christ's death, chapter 6:5, which implies taking root downwards; we have there the principle of analysis, which is a most important lesson in our spiritual education, to analyse what is inside of us spiritually, so that we get a clear knowledge of it, and that God has dealt with the flesh to His own glory: "having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh", chapter 8:3. I believe the difficulty with us is, either that we have not been grounded in Romans, or if we have been, we have allowed something to darken our vision.
Eu.R. Is there not a spiritual link between what the Lord gave in the last century -- what we have preserved in the Collected Writings and so on -- and the ministry He is giving today?
{271}
J.T. There is, and we cannot afford to miss it. "Thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with (or followed up) my teaching", etc. If the Holy Spirit is speaking, it is to be followed up, and we are to test everything; "Prove all things". There may be imperfection in the vessels the Lord is using, but is there that which the Spirit is saying? If there be that, we cannot afford to be without it, and if we neglect it we shall be in error; God has furnished it for us.
Ques. Is your thought that if we were more watchful for God's ways with us, we should see that He wants the truth built into our souls?
J.T. Yes. Timothy is a good example for all of us. It says, "thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, long-suffering, love, endurance, persecutions, sufferings". That challenges those who are in any way seeking to serve, not only as to what they are putting out in the way of doctrine, but as to their conduct, their manner of life. If we are to know those from whom we have learned the things of God we must consider their manner of life.
C.C.E. I notice how very frequently in Timothy we get the expression "doctrine" or "teaching". It is used a very large number of times, and does that not show the importance of it?
J.T. It does. One has been looking into it a little in regard of Paul's ministry, how the Spirit of God stresses it. Paul and Barnabas go through the whole length of the island of Cyprus, and they find Bar-jesus who was with the deputy of the island, who is said to be an intelligent man, which is a very notable thing. He was a man in whom God was working, but on the line of intelligence. So when Paul had looked on Bar-jesus and he had become blind, it says that the deputy was "amazed at the teaching of the Lord"(@Acts 13:12), which means he had ability to discern that kind of teaching; he had never met the like before. And so right through you have that thought. When you come
{272}
to Ephesus you have Paul teaching in the school of Tyrannus for two whole years; it is that kind of authoritative teaching; it so affected Timothy that he followed it up fully, and, at the same time, he knew the character and ways of the devoted man whom God was using to unfold it.
J.R.S. Do you think we might covet the sensibilities of Timothy, his weeping, and so on, which made him so sensitive to what Paul had to say?
J.T. The apostle notes that here. And he goes on, "But *thou*  abide in those things which thou hast learned, and of which thou hast been fully persuaded, knowing of whom thou hast learned them; and that from a child thou hast known the sacred letters, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus". Paul refers to the scriptures, which Timothy had known.
M.W.B. As to following up the teaching, sometimes when the Lord may be distinctly emphasising a line of truth, as at the present time, something in relation to Himself personally, there is difficulty in the acceptance of what He may be saying because previous ministry relative to other lines has not been followed up. Is it not incumbent on all of us to take specific interest in what the Lord is saying at *any*  time, and to be concerned as to it?
J.T. That is most important. It is quite obvious the testimony is cumulative. It is in links as of a chain, and I think the writer of I and 2 Chronicles suggests a man of that kind, a man like Timothy or Luke, who had thoroughly followed up the golden thread of the testimony. The writer of Chronicles begins with Adam. He says, as it were, we must not miss anything, even what there may be in Adam, and he traces the history right down. Luke takes it up in the priesthood and carries it to Paul's position in Rome -- the testimony definitely among the Gentiles. The suggestion is that all the features of the truth are linked together as one
{273}
whole. And if that be applied further, since apostolic times the Holy Spirit has been ministering; He never gives up. He may be driven in by the conditions of Christendom, but He is here and always ready to minister. Can we afford to miss anything that He ministers? We cannot. If we skip one feature of His all-wise presentation of Christ in ministry, we shall be defective, and that is why I believe this is written: "thoroughly acquainted with my teaching, conduct", etc. But the apostle shows that Timothy was also conversant with the Scriptures, grounded in them, and that he had faith; it was hereditary, it came down to him.
F.S.M. Do you think emphasis is laid on the value of spiritual impressions in childhood? @2 Timothy 1:5 and 3:15.
J.T. That is true, and what the history of Timothy would denote is the interest God has in a cumulative and constructive history in a believer, so that there is nothing left out. From a child, Timothy had gone right on and taken on the *best*  there was, that is, Paul's ministry. He was thoroughly acquainted with it, and knew all about the life of the great servant through whom the ministry had come.
{274}
AUTHORITY IN DOCTRINE AND FELLOWSHIP (2)
@Acts 2:42, @1 John 1:1 - 4, 7; @1 Corinthians 10:14 - 22
J.T. For those who may not have been present yesterday it may be remarked that our subject is the apostles doctrine and fellowship, extending to and inclusive of Paul's doctrine and the fellowship that he speaks of. The proposal was not so much to consider the doctrine of the twelve, and the doctrine of Paul in themselves, but rather to show that it was *their*  doctrine. There had been doctrine -- or teaching -- earlier, teaching carried down from the Old Testament, which of course is not abrogated, which stands, but is not included in the apostles doctrine. What the apostles taught was the test for faith -- and their fellowship also -- so that the believers are said to have persevered in them, showing that there was opposition. Whatever they taught would be cherished by the converts; it would have authority with them. It is not intended to suggest that we have any such authority vested in any man now, but to show that there *is*  authority. The presence of the Holy Spirit, a divine Person, continuing on with the assembly, and in it, and speaking, necessarily carries the thought of authority. So that where God works in the soul of a man or woman or child, there is the recognition of that. "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies", @Revelation 2:7. An ear to hear implies a work of God. The thought is illustrated in the three thousand converts at Pentecost who "said to Peter and the other apostles. What shall we do, brethren?"(@Acts 2:37) They recognised, not only Peter, through whom the light immediately came to them, but the other apostles; that is, the authority of God distributed in those twelve, was recognised in them, by those in whom God was working.
{275}
That illustrates how those in whom God works at all times recognise the authority of God as it is expressed. It was not as if at that particular moment a voice from heaven had called attention to those twelve men, that they were the representatives of Christ's authority; they were manifestly that, and the converts discerned it, and so in this verse we have the expression "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles", (verse 42).
P.L. "They recognised them that they were with Jesus", (@Acts 4:13); would that be the moral side?
J.T. It would. Peter, we are told, stood up with the eleven, not with the hundred and twenty, and his opening words are in verse 14. "Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice and spoke forth to them. Men of Judaea, and all ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and give heed to my words", @Acts 2:14. There is the assertion of authority in the person who speaks, but then the eleven standing there evidently conveyed the same thing to the converts. In making these remarks, it is in no way to suggest that there is any person, or persons, in whom the authority of God is formally vested now, but to call attention to the Spirit speaking, and that He speaks through persons selected of Himself, who have moral qualifications, and where that is so, those in whom God is working will recognise it, and where it is not recognised there will be the assertion of independency.
H.E.S. Is that especially called attention to in 2 Corinthians, where the apostle is so concerned that what he says should be borne out in all that he is?
J.T. That is so. As we had it yesterday, the Lord said He was altogether that which He said, @John 8:25. As was remarked, there is no intention of unfolding the doctrine of the apostles; it would be too much to undertake in two readings. It means the doctrine of Christianity; but Paul is introduced as *distinctive*. The
{276}
ministry of the twelve was set out in its own distinctiveness and quality in Peter and John, according to chapter 3, but Paul's teaching is distinctive to himself, and it represents personality, which is a matter of consequence in the ministry, because it is called attention to in the Lord. His Personality is announced before He enters upon His service: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", (@Matthew 3:17), and then He is anointed. Correspondence to this is seen with David, as anointed his personality is stressed: "he was ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance", (@1 Samuel 16:12); and moreover one of Saul's attendants said, "Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, who is skilled in playing, and he is a valiant man and a man of war, and skilled in speech, and of good presence, and Jehovah is with him", (verse 18). So that personality enters in to the ministry, and it would appear that the Lord emphasised that special trait with Paul, so that his personality entered into his ministry more than any of the others; it is to bring out what personality implies, and in personality the idea of what is more excellent. So that we have the full thought of God set out in the mystery, in Paul's teaching. He not only speaks of his teaching, but his gospel -- "my gospel" and "my teaching" -- and that is a matter I believe the Lord would have us to note, because, after all, aside from personality, ministry is not of much value: ministry and personality should go together.
M.W.B. Then, would you say that two things are requisite? On the part of those who hear there is to be the ear to hear, and then on the part of those who speak, there is to be the personality or moral antecedents and qualities.
J.T. That is it; the minister is attractive personally. His gift, of course, will enhance him, but *he*  should enhance his gift and his ministry.
M.W.B. Would you say a word as to the place the
{277}
epistles of John have in the question of teaching or doctrine?
J.T. Well, his epistles show that he has a very great place, mainly in regard of life. I suggested the passage in his first epistle because it brings in the question of fellowship in relation to life, and I thought it would amplify this verse in @Acts 2, where we have the apostles fellowship. John formally calls it "our fellowship". He speaks of the same thing, saying, "our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ". That is not what we properly speak of as Paul's fellowship, or sometimes what we speak of as a Christian fellowship: it is what is exclusive to the apostles. Is that clear?
M.W.B. I was wondering if you would say a little more about the distinction between "our fellowship" in John, and the distinctiveness of Christian fellowship in @1 Corinthians 10.
J.T. We have what we rightly call Christian fellowship in Paul's ministry. John touches on it in verse 7: "if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another": that touches Paul's side. Paul never says 'my fellowship'; the twelve do; they say "our fellowship". Paul says "my doctrine -- my gospel", but with him it is just fellowship; so that he says that God has called us "into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord"(@1 Corinthians 1:9), and then, in the verses read in @1 Corinthians 10 the cup is fellowship and the bread is fellowship; and in the last verse of the second letter there is the fellowship of the Spirit.
M.W.B. The "our fellowship" of John is more connected with the inauguration of Christianity.
J.T. That is what I understand.
M.W.B. Then, what is implied in, "that ye also may have fellowship with us"?
J.T. That bears out what we are saying. The generality of saints come into the fellowship subordinately;
{278}
they come into what the apostles had with the Father and with His Son; but the apostles had a distinct platform of their own in the promulgation of the testimony.
Eu.R. In speaking of the apostles fellowship, are you stressing the thought of authority connected with the fellowship as well as with the teaching, and that that remains connected with the fellowship?
J.T. Yes, the idea of authority that shuts out all independency in fellowship.
Eu.R. One great evidence of it would be that sin is dealt with authoritatively.
J.T. Quite so. It is a partnership, as we have often remarked. The word signifies that I participate in something jointly; and the doctrine of the apostles would enter into the fellowship of the apostles, for the fellowship must be governed by principles, exclusive and inclusive; and no doubt that is why their names are in the foundation of the wall of the heavenly city.
J.D. How far does personality weigh with the Lord in selecting a vessel -- or does it weigh with the Lord at all?
J.T. It does weigh with the Lord; it is stressed as in Himself, as we have seen. He selects sovereignly, but He selects on moral grounds too.
H.E.S. Is it particularly seen in David, who was a man after God's own heart, although sovereignly chosen?
J.T. That is what I was remarking. The question of choice is greatly stressed in @1 Samuel 16: the prophet is sent to Bethlehem to the house of Jesse the Bethlehemite, a man in the recognition of the testimony already. Bethlehem had a great place, and Jehovah said to Samuel that he was to anoint *whom He would name*. Samuel did not wait for the name; he would anoint Eliab, but he had to wait. There was no one in the house that Jehovah could name. That means
{279}
that God is not going to accept any one; He is not prepared to accept what I may present to Him in myself; He is not obliged to; and He resents any such thing as the ordination of a minister by a so-called bishop; and the assumption that, because of university and divinity qualifications, he must be accepted. God resents it; He says "whom *I*  name". And so the seven sons of Jesse pass before the prophet, and he says, "Jehovah has not chosen these"(@1 Samuel 16:10). That was a very solemn thing. They were all put to shame, although no doubt they were at their best. So that, we have not only the rejection by the Lord, of Saul, and of Amalek in Agag, in the previous chapter, but the rejection of all the sons present of this house of Jesse the Bethlehemite; there was no one there whom God could name. The next thing is that Samuel says, "Are these all the young men?" There is the challenge. Now Jesse had a place in the testimony; he is acknowledged; he and his sons are called to the sacrifice; he and his house are sanctified so that we may be outwardly recognised in the testimony -- have a place in it -- and yet not be called into the service. Therefore, he has to wait; they have all to wait until David comes in. I refer to that in answer to our brother's question as showing how particular God is as to personality. As soon as David arrives, personality is immediately stressed. He was of "beautiful appearance"; and Jehovah says, "Arise, anoint him; for this is he"(@1 Samuel 16:12). The same chapter shows that an observer among the ordinary people discerned other distinguishing qualities in David: "I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite",(@1 Samuel 16:18) and he describes his qualities. Later he has such power to play, that he relieves even a man like Saul!
W.C.G. Was the personality you speak of in David to be seen in his appreciation of the ark?
J.T. No doubt. "We heard of it at Ephratah",(@Psalm 132:6) he says; there was also the energy of life in him. He was ruddy, which implies the energy of life. It is not mere
{280}
ability or gift, but the man himself is living and in spiritual power; and he had a beautiful countenance, he is personally *attractive*. All that appeared in Christ perfectly, infinitely, but it also appeared in Paul; there were all those features that enhanced the testimony in him, so that his personality entered into it.
W.C.G. In Christ it was God Himself: "God has been manifested in flesh", (@1 Timothy 3:16).
J.T. Just so; but manhood was there: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased"(@Matthew 3:17) refers to this.
Ques. Do you mean that God in calling us to the fellowship of His Son has in mind that His features are to be seen in us as in the fellowship?
J.T. Certainly, otherwise the fellowship would be discredited. That it is the fellowship of His Son is the *dignity*  of it. There is to be some reflection of the Son in those in the fellowship, and if there is to be that, there must be the fellowship of His death, that is chapter 10, and then the fellowship of the Spirit. Those three features must go together; they are characteristic. It is not so much the authority entering into the fellowship, but the characteristic features of it. It is the fellowship of *God's Son*.
J.D. Would you distinguish between the fellowship of "his Son" and "Jesus Christ our Lord"?
J.T. Sonship is the attractiveness and dignity of it, but "Jesus Christ our Lord" would be the authority of the Lord entering into it.
Eu.R. When it says, "by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord"(@1 Corinthians 1:9), is that general to Christians now?
J.T. Yes, fellowship as Paul presents it. What he introduces is properly our fellowship, not exclusive of the others, but inclusive as to the principle of authority. The apostles fellowship involves authority, and at the same time gives them a distinction that no others have.
{281}
Eu.R. But the faithfulness of God is behind this general fellowship right through.
J.T. Exactly; "God is faithful".
A.S. In @Mark 13:34 it says that He gave authority to His servants -- who would they be?
J.T. They are just "bondmen". What is seen there runs right through. It is not a question of the apostles there, but bondmen; in whomsoever true bondmanship to God is found, authority is with them. That scripture enters specially into what we are speaking of. It is *the*  authority there, you notice; it is not simply authority, but the authority, the whole idea, and that runs right through.
M.W.B. Would you say a word about the link between the doctrine and the fellowship? Is it possible for us to have the fellowship in a practical sense if the doctrine is wanting?
J.T. I think not. They are linked together in the passage, as you will observe: "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers". Now, "in breaking of bread and prayers": this is not a question of the apostles. It is not the apostles breaking of bread nor the apostles prayers; it is just the "teaching and fellowship of the apostles"; the others flow out of the divine nature and the intelligence of the saints. The breaking of bread and prayer with all that follows shows what they were as the subjects of the work of God. But these two things -- the teaching and fellowship of the apostles -- are linked together. Aside from the teaching there could be no claim to the fellowship.
M.W.B. Does that go so far as the exhortation in the second epistle of John, that if one came and brought not the doctrine, there was to be the refusal of admission to the house?
J.T. Exactly. That was the point raised at Plymouth. It was a question of the doctrine, and not only the
{282}
doctrine, but of clericalism primarily, which effectively nullified the fellowship.
M.W.B. What do you mean by clericalism in that sense?
J.T. Well, they had a set of ministers there who held the ministry in their hands, which in principle shut out the Spirit. Thus fellowship was involved. Subsequently the worst kind of doctrine developed. Bethesda in receiving from the meeting thus affected, committed itself to the evil. The passage you referred to bears on that; if one has not the doctrine, he is not to be received nor even to be bid God speed, because in doing so you are a partaker in his evil deeds -- that is the idea of fellowship.
M.W.B. It should make us very careful as to how we link ourselves in any way with that which is so corrupt in Christianity professedly today.
J.T. The fellowship is the great bulwark we have, and it implies our loyalty to Christ, to the truth, and consistency with the death of Christ, and also our loyalty to one another. That is the way Paul develops the truth of fellowship. John says, "if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we *have*  fellowship with one another", not that we should have. John deals with things abstractly: "if we walk ...", but Paul in 1 Corinthians brings out the thought of loyalty as to one another -- I mean as committing ourselves -- "we, being many, are one loaf" -- and whether we are true to that when we are not assembled, whether we are consistent with it when we are not under each other's eyes.
E.P. If the man who does not bring the doctrine of Christ could not be received into our houses, could he be received into our gatherings?
J.T. Certainly not; the assembly is more holy than our houses. Other scriptures besides 2 John treat of the assembly's judgment of such a person.
{283}
F.S.M. Would Lydia furnish an illustration of what you are saying? She attended to the things spoken by Paul, and then she besought him, saying, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there"(@Acts 16:15). Is there not the positive side that fellowship would give an open door to Paul and all connected with him?
J.T. Quite, it is the converse of John's second letter. One man is excluded because he does not bring the doctrine; another man is received, we may say, because be brings it. Lydia's heart was opened "to attend to the things spoken by Paul"(@Acts 16:14).
H.M.S. Is it of value that those two principles are established in sisters -- the elect lady in the epistle of John and Lydia in the book of Acts?
J.T. It is remarkable, showing the important place that sisters have in the fellowship. The elect lady is called upon to exercise discipline in her own locality. A lone sister may exercise discipline in that way. It is a question of fellowship. Whether l am in a large or small meeting, or even isolated, the fellowship must be maintained; the obligation is always present. So there is what we may call local fellowship, and general, but the general necessarily includes the local. There is really only one fellowship, but it takes a general bearing and a local bearing. The apostle Paul deals with it locally at Corinth, but when he says, "we, being many, are one loaf, one body", he is speaking of the general fellowship -- not "ye", but "we".
J.A.P. What relation has eternal life to fellowship?
J.T. John's side of the truth is to give *body*  to it; he speaks of what is substantial; here he uses the neuter pronouns "that" and "that which". In the first three verses "that which" appears four times; meaning that what he was presenting was substantial. Life is substantial; whether in Christ or in the saints. Here the apostle is referring to Christ, saying, "That which was from the beginning, that which we have
{284}
heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life". It is no mere phantom or myth or theory; it is a substantial thing, so to speak, a thing handled and seen and contemplated. Later he speaks of the life as in the saints: "Which thing is true in him and in you", chapter 2:8. That gives body to our fellowship. We have got something really enjoyable and attractive, which should be so to every Christian. All is that "your joy may be full". Why should we not have joy in our fellowship?
Ques. Do we have fellowship with the Father and the Son?
J.T. We ought to leave any particular scripture in its own setting. I should not deny for a moment that we have fellowship with the Father and His Son in a way, but why should we say that? The scripture, speaking through one of the apostles, says, "*our*  fellowship", and *ye*  "have fellowship with us"; it does not say 'ye' have fellowship with the Father and His Son. I am only remarking as to the importance of letting scripture have its full place with us. I know that many disregard the distinction -- as other such distinctions -- but we lose if we do. Let scripture speak for itself.
Eu.R. And in 1 Corinthians when the apostle says "ye", the bearing of that is on the saints in a locality, but when he says "our Lord", that involves what is universal, seeing he puts himself in. It would greatly strengthen things in localities, where things are small, to feel Paul bringing them within the embrace of the "our".
J.T. Just so. It is wonderful to dwell upon the dignity of what we are called into. There may be a Freemasons lodge and other such things in the same town; that is, certain other fellowships, but we see the fellowship *we*  have! A member of the Royal Family may be Grand Master of the Freemasons; but look at the fellowship we are in -- the fellowship of God's
{285}
Son! We ought to take that in; but then, the converse of that is the fellowship of *His death* , and therefore, the dignity we have spoken of as in the fellowship of God's Son, is not to make anything of us in the town. We have to be on our guard about these large meetings, because they do tend to make us something in the town. I am not deprecating them at all. May God grant there may be greater enlargement among the Lord's people; but the fellowship of God's Son is not to make us anything in the town, as of the town, but is rather like Bethany, "where was the dead man Lazarus whom Jesus raised from among the dead"(@John 12:1): that is the position. He sat at the table with Him. That is all inward and spiritual. There is no thought of making anything of us in our localities as religious bodies; but the moral dignity is there, and this is maintained by the fellowship of Christ's death: "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ?" That involves the general fellowship, but expressed locally. The Lord's death is thus shown, and this incurs reproach.
H.E.S. The same thought is seen in Ittai the Gittite who said, "As Jehovah liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant be", (@2 Samuel 15:21).
J.T. Exactly. He had only come "yesterday", but he was in the fellowship, and he valued it. Wherever the king might be he would be, and that is the position; wherever the King is we should be. Christ is rejected as David was then, but nevertheless He is God's Son.
Ques. What have you in mind in referring to @John 12 in regard to the "dead man Lazarus" being there?
J.T. In the way the facts are stated there is a moral bearing on Lazarus, that he did not belong any more to the town; he was not "a man about town"; as to the world he was a dead man. He was risen and brought
{286}
back to normal life, but the way the Holy Spirit mentions it shows that the man had ceased to be a living man in relation to this world; he belonged to another world.
Eu.R. He would be dead to the religious and social circles in that town.
J.T. Yes. So that a company of Christians in any town or city, is not made anything more of by the fact that they are of the fellowship of God's Son; it does not enhance their position in the town. Chapter 10 puts them out of view, because partaking of the Lord's Supper means the communion or fellowship of the blood of Christ. He poured out His precious blood, and the body of Christ lay in death. That is what we have part in; that indeed is what we are feeding on; eating the bread and drinking the cup of the Lord's supper implies this; the eating and drinking is also a testimony to the Lord's death: "For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come", (@1 Corinthians 11:26).
Eu.R. There is thus a stigma upon those in the fellowship.
J.T. It is a very searching matter; and I think we ought also to add the thought of the fellowship of His sufferings. The sufferings of Christ perhaps have not the place with us that the Lord would give them. We are to know the fellowship of His sufferings. That is a connection in which the word 'fellowship' is used that should never be out of our minds.
P.L. Assembly sorrows would enter into the fellowship of His sufferings.
H.O.S. When the apostle Paul said that he filled up "that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body" (@Colossians 1:24), was that his special distinction in regard of suffering?
J.T. It shows how he calculated what should mark the assembly in the way of suffering, that it was one of the features, and evidently the saints were behind in this. There was a need of filling up, and he did it
{287}
in himself; so that I am sure the Lord would bring us into the participation or fellowship of His holy sufferings. As He entered Gethsemane, there was remarkable care and precision in what He was doing with His own. He wished them to be in full view of all that happened to Him. He said, "Sit here until I go away and pray yonder" (@Matthew 26:36); a very touching thing, that some are just caused to sit down, while He goes some distance and prays. Then He took three with Him, and "began to be sorrowful and deeply depressed" (@Matthew 26:37), and He sought that they should watch with Him. Then He withdrew from them a stone's throw, showing that there should be a full view. A stone's throw is not very far, not like the two thousand cubits that separated the ark from Israel: He was near enough to be in full view, so they could observe His agonies. Peter says of himself, "witness of the sufferings of the Christ", (@1 Peter 5:1). Now, these things were not written only for them, but that we might have a full view spiritually, and be able to see all that happened, in order that we might have fellowship in the sufferings.
M.W.B. You have drawn a distinction previously between the way Luke presents that scene, and Matthew and Mark, referring to the mount of Olives in Luke. Would you say a little more about that? Does it necessarily imply spiritual power?
J.T. I think so, and the word 'custom' is added: "according to his custom". That is not brought in in connection with Gethsemane. Gethsemane is more the pressure side. You only get Gethsemane in Matthew and Mark, and correspondingly the forsaking is only found in those two evangelists. Luke's way of mentioning it is to bring it within our range, to make it, as it were, easier for us. The pressure side is not stressed, but rather that it was a custom of the Lord's to go to the mount of Olives. He went to a place where He had been accustomed to go, and His disciples followed Him. If we get into His customs, we shall find they are not
{288}
*mere*  customs, but there is power in them. Then Luke tells us that He was helped by angelic ministry, which is another touch we can count upon. Luke's side is to make it possible for us, if Matthew and Mark stress severity of suffering.
H.E.S. In John's gospel the Lord's greatness and glory are seen, while in Luke it is how near He has come to us in suffering.
J.T. Yes. John gives us the ark going through Jordan, and the *distance*  is maintained, but I think Luke would bring us near to it, and present it so that we might accept it more. You say, I can accept that much. The Lord will own you as having part in His sufferings if you do.
Ques. Have we on the one hand the privilege of entering into the Lord's sufferings, and then, are we also privileged to enter into the joy of the Lord as exalted among His brethren, like David?
J.T. Exactly. John gives us the joy side: "that your joy may be full".
Ques. If we enjoy that, is it something like the land of Goshen, where we have no dog-flies?
J.T. Just so. In fact, in the fellowship we are immune from all the plagues of Egypt.
M.W.B. You have referred to the fellowship in connection with the truth, and the sufferings of the Lord; would you say a word as to the way we involve our brethren in the question of fellowship?
J.T. I thought we should see that in @1 Corinthians 10, because that chapter has in view our every-day relations. It is the Lord's supper, and our participation in it is made to bear upon our public relations and conduct. The word 'communion' used here in the New Translation is perhaps a little misleading as to what is taught in the passage; because it has acquired a somewhat different meaning from its original as used by the apostle. The word 'communion' today is a common expression, used by persons in the denomination for
{289}
taking the sacrament: the holy communion, as they say. But, in truth, in that they are not thinking of their relations to others -- their joint participation with them, they are only thinking of their communion with the Lord, in an individual way, which is not the idea at all. The idea is that the Lord's supper is a joint matter, that we as brethren in any given locality have partnership, or are joint participators in something, and that something involves the death of Christ, that is, the blood of Christ and the body of Christ; then further, that, inasmuch as that fact is so solemn, it is to enter into all our public relations and conduct. I am not only under obligation to the Lord in that, for He is not regarded as in the fellowship; the fellowship is among the saints. We are in the fellowship, and it is the fellowship *of*  His blood and *of*  His body. That is *characteristic* , but the fellowship is that in which we partake. It is a question therefore of my conduct, and whether I feel under obligation to the brethren, both locally and generally.
H.O.S. Would that have been seen with Ruth when she sat down and dipped the bread in the vinegar?
J.T. Quite so; she had part in what the reapers had. She was not to go into any other field; but that is what young Christians do sometimes: they go into another field and become damaged.
J.D. Speaking of the obligations of the fellowship, do they exist whether we break bread or not?
J.T. It is well to go by the scriptures. The obligation is placed on what we are *doing* , upon the cup which we bless, and the bread which we break; and then again, it says, "as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup". The obligation is attached to what we are doing. That is, am I in the fellowship? If I am in the fellowship, then I express it as in the breaking of bread; I am not in it otherwise. The obligation attaches to that.
{290}
M.W.B. It is not always seen that any action in any sphere of our life involves our brethren. Is that not the meaning of the fellowship?
J.T. That is just the idea. We are joint partakers, and so, if someone has some particular view of the truth and carries it on apart from the brethren, it is a denial of the fellowship. It is not that we always see eye to eye in everything, but we are "using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace", (@Ephesians 4:3). There is no lower standard than that. Then there is the "unity of the faith"; but if I take up a line of teaching which is regarded as unscriptural, and I persist in it, and refuse entreaties and exhortations and admonitions, well, I simply deny the fellowship, and, not only that, but I am not hearing the assembly. One may say. Where is the assembly? But then, the light intended to govern it governs us. There are those who are walking in the light of the assembly, and the Lord is with them, and disregard of their entreaties and admonitions is simply that I am not hearing the assembly. That is the way the truth stands; to refuse it is an absolute denial of the principles of the fellowship.
Ques. And would such a one be amenable to discipline?
J.T. Certainly. Not hearing the assembly renders him a subject of discipline. "An heretical man after a first and second admonition have done with", (@Titus 3:10.) It is the refusal of admonition that immediately occasions the discipline.
M.W.B. Is it not equally applicable to the question of associations, such as unequal yokes? Do we involve our brethren in matters of that kind -- marriage, for instance?
J.T. We do. It is remarkable that we have such a long chapter on it in this very epistle, which is the "law of the house". The Corinthians had apparently written to the apostle about the subject of marriage,
{291}
and he had entered into it at length, stressing that it must be "in the Lord".
F.G.W. What about Christians who have never broken bread? How do they stand in regard of this scripture?
J.T. Well, they have to deal with the Lord as to that. They are neglecting His request, and they are outside the circle of those who do; we pray for them. We cannot impose obligations on them until they actually break bread, for that is the way the truth is stated. "The Lord knows those that are his", (@2 Timothy 2:19), and "I rebuke and discipline as many as I love", (@Revelation 3:19), indicating that we may claim them for the fellowship, but they are not in it. They do not partake of the Lord's table, for we cannot do this save as consistent with it. These "cannots" in the passage are to be noted. It says, "Ye cannot drink the Lord's cup, and the cup of demons: ye cannot partake of the Lord's table, and of the table of demons. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?" People enquire sometimes whether that means nominal Christians who partake of the so-called sacrament. We would not infer that they are partaking of the table of demons. They are not, unless indeed we refer to the Mass in the Romish system; but what we can say about every independent company is, that it is not the Lord's table, and that is enough.
Eu.R. What does the Lord's table convey to you here in this chapter?
J.T. The stress is on the *Lord* ; He dominates it; it is a question of *food* , but partaken of in this dignified, exclusive setting.
Eu.R. Is it administration?
J.T. It is the centre of the Christian system in this sense, as over against Judaism and heathenism. The allusion is evidently to the bread. It is *His*  table, what He furnishes as food.
{292}
Pages 292 - 415 "The Praises of Israel" Readings and an Address, Edinburgh, 1933 (Volume 116).
THE PRAISES OF ISRAEL (1)
@Luke 1:1 - 23, 39 - 56
J.T. I have been thinking of the praises of Israel, that is, the service of the assembly Godward, as may be seen in the gospel of Luke.
It will appeal to every heart here to be reminded that the Lord in the greatest sorrow Psalm, as forsaken of God, speaks about God inhabiting the "praises of Israel", and in that same Psalm in resurrection, having declared God's name to His brethren, says He would sing in the midst of the assembly to Him; the remaining part of the Psalm being full of the idea of praise. I believe too it would be recognised that Luke, of all the evangelists, furnishes us with what peculiarly answers to this, and not the least, in that he formally links on with 1 Chronicles -- this book linking on with Exodus, where the praises of Israel begin -- chapter 15. We have there a song by Moses and the children of Israel, extending on to David's ministry; in that song the sanctuary is viewed in an objective way, not in an experimental way, for they were not yet in the land; but in Miriam's refrain there is the indication that there should be something experimental, however little, in the service of God. The place the women have in @Exodus 15 in this service suggests what we get in Luke, and we see in chapter 1 the prominence these chosen female vessels have in the service Godward.
The title of @Psalm 22 (Aijeleth-Shahar) is feminine, showing that in the hour of His deepest sorrow the Lord had results for God in this sense in view. This is fully developed in the assembly. As we proceed, the Lord, I think, will show us that this gospel is progressive in this feature -- as in others.
{293}
These remarks indicate what I had in mind. The Lord has been helping us in regard to Himself, as to His Person and the other Persons of the Deity, with a view to a clearer apprehension of God -- the Father, the Son and the Spirit, and this would have in view that there might be a fuller and more intelligent note in the assembly.
A.N. I do not quite catch the connection between Chronicles and Luke; would you make it clear?
J.T. In 1 Chronicles you have the twenty-four courses of priests inaugurated by David, and they are alluded to here in the ministry of Zacharias, who is said to be "of the course of Abia", verse 5.
H.E.S. Are you suggesting that Luke's line is subjective and that the subjective line is progressive?
J.T. Well, it has a subjective result in view. We should bear in mind what was remarked as to @Exodus 15, that the body of the song there is objective, leading on to entrance into Canaan and the ministry of David and Solomon. So we are not restricted in our service Godward to what is purely subjective, or it would be very small. The first contribution to the praises of Israel gives the idea. The objective has prominence, and then Miriam, who is said to be "the prophetess, the sister of Aaron", takes the tambour, and the women of Israel follow her with tambours and dances. She answers practically in the first two lines of the song, and thus intimates that that is about the extent of the spiritual stature of the people.
To make the thing clearer, verse 19 is interposed, to make way for what Miriam says. It is not poetic, as will be observed. The song ends in verse 18, and then we have the historical statement: "For the horse of Pharaoh, with his chariots and with his horsemen, came into the sea, and Jehovah brought again the waters of the sea upon them; and the children of Israel went on dry ground through the midst of the sea", @Exodus 15:19. That is a plain statement of fact; and then it says, "Miriam the
{294}
prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took the tambour in her hand, and all the women went out after her with tambours and with dances. And Miriam answered them, Sing to Jehovah, for he is highly exalted: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea", @Exodus 15:20,21. That is really verse 19 rendered poetically, and that is as far as they had gone. So that, whilst Luke suggests the subjective side, it is not wholly so, because we shall see that the praises encircling the inscrutableness of the Deity in chapter 10 and the spiritual environment of the assembly in chapter 19 involve heaven; "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". God would have His people instructed spiritually as to the *whole scope*  of His mind, and He looks also for *some*  subjective response.
J.H.T. As to the inscrutableness of the Deity, are you referring to verse 22 of chapter 10, "no one knows who the Son is but the Father, and who the Father is but the Son"?
J.T. Yes. I hope we shall take it up in a subsequent reading, but I refer to it now to show the extent of the praise, that it is not necessarily bounded by our experimental knowledge. Of course, when *Christ*  praises the response is complete.
Eu.R. Do your remarks bear on the title "the Word" in verse 2?
J.T. The introduction of "the Word" here should be carefully noted. No doubt most of us have observed that Matthew and Mark begin with "Jesus Christ", and Luke and John begin with "the Word". The opening statements of all the gospels assume that the Persons or things to be treated of are already generally known; there is no suggestion that they are not known. Whether it be in Matthew or Mark, Jesus Christ is assumed to be already known by those who are to read, and Luke and John also intimate plainly that the Word -- the *Logos*  -- is already known by those who are to read. Much is to be said about Him that was not
{295}
known, but it is assumed that He is known by this title, for there is no explanation given of it.
H.D'A.C. Is not that the case in the beginning of Genesis: "In the beginning God ..."? There is no explanation.
J.T. Exactly; and so *Jehovah*  in @Genesis 2.
D.L.H. Is there any term that applies to God in the absolute?
J.T. "I AM" is enough to link us with the Absolute, indicating that the Absolute is there, and is to be regarded apart from other considerations. That He exists is the great dominating fact, and He may be referred to by appellations provided by scripture. But these are relative.
D.L.H. Then do you view the term "Elohim" as standing in relation to creation?
J.T. Yes, clearly; the meaning of it would imply that He is the supreme One, the One to be worshipped, already known in this way long before Genesis was written.
H.D'A.C. Does it not involve His being worshipped? When you think of God you must think of worshipping Him.
J.T. Yes, to be worshipped by creatures. Worship would have no place between the divine Persons themselves viewed in the absolute. I believe some of our thoughts have been loose, and no doubt are so still, as regards God and as regards divine titles and names. The names given without explanation, such as Elohim, imply that God was already known. The Holy Spirit was operating from the first overtures of God in the creation; He is seen hovering over the waters, and then striving with men; He was there from the outset and working in the hearts of men such as Adam, Abel, Seth, and Enoch. He would give them intelligence as to God in so far as it was in keeping with that time, and they would speak accordingly. The Spirit was
{296}
always operating, so that men were in relation with God intelligibly, and when the Scriptures were written these titles were taken up. Others are given formally in Scripture, with their significance attached to them.
J.D. With regard to the expression in Genesis as to the Spirit of God hovering over the face of the waters, do you think that is a Person in the Godhead?
J.T. Yes, He is mentioned in a personal way.
W.C.G. How far back does the expression, in @Luke 1:3, go; "From the very first"?
J.T. That with which he was "accurately acquainted from the origin" I understand refers to the origin of Christ as Man here; that is, Luke views the Word and His activities in His ministry here historically. John speaks of Him as already known as the Word (for He gives no explanation of the title), in relation to His deity. Luke speaks about "eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word", showing that His service here was under the eyes of certain ones; they were eye-witnesses of and attendants on Him.
J.S. Would you say that John begins with Jesus as known here -- the Word?
J.T. Yes, One known here. As Luke alludes to Him in relation to His ministry, John alludes to Him as in the Deity in the past. He says, "In the beginning was the Word" -- not "from", but "in"; in Luke it is "acquainted *from*  the origin".
Eu.R. Does it link on with Hebrews: "having had its commencement in being spoken of by the Lord, has been confirmed to us by those who have heard", @Hebrews 2:3?
J.T. Yes, and with John's epistle: "That which was *from*  the beginning", @1 John 1:1.
H.E.F. Does the expression in Luke carry us back to His birth, or to the commencement of His ministry?
J.T. His birth, for Luke proceeds to speak of that, so that we get the incarnation here in a fitting way.
{297}
Luke has in view our feelings and our affections, and brings out the incarnation in the most touching manner.
A.N. What is the thought in Luke connected with the Word, as distinct from John?
J.T. I think we ought to link it on with our present subject.
A.N. "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated His glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father)", @John 1:14. It would not be quite that line here.
J.T. Luke gives more what He was openly in His ministry; he speaks of eye-witnesses and attendants *on*  the Word; the idea conveyed was there, and was witnessed. We need to be educated, therefore, because the term "the Word" implies, among many other things, great accuracy as regards the mind of God.
Ques. Is there any thought of the Word in @Colossians 1? Would the "image of the invisible God" be linked with the Lord being here?
J.T. Surely that is what is alluded to; it is Christ as in manhood. You cannot grasp a divine Person in absolute Deity; you cannot see Him, He is God. He is the invisible God Himself, viewed thus. It is in manhood that you get the image.
P.L. You spoke of spiritual accuracy in connection with the thought of the Word; have we that in Colossians: "Let the word of the Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another, in psalms, hymns, spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to God", @Colossians 3:16?
J.T. That should help us. The "word of the Christ" governs the passage, and it fits in peculiarly in Luke, for he speaks about writing with *method*. This is seen in "psalms, hymns, spiritual songs".
A.L. Does David's first reference to the ark in @Psalm 132 link on with the thought in Luke? "We heard of it at Ephratah", he says, that is connected with Bethlehem Judah.
{298}
J.T. "We *heard*  of it"; that enters into the idea of the Word here. I have no doubt that David's remark would enter into the whole of Luke, that is what He speaks of, the ark in relation to the service of song. John does not present Christ as the ark in that relation, but as overthrowing Jordan; but Luke presents the ark in relation to the service of song, and that is how David regards it. As soon as he brings it to Zion he lays tribute on the Psalms to secure a suitable ascription of praise. We ought to see that the ark is here in the Babe, in Christ, in relation to the service of song; we thus have the link with 1 and 2 Chronicles, as we were remarking.
Luke proceeds immediately to tell us about Zacharias and Elizabeth and their relations to the priesthood; that they were really of the priestly order, and that Zacharias was serving. Everything was apparently right outwardly. Personally he was a righteous man and his wife was a righteous woman, and he was offering incense according to the order of his course, and the people were all praying outside. As we might say, everything is in keeping with the requirements of 1 Chronicles, but then heaven is concerned about the *underlying condition*  and, I think, the Lord's present word to us is in regard of that. Gabriel is on the *right*  side of the altar of incense, suggesting that God is to have the *best*,  and he challenges Zacharias as to his state of soul, in the most tender way, saying that God had heard his prayer. He says, "because thy supplication has been heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John". Now this is what we ought specially to notice at this enquiry. Everything is right outwardly, and the angel assumed nothing different; he assumed that prayers had been made and that they had been heard, but what develops shows there is *unbelief*  in spite of the outward order. The Lord has been greatly helping the brethren in regard to order, as the apostle said to the Colossians,
{299}
"rejoicing and seeing your order", but there may be something underneath, that in time will nullify all.
That Zacharias is unbelieving, might appear to be a small matter. Possibly he had forgotten his prayers; the time had long passed when he might reasonably have expected an answer to them, but heaven does not forget, and all things are possible with God; although it might have seemed a small matter that he had forgotten, the thing is so serious that he is to be dumb for a season. Surely all this is to remind us of the importance of seeing to the underlying state in the meetings, as well as seeing to the public order.
F.S.M. Is there a link between the expression in regard of David that "he appointed certain of the levites to do the service before the ark of Jehovah, and to celebrate, and to thank and praise Jehovah the God of Israel", (@1 Chronicles 16:4), and what is stated here, that Zacharias was fulfilling his priestly service before God, and the end of this gospel, where the saints are found praising and blessing God? Was the underlying difficulty removed?
J.T. That is what I hope we shall come to; but I think we may take Zacharias as a sort of allusion to Israel as failing in the praise. They will come into it again, as Zacharias does here. At the end he takes it up beautifully as his tongue is loosed, but in the meanwhile others come in, for the praise is to go on, so that we have Elizabeth and Mary joining in the "praises of Israel" most beautifully, and Zacharias has to wait. Praise waits for Jehovah in Zion; it will come in time, but in Psalm 22 the Lord begins, not with Israel properly, but the assembly, as the word used in Hebrews indicates. I think we may regard Elizabeth and Mary as answering to this, the assembly coming in before Israel.
P.L. Would the thought that he resumed his praise on the eighth day suggest that Israel will finally come into line with heaven?
{300}
J.T. I think so, when the promised son appears: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given", (@Isaiah 9:6). When He comes in they will know it, and the "praises of Israel" will be resumed in Zion. In the meantime we may regard Elizabeth and Mary as suggestive of something higher and more beautiful, peculiarly feminine. I do not know of anything more touching than the visit of Mary to Elizabeth in the hill country, to a city of Judah. It brings out what is proper to the assembly, the peculiar *sensitiveness*  of the instrument, so to speak. And "as Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit, and cried out with a loud voice and said. Blessed art thou amongst women, and blessed the fruit of thy womb. And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For behold, as the voice of thy salutation sounded in my ears, the babe leaped with joy in my womb. And blessed is she that has believed ..." That has to be regarded as over against Zacharias; it is in connection with *faith*,  as the Lord said to Thomas, "Blessed they who have not seen and have believed", (@John 20:29). Peculiar sensitiveness is suggested in the response of the babe, as the sound of Mary's voice fell on the ears of Elizabeth, as she says, "the voice of thy salutation".
D.L.H. Why is it said "a loud voice"?
J.T. I suppose the loud voice implies depth of *feeling*. You get it frequently, especially with the Lord Himself.
D.L.H. You get it occasionally in the Psalms: "I *cried*  unto Jehovah with my voice",(@Psalm 142:1) as if there was a loud voice.
J.T. All this is to be noted as preliminary to the great subject before us, uniting these women as it says, in "the house of Zacharias", in the hill country, in a city of Judah. Then the salutation of Mary conveys,
{301}
we may say, spiritual affections, because Mary has been already instructed by Gabriel that her kinswoman Elizabeth was with child. The link between them in what would draw out their mutual sympathy is thus established from heaven. It enters into the constitution of the assembly, what we are as divinely instructed, and how, being instructed, we come to understand that others are also in the like case, so that mutual sympathy is begotten, and relationship: "thy kinswoman", the angel says.
E.G. Is there this wonderful sympathy between the mother and the babe? It says that the babe "leaped with joy".
J.T. As I was saying, it implies the constitution of the assembly, what the body of Christ is, as worked out in 1 Corinthians. That epistle, among many other things, has in view the formation of the instrument. The tuning is in chapter 15, after we have the Lord's supper and the truth of the one body; the working of the Spirit in the body; then love; then the order in the persons speaking in the assembly, and those who should not speak, that is, women; and then the resurrection tightening up the chords; and then the sentiments connected with the first day of the week in chapter 16. I believe Corinthians has all that in view, and there is a suggestion of it here in the babe and Elizabeth. There was a salutation from one who reflected the angel's instruction, and so we are in the realm of spirituality of the highest order, corresponding to the sensitiveness in the persons who form the assembly.
J.T.S. Would the word, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren", bring in mutual relations and sympathy in view of, "in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee" (@Psalm 22:22)?
J.T. Exactly. I suppose Mary Magdalene, as she received the message from the Lord for the brethren, would be amongst them in the most sisterly way; she would not be there in any official way; the very initial
{302}
idea of the organism would preclude her taking an official attitude, but she would be amongst them in delightful simplicity. It says, "Mary of Magdala comes bringing word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her", @John 20:18. There was the essence of simplicity, and yet the greatest possible things would be conveyed in her words. There would not only be the words, but the beautiful feminine feeling of Mary Magdalene permeating, as you might say, the whole company; the whole scene in the upper room would be impregnated with that atmosphere. That is how it would work normally, if the Holy Spirit were here; the house would be filled, as in @John 12; and I believe all that shows how practical the idea of the organism is, how the Lord would put us into touch with each other by His communications, as the angel said to Mary, "Elizabeth, thy kinswoman ... this is the sixth month to her". Then it says that the angel departed from her, meaning that Mary is left. Now what will she do? She did not tarry, but "rising up in those days, went into the hill country with haste, to a city of Judah, and entered into the house of Zacharias".
H.M.S. Is not this word of Elizabeth the first inspired utterance in Israel since the prophet Malachi? Does it not show that the time of praise waiting in silence for God is coming to an end, and that He is going to hear the voice of praise again in Israel? Would it not be very acceptable to God that this woman should call the unborn Saviour, Lord: "the mother of my Lord"?
J.T. I think that is right. Whatever is unwritten we have to leave, and this is the first record we have after Malachi. It is introduced as in those still viewed as the remnant of Israel, but the organism that was in view is clearly intimated. The impulse is from heaven, because all that entered into Mary's salutation, you might say, was from Gabriel -- the wonderful things
{303}
about the Lord and about the incarnation. We have not very much about the incarnation in our service of song, but I believe the Lord would help us to dwell on the marvellous mystery of the incarnation. The first word of the angel to Mary is, "Hail, thou favoured one! the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou amongst women", @Luke 1:28. Then she feared, and he said, "Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favour with God; and behold, thou shalt conceive in the womb and bear a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus. *He*  shall be great, and shall be called Son of the Highest; and the Lord God shall give Him the throne of David his father; and He shall reign over the house of Jacob for the ages, and of His kingdom there shall not be an end. But Mary said to the angel. How shall this be, since I know not a man? And the angel answering said to her, The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and power of the Highest overshadow thee, wherefore the holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God. And behold, Elizabeth, thy kinswoman, she also has conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month to her that was called barren: for nothing shall be impossible with God", @Luke 1:30 - 37. Now, it seems to me that the infinite substance, as I may call it, that enters into all that, enters into Mary's salutation. It is heavenly impulse, but in such richness, involving so much as it alights upon the ears of Elizabeth, that it enters into her whole being, and the being of her unborn child. It seems to me that the Lord would press upon us as to this great subject, the spiritual sensitiveness that belongs to the organism, that is to be used as an instrument of God's praise.
E.J.McB. Is it worthy of notice that all this transpires while Zacharias is dumb, that Mary has the light of the coming in of the Son of God, and when Zacharias recovers his speech he speaks of the horn in the house of David? Is not the great subject of praise now connected with the Son of God?
{304}
J.T. Elizabeth says to Mary with a loud voice, "Blessed art thou amongst women". Of course, we must make due allowance for this extraordinary person, but it suggests what the saints are to be to us, what anybody is to be to us who brings us light, and whose spirit is impregnated with heavenly thoughts about Christ: "Blessed art thou amongst women, and blessed the fruit of thy womb. And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?" That is, Elizabeth is duly cognisant, and sensitive, and appreciative of the salutation of one so honoured; it has come through Mary, but it is the "mother of my Lord". Still unborn, but to her, He is "my Lord".
W.C.G. Would you say that is a practical example of what you have referred to, as the means by which the underlying state is helped? Did these women not practically carry out the "more excellent way" referred to in Corinthians?
J.T. Making all due allowance for the actual circumstances, we can see how one saint affects another. It promotes the thought of the assembly. In the one instance we have the Holy Spirit operating -- Elizabeth is said to be filled with the Holy Spirit, whereas there is nothing said about Mary being filled by the Holy Spirit. Her contribution to the "praises of Israel" is rather a calculated composition of one already formed in the knowledge of God. Like David, she draws from spiritual sources, as is seen in her language. As David restored the ark, he drew from the Psalms; it was not an impromptu contribution, but something thought out spiritually; and that, I think, is the side we see in Mary. In the assembly we get immediate promptings from the Spirit, and when we have that there is the sense of a touch, an impulse; but then there is the production of the instructed. The Lord speaks of "the tongue of the instructed". God looks for that; as was said, "five words with the understanding".
R.B-n. You mentioned the principle of unbelief
{305}
in Zacharias showing the weak state there, unsympathetic with what God was about to do; have we in the women the suitable subjective state, with the result that they are found sympathetic with God and what He is doing. They voice intelligent praise and salutation.
J.T. I think we may learn that from Mary and Elizabeth. Elizabeth salutes Mary, "Blessed is she that has believed", and then, besides believing, Mary was *subject*  . "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord; be it to me according to thy word", @Luke 1:38. That is the basis of intelligent priestly service in the assembly; whereas on the other hand, in Elizabeth you have the promptings of the Spirit effected or initiated by Mary's voice. Initiation is really with Mary, she is an instructed one; and then Elizabeth is a ready vessel of the Spirit. What is said of her here suggests the necessity for readiness in the assembly. She hid herself five months, she is very comely in her ways; and she is ready for this occasion, and then she gives her contribution; but Mary's is more the calculated, instructed side of service in the assembly.
M.W.B. Would these two cases illustrate what you were saying earlier about praise being the outcome, not only of what we have reached subjectively, but also of that which might be produced as under spiritual impulse according to the light received?
J.T. Exactly. We must ever make allowance for the action of the Spirit in the assembly, for the service of God today is not a ready-made service such as they had in Israel, or such as in the established churches around us. We have general principles to govern us, but the Holy Spirit is with us, and Elizabeth represents how the whole organism is capable of being stimulated by a spiritual touch; and then with Mary we have the formal instructed contribution which is proper to the assembly, because it is the place of spiritual intelligence, as well as the place of feelings and affections.
P.L. Would the Maschil Psalms be on the line of
{306}
instruction, and then, "I have restrained and composed my soul, like a weaned child with its mother". (@Psalm 131:2) -- would that be the tender sensibility that would respond to spiritual impulse?
J.T. Yes. I am glad you mentioned the Maschil Psalms; they run through the Psalms and represent what is seen in Mary. Mary employs scriptural language, and I believe that is another side of the subject, that the Lord would instruct us as to the kind of language to be used in the service of God.
A.N. Would you get the two things in the expression, "communicating spiritual things by spiritual means?" (@1 Corinthians 2:13).
The things are there to be communicated by spiritual means.
J.T. Just so. The first reference to the Spirit in Corinthians is in chapter 2, and it is to bring out that divine things are revealed by Him: "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love Him", @1 Corinthians 2:9. Then we have the mind of Christ, which would imply the means of thinking and speaking. Then in chapter 3 you get the Spirit in the temple; His presence amongst us implies that the temple of God is here, and so the Holy Spirit is linked on right through to the end of the two epistles, finishing up with the "communion of the Holy Spirit". He is the power of the service. He forms and instructs us so that we should have the "tongue of the instructed", that we might know how to speak, as it says, "five words with the understanding".
J.A.P. Is the thought that Mary's contribution was less subjective than that of Elizabeth?
J.T. It represents what we were saying, that the service of God must necessarily include the objective; that is to say, God would have us take in the whole range of His thoughts. I have no doubt that is one reason why the Word -- *Logos*  -- is introduced here,
{307}
and I think Mary is more that side. It is to her credit to say that; she was spiritually equal to grasping the position, and had such a knowledge of Old Testament language that she could bring it in and apply it beautifully.
Eu.R. Does her expression, "God my Saviour", link on with @Exodus 15, and the latter part of her contribution with @1 Samuel 2?
J.T. There is a beautiful link there with Hannah's song which is called a prayer, showing what a lowly, subject, dependent woman she was, but the language is really that of a priest throughout. @1 Samuel 2, is a great contribution to the "praises of Israel", and Mary has that in mind; it is not with her the impulse of the Holy Spirit in the believer, but rather the Colossian point of view where the Holy Spirit is only mentioned once, intimating that His work is more in view than Himself; this is to bring out what the assembly is as formed in spiritual intelligence.
J.J. Would Mary's going to Elizabeth and unfolding this wonderful fact of the incarnation be similar to the second chapter of Philippians that Paul could write owing to their sympathy and sensitiveness?
J.T. Yes; the state of things at Philippi warranted that.
J.H.T. You have said that the Psalm that David delivered to Asaph and his brethren was a collection from the Psalms -- is that in your mind in referring to Mary's contribution here?
J.T. Yes, it is the intelligent side. What David did in inaugurating the service of praise was necessarily dependent on an underlying condition, that the spirit of praise was there. What is the use of a form of service unless there be the substance underneath? That is what is indicated in, "Blessed is she that has believed". Then she is subject, and she also shows that she is able to analyse *inwardly*,  because we have to do that whatever the instrument; she distinguished between her soul and
{308}
her spirit, as will be observed in @Luke 1:46, 47. To discern in oneself the difference between the soul and the spirit points to spiritual ability. @1 Chronicles 15 greatly stresses "the due order", what God required, but besides that, as 1 Chronicles goes on to show, there was great spiritual ability -- at least typically -- in Israel, in the persons instructed in song. As many as four thousand singers are spoken of, so that in the inauguration of the courses by David, the material was there. Elizabeth, as we remarked, represents the sensitiveness in the assembly that would discern a spiritual touch; that is, someone says something that is spiritual, that he has received from the Lord, and it is discerned; we are moved by it, and then room is given to the Spirit to operate in relation to it. Here the babe is included -- a most remarkable thing. There was room for the Spirit to act uninterruptedly in Elizabeth at this juncture, and then we have the intelligent setting out of the thoughts of God in scriptural language by Mary.
M.W.B. Do you think the two cases would illustrate how those younger in the faith would take up appropriately the praises of God in the assembly, whereas those instructed would be able to speak to God more intelligently?
J.T. That is what we may see here. Elizabeth is capable of being touched, and that ought to include all who in self-judgment give scope to the Spirit, so that He is not interrupted. Here it extends even to the unborn babe. Well, no one in the assembly can assume to be *less*  than that, yet the unborn babe is affected. The suggestion is of the capability of being affected in the assembly, compare @1 Corinthians 14:30.
F.S.M. It is the pleasure of the Spirit to use spiritual substance in the praise of God, and that would be an incentive to have *more*  spiritual substance, not only to communicate and help one another, but primarily for the service of praise. It is significant that both Elizabeth
{309}
and Mary, and then Zacharias later, and Stephen, all exhibit a spiritual knowledge of the Scriptures.
Ques. Do you connect the ability to be touched with the soul, and the instructed contribution with the spirit?
J.T. Yes. The soul is what we might call the lower affections, and the spirit that which is nearer to God. They are both in perfect harmony here.
E.R. In @Psalm 22 it says, "The meek shall eat and be satisfied; they shall praise Jehovah that seek him: your heart shall live for ever", verse 26. I thought that contains a principle with regard to feeding, that you must be satisfied before your heart can praise the Lord.
J.T. Very good; it fits in well with the Lord's supper. In Matthew and Mark the Lord speaks of eating, and in these gospels the hymn follows the Supper.
C.E.T. Was this account written for one *already*  instructed, but in order that a contribution might be the result?
J.T. That is a good suggestion, for it was written to one person. Luke gauged the stature of Theophilus, and the Acts further written to him would be in the same relation. The introduction to the Acts shows that Theophilus was learning, because in it Luke drops the epithet "most excellent". Reduction is required if we are to lay hold of the great thoughts in these two books. The Acts, beginning with "the former treatise", goes on to speak about the Lord presenting Himself alive to the disciples whom He had chosen, and then assembling with them. It seems as if we should lead on to that in our inquiry, to the idea of the Lord presenting Himself alive and then assembling with them. Theophilus, as he followed Luke, would say, I would like to understand how the Lord assembled with His own, and that in resurrection.
H.E.S. Is the suggestion that what is official in Theophilus and Zacharias gives place to what is spiritual?
{310}
J.T. Yes. Reduction was needed, especially in Theophilus. Luke evidently understood that it had taken place, so that Theophilus was capable of accepting another great treatise on this subject -- "concerning all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach", @Acts 1:1.
P.L. Would it be right to say that presenting Himself living to them after He had suffered would touch the soul more on the line of Elizabeth, and then the assembling forty days with them secure the spiritual instruction for which Mary stands?
J.T. The suffering side gives tone to the service. I hope the Lord will keep @Psalm 22 in our minds throughout these meetings, for the sufferings are what give tone to the assembly's service.
W.R.P. Have you any thought as to the fact that Elizabeth was old and well stricken in years, and that Mary was a virgin and of course young? What bearing has this on the two states that you have been bringing before us?
J.T. I suppose the old people in Luke denote the system that was passing away; but this gave occasion for God to show what He could do in spite of human weakness. The new system is suggested in Mary and the babes; all is to be fresh and young, but linked with the old. Indeed, I suppose we have a suggestion as to older brothers and sisters, how that in old age they bear fruit, and that links on with the coming generation -- "another cometh".
F.G.W. Is there the thought that Elizabeth and Mary begin with @Isaiah 8:18: "Behold, I and the children that Jehovah hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel", and when the Spirit of God links @Psalm 22 with it in @Hebrews 2 there is the added allusion to the thought of the Sanctifier and the sanctified all of one? Have you the development of that in Elizabeth and Mary?
J.T. Exactly.
{311}
Ques. You spoke of Elizabeth being filled with the Spirit, and Mary as the virgin. Is the latter suggested in Paul saying to the Corinthians that he would present them "as a chaste virgin to Christ" (@2 Corinthians 11:2)?
J.T. Yes; and added to that is the instruction that the letters to the Corinthians had in view. I believe Mary represents this side also.
J.J. Is there any reason why Paul does not develop the expression "the Word" that we get here?
J.T. I do not know. One has thought of other expressions in the gospels that are not developed in the epistles. Perhaps the Lord will help us as to why they are not -- such expressions as "the Word" and the "kingdom of the heavens". Nor do you get the title "Son of Man" developed. We should enquire why it is.
M.W.B. Referring to what you said earlier about "the Word" linking it with the Lord in His infancy, is there in this the expression of God as come down in such lowly grace?
J.T. That is a feature of it. Not that the Lord Jesus was doing anything in babyhood, but the thoughts of God were there. Though expressed by others, the thoughts of God are immediately in evidence. These chapters show how the thoughts of God are brought in by Gabriel, and then by one angel to the shepherds, and then by the multitude of the heavenly host. The thoughts of God were all there, so "eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word" would include all that.
D.L.H. So Simeon says, "Mine eyes have seen thy salvation", @Luke 2:30. "The Word" was there for him.
J.T. And how beautifully he opened up the mind of God about the Lord as he had Him in his arms!
{312}
THE PRAISES OF ISRAEL (2)
@Luke 1:67 - 80; @Luke 2:8 - 14, 25 - 38
J.T. Our subject is not Luke's gospel, but rather the service of the assembly Godward as seen in Luke, and features in the gospel specially leading up to or illustrating this subject will of course come under review. Whilst the dispensational feature enters into chapter 1, involving that Israel's service is in abeyance, as seen in Zacharias, that of the assembly is introduced and maintained, and the contribution by Zacharias later has a bearing on our subject if taken in connection with that of Elizabeth and of Mary. It adds the *prophetic*  feature, bringing in in power the mind of God governing the moment; and so, in the assembly, whilst direct service Godward may be in view or proceeding, the prophetic word often greatly enhances it; sobering us too, for the prophetic word has always that tendency, to subdue and sober, and to give God His place. Zacharias says nothing about what happened in himself, whereas Elizabeth and Mary do; they speak about what happened in themselves; that is, they allude to the work of God in the persons who form the vessel of service, whereas Zacharias simply brings in the mind of God prophetically, and in connection with the name John; for it is as he writes down, "John is his name", that "his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue, and he spake, blessing God", (verse 64). There is complete detachment from the natural, and complete identification with the spiritual.
H.E.S. In the case of Elizabeth and Mary, is it a question of what God had done in them, whereas with Zacharias what God had done for him?
J.T. Quite so; what God had done, extending back to the beginning of the world. As he says, "as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, who have
{313}
been since the world began". It is the fulfilment of an extensive presentation of the mind of God.
P.L. As to the prophetic word stimulating the service of praise, do we see that in Habakkuk? Does it not culminate in praise "To the chief Musician. On my stringed instruments" (@Habakkuk 3:19)?
J.T. Well, that is the way it stands; from discipline and variable notes to the highest feature of singing in his "high places" on his "stringed instruments".
P.L. I thought he was weaned from the natural: "There shall be no herd in the stalls",(@Habakkuk 3:17) and so on.
J.T. Yes, there is complete superiority over adverse things, an important matter. Zacharias sets the present world aside altogether in linking on what God had spoken since the beginning of the world. The testimony of God's holy prophets since the world began would be to another world. The introduction of another world lifts us out of this world.
Eu.R. Is there a link with @Psalm 22 in Habakkuk: "He maketh my feet like hinds feet", chapter 3:19?
J.T. Yes. It is not only an objective thought, that is, the resurrection of Christ, but the power of resurrection in ourselves. As it says in Colossians, "In which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", and then, "you ... he has quickened together with him", chapter 2:12, 13. Making our feet like hinds feet brings us into accord with @Psalm 22 according to the title; there are high places, and hinds feet, and stringed instruments in @Habakkuk 3:19. The mind of God brought in prophetically in the assembly is sobering; it brings God in, addressing the intelligence as well as the conscience; it takes us out of seen things, out of man's world.
M.W.B. Do you suggest that in the assembly a word of prophecy would have a stimulating effect upon the praises? Sometimes it is introduced as an incident in closing -- would that be corrected by this thought?
{314}
J.T. It comes in very often as stimulating and regulating the worship. I find it that way. I believe it honours God, assuming of course it is from Him, compare @Numbers 7:89.
Ques. Would the word of prophecy come in as an answer to the exercises of those in the hill country, to stimulate and adjust them in regard to the praises of Israel?
J.T. I think it does. It will be observed in verse 39: "Mary, rising up in those days, went into the hill country", as we had it this morning, where she had most beautiful converse with Elizabeth; and then the birth of John, and what occurred in connection with it, brings in more extended interests. It says, "And fear came upon all who dwelt round about them; and in the whole hill country of Judaea all these things were the subject of conversation. And all who heard them laid them up in their heart, saying. What then will this child be?"(@Luke 1:65,66) Then it adds, "And the Lord's hand was with him", that is, the Lord's hand was with the child, sustaining the great testimony that had come out, an important item here in that particular setting. Then it says, "Zacharias his father was filled with the Holy Spirit, and prophesied". That is, it is not Zacharias alone, but "Zacharias his father", stressing his relation to John. It is the *born*  child now, and the Lord's hand is with the born child, (verse 66); but then, that in itself is not enough; we must have the *mind*  of God unfolded, and so, Zacharias being filled with the Spirit, *prophesied*,  saying, "Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, because He has visited and wrought redemption for His people". He takes up the praises of Israel, John being immediately before Him in it, but He is not the subject, for Zacharias goes on to say, "He has visited and wrought redemption for his people, and raised up a horn of deliverance for us in the house of David his servant; as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, who have been since the world began". Christ is thus the theme with
{315}
Zacharias, and chapter 1 is complete in itself in this way as to the subject with which we are dealing.
C.G. Is there any correspondence between the beginning of Luke and the stone water-pots in @John 2? We have six persons mentioned -- Elizabeth and Mary, Zacharias and Joseph, and Simeon and Anna.
J.T. The filling in John is by Christ Himself; He had come, according to chapter 1, "full of grace and truth". Here the filling is by the Spirit. There is a connection in the number. The stone in John would denote what is *permanent*. The vessels in John were filled with the water which became wine, pointing definitely to millennial joy, and in that sense therefore, not rising to the level of these persons, nor to the level of the hill country and the communion there. The service of God being on this level in Luke, the priestly touches there are very suggestive.
J.J. What would be the importance of the title "the Highest" in verse 76? It seems to be another title which is not carried on into the epistles. Would you say a word as to it?
J.T. You have it earlier, in verse 35: "the power of the Highest"; then the one you quote: "the prophet of the Highest"; and then "the dayspring from on high" in verse 78; then in the next chapter, "Glory to God in the highest", and again later on in the book. I think it is a word that gives character to Luke, denoting moral elevation -- not so much place as moral elevation; which is an element that ought to enter into the service of the assembly, lifting us out of the current religious manner of serving God.
J.J. Does the word 'Highest' refer to the Lord personally?
J.T. It does in verse 76. In verse 35 it is more God Himself -- "the power of the Highest".
W.W. Being the "Son of the Highest" in chapter 1 would support what you said, that it is a question of moral elevation.
{316}
H.O.S. Abram said to the king of Sodom, "I have lifted up my hand to Jehovah, the Most High God, possessor of heavens and earth"(@Genesis 14:22), and he would not take anything from the king of Sodom. Would that be an example of moral elevation?
J.T. It is.
W.W. Does it suggest the idea of lifting things out from the depths on to the plane of Ephesians? That is what He who shall be called "Son of the Highest" would do.
J.T. I think that is right; it is moral elevation. The "Most High God" conveys an additional thought as over against idolatry, and so Melchisedec is "priest of the Most High God"(@Genesis 14:18).
N.K.M. You referred to the prophetic word coming in to stimulate worship; would it be normal for a prophetic word to be given when we are together to break bread?
J.T. It is a question of how the Lord may guide but generally I find it is sobering, and emphasises the thought of God in the assembly. It is regulating as well. We have often noticed the great wealth of the twelve princes in @Numbers 7, and how the Spirit of God dwells on the various items that each brought, and then gives them in their total. You might assume from that, there was plenty of wealth for the service, and there was; but after all that, as Moses went into the sanctuary to speak with God, he heard a voice from between the two cherubim from off the mercy-seat, as if God would speak in all His majesty at that moment, He would assert His presence. He who dwelt between the cherubim; but it was from off the mercy-seat. All that emphasises God, and His place in the assembly. Then Moses spoke to Him.
The subject treated of in @Luke 1 is complete in itself, offering much instruction in regard to assembly service; and at the end you have a born child. You have two unborn children in the earlier part of the praises, and
{317}
the mother of our Lord affecting the mother of John the baptist, but now we have a child born, and his name. It is a definite living formation with a name, which as far as we learn from the authorities denotes "God's giving" -- all is on that principle. Then the tongue of Zacharias is loosed and we have the great interest and the conversation in the hill country; the laying things to heart, and then the prophecy of Zacharias which takes the form of praise, and therefore belongs to the "praises of Israel". It was a state of things sustained by God. The hand of the Lord was with the child from that point; and now we have the mind of God, not in relation to him only, although that is brought in, but the subject is Christ. He is yet unborn, but He is there, and John is to be the prophet of the Highest. The position is to be sustained. It is a very difficult matter in assembly service to have the thing sustained in living power.
J.S. It says, "The child grew, and was strengthened in spirit".
J.T. It shows that the energy of life, which should mark the assembly, was there. The hand of the Lord was there also to support; and in the prophecy we have the mind of God, not only in relation to John, but in relation to Christ. Then there is increase: "the child grew and was strengthened in spirit".
J.S. "And he was in the deserts"; is that lifted out of the world?
J.T. That is part of the means of sustenance; it ministers negatively; we do not go back into the world as nourishing us. He was in the deserts: it is in the plural, the *full*  idea of the desert.
Ques. The purport of this prophecy would appear to be deliverance from the enemy and light to the people. How would that operate now?
J.T. It all enters into the assembly. It has other meanings, of course. We have seen how God is brought in by the prophetic word, a born child, a definite formation
{318}
livingly, and the mind of God about him; and then he grows. The position seems to be very clear and compact, so that, entering chapter 2, we are on other ground; there is another Child -- the Lord is born.
We are thus further on.
A.N. Would you connect this in any way with @1 Corinthians 14 as to prophecy being the evidence that God was among them?
J.T. I should. That is the point of the prophetic word there: "God is among you of a truth",(@1 Corinthians 14:25) only that goes further than what we have here. The point of that is toward a man coming into the assembly.
A.N. I thought it might have a bearing on your point as to the prophetic word in connection with the service of God.
J.T. Well, it does, but if you take Zacharias here, what he says is of a piece with what Elizabeth and Mary say. In what they say they occupy us mainly with what had taken place in them. Then we have a born child. In their service, it is an unborn child -- the Lord and John the baptist unborn, but now we have a born child definitely apprehended as from God, the gift of God. It is evidently of God, and there is extended interest, so that they laid the things up in their hearts, and said, "What then will this child be?" We have something definite now. It is not simply what he shall be, but more than that, what he shall be in relation to Another, that is, to the horn of deliverance raised up in the house of David, dating back in the prophets to the beginning of the world.
M.W.B. I would like to get a little more clear as to the thought of the unborn child. Is your thought that the worship or praise here becomes more distinctly objective and positive -- engagement with Christ, rather than what He had done in us?
J.T. Yes. It is before the eye in a born child. We have something definite now, as you might say, objectively in the assembly. When Christ is apprehended in
{319}
the assembly. He is objective. He is not in us as state; that is not the idea; He is in the assembly. It is not an undeveloped thought, an unborn child, but there is a Person there objectively. I do not say, of course, that is John, but it conveys the idea that Zacharias has in mind. It is really the Lord Jesus -- the "Dayspring", the "Highest", the "Horn of deliverance". In chapter 1 we are dealing with John as *born*,  just born, and his name written down as over against the name Zacharias. It is the transference of the mind from the natural to the spiritual, having a person objectively before you.
E.J.McB. Do you mean that what may have been in mind potentially has taken definite form, so to speak, in the meeting, and now having the child before you you have something objective?
J.T. Yes, and that is enlarged on in what Zacharias says; we have the relation of the born child to Christ, and that *sustained*  -- the hand of the Lord was with him (with John), and he grew.
We may proceed to chapter 2, for we have the Lord born now. We are on other ground. It seems to me that chapter 1 may be taken by itself, although of course the whole book is constructive, but we learn "in part". In chapter 2 the whole Roman empire is in movement and all in view of this great event, and the Child is born in Bethlehem. There is nothing said of the town in regard of John, but there is in regard of Christ. We are now coming to the thought of geography, so to speak, the fulness of which I hope we shall see in chapter 19. There is spiritual geography in relation to the birth of Christ, because God has His geography and He keeps it in view.
W.C.G. In speaking of geography, are you referring to "the same country" mentioned in verse 8? Is that the connection with chapter 1?
J.T. Yes, only it is the country relating to *Bethlehem*. No doubt it is in general the hill country of chapter 1,
{320}
as the hill country of Judaea embraces an extensive territory running up to Hebron, an elevation of some 3,000 feet; so that Bethlehem, would be very elevated. But here it is "David's city, the which is called Bethlehem". The shepherds were in *that*  country.
D.L.H. Would you explain what you mean by spiritual geography?
J.T. I think it began with Abraham. I do not say it is not earlier, but it begins with faith laying hold of another world, so that we get it with Abraham in Bethel, which I think stands for the idea as much as any point; it is so much referred to later. We shall come to it in chapter 19 of our gospel, but it is worthy of note here because of Bethlehem, David's city.
A.J.H.B. It is "out of the city Nazareth to Judaea to David's city, the which is called Bethlehem"(@Luke 2:4). We have been coming away from the place where there was reproach, unto a place where there is no reproach, an elevated place.
J.T. I think that is right, and we have the royal link with David. All this will come out more clearly as we touch chapter 19. It says, "there were shepherds in that country abiding without, and keeping watch by night over their flock". *They*  surely will come into the "praises of Israel". They represent the kind of people that God will honour. How great an honour it is to have part in the "praises of Israel", to be brought out of the low level of current religion, with its organs and choirs, into such holy, elevated employ, spoken of by the Lord Jesus on the cross. These shepherds denote the kind of people that are included; they are morally suitable for this. They were "abiding without, and keeping watch by night over their flock". How very like David they were! "With whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness?" said Eliab to him, @1 Samuel 17:28. But he had not left them without a keeper. The shepherds are a link in the chain of faith. Zacharias speaks about the "holy prophets, who
{321}
have been since the world began". We may go back to Abel, who was a keeper of sheep.
H.D'A.C. What difference is there between the expression "since the world began" and "before the foundation of the world"?
J.T. The former is the world *to which*  God witnesses -- the world with man in it. "Before the foundation of the world" refers to the era of purpose, antecedent to what is material. We have also what is "before the worlds", @1 Corinthians 2, represented spiritually in Hebron.
Ques. Would the shepherding have in view the service of the house? I do not want to anticipate, but it says they "were continually in the temple praising and blessing God", @Luke 24:53.
J.T. The line of shepherds began with Abel. They were an abomination to the Egyptians. David was one characteristically, one that would stay out at night to look after the flock, one who knew what it was not to give sleep to his eyes nor slumber to his eyelids. Jacob also was out at night. That is the thought; so that these link up with the holy shepherd feature of Christ, and they surely must come into the "praises of Israel".
F.S.M. These shepherds, having seen the babe, "made known about the country the thing which had been said to them concerning this child", @Luke 2:17. Those who are able to share in the praises of the assembly are the better qualified for testimony concerning the Person who is the subject of those praises.
J.T. The shepherds became evangelical.
Ques. Would you connect this with @Psalm 87: "This man was born there", and then it says, "As well the singers as the dancers shall say, All my springs are in thee"?(@Psalm 87:6,7) Is there any connection there?
J.T. There is. I understand "thee" to be Zion there. I think we are getting on to that, and the Lord will help us to see where the springs are.
{322}
Eu.R. Would you link on with that Psalm the statement here as to each going to his own city?
J.T. Exactly. It is a suggestion of the idea of *locality*,  which we shall get in chapters 10 and 11. Luke has locality in mind.
Zion is the divine system, it being that which is especially said to be loved: "This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have desired it", @Psalm 132:14. "Jehovah loveth the gates of Zion", @Psalm 87:2. It is what God had as David brought the ark there; and then the singing began; and every true Israelite would say that his springs were there.
J.D. I was wondering whether the assembly corresponds to that. In connection with the mystery in Colossians we have: "In which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge", (chapter 2:3).
J.T. Exactly; what treasures! They surely enter into the praises of the assembly.
Eu.R. "All my springs are in thee" -- Are you suggesting that God would have our springs in the assembly?
J.T. Exactly; that is the way it works out. We shall see that in the closing chapters; all is working up to that. It says that the Lord, as risen, stood in the midst of them. We have the idea here: "an angel of the Lord was there by them". What is going to happen? These men are to be encircled with heavenly glory. What a thing that is! The Lord would bring all His people into that! The shepherds are morally suited to it in that they are keeping their flock by night. A shepherd is one who cares for and attends to others with *skill*  and self-sacrifice. Shepherding requires skill, but here the point is more self-sacrifice; that they were "abiding without, and keeping watch by night over their flock". These men come into the "praises of Israel". It says, "an angel of the Lord was there by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them".
{323}
J.R.S. Would the shepherds have their knowledge of God greatly increased in a practical way through the very service of shepherding?
J.T. Quite so; there is a reflection of Christ in it. As in that occupation light came to them. They were in proximity to Bethlehem. They were "in that country"; they were not *in*  Bethlehem, but they soon get there. They were adjacent to it and morally in keeping with it; they were in keeping with David, the great inaugurator of the service of song; and they are brought into it now in a most living way; and first, by the angel enlightening them. We have the idea of light shining *round*,  which is another excellent thought. Then there is the word, "I announce to you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all the people; for today a Saviour has been born to you in David's city, who is Christ the Lord". We are now on the footing of David and in relation to David's city, and David, and the son of David, "the root and offspring of David", as He announces Himself at the end of Revelation.
A.N. Do these shepherds set forth moral conditions to which communications can be made?
J.T. That is the idea. I believe God would appeal to His people as to this. There are many, alas! Who are opposed to what is of God and are showing it in the most unmistakable way; but these shepherds denote persons in close proximity to the centre of interest, and they must be included in the service of praise. The ministry is angelic, but it is a bringing down of the service of praise so that they are encircled. They are first illuminated by the light and the presence of a heavenly visitant who is "by them", and then there is the multitude of the heavenly host coming down.
W.R.P. Why is the ministry of angels such a marked feature in this part of Luke's gospel? Is there anything that answers to it in the assembly today?
J.T. I think the prominence given to them is that they are representatives of *heaven*. They are "ministering
{324}
spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation", (@Hebrews 1:14), which is always a present thing. I believe that emphasises the idea of salvation in this section, so that they are here called "the heavenly host". There are two collateral thoughts there -- "the heavenly" and "the Highest", both tending to lift us out of what is earthly and worldly. There are other thoughts of course connected with angels. Where you have a dignitary as in Luke and Daniel, I suppose the *order*  of heaven is in mind; there is the idea of *rank*. Gabriel stands before God. But in "the heavenly host" we have the atmosphere of heaven brought down in the way of praise.
Ques. Referring to @Isaiah 9, "unto us a child is born",(verse 6) would that be the subjective side of the truth in the saints?
J.T. It attributes the birth of Christ to Zion: "This man was born there"(@Psalm 87:6). Others were, but *this*  is accredited to Zion. How great the system is! It is great in that sense, and @Isaiah 9 is to bring out how great the people are, that the Messiah should come to them. The Child is born and the Son given to them; and then we have the glorious names attaching to Him; combined, they form His name.
Rem. In regard to @Psalm 22: "Thou art holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel";(verse 3) I had looked upon that as a divine ideal, and that the Lord Himself alone could express it as having known what the holiness of God was in respect of the judgment He passed through; it brings before us how the heart was completely satisfied. God was His portion. It shows the value of what worship is to the heart of God.
J.T. Quite so; how great it is! How great was that expression when the Lord was at the extreme point of suffering! How wonderful that He could refer to that!
J.L. What is the link between the stone and the shepherd in @Genesis 49:24?
{325}
J.T. The stone refers to permanency, to God's relations with Israel in Christ, as permanent.
J.L. As flowing from the suffering shepherd character as seen in these verses?
J.T. The two things go together; the shepherd is the stone. The shepherd character is first, gathering and caring for the sheep; but the "stone of Israel" is carried through Scripture as denoting what is permanent and usable for foundation and building.
J.L. "The archers have provoked him, and shot at, and hated him; but his bow abideth firm"(@Genesis 49:23,24); would that refer more to the shepherd character?
J.T. I suppose so. In @John 10, where the Lord brings Himself forward so beautifully as the Shepherd, the archers are all round Him. The Jews surrounded Him, it says, but "the arms of his hands are supple by the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob"(@Genesis 49:24). The Lord did not surrender; He resorted to first principles; "He went away from out of their hand and departed again beyond the Jordan to the place where John was baptising at the first: and he abode there ... . And many believed on him there", (@John 10:39 - 42). So that there was no surrender.
A.H.P. Is that why in @Micah 5 the shepherds and the princes are brought in together? It says, "And thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, little to be among the thousands of Judah, out of thee shall he come forth unto me who is to be Ruler in Israel: whose goings forth are from of old, from the days of eternity", verse 2, and then later in verse 5: "When the Assyrian shall come into our land, and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight princes of men". I was wondering whether we see the culmination in the shepherds and the princes.
J.T. I think we will all recognise that as an important contribution to our subject, bringing out the Lord's Deity as born in Bethlehem, and then the seven shepherds.
{326}
The idea of the shepherd is greatly emphasised, entering into what we have before us.
Ques. Would the praises of the angels be any part of the "praises of Israel"?
J.T. I think they come in here as provisional pending the formation of the assembly, they do what God has in mind for the assembly. The shepherds would get the idea of praise through them. You can understand how they would follow after the *heavenly*  way. You cannot conceive of anything out of accord in the praises of the multitude of the heavenly host. It is heaven's way brought down, and as educational, would enter into the service of the assembly.
Ques. Why do the shepherds get such a full revelation of Christ?
J.T. It is that they are morally in keeping. They are greatly honoured; they are more honoured than the wise men from the East. If you make a comparison between them and the Magi, you will see that they are more distinctly honoured; doubtless this is because they bear a more distinct character of Christ in their occupation. They are outside of what is current; it was the time of the census, and people would be in the towns, occupied no doubt in one way or another, selfishly; but these were unselfish, and one point is to direct our minds to any who bear this character; heaven's thought would be to bring them in, to cause the light to radiate around them. There are the angels standing by, and then the light radiating around, and then the instruction as to the birth of Christ; He is born *to them*,  showing how they were regarded. And He is the Saviour, not that He will be; the "Saviour ... who *is*  Christ the Lord". Then, as if to accentuate greatly what is there, the multitude of the heavenly host comes down, and the effect is that they are moved. It says, "It came to pass, as the angels departed from them into heaven, that the shepherds said to one
{327}
another, 'Let us make our way then now as far as Bethlehem, and let us see this thing that is come to pass, which the Lord has made known to us'". They did not say, "which the angels have made known", but "which the Lord has made known to us". They recognised that God had done all this.
{328}
THE PRAISES OF ISRAEL (3)
@Luke 3:21,22; @Luke 9:34,35; @Luke 10:17 - 24; @Luke 11:1 - 4
J.T. Referring to our subject which is the service of the assembly Godward, as seen in Luke, it may be remarked that the formation of the vessel of praise is included in the subject, as well as the praise itself. This gospel furnishes instruction, not only as to the service of praise; but the formation of the vessel in which the praises are to be rendered is also contemplated. That vessel is in the last chapter, as we shall doubtless see, but the component parts or elements are in view in the persons brought into evidence, where the thought of praise appears. We should also bear in mind the presentation of Christ as unborn, and born; then as a Child and as a Boy; then as in the consciousness of sonship without His sonship being stated; then His sonship announced from heaven, but announced to *Himself*  in this gospel; then His sonship announced to others on the mount of transfiguration, with the added word that He is to be heard: "Hear him"; then His inscrutable relations in the Deity, but withal in a known relation with the Father. That is as far as we may get in this reading.
It is necessary to revert to chapter 2. We left off with the shepherds surrounded by heavenly light and then by a multitude of the heavenly host praising God; the Babe born, that is, seen objectively, but a Babe; and then the Babe born *to them* : "born to you", as if the thought of *enrichment*  begins, and the *formation*  accompanying it, in Mary who pondered the things in her heart, keeping them in her mind. Then we have the bringing of the Babe to the temple, and the statement that there was *a man*  in Jerusalem who had communications from the Spirit, upon whom the Spirit of God was indeed; he had communications from the Holy
{329}
Spirit about Christ, and he took the Child in his arms. We have here an added thought of "a *man in Jerusalem*", a city as yet the centre of divine thoughts.
Up to this point, we have mentioned a certain priest and his wife of the daughters of Aaron, and then a virgin, and then Joseph, without any explanation as to who he is, and then the shepherds without mentioning their names, and then a man *in*  a certain place, namely, Jerusalem, upon whom the Holy Spirit was, and who had communications from Him about Christ. He takes the Child in his arms and speaks about Him, going beyond what Gabriel had said and what Zacharias had said, presenting Him as light for the revelation of the gentiles and the glory of God's people Israel.
Then a prophetess is mentioned, whose name is given and whose age is given, her history stressing her womanly qualities. So that we have these component elements brought forward, and then the introduction of the word "Boy" attached to the Lord, and His peculiar normalcy in that stage when He was seen in the temple -- sitting in the midst of the doctors, hearing and asking questions; His understanding and answers are noted. Then that He is conscious of His sonship without it being said formally that He was Son, chapter 2:49; He does not take it upon Him, but awaits the heavenly voice for that; then that it should be said *to*  Himself. I think the brethren will see there is much for us as to assembly formation, and the praise that goes with it, in chapter 2, for it has to be remembered that formation is not to be regarded as a thing by itself. As things are formed they are functioning, as in the tabernacle of old; as the parts were made and set up they were functioning, see @Exodus 40.
D.L.H. Have you any thought as to Anna's history in regard to living with her husband seven years, and then being a widow of eighty-four years? Why are details of that kind given to us?
{330}
J.T. It is to bring out the feminine feature in her. They are mentioned as creditable to her, her virginity, and then the duration of her widowhood, which, I take it, is what is meant by eighty-four years, involving in a woman great experience, which would have a place in due course in the vessel of praise.
Eu.R. In verse 38 she seems to function in two ways -- in praise to the Lord and testimony to men. What form would those take on the part of sisters in the assembly economy?
J.T. Sisters taking part in the vessel of praise now are of course regulated by the law governing it, that is, 1 Corinthians. We have to look at all these elements in Luke from the standpoint of Paul's doctrine and instruction governing the assembly; therefore, it is a question of the *qualities*  indicated. The idea of virginity is stressed, and then living with her husband from that time for seven years, and then living a very long time in widowhood; and what marks her now at such a great age is great *activity*,  departing not from the temple night and day, praying in relation to the temple, and then speaking of Christ to all that looked for redemption. That is, she has a *knowledge of persons*,  a knowledge of the effect of the work of God, and her activities are to the end that they might be brought into relation with Christ -- "all those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem";(@Luke 2:38) that is the way it should read, Jerusalem being of special importance in chapter 2 because of its position then as the centre of God's thoughts. And she came in at *that hour*,  that is she did not miss the great occasion.
J.H.T. Would the long and faithful surrender of what is sweetest in nature lead to the development of one of these component parts in the assembly? The apostle says to Timothy, "Younger widows decline". I wondered if the surrender of the natural would help.
J.T. It does -- the maintenance of widowhood for such a long period. Babylon says that she sits a queen
{331}
and is no widow. That is the opposite of the assembly; the assembly experiences widowhood in the sense of the absence of Christ.
H.E.S. Is widowhood one of the distinctive features of Luke's gospel?
J.T. It is. We see it here, and with the widow of whom the Lord took notice as casting her gift into the treasury. Those two together stress the idea. When we come to the widow who cast her all into the treasury we have a distinct landmark. The old system was not equal to her; it was not great enough for her; and so the Lord immediately speaks of the destruction of the temple. We shall see that later.
J.D. Did she represent the state of the people, and was she in line with the movements of the Spirit of God in regard to the vessel of grace?
J.T. Yes; the land had been married, but it was now in a state of widowhood; the bonds had been broken and she felt it.
Ques. Would you say that with the sense of widowhood there was still praise for Jehovah?
J.T. Quite so; Anna was capable of it; she was one with capabilities. It is said that "she coming up the same hour gave praise to the Lord", @Luke 2:38. The occasion moved her.
M.W.B. Do you think it being mentioned that she came up at that hour implies that there is a certain sequence as to Simeon, a man at Jerusalem, things proceeding as we find in this widow?
J.T. I think so; she is a counterpart to the man. If you link the passage with @1 Corinthians 11, you see the beautiful seemliness here in the man and the woman, only she is introduced to us as a prophetess and her name given afterwards. It is *that*  side, following on the other personalities mentioned.
A.L. Is it like the reference in @Psalm 137? Did she remember Jerusalem above her chief joy?
{332}
J.T. Quite so, and especially the temple: "Who did not depart from the temple", it says, "serving night and day with fastings and prayers" (@Luke 2:37). Jerusalem was the area of her evangelical activities, but her living associations were in the temple, and that with suitable habits, fastings, and prayers night and day.
A.J.B. Would her constancy be a fine feature to emulate?
J.T. Exactly. If we emulate it we shall not miss the great occasions, and we shall be ready to take a suitable part in them. Her part is very different from that of Simeon, but she fits in with it.
J.J. Would the intelligence of Simeon be important in that he does practically as Jacob did in crossing his hands? Simeon brings in the gentiles first. Would the volume of praise that was to come from the gentiles be before him?
J.T. I think that is right. It is *a man*,  not a Jew. If some Jewish feature were to be stressed, doubtless it would have been a Jew. One point in all this is to get the full thoughts of God about the Babe, that is, Christ known in this simple way; and then that we begin to get enlarged as to God's thoughts about Him; not what He is saying Himself yet, but what God is expressing about Him.
P.C. Would this be like the hour of incense, as mentioned in chapter 1?
J.T. There never had been such a day as this in the temple.
P.C. Would it be in keeping with @Psalm 22, where it says, "All the families of the nations shall worship before thee?" (verse 27).
J.T. Exactly; it is not the inner house here, but the external part; it is the temple and the mind of God made known by a man already there, a man prepared. It is said of him that he was *in*  Jerusalem, the preposition indicating that it was characteristic of Him.
{333}
H.E.S. Why is it said in regard of Simeon that "the Holy Spirit was *upon*  him"(@Luke 2:25), whereas of Zacharias and Elizabeth it is said that they were *filled*  with the Spirit? What are we to understand by that?
J.T. The difference is between what is inward and what is outward. The anointing is seen in Simeon without the word being used. It is the dignity that belonged to him in those circumstances; he is really a priest without being called that. It is transitional. Zacharias was a priest; he is introduced to us as "a certain priest". Now, Simeon is really a priest without the name attaching to him, which is in keeping with Luke. It is said of the Lord: "If then indeed He were upon earth. He would not even be a priest", @Hebrews 8:4, but He *was*  a Priest; He was that, although not yet owned officially.
H.O.S. Would taking the little Babe in his arms point on to the heave-offering?
J.T. It would; the arms are suggestive of power in the expression of affection, compare @Song of Songs 2.
H.M.S. Are there not here four things -- the temple, the custom of the law, the Spirit, and the Child Jesus? Two of those things were to pass away, and what would be left were the Spirit and the Child Jesus.
J.T. Then "Jesus alone with themselves" later.
Ques. I notice it says that "they returned to Galilee to their own city", and then we are told that "the child grew and waxed strong"(@Luke 2:39,40). What is the bearing of that?
J.T. It is in keeping with what we had yesterday as to John. It is said of John that "the child grew and was strengthened in spirit"(@Luke 1:80). That would be the *maintenance*  of the state of things described at the end of chapter 1. Whilst of course there are other great things entering into this, which we shall not be able to touch, I think the growth of the Lord here may be taken to represent what proceeds in our apprehensions. "They returned to Galilee to their own city Nazareth", (@Luke 2:39) and it says, "He went down with them and came to Nazareth,
{334}
and he was in subjection to them. And his mother kept all these things in her heart. And Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men"(@Luke 2:51,52). We have in that the suggestion of the steady growth and maintenance of what is indicated in the chapter; that is to say, the teaching is progressive; there is no retrogression; things are well maintained and go forward, which ought always to mark the assembly.
P.L. Do we get that thought in regard of Antioch? "As they were ministering to the Lord and fasting" -- things are maintained. Then "the Holy Spirit said";(@Acts 13:2) is that advance?
J.T. Very good. The idea is progress, things well maintained and progressing.
Rem. I was thinking of the movement from Jerusalem to Nazareth in connection with the service of praise.
J.T. The return to Nazareth from Jerusalem represents a great general thought which always enters into the position of the assembly. Nazareth is what you might call a local position, a place to which *reproach*  is attached. How will we do there? What comes out is that Mary is getting on. She had made a blunder, and learns by it. It is a poor thing if we do not learn by our blunders. Mary did. She represents that side all through this chapter, how we develop in relation to what is objective. She is learning. They found Him in the temple, but then the Holy Spirit does not say only that. He says what went on in the temple. He does not leave us with the simple fact that He was in the temple; there must be something there to be learnt. He was "sitting in the midst of the teachers and hearing them and asking them questions. And all who heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers". (@Luke 2:46,47) Then it says, "And when they saw him they were amazed: and his mother said to him. Child, why hast thou dealt thus with us? Behold, thy father and I have sought thee distressed. And he said to them. Why is
{335}
it that ye have sought me? Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business? And they understood not the thing that he said to them", @Luke 2:48 - 50. There is a state with them which plainly indicates they had been remiss, and now they do not understand, which is a humbling thing. It was plain enough there was another Father than Joseph Mary said, "Thy father and I"; He says, "My Father's business", a very different business from that of Joseph. He was occupied in the temple, but they did not understand. But then it says, "He went down with them and came to Nazareth, and he was in subjection to them", @Luke 2:51. That is, attention is now called to Christ leaving the centre of things in Jerusalem. He goes down to Nazareth with them and is in subjection to them. There is much practical instruction in this. And His mother is said to have kept things in her heart, showing that precious things are being accumulated, they are not lost. Mary represents a treasury, one who *keeps*  things. David had the idea of treasuries -- not only a treasury, but treasuries; and Mary represents that idea, so that things are preserved. Then it says, "Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men", @Luke 2:52. We might say, How will He get on without the doctors? If He were only left in Jerusalem see how He would progress. But all such reasoning is wrong. As in the position assigned under the will of God we shall not suffer. We may be a long way from the chief sphere of interest, but as moving under the will of God we shall not lose: we shall gain.
P.C. Would the treasuries that you mention in connection with the temple be connected with the fragrant drugs necessary for the work of the perfumer in connection with the altar of incense?
J.T. Exactly; they would be regarded as valuables; the component parts of the incense were very valuable.
I do not know whether the brethren have all followed the instruction here; it is very practical -- leaving the
{336}
doctors and the great places in Jerusalem for an obscure place. The Lord Himself did it. It was not that His parents took Him down; He did it, "He went down with them and came to Nazareth, and He was in subjection to them", (verse 51). Now He is advancing "in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men", @Luke 2:52. Jesus is in the presence of God and men -- all in view of the testimony.
E.J.McB. Is your thought that He was conscious of sonship in Himself by the statement, "My Father's business"?
J.T. Yes.
E.J.McB. Before it is publicly brought out?
J.T. Yes, and then chapter 3 confirms it; heaven confirms the attitude He took up in chapter 2, because in this gospel it is, "*Thou*  art my beloved son"; it is for *Himself*.
P.L. The humiliation of Jesus in @Philippians 2 -- the mind in which He went down -- is put in contrast to the opposers in chapter 1. Would that answer a little to His leaving the doctors? And then, after that, we have, "Do all things without murmurings and reasonings"(@Philippians 2:24) -- would that be the spirit of Mary? She was murmuring and reasoning in the temple, but now she is keeping these things in her heart: is that the effect? It says that Jesus "went down" -- would that cover a little the thought of @Philippians 2?
J.T. It is put as if He did it. He went to the place of reproach, and instead of suffering disadvantage. He is gaining -- and advancing in wisdom and stature and in favour with God and men.
M.W.B. Do you think there is the suggestion of the local setting of the assembly in "their own city", and being in subjection?
J.T. Yes; Jerusalem represents the general position, and Nazareth is like the local company standing in relation to it. Whilst we do not have the full thought of the local company and the general position as we
{337}
shall see it later, yet we have the suggestion of it. This is all progressive and constructive, so that the great vessel of praise is being formed in its elements. Mary the Lord's mother is undoubtedly to have a great place in the vessel of praise, because she is seen in the upper room in Acts, and she is seen at the cross also; and Simeon tells her that a sword should pierce her own soul, that is, the suffering side is to come in.
H.M.S. Is not the Lord in this chapter seen in fulfilment of Malachi's prophecy: "The Lord whom ye seek will suddenly come to his temple"? chapter 3:1.
J.T. The thought is there. He is not yet formally noted as the "Angel of the covenant", but He is there.
Ques. Would you emphasise the necessity of local conditions and exercises in connection with growth in wisdom and stature?
J.T. That is very suggestive as to brethren who are isolated, and so exposed, like a high mountain, to the bitter cold winds -- that the Lord here took this course Himself and was in Nazareth, advancing in wisdom and stature and in favour with God and men. It should be very comforting for persons who are isolated, that the isolation need not interfere with spiritual progress.
P.L. It was the daughters of Jerusalem who paved with love the midst of the palanquin of king Solomon, @Song of Songs, 3:9,10. Would that be a little like @1 Corinthians 13? You spoke of Nazareth representing what is local -- a "daughter of Jerusalem".
J.T. Quite so; the idea is that local companies yield what the Lord needs. He does not suffer; He has the very best in the palanquin; the material with which it is made shows it is the very best. Where did they get their material? The idea is of wealth used in love, to the end that Christ is, so to speak, suitably carried.
Ques. Is your thought that the way the Lord is presented in the end of chapter 2 suggests what should characterise us in local conditions?
{338}
J.T. Yes; how we may progress *there*  .
Rem. His mother addresses Him as "Child", but He is consciously in the enjoyment of sonship.
J.T. Exactly, without the use of the term "Son". He is in perfect seemliness at the age of twelve, that, whilst it is obvious He is conscious of His sonship, the Spirit of God waits heaven's announcement before the word is directly applied. In chapter 1 it reads. He "shall be called Son of God".
Eu.R. Do we get the suggestion of our moving from the local to the general position, in the psalm touching on Jerusalem: "Whither the tribes go up", @Psalm 122:4?
J.T. Yes. The *general*  idea of the assembly is Ephesians, and the *local*  is Corinthians. It is a question of spiritual power whether we reach the general idea. We shall come to this later in our readings. I think the Lord's indicating His knowledge of His relation to His Father at the age of twelve leads to the understanding that the vessel of praise is human. Luke would show that it is not angelic, but that the Lord is in the sense of His relations with God: "My Father's business", He says. How wide is that thought!
Then, in @Luke 3, we come to the full thought on the same line, but the Lord, as our attention is called to Him, is not yet presented objectively. Matthew says, "*This*  is my beloved Son"(@Matthew 3:17), and therefore the idea is there; but in Luke the idea is that the One seen there is in the consciousness of sonship Himself. Heaven announces it to *Him* ,and also that He is to the pleasure of the Father. "*Thou*  art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". Then we have the Holy Spirit in a *bodily*  form, for the idea conveyed is of substance and entirety; the Holy Spirit is there. Then we are told that Jesus began to be about thirty years of age. Now, making all due allowance reverently for the fact that the Lord's Person enters into this, there is also the
{339}
human side, the understanding of which enters into the constitution of the assembly -- the presence here humanly of this glorious Person in sonship in His own consciousness, and the presence of the Spirit in a bodily form as a dove, suggesting entirety and peculiar sensitiveness. This is one of the greatest groups of things to grasp in regard of the vessel of praise.
D.L.H. Is the idea of maturity in your mind as in the assembly?
J.T. In the thirty years -- exactly. "Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years old" -- *Jesus Himself*. (@Luke 3:23) This is a notable thing, it is a question of His consciousness, leading in thought to the assembly, which was to be marked by this feature; as there, we are to be conscious, by the Spirit of the things that enter into it.
C.C.E. Does it not refer to the levitical age of service?
J.T. It does, but the wording indicates conscious manhood in Christ: "Jesus himself".
J.J. Is there anything to be understood by the eighteen years of silence in His history between the ages of twelve and thirty?
J.T. What is unspoken in Scripture speaks most loudly at times. What years they were! A Boy speaking, as He is said to have spoken, in the temple, and then growing in wisdom and stature and in favour with God and men. What years they were for any who had anointed eyes to see what occurred in them! Because there was continual growth in wisdom and stature.
M.W.B. Whilst sonship is proper to Christianity and to all Christians, is what you are saying intended to convey the thought that maturity here is normal, and that before we get the real consciousness of the relation there would be growth?
J.T. Exactly. Maturity is a great thought in Paul's ministry. The Corinthians were not mature; they were to be grown men in their minds, but Ephesians gives
{340}
you the full thought -- "The measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", chapter 4:13.
W.T. So it is *Jesus*  that advances, not simply the Boy Jesus.
J.T. It is Jesus Himself now; the diminutive thought is dropped.
R.B-n. At the age of maturity is not the thought very much what the Lord is to the Father, whereas at the age of twelve it is more what the Father is to Him? The Father can now give the public declaration, showing definite committal to Him as a Man here.
J.T. Yes, the suitable time for this had arrived.
M.W.B. What relation is there between the priestly service of the sanctuary and sonship?
J.T. The idea of priesthood is to guard the holy things. The priest excludes all that is unholy and unsuitable; it is a term relative to conditions of time, and necessarily comes to an end when there is nothing unholy to exclude; whereas sonship remains. Sonship is the proper relation with God; the priesthood is a typical term used to show that the saints are holy and intelligent, and so qualified to serve God in spite of contrary conditions, rigidly excluding what is unsuitable to God. Scripture says, "The priests lips should keep knowledge", (@Malachi 2:7); they know what to do.
Eu.R. Does this thought of humanity fit in with the shittim wood in the tabernacle, and is there the suggestion of the Lord Jesus being a pattern for the assembly, in that it entered into the boards of the tabernacle as well as the ark?
J.T. Yes; the order of Man seen in Him is in view. At this stage we may well be reminded of the importance of consciousness, that we are to be conscious of things. The Lord, being the pattern as expressing this order of humanity, is conscious of sonship in the temple, and then heaven announces it; and the Holy Spirit accompanying it, points to its becoming extended -- redemption being accomplished. I am not, of course,
{341}
ignoring the deity of the Lord which ever remains, but we have the human side here. The assembly is of Him and human in that sense, and the Lord takes part in it Godward. It is what God intended in His counsels, a human vessel of praise. Thus, "Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years old"(@Luke 3:23). Then, in chapter 9, we have the added thought of "Hear him". That word "Hear him" assumes His rejection. The old system is now to be abolished, that is to say, it has proved reprobate. The going up to the mount is consequent upon His rejection, to bring out His personal dignity in relation to heaven, and that *He*  is to be heard. The suggestion is very wide, because Moses and Elias represent all that had been said. Then, too, there was the current system at Jerusalem; all that has been left, and there is to be a new system. Mary of Bethany comes in in this section, and I mention her here because of her importance in the vessel; she comes in as representative of those who hear the Lord. Her attitude means that she is going to learn everything from Christ. We have to learn everything from Him, and that is the thing that comes out in the mount of transfiguration.
A.N.W. Why is it not stated in either case *whose*  voice it is that speaks?
J.T. You mean it is just a voice from *heaven* ? The assumption is that we have trained ears and discern the voice. The importance of heaven is asserted. There can be no doubt whose it is; the word "son" is used: "My beloved Son". That is to say, the centre of things is in Christ now. It is the transfer from Jerusalem as a centre, although it held a position outwardly to a much later time; but the transfer is already beginning. Heaven is not now speaking to Jerusalem or any one in it; it is speaking to Christ. On the banks of the Jordan we are far away from Jerusalem; that is to say, you have the principle of transfer from the earthly centre brought in there. In chapter 3 Christ is already the object of heaven, and again in chapter 9 He is the object of
{342}
heaven as over against Moses and Elias. It is imperative in chapter 9 that He is to be heard -- an important matter in regard of the assembly, because so much that is of man has been brought in since the apostles times; we must come back to this. It is what the *Son*  says.
Ques. Why is the change from heaven to the cloud in chapter 9, in contrast to the voice out of heaven in chapter 3?
J.T. The allusion is to the wilderness position. The cloud was the symbol of the divine Presence; what is presented fits in with the Old Testament position, contemplating that Jesus Himself was now the tabernacle. Peter thought that there should be three tabernacles, but what happens shows that the wilderness position is in view, and the cloud of the divine Presence is now recognising Jesus; it is in relation to Jesus. It is a complete transfer. We are being educated here in the way of transfer in our minds to another centre and system.
H.E.S. Is that why Peter says in his epistle that it was the "holy mount", because the Lord is Himself regarded as the tabernacle?
J.T. Quite so; you can understand how after he received the Spirit and after his long service, Peter would speak of it in such beautiful terms -- the "excellent glory", he says.
A.N. I wondered whether there would be a similarity here to the position in @Matthew 16: "Who do men say that I the Son of man am?"(verse 13) and they looked back to the old economy, but the Lord indicates that an entirely new position was being taken up. Is that your thought?
J.T. Yes; He would build something entirely new; and it would be His own -- "My assembly". It is the power of transfer through the Person of Christ being called attention to from heaven. We are being
{343}
accustomed to that in this account, and it culminates in His presence in the assembly, chapter 24.
P.L. So that Peter is educated just previous to this scene -- if he had understood what he had said. "Peter answering said. The Christ of God", (verse 20) -- is that the tent of witness, the anointed vessel?
J.T. Well, quite so; it is here "The Christ of God". That is in keeping with Luke -- what is to be presented in testimony on the part of God.
Ques. You are stressing the point of "Hear him". I wondered whether that would fit in with what Paul said to the elders of Ephesus, "Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that He himself said". (@Acts 20:35)?
J.T. It was a saying not recorded in the gospels, but full of holy instruction: "It is more blessed to give than to receive", @Acts 20:35.
H.D'A.C. Would you say a word as to the cloud overshadowing them as they entered into it? It does not say that the cloud overshadowed Him. Does it correspond with the shekinah glory?
J.T. They were to become the tabernacle in relation to Him, that is, it was "Jesus alone with themselves" afterwards. They represented what the greater and more perfect tabernacle would be, "which the Lord has pitched and not man", (@Hebrews 8:2).
H.H-s. In Peter's second epistle he says, "he received from God the Father honour and glory, such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom *I*  have found my delight", (chapter 1:17). I was wondering whether there was an advance there: "such a voice".
J.T. Peter is now full of this great scene. It shows how we progress in our souls if the Spirit has His way with us; there is no doubt that the use of the word "tabernacle" by Peter links with this position. He represented the tent of testimony in great measure.
Ques. Would the "voice out of the cloud" suggest inscrutability?
{344}
J.T. It reminds us that the Father is there. It is the presence of the glory where God was, that is, in relation to the tabernacle, what is here on earth for Him. We do not get inscrutability exactly till we come to chapter 10, although we are being prepared for it.
Ques. Would it be right to say we hear the Father's voice directly, or are we now limited to the Lord's voice?
J.T. The Lord says, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father", (@John 14:9). But the Father is to be apprehended by Himself, and the Father speaks Himself. *How*  He does it is beyond us; but it is through human language, as we may say; the words are human words, they are words intelligible to men. That I apprehend would be always true; what the Father says is intelligible to men. We cannot say what the mode of communication may be between divine Persons viewed in absoluteness.
W.W. Does it not require in us the trained ear, that you spoke of?
J.T. Yes. We cannot have a vessel of praise without trained ears; there must be discernment of sounds and voices.
Eu.R. Do you get the suggestion of the Father by Himself in relation to the assembly in @1 Corinthians 8? "To us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and we for him", verse 6.
J.T. Yes. Each of the divine Persons may be apprehended separately. When we think of God we can only think of one God; but the Father may speak, or the Son may speak, or the Spirit may speak. Each Person may speak; we are to live in Scripture's way of thinking and speaking. We cannot explain or compass these things, but as born of God we are brought into an environment in which these things exist, and we must grow up intelligently in them. So that we learn how to speak and think in that environment, the Holy
{345}
Spirit being the power for it in us. The angels in heaven are in an environment of their own and they think accordingly. It is impossible to compass these things -- that the Father can speak out of the cloud in human language; we just accept it.
J.J. The scene in chapter 9 may be regarded as taking us out of what is merely local.
J.T. We have now reached the end of one great chapter in the Lord's history. His sonship is asserted, and then the great fact is worked out by the anointing in the succeeding chapters; and then the mount of transfiguration, which has His rejection in view, so that we may get a view of His relations up there; but still in regard of the testimony, to show how He is superseding everything. Not only is He personally the centre on earth, but everything is to be *learned*  from Him now. We have to listen to Him. Then, chapter 10 brings out His inscrutable relations in the Deity, and yet His perfect humanity is in evidence; He *rejoices in spirit* , showing how perfectly human He was in that way.
P.L. Would that touch as to His deity tone the vessel of praise in the spirit of worship?
J.T. It does. You can see how we are drawn into heavenly relations, and, to contemplate the relations of Deity in so far as we are able to apprehend them. So that we are now in the presence of the greatest things, and all is with a view to formation in us; and formation, as I apprehend, in relation to the local company, because chapter 10 contemplates that. It contemplates "every city and place" to which the Lord was about to come; and then in the end of the chapter we have "a certain village" in which things were not right -- at least, in Martha's house; and then the Lord praying "in a certain place", chapter 11. Those are the great facts in chapter 10 and the beginning of chapter 11.
D.L.H. Would you explain the distinction between what the Lord says here and in Matthew in regard to
{346}
Himself? In Matthew it is, "No one knows the Son but the Father", chapter 11:27. Here in Luke it is, "No one knows who the Son is but the Father".
J.T. Well, the mind is brought to think more directly of the Person, in the way Luke presents it. Without stressing the relation or appellation "Son", the mind is brought to think of the *Person*,  "*who*  the Son is". I think, without assuming to understand the full bearing of it, that the Spirit of God looked on prophetically to the great activity of theologians in the second, third, and fourth centuries, which, I believe, the Lord is now showing to have been, very largely, in disregard of this verse. Although honest in many cases, there was the attempt to make the Son's personality logical, such as the human mind could take in. Doctrines which are not right were laid down and have been handed down to us.
Ques. When the Lord Jesus uses this title "Son" in chapter 10, is He referring to what had been given from heaven in chapter 3?
J.T. Of course. He was the Son as become incarnate, but the acknowledgment of this by the Father is necessarily in view.
Rem. So that His personality is greater even than that title.
J.T. Surely; He is and ever was God. Although remaining a divine Person, equal with the Father, His sonship involved obedience and subjection, as Scripture shows throughout. Luke has in mind to occupy us with the Person, *who*  He is, and to make it clear that it is *not*  for us to know. It seems to me that that had a powerful bearing on the theologians and on the way creeds were formulated, in which it is stated that the Lord was begotten of the Father before all worlds. This was evidently needed, according to the theologians, to make the idea of His sonship before incarnation, intelligible. It is not true, and the Lord resents it.
{347}
H.D'A.C. If so, where was He before He was begotten thus?
J.T. The statement is contradictory of other statements in the creed, and is derogatory to the Lord.
D.L.H. I do not know that I quite catch the distinction in your mind between the two thoughts. "No one knows the Son but the Father"; that is absolute, but here it is, "No one knows who the Son is but the Father". In a certain way I thought John told us who He is, that is. He is God, the Creator, and so on, as in the first few verses of John's gospel. So that if we were to be asked. Who is the Son of God? we should have to say. He is God, He is the Creator.
J.T. That is so far good; but there is more than that involved. I think it is an exclusive thought to shut out the human mind; because it is certain that if the human mind were admitted, there would be an effort to define the Person of the Son. The note by J.N.D. to @Matthew 11:27 helps a little as to the use of the word 'know'. It is said to be "a real knowledge, not merely objective acquaintance with a person"; that is, as I apprehend, a real understanding of the being and relations of the Person become Man. It is in that sense, and as if the Spirit of God were to say to the theologians. Do not touch this, you cannot fathom it. It is a prohibitive thought, guarding the Person of the Lord Jesus. We must think of Him as presented in Scripture, and the Spirit gives us understanding in keeping with creature limitations.
H.D'A.C. Have you any thought about @Ephesians 4: "the knowledge of the Son of God"?(verse 13) Is there any distinction in your mind between the two thoughts?
D.L.H. It is the same word in Ephesians as in Matthew.
J.T. We have to read it contextually, which is always important as we read Scripture. Paul is treating of the Lord as Son in relation to man, those addressed
{348}
being also sons of God; the appellation has importance there, for it is a question of knowing the Person in *that relation*  -- the Son of God. But @Matthew 11 and @Luke 10 are not treating of the relation of sonship, but of the Person who has taken that relation.
Eu.R. Does this involve that He has come down into humanity? Is there not an indication of what you are suggesting in connection with the manna? It would leave us rather on inquiry, do you think, "who the Son is"?
J.T. There is some link there, I think. We have noted elsewhere that a big question mark may be on the face of @Exodus 16. What is it? The natural man will never arrive at an answer to it. What is it? But here it is, *who*  the Person is? It is prohibitive of the natural mind; no one knows, nor is it suggested that any one ever will know. That He is God is a great general fact which John states, but a thorough knowledge and understanding of that Person no creature is capable of.
H.E.S. Is the attempt to define *who*  the Son is, something akin to the mistake of the men of Beth-shemesh who looked into the ark?
J.T. Pretty much, and I think the Lord is raising the whole question of what I may call theological Christianity, and what He thinks about it. He would have His people revert to what Scripture presents and of which the Spirit gives understanding. Faith is in relation to the Spirit; we are to "keep, by the Holy Spirit ... the good deposit entrusted", (@2 Timothy 1:14).
M.W.B. Do I understand that in Matthew and in Luke it is the Person that is emphasised; while in @Ephesians 4 it is the divine thought for man, as set forth in Him as Son?
J.T. That is the idea exactly, so that the relation is in view, to apprehend Him as the Son of God.
Ques. In @Matthew 11 it says, "All things have been delivered to me by my Father, and no one knows the
{349}
Son but the Father, nor does any one know the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son may be pleased to reveal him"(verse 27). Would you say a word as to revealing in connection with the Father?
J.T. Well, we have to accept the statement. One great point in understanding divine things is to settle yourself in the presence of a statement whether you understand it or not, and in due course the Holy Spirit will give you its bearing. In that connection I would remark that I believe we fail to keep our sabbaths. The keeping of the sabbath implies lying fallow, especially the land. The land may be taken to represent a person; in lying fallow divine things settle into him, and he begins to see something of their meaning. Now this passage is one that is constantly before us, thank God; and I believe what has been said here today is right, that what is said about the Son is a prohibitive thought to shut out the human mind; whereas there is no prohibition in regard of the Father, because it is that Person who is God; He is said formally to be God: "There is one God the Father",(@1 Corinthians 8:6) and it is obvious that He is to be known, as the Lord could say, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father"(@John 14:9). So that revealing the Father is the bringing out of God in the sense of love and grace, but more than that, by a specific revelation; because the word is not "declaration" here, but "revelation", which is always *to persons* : "he to whomsoever the Son is pleased to reveal him". It is intimated that the Son may give one a full understanding of the Father.
Ques. Would the word coming from heaven indicate that we must listen now to what He would say about the Father?
J.T. Quite so.
J.H.T. Would the word in @Proverbs 30 indicate the prohibitive thought? "What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?"(verse 4) And the word says,
{350}
"Every word of God is pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him. Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar", (verses 4 - 6). Would that apply to the theologians?
J.T. Very directly -- to the additions found in the creeds.
{351}
THE PRAISES OF ISRAEL (4)
@Luke 15:22 - 28, @Luke 19:37 - 40
J.T. In order to link on with what came before us this morning, we must revert to chapters 10 and 11. The governing thought from the mount of transfiguration is the Son; delightful to heaven, but *to be heard*,  so that we have to learn everything from Him. Indeed, in @Matthew 11, which corresponds with @Luke 10, the Lord said, "Learn from me"; here, it is the hearing rather: "Hear Him". On His coming down from the mount we are told, "The days of His receiving up were fulfilled", (verse 51). In a certain sense. He was received on the mount, but the full thought is in His ascension; and we have the local thought introduced in chapter 10 in the seventy being sent out "before his face into every city and place where he himself was about to come"(@Luke 10:1). Then they return and relate their success, and He says, "Yet in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens"(@Luke 10:20). So that we are being brought into correspondence with Him as about to be received up.
Then we have the statement, "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven"(@Luke 10:18), that is, all adverse power is removed, and place is made for us without fear of disturbance, a thought which has its place in the assembly, we are to be in an undisturbed state. Then He "rejoiced in spirit", I apprehend, as an example, although it was perfectly real and normal to Him at this time because of what was coming into evidence. Instead of Israel, He was having the assembly; the babes, to whom He alludes, being the potential material for it. We are reminded of the pleasure the Lord has in us. That is the idea of rejoicing in spirit; a state in Him that would affect us and give a lead, for the
{352}
assembly is surely the place of joy. It is where He secures the results of His death now, the joy that was "set before Him", and it lends a certain liberty to us as there, the sense that He has joy in us, and He praises. We have the manner of His speaking: "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes: yea. Father, for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight", @Luke 10:21. Then He refers to the position He occupies administratively, saying, "All things have been delivered to me by my Father"(@Luke 10:22); and then He dwells on the thought of inscrutability as to Himself: "No one knows who the Son is but the Father, and who the Father is but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son is pleased to reveal him". (@Luke 10:22); Then He turns to His disciples privately and speaks about their eyes, how blessed they were because of what they were seeing. All that is educational, and is intended to bear on the local position; because we have immediately, the idea of the *neighbour* ; who a neighbour is and how a neighbour acts; and then a certain *village*,  then, in chapter 11, He is praying in a "certain *place*". It would seem therefore as if the whole section, inclusive of the end of chapter 9, chapter 10, and the early part of chapter 11, is the heavenly position of the saints, and the Lord's delight in us as belonging to heaven; His own place in the Deity being brought in, and the blessedness of our eyes because of what we see -- all that bearing on the local position.
M.W.B. Would you say why the local position is emphasised here?
J.T. The heavenly setting necessarily enters into the local position as giving colour to our testimony there. Although the general heavenly position is really in this section, until chapter 19 that is, the entrance into Jerusalem, it is typical of what we are to *reach from*  the local side; but our local position is necessarily coloured by the heavenly, otherwise there is no proper testimony.
{353}
M.W.B. And does it imply that local conditions must be right before there can be the passing on to what is suggested in Jerusalem?
J.T. I think so. What comes out in the early part of chapter 10 is the light in which we are gathered, in which we should come together; and then, in view of this coming together, what the neighbour is; and then the household conditions locally. Chapter 10, following on the others we read, shows that neighbourly conditions did not exist, neither did suitable household conditions exist, and I think that necessitates the prayer of chapter 11, and the answer to it is in the Spirit, the furnishings that there must be. So that the Spirit is given to those who ask the Father "who is of heaven". It is *of*  heaven, not *in*  heaven. The point is, what is *out of*  heaven seen in a locality, and this necessitates the Spirit.
Ques. Do you think that the Holy Spirit is omitted from chapter 10 to make way for Him coming from the Father in chapter 11?
J.T. The Spirit proceeds from the Father; we must have the Father. We have the Father in chapter 10, and prayer to Him in chapter 11, and then that He is "the Father who is *of*  heaven". In the prayer in the beginning of the chapter the words "which art in heaven" should not be there. In verse 13, it is "the Father who is of heaven"; it is His character more.
H.E.S. In the priest and the levite you get what is official, but they have to make way for what is moral and spiritual.
J.T. That is how the truth stands. The Lord sets out the thing in the parable of the Samaritan, and then He puts it to the man to name it. Which is neighbour? He says. The lawyer is to name which is neighbour, and he says, "He that showed him mercy", and the Lord said, "Go and do thou likewise"(@Luke 10:37).
{354}
Eu.R. In chapter 10 we get the thought of city and place and village; would it help if you said a word as to those?
J.T. Well, the idea of a city is prominent in assembly economy; it denotes an ordered place. It is a place of man's will, as in this world, but God would set in it what is to displace that. The principle of the present testimony is, that there is something displacing, by moral superiority, what has proved reprobate. The world's cities are places of organised evil, and organised evil is the worst form of evil, and God proposes to displace that morally, before He displaces it actually. He displaces it morally in what He produces in the assembly; so that, throughout the Acts you will find the thought of a city prominent. The disciples were to continue there, according to the end of Luke; then in @Acts 9, Saul is to go into the city to be told in it what to do, meaning that in the city, the place in which man's will was carried out, God had something in which His will was to be carried out. So Saul is to be told *there*  what he must do. Then you have the idea of a "place", which would include anything with a name in the shape of a locality. A "village" is something between, having somewhat the nature of a town or city, and yet not a city. The importance of the assembly, by virtue of moral qualities from God, superseding what man has organised, is very great. The Lord in rejoicing in spirit gives a lead to what is in the assembly in the way of joy, a joy of the highest order. He rejoiced in spirit, and in regard to the place of His own in the heavens. It is not merely a better or more ordered religion that we have, but something heavenly, with heavenly feelings attached to it, and all that becomes it in the way of brotherliness, neighbourliness, and household hospitality. I think that is the idea in chapter 10.
P.L. Have you those features in Paul himself amongst the Corinthians? Is there the neighbourly touch in the way he would spend and be spent for them,
{355}
and then the brotherly touch -- "Sosthenes the brother" -- and then the hospitable household at the end of chapter 16 -- "the house of Stephanas"?
J.T. Quite so. All these thoughts were there. These thoughts had been or were at Corinth, although the whole assembly was not characterised by them. Just as we get here, the right thoughts existed in Martha's house in Mary, but the house was not characterised by them; and I believe that is what occasioned the prayer of chapter 11. At least, that is the moral link.
What is called the Lord's prayer here has a dispensational character which, of course, must be allowed for in the gospels. If we look into Luke, we shall see that the Lord comes down in His instruction to where men were. If He wished to set out the place of bliss, He is pleased to speak of Abraham's bosom. He came down to the Jewish level, so as, in spite of ignorance, to reach people. So that if He gives this formal prayer, He intends, not that the saints should use it in a formal way, but that they should get from Him the initial idea of prayer. He would not take us beyond our stature. You have it modified in Luke, because it is aiming at the saints being brought into the assembly's way. It reads here, "Father", which is the way the Lord Himself would speak to His Father, "Thy name be hallowed". No Christian need be afraid of saying that at any time. "Thy kingdom come": that also is quite admissible in the Christian's prayer. "Give us our needed bread for each day; and remit us our sins, for we also remit to every one indebted to us; and lead us not into temptation", @Luke 11:2 - 4. It drops down to where His disciples were at that time, but there is enough in it to link them on with Christianity as they advanced in the truth.
J.H.T. You spoke of light and feelings and prayer. Are they developed for us in the Acts? Saul sees a light from heaven, and then he hears a voice, "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest" @Acts 9:5 -- would that represent feelings?
{356}
And then in the service at Antioch, would the prayer and fasting there lay the basis for the overthrow of the world's cities and make way for the formation of assemblies, so that the "praises of Israel" might be known and enjoyed?
J.T. That is very helpful. The thought of cities runs through, even to the time when the Holy Spirit "in every city" testified to Paul. God had a means of speaking in every city. It seems as if in that we have the suggestion of the triumph and superiority of Christianity; through it God had a means of speaking in every city -- of course alluding to cities in which there were assemblies.
H.M.S. Would we also have those conditions in @Romans 15? There are brotherly conditions there, and the result is, "That ye may with one accord, with one mouth, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ", (verse 6)? If that were so, there would be a challenge to the continuance of Rome.
J.T. Just so. The epistle would show that there was great moral superiority suggested among the saints there, with such power that they could pray for the very authorities, as still owning them as representative of God. There seems a certain magnanimity in that attitude on the part of the saints in the assembly, that we can speak of "the powers that be" as ordained of God and pray for them, and yet know that our testimony implies their complete overthrow, the assembly taking the place in due course of all rule. That ought to give us power to sing.
P.L. I wondered whether those thoughts of light, feelings, and prayer do not run very much through the book of Deuteronomy, which was given to the people just before they crossed the Jordan and surrounded Jericho to bring it down. Does Moses embody those features in his spirit? So much is said of brotherliness and neighbourliness, as well as light from him, the tenor of the law -- the spirit and feeling of things,
{357}
and then closing with the song of Moses. Does Jericho fall consequent upon this spirit being found among the people?
J.T. It is Deuteronomy carried on into Joshua. Deuteronomy is more the *spirit*  of things under Moses; it is more the spirit than the letter: "The letter kills, but the Spirit quickens", (@2 Corinthians 3:6); and it is carried over into Joshua, so that the saints are typified there as walking round Jericho, an unheard-of military procedure, and one that would cause wonderment in the city, but which brought it down most effectively. It is the manner of the power that is there, and that is the character of the testimony Luke would develop; the spirit of it, the moral greatness and superiority of what there is, in the very presence of organised evil, so that the victory is already present in a moral sense.
W.C.G. Would you say how the conversation between the Lord and Martha in her house bears on the subject?
J.T. The Lord portrays the neighbour, and the lawyer discerns who he is, the one who *showed mercy*. That is a public need. The lawyer could name it, and it is most important that it should exist among us; unselfish service rendered to needy ones. Then we have the state of Martha's house, which, although she received the Lord into it, must have occasioned Him great uneasiness; indeed, even He comes under her criticism. How sorrowful that heavenly light should be possessed, as the chapter indicates, our heavenly calling, and the idea of the neighbour portrayed for us, and ourselves having a house and receiving the Lord into it, and yet the spirit suitable to a believer's house be absent! All this bears most powerfully on the local position. But withal, in the house there was a full answer to what was said on the mount of transfiguration, for that is the point to keep in mind: "Hear him". Mary is answering fully to that, so the divine thought is maintained in her.
{358}
W.C.G. Then Mary's state would be the effect of the word being operative.
J.T. It had begun to be effective in her, or she would not be sitting. We were speaking about restfulness, knowing how to sit down and listen. It is said that she, "Having sat down at the feet of Jesus, was listening to his word"(@Luke 10:39). She was pleasing to heaven, she was answering to the mind of heaven, as expressed on the mount, and the Lord would not be satisfied until all the house -- all the meeting in the place as you might say -- is brought round to that. If He has one that He can point to. He has a great advantage. He says, "Mary has chosen the good part"(@Luke 10:42), a principle carried forward from chapter 7, where the Lord says, "Seest thou this woman?" Anyone He can point to, as illustrating what is in His mind, is a great advantage to the Lord.
P.L. Would Chloe provide that element as seen in 1 Corinthians?
J.T. Yes; it was "those of the house of Chloe", and they went so far as to *show*  what had to be corrected. Mary *shows*,  in what she was doing, what had to be corrected in Martha; Martha was not doing it. Paul says: "For it has been shown to me concerning you, my brethren, by those of the house of Chloe, that there are strifes among you", (@1 Corinthians 1:11).
Ques. Does the Lord give the answer to the need when He says, "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him" (@Luke 11:13)?
J.T. I think we shall see that the Holy Spirit is the full supply; nothing short of the Spirit meets the local need. Then, that being set out, the Lord's activity follows. It says, "He was casting out a demon, and it was dumb". Now, the angel's word was that Zacharias was to be dumb because of his unbelief. That was not Satan's action; that was God's action; as if, in His mind, speaking is of no value except it is in faith. But here the enemy is keeping a man from speaking, and inasmuch
{359}
as the Spirit is obtained from "the Father who is of heaven", the point is to get people to speak under His power. So the Lord was casting out a demon; attention is called to what He was doing, and the demon being cast out, the dumb man spake.
F.S.M. Are these four points essential if we are to take part in the praises of the assembly: the thought of joy of spirit, suggested in the early part of chapter 10, and the restfulness of heart the Lord would have brought Martha into, and devotedness of mind, and then open lips?
J.T. Yes, that order appears in this section. The idea of speaking is specially a feature in Luke, because the "priest's lips should keep knowledge"; the praise service as the temple was built was by them, @2 Chronicles 5 So that Zacharias is rendered dumb until the promised child is born. He went to his house, and no doubt went through great exercise with Elizabeth, but after he writes, "John is his name", he speaks and blesses God. And so the young man who is raised up at Nain began to speak. One having such an experience could contribute by speaking; and now, the demon being gone out of this man, he speaks, the context being the gift of the Spirit. In the assembly we say that Jesus is Lord by the Spirit. Then, in chapter 24, the Lord comes in in relation to *what they were saying*.
Ques. Are you regarding the dumb man as a silent brother in the meeting, and Mary as the responsive element that would be full of matter in the "praises of Israel"?
J.T. Just so. We have silent brothers, and we should be thankful when they are able to speak by the Spirit. Then we have brothers who speak, like Zacharias, as we may say, but what is said is not in faith. Only what is in faith and by the Spirit is of value in the assembly; in fact, God intimates that all other talking is valueless.
P.L. "Not knowing what he said".
{360}
J.T. Exactly; better not to say it at all, if we do not know what to say. So the apostle enlarges on that in the letter to Corinth, as to praying and singing with the Spirit and with the understanding.
J.J. Is the thought that the praises reach their highest point in chapter 15 or in the further Scripture?
J.T. In chapter 15 we reach the house, not as a place to receive the wayfaring, and the halt and the blind, but as furnished with the very best. It is not now exactly a local thought, as I understand it, but general; for the house viewed as the house of God is never local; it is always catholic. The point is to show how it was furnished, and that there was the music and the dancing. It is not said that there was praise to God, the point is the wealth of the place, the merriment, the spiritual buoyancy and fulness of joy that is there, answering to Ephesians. Things are of the very best, illustrated by the best robe and the fatted calf. "And they *began*  to be merry". It is what is there, and all was within the hearing of the elder brother.
W.C.G. A verse in the psalms corresponds: "I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy; and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple", (@Psalm 5:7). We have had the multitude of mercy leading up to this point.
J.T. We are there. Chapter 15 is the highest point reached, and is the richness of heaven lavished on the gentiles. The wealth that is there is stressed. It is a great point as to young believers -- to make plain that there is a merriment of a spiritual nature. What is seen here enters much into the service of God. It is what enriches and satisfies spiritually.
H.E.S. Why is it that in view of the rich unfoldings of chapter 15 the necessity to hear is again emphasised at the end of chapter 14?
J.T. Chapter 14, from verse 25 to the end, is to bring out what would come about through the preaching of the gospel, as on the principles laid down in that
{361}
chapter. If more were to come than those who were subjects of the work of God, they would require to be tested and sifted, an important matter in gospel service; that extraneous matter should be excluded. The passage contemplates that there would be a mixture in the listeners, so that, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear", @Luke 14:35. Chapter 15 brings out a subject by itself, and emphasises the wealth lavished on the returning gentiles in the house: "In whom *ye*  also are built together for a habitation of God in (the) Spirit", (@Ephesians 2:22). It is the presence of the Spirit bringing in all the wealth of heaven, rendering the place spiritually buoyant, full of music and dancing.
Ques. Would it be a little answer to @Psalm 132? "her saints shall shout aloud for joy", (verse 16).
J.T. Quite so.
H.O.S. Would the preaching of the mystery in the gospel be connected with that thought, that those outside should hear the music and the dancing going on in the Father's house?
J.T. Yes. The idea is that the music and the dancing are within the hearing of the elder brother outside; that it should be heard outside shows how *fully*  the thought was there.
H.O.S. Those inside enjoy the blessedness of the place and those outside hear.
J.T. "As well the singers as the dancers shall say, All my springs are in thee", @Psalm 87:7. The system, so to speak, is furnished and self-sustaining.
Eu.R. That is very beautiful, and it links with @Psalm 87 which says, "Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God". Then it mentions the reprobate cities, and brings in the light of the heavenly when it says, "Jehovah will count, when he inscribeth the peoples". (@Psalm 87:3, 6).
P.L. Have we something of this kind at Ephesus in the great joy that prevailed, and then is the elder brother seen in Sceva the Jew, one who, so to speak, would
{362}
not go in? It is said, "the man in whom the wicked spirit was, leaped upon them, ... so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded". (@Acts 19:16). Is that the position of the Jew today?
J.T. Quite so. It is worse than the case of Zacharias. In @Acts 13 Bar-jesus is rendered blind, not to see the sun for a season; it is worse to be blind than to be dumb. Bar-jesus and the seven sons of Sceva represent the Jew under the government of God and Satanic power. In the presence of all this, @Luke 15 brings out victory in great moral superiority. Although the elder brother refused to go in, the music and dancing went on, and goes on still.
M.W.B. In the development of your thought, do we pass now from the local idea of Corinthians to the exalted platform of Ephesians?
J.T. That is what I thought, and that links on with chapter 19, where we come to spiritual geography, as we have already remarked. Leaving out for the moment what Jerusalem was about to become as the place of the Lord's murder, it is viewed still as Jerusalem, the divine centre, and He weeps over it. So that the places mentioned in the chapter -- that is, where the colt was tied, Bethphage, and Bethany, and the mount of Olives -- are all near Jerusalem, pointing to what is spiritual in the way of environment; this has an answer in the assembly. It is not only now the Lord there in the greatness of His Person, as in chapter 10, but an environment tending to promote praise. "In his temple doth every one say. Glory!" (@Psalm 29:9). So that, whatever one has to contribute in the assembly is enhanced by what is there. The praise here is spontaneous, the whole environment entering into it and enhancing it.
P.L. Does that bring us to Philippians in principle, consequent on Ephesians? "Rejoice in the Lord always: again I will say, rejoice", @Philippians 4:4. Does the Lord's descent in chapter 2 provide the holy environment for praise?
{363}
J.T. It does. All these thoughts affect us and enter into us, so that every one says, Glory! as we read in @Psalm 29. They speak, and the Lord says in answer to the Pharisees, "If these shall be silent, the stones will cry out". It is because of what was in the general surroundings and of His presence as entering the city. It says, "all the multitude of the disciples began, rejoicing, to praise God with a loud voice for all the works of power that they had seen, saying. Blessed the King that comes in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". What they say suggests that the priestly state was present. Although they were a multitude, they were disciples, and they leave out, "Peace on earth". If they were copyists, merely reiterating what had been said before, they would have said, "Peace on earth"; but they do not. It shows the progress being made on this line; it is, "Peace in heaven", and the praise is to God.
Rem. There is a difference between the angels and the disciples. The angels say, "Peace on earth", chapter 2.
J.T. It was quite right to say it *then*,  but "peace on earth" is not the point now. The Lord is transferring the thoughts of the disciples to heaven after the mount of transfiguration, so that it is, "Peace in *heaven*".
Eu.R. Then we have in the assembly not only great light, extending on to the future, as suggested in @Exodus 15, but we are privileged to find ourselves in an atmosphere and environment where we are helped in giving expression to our praise?
J.T. That is quite obvious. They had no sanctuary in @Exodus 15; it was not yet set up, so that there was nothing in the environment to enhance the praise, but now there is, as we have suggested here. I do not mean that this is the sanctuary, but we are in the environment of Jerusalem, the centre of things; the ass and the colt were detained there -- in the presence of those great spiritual suggestions; Bethphage, Bethany, and the
{364}
mount of Olives were all in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem.
J.H.T. It is said of Paul and Silas in the prison at Philippi that in praying they were praising God with singing. @Acts 16:25. Did they leave at Philippi the inception of the work of God there and an impression of what was to accrue? He says to the Philippians later, "My God shall abundantly supply all your need according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus", @Philippians 4:19. Is the germ of it seen in Philippi in the prison?
J.T. Quite so. What power there was with Paul and Silas! It brings out in the most striking manner the character of the vessel of praise, how the praise goes on in the most adverse circumstances. But here, it is not what is adverse, but what is favourable. The sanctuary is calculated to enhance the praise. The assembly as ordered of God has all that in it which enhances the praise, so that the Lord reminds us that if we do not praise in these circumstances, we are harder than stones. That is the idea, because the stones would cry out, the Lord said, if the disciples did not; but the multitude of the disciples did cry out and with a loud voice.
M.W.B. In what way would you name the agreeable circumstances or environment for us today? How would you speak of them?
J.T. The assembly formed in its Pauline character as at Ephesus. It would require spiritual understanding to see the nature of it, but it is conveyed in the apostle's remarks as to what the gentiles were brought into: "No longer strangers and foreigners, but ... fellow citizens of the saints, and of the household of God, being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone, in whom all (the) building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord; in whom *ye*  also are built together for a habitation of God in (the) Spirit", @Ephesians 2:19 - 22. If you connect that with @Isaiah 56, where
{365}
God makes those who pray joyful in His house of prayer, you can see how the house is a place that conduces to prayer or praise. If we are there and have no praise or worship in our hearts, the Lord would say that we are harder than stones.
J.R.S. Are you connecting your remarks as to the environment with the house in chapter 15?
J.T. Yes. Chapter 15 is the house, presenting especially the wealth that is *inside*  it, everything of the best. This chapter 19 is more an extended environment; it is a broader view. Jerusalem is in view, as we may say; the Lord is leading into it. There, is the great objective, and these other towns and the mount of Olives are there, having their own significance. The colt tied is not to be omitted here. It is representative of a young believer, covered with the clothes of his brethren, and the way strewn with their clothes. Everything denotes the care and consideration of love; it is a reflection of heaven; everywhere I look suggests something that ought to make me give thanks to God and praise, especially when there is a multitude doing it.
J.J. Is it like what Samuel said to Saul as he anointed him? If Saul had observed the spiritual significance of the places mentioned and entered into the reality of them, he would doubtless have been preserved, @1 Samuel 10:3 - 8.
J.T. Quite so. That is a good passage bearing on our subject. All those things should have promoted spiritual emotions in Saul. It is a great thing to be capable of spiritual emotions, and this environment at Jerusalem would suggest them. The Lord Himself expressed emotions here, for He wept over Jerusalem. How different it will be for Him when He enters into it in the future! Now the assembly takes its place.
H.E.S. Is the idea, that God having brought forth His best in chapter 15, there is now in chapter 19 a response from those in the good of these things?
{366}
J.T. Yes; it is all constructive, so that we are now in the very centre, and the Lord is being carried into the city by this colt upon whom He had been set. The disciples are marked by great and suitable activity under these circumstances. It says, "Having cast their own garments on the colt, they put Jesus on it. And as he went, they strewed their clothes in the way";(@Luke 19:35,36) as if to sustain the thing and to amplify it, "they strewed their clothes in the way. And as he drew near already at the descent of the mount of Olives, all the multitude of the disciples began, rejoicing, to praise God".
Ques. How would you connect this subject of praise with the thought of worship?
J.T. In a general way praise is worship. Worship in itself may be unspoken, but praise must be spoken. Worship is the idea of motion forward, being fully absorbed in the Person who is before you. I hope we shall have that later, but this is leading up to it, following on chapter 15 of which it is a piece; the latter giving the wealth of the house and this giving the more extended glorious environment; so that the suggestion of praise is so great, that if one is callous he is harder than stone.
P.L. "Let the sons of Zion be joyful in their King" is right at the end of the psalms, where all that have breath shall call upon Him, (@Psalm 149:2). That is the great environment of praise.
{367}
THE PRAISES OF ISRAEL (5)
@Luke 22:14 - 20, 39 - 46
J.T. We dwelt yesterday on chapter 19, and the thought of spiritual geography was mentioned and left open for this meeting. The matter had been mentioned earlier during the meetings, and had been deferred until we arrived at this chapter. It is a feature of importance in regard of the subject before us, especially as seen in chapter 19, where, in view of the circumstances and surroundings recorded in the passage read, the Lord said that if the disciples held their peace, the stones would cry out.
Judaea is the first place mentioned in the book, and in a sorrowful setting, because it is said that Herod was king of it. Judah, as we know, denotes "praise", and is specially mentioned in chapter 1. Mary, after receiving the message from the angel, and in her entire submission to the will of the Lord, goes there -- to the hill country, "to a city of Judah". The hill country of Judaea denotes moral elevation, but having a link with "praise", which "Judah" signifies, where Mary remained for about three months in communion with her kinswoman. Then we have a city of Galilee called Nazareth. It is where heaven intervened instead of in Jerusalem in relation to the incarnation -- a fact that should impress itself upon us as denoting reproach religiously.
Then the birth of John brings out a further thought of the hill country of Judaea; it became the subject of conversation there. That such a topic occupied the people is significant. I suppose the elevated country would suggest a good atmosphere, and may be rightly connected with such an occasion as we are experiencing during these three days, when God gives extraordinary freedom from care, and there is a certain spiritual exhilaration amongst us as we are occupied with heavenly
{368}
things. So that what follows in chapter 1 is salutary and balancing. John the baptist was in the deserts. Instead of the hill country, he is in the deserts where there was nothing to minister to nature; a balancing thought, and one which, I think, should enter into our instruction today in view of our dispersion to our several localities, some of which may be characterised as desert. Indeed, the idea is that we disperse into our ordinary circumstances, which are desert, viewed spiritually, and tend to balance what we have been experiencing.
Then in chapter 2 we find Bethlehem -- of special note. (Of course, there are other places mentioned throughout the book, but those I am noting enter into our subject.) Bethlehem has a great place spiritually in Scripture, and one thing to be noted is what Micah says of it, "little to be among the thousands of Judah", (chapter 5:2). There is a very salutary suggestion that these great matters are still held in smallness, but yet in moral greatness, for as translated in the New Testament it is "art in no wise the least", (@Matthew 2:6). It is not to be the least because of Him who came out of it, who is "from the days of eternity", as Micah says. Then, we have a country in relation to Bethlehem, as we have already noted, a country in which shepherds kept watch over their flocks by night, as if to show that the shepherd principle of Bethlehem, seen in David, is maintained -- that is, the principle of self-sacrificing love, a most important matter, especially when things are outwardly small. And they were small, for the Lord, although born, is viewed expressly as a Babe, and in the most lowly circumstances -- laid in a manger. It is not so much the opposition that there is in the world against the Lord, but rather a circumstance of the divinely selected way of His incoming. But conditions occasioned by sin made this way necessary.
Then Jerusalem is the next place to be noted, not yet as hostile, but as the centre of God's thoughts --
{369}
and a man in it on whom the Spirit of God was. Simeon was divinely communicated with as to Christ. He was a spiritually instructed man, and so is characteristic here. He was not instructed after the manner of men or current religious education, but divinely. The Jordan is the next place, where we are in the presence of John's ministry; having come from the deserts, he is at the Jordan. Not much need be said as to the great spiritual significance of Jordan. It belongs to maturity. It is a type of death that belongs to full growth; whether in the history of God's people of old, or in the history of Christ, it stands related to maturity. It is not theoretic, it is something to be taken up in manhood; a man fully facing death and all that it signifies. For faith it is now abolished, Christ having died and arisen. The Lord is seen there, chapter 3, in maturity: He began "to be about thirty years old"(verse 23); but He was baptised, and, as having come up out of the water. He is praying. We should note the fulness of the practical thoughts that enter into this touching scene.
Then, to pass over the historical points noted in relation to the gospel in the intervening chapters, we come to Jericho in the beginning of chapter 19; into which the Lord entered and passed through. The idea of spiritual geography that we are speaking of begins in chapter 19, which is very full of the thought. The Lord was "going up to Jerusalem", meaning evidently that the city is the great objective. Then we have Bethphage, which is said to allude to early figs, and Bethany, well known to us, having the meaning, as is said, of "house of song"; and hence specially relating to our subject. We may say now, it is the place of love also, in view of the Lord's relations with it. Then the mount, of Olives, and then Jerusalem itself, as I said, at the end. As far as I understand, that is the outline of spiritual geography in relation to the subject we are dealing with, that is to say, the service of the assembly Godward.
{370}
J.H.B. Is your thought that each of those places would represent some moral feature?
J.T. Yes. I have sought to indicate a little what each suggests. The geography entering into assembly associations is ever present to faith; we live in relation to it, not only when we are together, but always.
P.L. Would the thought of "This man was born there". (@Psalm 87:6), suggest that certain spiritual geography enters into our constitution?
J.T. That Psalm should be kept in view in what we are engaged with, for it ends with the idea of music -- the singing and the dancing, or, as it may be rendered, "as well the singers and the players on instruments"(@Psalm 87:7). It is a question of praise, and all their springs are in Zion.
W.S.S. Is it significant that David's city is emphasised in chapter 2, over against Herod being king in Judaea?
J.T. It is. The fact that Herod, Edomite as he was, was king, was very humbling, and there must be something to correspond with that now. What belongs to David is in other hands, but the birth of Christ in it meant the overthrow of Herod and all that he represents. Micah shows that He was the "Judge of Israel", although smitten on the cheek, chapter 5:1, but there would be complete deliverance. The chapter has already been dwelt upon: "they shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek. (And thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, little to be among the thousands of Judah, out of thee shall he come forth unto me who is to be Ruler in Israel: whose goings forth are from of old, from the days of eternity)", @Micah 5:1,2. Then they are given up judicially, it says, "Therefore will he give them up, until the time when she which travaileth shall have brought forth: and the residue of his brethren shall return unto the children of Israel. And he shall stand and feed his flock in the strength of Jehovah, in the majesty of the name of Jehovah his God. And they shall abide; for now shall he be great even unto the
{371}
ends of the earth. And this man shall be Peace. When the Assyrian shall come into our land, and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight princes of men. And they shall waste the land of Asshur with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof; and he shall deliver us from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth within our borders. And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many peoples as dew from Jehovah, as showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, neither waiteth for the sons of men. And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the nations in the midst of many peoples, as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if he go through, treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and there is none to deliver. Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off", (@Micah 5:3 - 9) Now, all that enters into Bethlehem at the birth of Jesus.
W.S.S. I thought, in connection with the subject before us, that Herod being king in Judaea would suggest that praise was in abeyance and that this great thing that was coming in in David's city was to be the basis on which praise would be produced.
J.T. Yes, we can see how all was secured in the birth of the Child. "Unto us a child is born", and then, "a son is given", (@Isaiah 9:6), and then the name that He has, implying all that we have been engaged with.
H.E.S. Is the moral greatness seen in Christ, in Luke, also in measure to mark the vessel of praise that is being formed?
J.T. The point in going over this spiritual geography is that there might be conformity with it, that we might live in relation to it. It is our environment; the geography represents great moral principles and conditions in which we live.
A.N. Do you get that illustrated in Elijah and
{372}
Elisha, that, when Elijah was to be taken up, they passed from Gilgal to Bethel, and from Bethel to Jericho, and then to Jordan, but it was in view of a double portion of his spirit -- the thought of spiritual elevation -- Elijah seen going up?
J.T. Yes. It is to be noted that Elisha moves first; that is, it says that Elijah went *with*  Elisha, showing that if we move from Gilgal -- that is, the acceptance of death in ourselves -- to the points of spiritual geography that denote the testimony, then the Lord is with us. If we are to visit Nazareth, or the hill country, or Bethlehem, we can only understand it aright as the Lord is with us. Elijah went with Elisha; that is the way the thing begins, and it ends, as regards the instruction, from Elijah to Elisha. Elisha's desire was great; he wanted a *double*  portion, which should be the prayer of every believer now. We need it; it is urgent that we should have all possible. In view of the ground traversed in that chapter, @2 Kings 2, Elisha understood the need he had of all that he could obtain, that is, a double portion; and Elijah says, "If thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee", verse 10. It is to bring in the idea of spiritual vigilance and watchfulness, so that we miss nothing.
One feels in these meetings how essential it is to be intent on the spiritual position; because, although we may hear and see things that are right and helpful, there must be the *seeing spiritually*,  and thus the keeping in touch. "If thou see me when I am taken from thee",(@2 Kings 2:10) and Elisha says, "The chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof!"(@2 Kings 2:12) I believe that secures the "praises of Israel"; because the "chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof" is a question *of power*.
Eu.R. With regard to spiritual geography, may we apply the natural figure, in that having been born in Zion we should feel that these different territories surrounding Zion are all of interest to us, and important as bearing on our constitution?
{373}
J.T. That is what I think we should learn. The landscape is very extensive. There is an important thought in the opening of the eyes of the man of Bethsaida: he saw "all things clearly", that is to say, what is to be seen is not only persons but *things*. I think these geographical places are included -- that we should see them clearly.
A.M. Would you say that if we do not set ourselves in relation to what is heavenly, the next test will come along in relation to Jericho, as with Elisha?
J.T. You mean that the power to recross Jordan required that he should get a double portion of Elijah's spirit; and we also have to do with Jordan. I suppose in Elisha's soul there was a thought, "How wilt thou then do in the swelling of the Jordan?" (@Jeremiah 12:5). That has to be understood, and we need power for it. It is a full-grown man that goes over Jordan. Elisha rends his own garment in two pieces, having taken up the mantle of Elijah.
J.H.T. Would Aquila and Priscilla be instructed in spiritual geography? Expelled from Rome -- would that be the reproach connected with Galilee? Finding themselves at Corinth, would they be instructed in the glory of the Lord, as suggested in the country round Bethlehem where the glory of the Lord shone round the shepherds: "he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord", and "we all, looking on the glory of the Lord ..." (@2 Corinthians 3:18)? Then, finding themselves at Ephesus -- would that correspond with Jerusalem? And then, again at Rome -- would that be the overthrow of the world's system, and the formation of a vessel of praise -- the assembly in their house?
J.T. That is all most instructive.
J.J. Would the Song of Solomon have any bearing on this subject -- the description of spiritual objects so constantly referred to in that book?
J.T. It is full of the thought. Spiritual geography tends to take us out of *physical*  geography to which
{374}
brethren are subject much more than they would admit or are even aware of. Territorial divisions of men, involving national feeling, greatly interfere with the service of the assembly Godward; for this latter we need to grasp and own practically the universal bearing of the house of God. A "man in Jerusalem" is the idea, a man in the divine centre.
W.C.G. Does the epistle to the Philippians represent the character that appears in those who recross Jordan?
J.T. Yes. The extraordinary sufferings at Philippi denote the power that operated in Paul and Silas, and subsequently marked the assembly there.
P.L. I was thinking of @Psalm 48 from the point of view of spiritual geography: "the city of our God, in the hill of his holiness. Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King", (verses 1,2), and then it speaks of the ships of Tarshish being destroyed with an east wind. Is that the human geography disposed of in the soul? And then, mount Zion and the daughters of Judah are made glad, and there is praise to God.
J.T. That psalm stimulates praise peculiarly.
J.T.S. Would the position in @Acts 13 suggest the deliverance from political geography in view of the service of praise?
J.T. Yes; it was what God had brought about among the gentiles, so the point was what was in the assembly there, as the outcome of a year's course of instruction to "a large crowd", as it says, by Barnabas and Saul. What that year's course had effected in Antioch! Then in chapter 13 we have the result in the "assembly which was there". Olivet here, @Luke 19, alludes to spiritual resources, and one enters Jerusalem, the great divine centre, in power in that connection. Luke mentions Olivet more than the other evangelists; even in regard of our Lord's agony it is the mount of Olives instead of Gethsemane.
{375}
Rem. Is what has been remarked summarised for us in the beginning of Acts? You have the public position of reproach acknowledged and approved in heaven: "Men of Galilee", and the inside place of power in the mount of Olives, and the public power in testimony in Jerusalem in @Acts 2, where there were men out of every nation under the sound of the word, which has some effect upon all.
J.T. Just so. You can understand how all that was needed, for the inauguration of the assembly. I hope this afternoon, if the Lord permit. @Acts 1 will come under consideration as completing our subject.
Ques. Would the fact also that the women at the cross are designated as those who had followed Him *from Galilee*  suggest they have gone through this course of spiritual geography?
J.T. Exactly; they have covered the whole way.
R.B-n. Is Jerusalem the great objective in the pursuance of spiritual geography? The upper room comes in in that connection.
J.T. Yes. Now to proceed to chapter 22. Here we come to the point of formal gathering -- coming together. We are, as you might say, on assembly ground. The surroundings are charged with murderous opposition to Christ. It says, "The chief priests and the scribes sought how they might kill him", (verse 2); and then, further, "Satan entered into Judas, who was surnamed Iscariote, being of the number of the twelve"(verse 3). What may be observed is the importance of public order, for the pretence of serving God, worshipping God aside from public order must be very objectionable to Him; and yet on the other hand, we may have public order, as we saw in chapter 1, without the underlying state of faith. The suggestion of order here comes from the Lord Himself. Elsewhere the disciples suggest it, but here. He takes it in hand Himself, indicating its importance. It says, "He sent Peter and John, saying. Go and prepare the passover for us, that we may eat it",(verse 8).
{376}
The point was the preparation of the passover and where it should be eaten, the introduction of the Lord's supper being in mind.
A.H.P. Would the mount of Olives contribute the spiritual dignity in which the saints should assemble at the Supper?
J.T. It stands related to the Lord's supper. They go to it after the Supper in Matthew and Mark, but we require what the mount of Olives suggests in the way of spiritual resources, and the help of the Spirit, in all these matters. What I think should be noted is that the Lord is Himself concerned in the preparation and the order that should attend the Lord's supper.
H.E.S. Should outward conditions and moral conditions go together? In Corinthians everything is to be done "decently and in order", @1 Corinthians 14:40, but the apostle is also concerned about the moral conditions that should be present.
J.T. Exactly; the moral conditions would be in the passover, but the outward order would be in the preparation. Order has to be taken account of by itself. It says, "Go and prepare the passover for us, that we may eat it", @Luke 22:8. It included the guest chamber and all the accessories necessary for the feast; so that, as was just quoted, all things are to be done decently and in order. That is one thing. The next thing is the moral state that is amongst us. I think the passover, or the feast of unleavened bread which accompanied it, represents the moral elements, sincerity and truth, which maintain the state suitable for the Lord's supper.
Rem. At the end of the verse speaking about order, it says that the twelve were with Him. I wondered whether that would suggest that He had confidence in them, so that, without having anything to adjust. He can indicate the thoughts of His heart immediately.
J.T. Yes. It is "when the hour was come". We have the idea of "the hour" first, and then the position,
{377}
how He places Himself at the table, and then the twelve apostles. Notice, it is not simply the twelve (the word "twelve" is doubtful apparently); it is the *apostles*,  stressing the thought of authority. Luke alone stresses the idea of the apostles being present, to ensure to the assembly in later years the authoritative representation of what occurred. The Lord has confidence in them, but they are apostles.
J.D. Would you say a word as to the place, "*Where*  wilt thou that we prepare it?"
J.T. The place is important. It would be a matter of what is in the place, whether the Lord's authority was recognised. The message was, "The teacher says to thee. Where is the guest-chamber where I may eat the passover with my disciples?" "And *he"*  -- it is an emphatic "he" -- "will show you a large upper room furnished", @Luke 22:11,12. He represents the state of things there; it was shown in that the Lord's word was immediately complied with; that disposes of all independent companies, persons who have formed companies in imitation of what is real; the Lord's will and the Lord's word not being complied with.
M.W.B. Does it in principle cover 1 Corinthians -- the Lord's commandment, the general idea of His authority?
J.T. Yes. The epistles to the Corinthians are the opening up of this. "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment",
@1 Corinthians 14:37.
Ques. Would authority be seen with Peter and the family side in John?
J.T. I think that is right. It is a beautiful combination, and enters in a very practical way into local gatherings. Peter, representing the administrative side, would require strict attention to public requirements or order -- coming into the meetings late and the like, which John would, so to speak, modify. They represent
{378}
a combination of feeling which ought to be present in every gathering, that there are certain circumstances which at times may justify certain irregularities, or at least may modify them. John is not a brother that says much, he is not presented as leading, he is generally associated with Peter, Peter being the speaker. So that John would be an element that is not intrusive; he will only say something if absolutely necessary. I believe that is the suggestion, and so he would, if necessary, modify anything that Peter might insist on. I am speaking of the features the two apostles represent. They are important in a practical way.
J.H.T. The only time that John speaks in the Acts has a bearing on this particular matter. It says, "But Peter and John answering said to them. If it be righteous before God to listen to you rather than to God, judge ye". @Acts 4:19. Is that essential referring to what we have spoken of as to listening?
J.T. Yes. If John joins in, it is very obvious that what is said is right and you cannot set it aside. Not that they are always together, because the time would come when Peter would be removed, as he was, and then John would have to serve alone, which he does in a wonderful way. His gospel and epistles and the book of Revelation are all his own service, but it is beautiful to see how the Spirit of God links him with Peter at the beginning.
P.L. Does finality mark his attitude? The "I suppose" in the last verse of his gospel would suggest a certain spiritual education that blends with the authoritative word.
J.T. "I suppose" in John's narrative is in keeping with the writer. He is *entitled*  to use the word in regard of such a great matter. When Paul said that what he said was not by the Spirit but from his own judgment, @2 Corinthians 7, we recognise the same qualification. If the Lord says of John, "If I will that he abide until I come", @John 21:22. He reserves him in view of the extraordinary
{379}
conditions that should arise. He is a man with great consideration and modifying feelings.
J.J. Is there anything important in the fact that these two brothers, Peter and John, prepare for the passover but not for the Supper? Was that left for Paul, do you think?
J.T. The Supper flows out of the passover. Paul does prepare for the Supper, as you say, only he includes the passover in his letter to Corinth, the feast of unleavened bread as leading up to the Supper. But he brings in additional thoughts in regard of the Lord's supper, and I think the long discourse at Troas was in view of complications that would arise, for the incident as recorded in @Acts 20 is to be regarded as prophetic in this respect on account of all that has been developed out of the Supper by Rome, the Lutherans, and others. A long discourse was needed; and so it is, that the ministry during the last hundred years, has been very largely in the elucidation of the Supper and setting it in its proper relation, especially that it belongs to the assembly. It cannot be linked up with a sect. Paul said, "For I received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you", @1 Corinthians 11:23.
D.L.H. Would you say why it is that at the institution of the Supper, the twelve alone were there -- that there was a limitation?
J.T. Well, evidently there were no sisters at the institution of it, although the idea is not so much to set out the assembly at the time, as to establish testimony that would be undeniable. In view of the history of the church, the complications and perversions that have arisen, it was imperative that there should be competent authoritative testimony as to it, and I believe that is why Luke stresses the idea of apostleship. He does not speak of any others being present but the apostles; it is a question of the apostles, a very important thing because of the controversy that has raged around this subject. It is a most important thing that we have
{380}
competent testimony, and added to this, Paul's testimony direct from heaven; and that he delivered it first of all to the Corinthians verbally, and then reiterated it in his letter, so that there could be no question as to what belongs to the order of the Lord's supper, what enters into it, as we may say, the "simplicity as to the Christ".
D.L.H. Then authority enters into the matter in the thought of apostles?
J.T. Yes. That is, their word ought to be accepted, and so the early Christians -- the three thousand -- are said to have persevered in the apostles doctrine. If anybody were to introduce a Roman Catholic idea as to the Supper, any one of those would say. The apostles do not say so, and that would settle it. It is a question of the *apostles*  teaching, the authority that goes with that, and Paul's position in Corinth was equal to that. He associates himself with the apostles, and says, "Am I not an apostle?" (@1 Corinthians 9:1).
W.C. Would the complications you spoke of arise from ignoring the Father's word on the mount, "Hear him"?
J.T. Exactly.
W.C. So that Paul takes it up and says, "I received from the Lord", @1 Corinthians 11:23. Did he assert the rights of Christ Himself?
J.T. That is a very important point to raise here, because Mary, as we saw yesterday, represents that side. She was listening to what Jesus was saying, and Paul received it from the Lord; it is a question of His authority.
Eu.R. Would it be right to say that, in the midst of the complications, the Lord intervened authoritatively at the beginning of the last century, and that took place in His rights being recognised assemblywise; so that the breaking of bread in each locality must be subservient to the general fellowship?
J.T. That is right, and Bethesda sought to set it all aside.
{381}
G.J.E. In the passage we are reading, the Lord and His apostles only were at this institution, but in the only reference to its working out in Paul's day in @Acts 20 there were many others from various localities gathered together with the brethren at Troas. Is there any reference to that in what has taken place now, spreading out universally?
J.T. I think there is. At Troas we have the word "assembled". We have not that word here, but @Acts 20:7 reads: "we being assembled". Notice the word "we". I take that to be the local assembly, but inclusive of many others. An assembly does not lose its local character by the influx of visitors.
A.N. Would you say in the fact of its being apostles, it was a question of the foundations, as in the holy city, the "names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb" (@Revelation 21:14)?
J.T. Quite so; and what that means, among other things, is *quality:*  "built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets", (@Ephesians 2:20). It refers to the quality of the thing, that it stands the test; you cannot overthrow what the apostles testified to.
J.T.S. Is there anything corresponding to the two men. Peter and John, in 1 Corinthians? "I received from the Lord" -- would that represent the authority? And then the apostle's word, "So that, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, wait for one another", @1 Corinthians 11:23.
J.T. Exactly, the two sides are there. The authoritative side, and the family side must be ever present, for the Lord's supper is really a family matter, although also an assembly matter, for it says, "when ye come together in assembly"(@1 Corinthians 11:18). The procedure should begin with the Lord's supper. Intelligence as to what is to be done marks the assembly normally.
Ques. Does the 'table' stand for authority, whether in connection with the passover or the Supper?
J.T. Well, we have the Lord's table in 1 Corinthians. The idea of the table is the administration of food. You get it in the tabernacle, and right through Scripture.
{382}
It suggests that food is administered or distributed in an orderly way, as seen in the shewbread. In @1 Corinthians 10 the Lord's table evidently alludes to the bread in the Supper, and so has the same general idea. It is also exclusive. Here the idea is the order that belongs to it. Of course, it is the passover table, but it is the order that belongs to it, so that the Lord *placed*  Himself there. The word "placed" is to be noted. It is what *He*  was doing, and the apostles were witnesses; they were present.
H.M.S. Why do you think this chapter does not mention the hymn that was sung at the end of the Supper, whereas we have it in Matthew and Mark?
J.T. That raises the question of the difference between the gospels of Matthew and Mark and the gospel of Luke. Matthew and Mark both record that the disciples were already eating when the Lord introduced the Supper; and then, as to the Supper, He says, "Take, eat", nothing being said about the memorial in either gospel. They have in view the moral constitution of the saints, that is to say, eating precedes worship, as seen in @Psalm 22:26, to which attention has been called. The allusion to the hymn sung in the two evangelists, Matthew and Mark, is to suggest the power in which the remnant emerged from Israel, from Jewish settings, and entered on to the setting of Christianity. It involves power; they went out to the mount of Olives, having sung a hymn. It is the emerging from one position to another. You do not get that in Luke, neither do you get anything about eating or drinking. Luke says, "This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me". "In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you". It says nothing about eating or drinking, but stresses the memorial. It has in mind the settling down into our souls of the love of Christ on the principle of recall, the power of calling the Lord
{383}
to mind, making room for Him to come in. So that you have no eating or drinking, no hymn, and no immediate going out to the mount of Olives by the saints; it is more the settled, quiet attitude of soul making way for the Lord to have His place. It makes way for the Lord to come in in headship. In Matthew and Mark *they*  sang a hymn and went out. Of course the Lord was there, but it is collective action. There is much more in this recalling than some may have noted; it is a question of the state of the saints as in the assembly, where there is that restfulness in recalling the Lord -- no activity, no eating or drinking or singing. I am not saying it is not all there, for it is, but I am thinking of the holy restfulness that is implied in quietly remembering the Lord. It is a question of *inward*  power, so that silence is spiritual, making room for Christ.
E.L.M. Does it connect with the thought you suggested at the outset, the intelligent movements being more with Matthew and Mark, and what is spiritually emotional more with Luke's line?
J.T. I think so. Mary of Bethany would suggest it. Sitting at the Lord's feet is a restful state, and one accustomed to that will know how to be in the assembly in the way of recalling the Lord in His supper.
H.D'A.C. So that He comes livingly before every mind and heart.
J.T. Yes, as the condition is there into which He can come spiritually.
E.G. In @1 Corinthians 11 you get the thought of remembrance twice, both in regard of the loaf and the cup: "This do in remembrance of me". It is not quite so in @Luke 22.
J.T. The apostle stresses the idea of remembrance, attaching it both to the bread and the cup. Then he also adds the side presented in Matthew and Mark, for he goes on to speak about eating and drinking. So the three evangelists are included in @1 Corinthians 11.
{384}
P.L. After they had partaken of it, it says "There was also a strife among them which of them should be held to be the greatest", @Luke 22:24. The disciples were seeking to make room for themselves in self-assertion in place of making room for the Lord.
J.T. Yes. We can see how the Lord was making room for Himself in this institution, according to Luke's presentation of it.
J.J. In verse 39 it says, "going forth he went according to his custom to the mount of Olives, and the disciples also followed him". Why is all this instruction about the people that exercise authority over them, and then about Peter, and the scrip and the sword, and so on, brought in between the remembrance and the going out, in Luke?
J.T. It was to bring them into accord with Himself. As was pointed out, "they began to question together among themselves who then it could be of them who was about to do this"(@Luke 22:23), and "there was also a strife among them which of them should be held to be the greatest"(@Luke 22:24). Well, one has to stop there; how sorrowful it is, that where the Lord is seeking to make room for Himself in this touching manner, they are occupied with who should be the greatest! What follows, therefore, is to correct them.
W.C. If the Lord comes in, it would be as "the sweet psalmist of Israel"(@2 Samuel 23:1), and He would take charge of the service.
J.T. Luke has in mind what we began with, the service of the assembly Godward, and in the record here the Lord is aiming at a place for Himself in the assembly, for how can we have the service, the "praises of Israel", without Him? The sweet psalmist of Israel is Christ. What follows in chapters 22 and 23 is to bring out the sufferings of Christ, which is a great feature entering into this subject of praise, because the sufferings give tone to the service. But the disciples have to be regulated as to their own wretched thoughts
{385}
about who should be the greatest, for how can we have the service of God in the assembly where any such thoughts exist? The Lord therefore regulates the disciples, and so, "going forth he went according to his custom to the mount of Olives, and the disciples also followed him". Now He has them *with Him*. No doubt it is the same event as recorded by Matthew and Mark, but here the Lord is entering on the suffering side.
Ques. Would you say the disciples entered into the sufferings of Christ sympathetically, over against the chief priests and the religious world? John strikes a special note of praise when he says, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father: to him (be) the glory and the might to the ages of ages. Amen", (@Revelation 1:5, 6).
J.T. The book of Revelation, from the beloved disciple, is full of the praise of Christ and of God, and the Lord undoubtedly is leading them all on to this here. So that He goes to the mount of Olives as was His custom. The idea extends back, as has been already remarked; and His disciples followed Him. Now He has them with Him. In the other evangelists, Matthew and Mark, you get the Lord disposing of the disciples in Gethsemane. You do not get the word "Gethsemane" in Luke -- it is in Matthew and Mark only -- because I think Luke would modify the sufferings, as we might say -- at least, as regards ourselves. In Luke we have the ministration of angels. Sufferings on our side might interfere with the service; they might be more than we could endure. The apostle says, "No temptation has taken you but such as is according to man's nature; and God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able to bear, but will with the temptation make the issue also, so that ye should be able to bear it", (@1 Corinthians 10:13). God would not have the service interfered with by undue pressure;
{386}
and so we have the ministration of angels in Luke and no forsaking, and the word "Gethsemane", which, I think denotes pressure, is omitted. All this is a question of consideration for us, while not in any way ignoring the sufferings of Christ in their *entire*  extent. The record of the occurrences that we are now dealing with in verses 39 - 46 -- whilst we know, of course, that all that Matthew and Mark speak of entered into this -- is in tender consideration for the saints in the service of God in their priestly capacity; there is divine mitigation so that the service should not be impaired, but that it should proceed.
E.J.McB. In the assembly you would have a soul that would magnify the Lord. The Lord's ordering of things is so beautiful; everything is so ordered that the soul of the assembly is in accord with Christ, compare @Luke 1:46,47.
J.T. That is what one experiences in having to do with the service of God and the saints; how the Lord comes in in what seems to be insuperable, and He becomes endeared to you. You get it constantly with Paul. "The Lord stood with me", he says, and it was a terrible time, "and gave me power"(@2 Timothy 4:17); and so at Jerusalem the Lord stood by him.
P.L. Have we that thought of mitigation and consideration in the fact that the Lord is kneeling in Luke instead of falling upon His face to the earth, as in Matthew? Then He found them sleeping from *grief*,  (verse 45), the Spirit affording a motive for their sleeping, and then the Lord says, "Why sleep ye? rise up and pray that ye enter not into temptation".
J.T. He was considering for them; He did not ask them to pray for Him. Their grief is mentioned by Luke only.
J.J. His sweat being as great drops of blood is mentioned in Luke only, whereas the forsaking is in Matthew and Mark. The intensity of the sufferings on this line is recorded as nowhere else.
{387}
J.T. I suppose it brings out the reality of His humanity. We have already dwelt on that side. The vessel of praise is a human one, although the Lord is known in it. The Lord Jesus, a divine Person, enters into it, and leads us, but the vessel is human, and I believe Luke specially stresses the reality of His manhood here.
R.B-n. Would you say a word on the way heaven took account of the intensity of the sufferings, and that an angel was in attendance, although the disciples evidently were at some distance?
J.T. "An angel appeared to him from heaven strengthening him". We have to take note of that, as strengthening Him in the circumstances, because it applies to ourselves. Sufferings will come; our note of praise would be very poor without them, but then there is mitigation in them, as we have remarked.
P.L. Is not the service of praise in Hebrews preceded by the tender activities of Christ as Priest?
J.T. Yes. Hebrews opens up the subject. The Leader of our salvation is there said to be made "perfect ... through sufferings". Provision is made for us to go through them and at the same time to have part in the service of God.
{388}
THE PRAISES OF ISRAEL (6)
@Luke 24:32 - 53; @Acts 1:1 - 5; @John 13:1
J.T. At the close of our meeting this morning we considered verses 39 to 46 of chapter 22, which depict the Lord's sufferings, and it was noted that, while they are a record of His sufferings from the standpoint of this gospel, there is an indication of mitigation on the part of God, which would cover our own experiences or the experiences of the assembly; God's eye being constantly upon us so that we should not be tempted above what we are able to bear, but that the service should go on. Sufferings give tone to the service. It says, "For it became him ... in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings", (@Hebrews 2:10). The book of Revelation shows how sufferings enter into the praises of God. That book is full of life, which issues in praise to God. As Hezekiah said, "The living, the living, he shall praise thee", (@Isaiah 38:19). The book of Revelation contemplates the Lamb, not in the mature sense in which the gospel of John presents Him as "the Lamb of God", but in a diminutive sense (the diminutive noun being used in the Greek), involving the absence of protection, so that He is presented as the suffering One. Luke, whilst not ignoring Matthew and Mark, brings in the sufferings of Christ more as that in which we can share, and which gives tone to our service.
Chapter 24 is another experience, the counterpart of the sufferings; the experience of knowing the Lord risen, knowing Him in the activities of His life as risen, this involving spirituality in the most positive sense. He vanishes out of their sight, which would be out of keeping with a state of flesh and blood. It is the spiritual condition in which Christ was raised, which eventuates in spirituality in us. We are not yet in a spiritual condition
{389}
as to our bodies; the Lord is, and He is presented objectively in that condition in resurrection, obviously for educational reasons, that the assembly should take on that character; as it is said, "being seen of them during forty days"; in chapter 24 we have the assembly in that relation. It is the assembly publicly, but nevertheless in a condition morally, to which the Lord can come. The two sides of the assembly viewed in these chapters, 22 and 24, constitute it an invulnerable vessel, like the ark of Noah: it goes through. In chapter 22 its foundations are laid, so to speak, in the presence of murderous opposition, but laid surely. That is to say, what happens is in the presence of accredited witnesses, qualified to testify to what the Lord did and said in the institution of the Supper. That is never to be lost sight of. The memorial is to retain what Christ was, as known amongst them. As it is said, "who have assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up". (@Acts 1:21, 22). All that entered into the Lord's supper, for His heart was fully told out to them in the gift of Himself so beautifully depicted.
Then chapter 24 gives us the other side of the position, the spiritual condition in which He is now, and in virtue of which He may be with us, unseen by the world, and with all the unceasing service that He carries on, mediately now, of course, but still carried on with a view to the formation and maintenance of the assembly. The two that went to Emmaus are samples of the result of this unceasing ministry, so that the assembly should be maintained here, the idea of authority entering into it now that He is not here corporeally Himself. The *eleven*  are there. There were twelve in chapter 22 -- an unbroken number, but now there is a broken number, but still the authority is there, and the recovered ones return and find "the eleven", as it says, "and those with them gathered together". It is not the side presented
{390}
in @John 20, because there is no reference to apostleship there, nor to a number. Here it is still the public assembly, but with these two features of its constitution.
H.D'A.C. Why is Jerusalem mentioned so frequently in this last chapter of Luke and in @Acts 1, and not once in @John 20?
J.T. Just for the reason that I suggested, that John is not concerned about geographical position or place, but spiritual state; nor does he touch the collective idea of the assembly, but the *persons who form it*. The word "assembled" is not in @John 20:19 in the original.
H.E.S. Is the apprehension of the spiritual conditions into which the Lord has passed intended to bring about a spiritual state in us?
J.T. That is the thought; it is objective; He is moving about amongst them; "seen by them", as it is said in @Acts 1: "to whom also he presented himself living, after he had suffered, with many proofs; being seen by them". It is an objective thought, but intended to be educational. One link between chapter 22 and chapter 24 is that of authority. What was there in chapter 22 had been severely tested and shattered, as you might say, according to the record in the end of chapter 23, but the service of the Lord brought them together, so that the features are carried through; and, although there are only eleven, yet the authority is there and *recognised by persons who had been affected by the Lord's ministry*,  chapter 24:33.
W.A.W. Is it all having in view the moment of His appearing to them? Did He take account of Simon Peter and the two downcast ones, in order that that condition might be revived?
J.T. And to bring out the great principle as existent -- the continuous service of the Lord in regard to erring ones, all with a view to the assembly being maintained. Hence, what the two from Emmaus found was that the gathered company were saying, "The Lord is
{391}
indeed risen and has appeared to Simon". Then, *they*  related "what had happened on the way, and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread". It is to bring out that side, what proceeds in the assembly, the recognition of the Lord's service, which is carried on in relation to the sign of His love, namely, the breaking of the bread. For it is not simply bread, but *the*  bread, for the article should be there, as if the idea was prominent in their minds.
H.E.S. In @Leviticus 8, in the consecration of the priests, the sacrifice was boiled and not roast with fire. Is that the priestly apprehension of the sufferings of Christ?
J.T. That is what I understand. Boiling alludes to Luke -- and John too; the sufferings are there, but presented in a modified way.
Ques. Is there the suggestion that the service of the Lord more than recovers what seems to be lost in Judas, in that two men are available and put before the Lord in @Acts 1? You were suggesting the importance of this service of the Lord, so that the service of praise should be filled out according to the divine intention.
J.T. And it will be noticed that in the beginning of chapter 24 there are two men at the sepulchre. Connecting it with what you remark, although there may be a breach -- as, alas! there have been many -- yet God supplies adequate testimony for His purpose. If Judas is lost, as he was, we have two men at the sepulchre, as if to say there is adequate testimony; and in the two referred to in @Acts 1 we see how there were those qualified for apostleship. They were such as had assembled with the others "all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us"(@Acts 1:21). I think we ought to be encouraged in that, that the Lord will have such as are suitable to fill up what is needed for the testimony until the end.
Rem. Is their state borne witness to by the fact that when there is the sovereign choice of the Lord,
{392}
the brethren are left in perfect harmony and united, @Acts 2:1. There is no jealousy because one had been promoted over another.
J.T. The matter is put into the hands of the Lord -- into the "lap" -- and the one chosen is recognised afterwards, because Paul says that He appeared to the *"twelve"*,  @1 Corinthians 15:5.
Eu.R. Would this activity of the Lord with regard to the erring one, and the two as discouraged, tend to elevate our thoughts with regard to such, that they might be available for the vessel of praise again?
J.T. It really honours the Lord to view the matter thus. It is His own way of recovery. He appears to Simon and He goes a long way after the other two, and indicates that He will go further. It is the untiring, vigilant service that the Lord maintains in regard of His own, which I believe continues and goes on to the end, with a view to the replenishment and maintenance of the assembly.
R.B-n. There could not be the complete volume of praise from this company with the two away at Emmaus, and so they are recovered through His own sovereign work and as recovered He is able to come into their midst.
J.T. Yes, they have assembly instincts which is an important matter. It is not that the shepherd went after the sheep and laid it upon His shoulders and carried it home rejoicing; that is not the side presented here; it is the present mode of the Lord's recovery of His own. They are recovered, not only through their hearts, but through their understandings. Their hearts burned, as He spoke to them on the way, but the burning of their hearts did not bring them back to Jerusalem; it was what they *saw*. That is the principle governing the period of the forty days; He was "seen by them". Now that is wholly spiritual, and so the keenness of vision is stressed, as was said about Elisha. Elijah said, "If thou see me when I am taken from thee"(@2 Kings 2:10); and, at
{393}
the ascension of Christ, it is said, the disciples "*beholding*  him". They saw Him go up, and then the angels say to them, "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven"(@Acts 1:11). So the suggestion is of spiritual power of vision.
Ques. Is it a mark of definite recovery that their contribution was in harmony with what was already being said?
J.T. It fitted in as a necessary part. It is the suggestion of an instrument, of what is being constructed. Their contribution was necessary. First there was absolute grace in the appearing to Simon; for it is the reign of grace, and grace prevails in this new system. Simon was the last one that ought to have been noticed, reckoning according to human thoughts. And then the testimony of the two, what they experienced and what they saw; it says, "they related what had happened on the way, and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread".
F.S.M. Would not the volume of praise be greater and the song sweeter as the result of the Lord's service of recovery in the case of the two and of Simon? So, are we not encouraged to seek to be developed in this service of recovery under the Lord, not only that individuals might be recovered to the assembly, but that the volume and sweetness of the praise might be increased?
J.T. I am sure that is right. Both Peter and those two would sing more sweetly and with deeper tone than they could have done had they not strayed. Not that there is any premium on straying, but it brings out the character of the Lord's workmanship.
A.L. Is it like the expression in the end of Hebrews, "the great shepherd of the sheep",(@Hebrews 13:20) and then. He will "perfect you in every good work"(@Hebrews 13:21)?
J.T. Just so.
{394}
Ques. David speaks of the "instruments of music which I have made"(@1 Chronicles 23:5), is this the counterpart of that?
J.T. That is right. "They related", it says, "what had happened on the way, and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread". It should read "*the*  breaking of *the*  bread". I believe the wording is to bring out the prominence which this was acquiring amongst the saints. Then we have the Lord's recognition of what they were saying; it says, "as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst, and says to them. Peace be unto you". It is "*their*  midst", "to *them*"and "unto *you*", the persons so gathered and occupied are before His mind in a peculiar way here.
C.G. Would @Jeremiah 18, as to the potter and the vessel he makes on the wheel, fit in with what we have had before us as to the vessel of praise?
J.T. Yes. The first vessel mentioned was marred; "and he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make" (@Jeremiah 18:4).
R.B-n. It was emphasised just now that the Lord comes into *their*  midst. Would you say a little more about that?
J.T. It is to emphasise how pleased He was with them as they were saying these things. What they were saying conveyed the state of things as He intended them to be, that is, that grace was prominent; and there was the breaking of the bread, which maintains in the assembly a constant sense of the Lord, who He is, and what He is, and how He is to be known amongst His own, so that He has His place in leading the praises.
H.D'A.C. It is remarkable that they had hardly finished speaking of the breaking of the bread, when Jesus was standing there in the midst.
J.T. Is not that to establish the thought? Because another feature of the assembly is that it is the place of right principles and thoughts; they find currency there, and they are maintained there.
{395}
Eu.R. Is the idea that the assembly is like a stringed instrument, and the Lord would have each believer concerned to be available to His hand and in tune with the other strings?
J.T. The suggestion is that each fits in as the parts in music. What they said was not said promiscuously; it fitted in. I believe that the saints suffer, and our service of song in the assembly is marred, by the method of applying tunes in our meetings. The application of music does not appear to be regarded as a spiritual matter at times; it seems just a question of any one raising any tune that seems suitable to the hymn, without much sense of waiting on the Lord about it.
J.H.T. With regard to that point, musical instruments are first referred to by David as "the instruments of God", (@1 Chronicles 16:42), and then as "the instruments which I made", (@1 Chronicles 23:5); does formation come into view there? Then, in the days of recovery, they used the musical instruments of David, the man of God, @Nehemiah 12:36. Over against that, we have to record what is said in Amos, that they "invent them instruments of music, like David", (chapter 6:5). The latter is mere imitation.
J.T. Yes. The other passages you quote show that the music is a part of the service, that it is not a mechanical thing that any one can supply, but is spiritual.
W.C. Does "I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing also with the understanding", (@1 Corinthians 14:15), bear on the tunes?
J.T. As we have had already, 1 Corinthians seems to carry with it the idea of instruments of music -- it may not be very pronounced, but it seems to be there. The Corinthians were certainly devoid of harmony in the different parties that existed among them, one group sitting down by themselves, and another group by themselves. You would get no musical harmony there. Chapter 12 insists on unity. Chapter 14 speaks of distinction of sounds in what is piped or harped, and
{396}
this enters into the singing with the spirit and with the understanding. Music is necessarily part of the singing. In heaven, harps are used. God looks for harmony. When the ark was brought into the temple, @2 Chronicles 5, it is said, "when the trumpeters and singers were as one"(verse 13), that the glory filled the house. It is as if Jehovah honoured the perfectly blended harmony.
J.S. The Lord said to them, "These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled". Would the psalms correspond to those musical instruments and the praise going up to God?
J.T. The idea of music must come in there.
M.W.B. Do you think it ought to be a question of spiritual exercise as to a brother raising a suitable tune to a hymn in the assembly?
J.T. It seems to enter into the constitution of the assembly which we are dwelling upon in this chapter, and in @Acts 1. A tune necessarily is an integral part of the hymn *as used*. As it proceeds from the vocal musical powers of the saints it is governed by their affections and their intelligence; it is thus spiritual.
P.L. Have we that thought in the many psalms addressed to "The Chief Musician", and then the kind of instrument upon which the psalm is to be played and sung being added?
J.T. Just so. As was remarked, the Lord added the psalms when speaking in the assembly, @Luke 24:44, but He does not refer to the psalms in His service of recovery, verse 27.
F.S.M. Of the singers whom David separated for the service of song in the house of God, it is said that they were all under the direction of the king, and of their fathers. Would that suggest the idea that in starting a tune we should be in subjection to the Lord and to our brethren?
{397}
J.T. Clearly. It is remarkable that "the captains of the host" were associated with David in separating those who were to be engaged in the service of song. But the fatherly element in the oversight would modify this, see @1 Chronicles 25.
G.J.E. "Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs"(@Ephesians 5:19) -- would that include the tune, the singing, and the harmony, as well as the words? There are the three -- psalms and hymns and spiritual songs; are they all good for the assembly?
J.T. Obviously the tune is included in the singing. They all belong to the assembly. I suppose a psalm embodies experience.
G.J.E. You would not set a tune for a spiritual song to a psalm. There should be an appropriate tune.
Ques. Is it not suitable that brothers should addict themselves to the service of tune-starting?
J.T. I think it is quite in order if carried out in a godly way.
Ques. You are not suggesting that every spiritual person can start a tune, but those who can, should do it with spiritual intelligence?
J.T. That is the thought. If one has the ability, to sing or to provide music he is an asset to the assembly, part of the wealth of the assembly; it belongs to all.
Rem. Are hymns on the same principle as in @Acts 6? When it is a question of ministering, the men are to be full of the Holy Spirit, and men were chosen of that character.
J.T. I listened to an address by F.E.R. about thirty-seven years ago which affected me much. He said there was nothing set up at the beginning that was not in the power of the Holy Spirit. Anything outside of that was not acceptable to God, and what you say confirms that, that even the work of deacons required that the men should be full of faith and the Spirit. And hence the provision of music in the service of God should be in the power of the Spirit.
{398}
D.L.H. Normally the one who gives out the hymn would also start the tune, but if he is incapable of doing it, then the Lord would be looked to, to guide in regard to the tune. Scope should be given to the person who gives out the hymn, to see whether he has also the tune that is suitable; it seems to me there ought to be more pause given to allow of this. If there were more quietness and waiting on the Lord in that way, confusion would be avoided.
J.T. I am sure what you have said should have universal attention.
The Lord here, as in the midst of them, stresses His humanity in resurrection, in the fact that He ate the honeycomb and the broiled fish. Not that He needed to do it, but according to the spirit of Luke's gospel, it would come within the range of our understanding, to assure us of the reality of His humanity in a wholly spiritual condition, which is to be reflected in the assembly, although we are not yet in that condition as to our bodies. Then their understandings are opened, and intelligence is given as to the whole scope of Scripture, according to the Lord's own way of dividing it -- which is an important matter, as aiding us in our reading of the Scriptures. Then, having stressed their place as witnesses, "he led them out as far as Bethany". I thought we might note these things as entering into our subject of the formation of a vessel of praise. The Lord emphasises His humanity in a new and eternal condition, a condition in which we are to share, and in which we share now inwardly; and then, that our intelligences are opened, so that we might understand, and then He *leads*  us.
That brings us to the final point, that is, the Lord's service as "minister of the sanctuary", as opened up in the epistle to the Hebrews. In order to amplify this, @Acts 1 says He presented Himself living to the apostles. The word 'present' is not simply that He is there, but that He shows Himself to us in such a
{399}
way that we see Him according to His thought at the moment. He was seen of them during the forty days. And then He "assembled with them". That is all to bring out what this vessel is, and His part in it.
Then, to link on with John's record, the Lord's communications at the last Supper, the beginning of chapter 13, tells us that He was going *to the Father* : "Jesus, knowing that his hour had come that he should depart out of this world to the Father ..." That being introductory to chapters 13 to 17, is to remind us that the mind of the Lord was toward the Father in what this section presents. The writers of the first three gospels in recording the events of the last Supper do not make any reference to His going to the Father; they are concerned about the public side, of which we have spoken, and of which we get the climax in @Luke 24 and @Acts 1. John brings in another line, in order to complete the instruction -- that the Lord, whilst He was dealing with the Supper and the things relating to it, also had in mind the Father, to whom He was going; and He would draw them into that current. So that we get much more from John about what occurred that night than we do from the others, and all, I believe, to draw our minds and hearts into the current of the Lord's mind. He was going to the Father, and He would have us to go with Him, not yet literally, but in spirit. In Luke He leads them out as far as to Bethany, showing how perfectly He moved in keeping with the dispensation: He did not lead them further than that, because He would let the idea of the remnant stand, which Bethany suggests; so as to continue the testimony to Israel, to give every possible advantage to the Jews. Thus at the end they are in the temple praising and blessing God, but that was not final; it was just in agreement with Bethany. So the beginning of Acts gives us more particulars as to their own movements after His going up; they returned from the *mount of Olives* ,which
{400}
corresponds more with the assembly, and as returned to the city they went to the *upper room*.
J.J. Would you say that from Luke's side, Jerusalem and the mount of Olives become a kind of spiritual position during the Lord's absence?
J.T. The history of Bethany denotes the place of love. It was where the Lord specially found remnant affection. In keeping with this, the testimony of the gospel was to *begin at Jerusalem* , @Luke 24:47. This fact ought to have appealed to the Jews.
W.C.G. Would you say that the proof that we are shepherding according to @Luke 24 is that we can supply some measure of Bethany conditions?
J.T. Just so. 'Bethany conditions' is a good expression, and the power of those conditions is seen in the movements of the disciples after the Lord was received up. It says, "*they*,  having done him homage, returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God". It was powerful testimony in the temple every day.
H.E.S. Does Luke's gospel show the way the Lord went, and what He did, while in John it is how He felt, and what He thought?
J.T. Quite so. He was thinking about the Father and leading them into the current of His mind. "Part with me", He says.
Eu.R. Are the disciples, as in the temple, in accord with Simeon, a "man in Jerusalem"?
J.T. Yes. There was this powerful testimony, as to what God had effected in Christ in the way of praise. They returned "with great joy, and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God". That ought to have had a powerful influence, in fact, more powerful in a way than preaching. A service of praise greater than that of David was there. It came from Bethany, the place of love, and which is said to signify "house of song", as already noted.
Ques. Would the end of Luke's gospel lay the
{401}
basis for the further movements, as seen in John?
J.T. Yes. Bethany was not final, but provisional. There is something beyond, and that is seen first in the fact that in @Acts 1, after He has ascended, they return from the mount of Olives. It is an indication of "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God", (@Romans 8:14). They went to the upper room, which would afford conditions for the realisation of @John 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17. The great thoughts running through refer to the Father.
J.J. Would you regard the first part of @John 12, where Bethany is mentioned, as Jewish? Is that the end of that line, and then the first verse of chapter 13, what goes outside the world altogether?
J.T. I think so. The fact that it was "before the feast of the passover" (the exact time unmentioned) is, I think, to show that the occasion was not governed by the Jewish feast. The passover, and the Lord's supper too, refer to what is here in this world as a testimony; whereas what the Lord had in mind takes us outside of all that -- His going out of the world to the Father.
W.C.G. Would @John 12 be the equivalent of @Luke 24 as to Bethany?
J.T. Pretty much; whereas the assembly is morally outside the world. The upper room corresponds.
The service of the disciples in the temple, verse 52, could not go much beyond the general service of God as inaugurated in the Old Testament, although the Lord had taught them to say Father, and they could bring affections and intelligence into it that had never been there before. It was in the temple; it was so far Jewish, but a testimony. But when they come to the upper room they are morally elevated; the assembly was there -- in principle, at least.
Rem. Would you say that one thought connected with praise is that of nearness, being near enough to God in moral and holy conditions to praise and bless
{402}
Him? The two going to Emmaus *knew*  a good deal, but at a distance; they knew nothing from personal experience of being near.
J.T. What we get in @Luke 24 when the Lord comes in, is to touch us, how He is to be known in the assembly, and, as thus known, we give place to Him as Leader. Intelligence as to what governs the position should enter into it; when the Lord has His place, when we discern Him in the midst. He is to be recognised as the "minister of the sanctuary", and I think @John 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 indicate the current of His mind as the "minister of the sanctuary". He is thinking of the service Godward; the Father is before Him.
A.N. Do the communications of those chapters come in following upon the assembly position having been reached?
J.T. Yes. As soon as the Lord is apprehended in the midst, it is a question of what He will do, for He is "minister of the sanctuary", and these chapters in John indicate the current of His mind. The thought of the Father runs right through. John begins and ends with it. In chapter 17 he gives us the Lord lifting up His eyes to heaven and saying, "Father". That is objective, and educational for us -- that we might have some idea of how to speak to the Father.
J.S. Would chapter 20 give us the "minister of the sanctuary"? The "minister of the sanctuary" supposes a scene of evil, whereas "my Father and your Father" would go beyond that.
J.T. @John 20 involves our greatest and most intimate privileges, but while we are in flesh and blood the idea of the sanctuary must be always present. It is necessary owing to the very fact that we are in flesh and blood.
P.L. Would you say that the Lord felt it that they had not asked Him where He was going? And might we suggest that He would still feel that?
{403}
J.T. He said, "None of you demands of me. Where goest thou?" (@John 16:5). They were not in the current of His mind nor thinking of what He was going into or of what He would draw them into. So, at the end of chapter 16 they say to Him, "Lo, now thou speakest openly and utterest no allegory. Now we know that thou knowest all things, and hast not need that any one should demand of thee. By this we believe that thou art come from God". Then the Lord said, "Do ye now believe?"(@John 16:29 - 31) So that He brings them to the point where they understand Him; and it goes on to say, "These things Jesus spoke, and lifted up his eyes to heaven and said. Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee", (@John 17:1). He "lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said. Father". The disciples would never forget that. If we were to hear John and Peter and the others in the assembly, you may be sure there would be some reflection of this manner of the Lord. As they received the Spirit they would, in measure, say Father, as He did.
Ques. Does this remind us of Joseph's remarks: "behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth which speaks to you", (@Genesis 45:12)?
J.T. As we apprehend Him, and how He does things, we learn how to be in the assembly. It says that He "assembled with them"; they would thus learn how to assemble, from Him.
P.L. So we say now, in the language of Canticles, "His mouth is most sweet", chapter 5:16.
A.M. And in the end of that book it says, "The companions hearken to thy voice", chapter 8:13.
Rem. Are not the three last words of @John 17 most important -- "I in them"? "I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known; that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them", @John 17:26. He is the One who has made that love known, and our hearts understand and appreciate it.
{404}
PATERNAL, MINISTERIAL AND KINGLY QUALITIES
@Genesis 48:8 - 19; @Deuteronomy 34:1 - 4,7; @1 Chronicles 29:10 - 19
I have been encouraged as before the Lord to turn to these scriptures. I wish to treat of them separately and together in this meeting. The first, indicating what is patriarchal, is an important side to the position of believers, and it properly begins with Abraham the believer, who is said to be "the father of us all", those who are on the principle of faith being blessed, as the scripture says, "with believing Abraham", (@Galatians 3:9). Then, from the passage in @Deuteronomy 1 hope to show in a few words what I may call the ministerial development, a most important feature also of our position as believers. Then, finally, what I may call the royal development, in its place also most important, for what is kingly is specially intended to stand out in these last days against the radical spirit that has become dominant.
The first is marked by love of the *saints*.
The second is marked by love of the *truth*.
The third is marked by love of *the house of God*.
David stands out distinctly in this latter way, as indicated in the verses I read; indeed, he speaks in the same chapter of his affection for the house, saying also elsewhere, "I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth". (@Psalm 26:8).
To go over the ground again, so as to make the subject clear, the first quality -- the paternal or patriarchal -- necessarily circles around the family; the second centres in the truth, Christ being the truth and the Spirit being the truth: and the third centres in the
{405}
throne, which, as I hope to show, implies *moral*  greatness now.
Having the subject thus briefly set out, we may dwell on the first, the patriarchal thought. It is not beyond any of us, for, as I remarked, it is really a question of love of the brethren. Although we may begin to love the brethren very young, as left here in the testimony we shall not remain young; we quickly pass the youthful stage and others come in who are younger. So that we, as actuated by love, begin to regard those who are younger as the objects of paternal care. As we grow older, this becomes accentuated as younger ones come along constantly. One generation passes away and another comes -- that is a fixed fact, and as we merge into middle age, or old age, we begin to think of the passing away. Not indeed that saints all live to be very old; it is of course not so, but I am speaking of how *love works*,  and nothing can be more interesting in the whole field of knowledge than love's way. The first commandment with promise is to the young, "that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth", (@Ephesians 6:3). It is a promise to be valued, and will not be abused by love.
As the youthful stage passes, we begin, as governed by love, to look with fatherly care on those who are younger; and as we are allowed to continue here in the wisdom of God, there is scope for love to operate in this as in other ways. As I said, one of the most interesting features in the whole field of knowledge is the movement of divine love, and it will be observed that it eventuates in a fatherly development in believers. Perhaps the need for fathers is as great as any that is current. One could count a great many who have reached, under the wise government of God, the stage in life to which spiritual fatherhood properly belongs, and God would lay it upon us that it should be assumed. It is not exactly an office, it is a family relationship developed in love, but developed too, in certain moral connections
{406}
as indicated in the name of the great father -- Abraham. His first name was *Abram*,  which, as no doubt most of you know, means "high father". That was before he had a family, as if the idea of *moral*  elevation as attached to separation from the world, is essential to fatherhood. That is to say, we begin to love the saints, not from natural proclivities or because of natural links or natural correspondence; we begin to regard them differently, that is in elevated moral relations. The idea of "high father" is in contrast to all that attaches to man in the flesh which is low and gravitates towards the earth and grovels there, and so we begin to look at the brethren from the standpoint of moral elevation, and thus love in this connection begins to show itself.
Now, all this is seen in the history of Abraham, and then to some extent in the history of Isaac, and finally in the history of Jacob; and what comes out in Jacob is that he had the experience of the *loss*  of children. He temporarily lost two, and so had experience thus occasioned. Now that enters into love's position at the present time. Many have been lost, and we qualify among other things, in the way we regard those who have been lost, for we cannot afford to lose *any*  of our brethren, however unlovable they may seem to be. I believe that Jacob had in his thoughts the essentialness of the twelve, that they *must not*  be lost. Divine counsels required the twelve, but "one is not"; that was the sorrowful note that had to be struck. And again, "Joseph is not, and Simeon is not", @Genesis 42:36. That is to say love is wrenched and tortured by the loss of children, children once possessed, but possessed no longer.
That comes out in the history of Jacob, and the Spirit of God records the patriarch's delight in the recovery of the lost. "Israel said, it is enough: Joseph my son is yet alive; I will go and see him before I die", @Genesis 45:28. It was intelligent affection, because it was not only a question of the loss of one son, but one of *twelve*,  one of a required
{407}
number. Let us never forget that there is a required number with God, and the loss of one of a required number enters into the sorrow. One could point that out in many ways. How the Lord felt the loss of the twelfth! But His love never wavered; He gave Judas the sop just as he was about to go out. That is a point of great importance; the power to love what is unlovely, and even what is opposed. I am not for a moment saying that Judas represents a brother, or the work of God, but he represents one of twelve, and the Spirit of God stresses the *eleven*  afterwards. So that the Lord would put it upon us to think of the lost ones; there are those who are lost to us, although the Lord knows those that are His, @2 Timothy 2:19. Every true believer, however obscure or feeble he may be, is known to the Lord, and each is included in the family. There are those who have not been lost to us; we have not had them, so to speak; but there are those we have had, who are lost -- and Jacob represents fatherhood in regard of sons once possessed but lost. How one could dilate on that in regard of @Luke 15! -- but I only touch upon it in regard of Jacob.
And now he said to Joseph, "Who are these?" It is an old man speaking, a man of great experience -- largely through his own failure, indeed, but in spite of this of God's love, for God loved Jacob; as scripture says, "Jacob have I loved". He met him at Luz as he was on his way to Haran, and He met him as he came back, and in a most familiar way, and ennobled him, giving him a great spiritual name; and He told him His own name also. He met him again as He was going out of Canaan to Egypt, and said He was the God of his father Isaac, assuring him, in type, that every thought of His was secured infallibly in a risen Christ. And now, "Who are these?" We may well look around and ask such a question. "And Joseph said unto his father. They are my sons, whom God hath given me in this place. And he said. Bring them, I
{408}
pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them". Then "Joseph brought them out from between his knees", showing that they were *cared for*,  and brought them to his father, and his father kissed them and embraced them. What a word that is for us from the paternal side -- "he kissed them, and embraced them", and in doing so, he was perfectly intelligent as to the mind of God about them, although his eyes were dim. I believe God would speak to us as to these qualities, many of us, as I said being in the fatherly and motherly stage of life; but old age is not to rob us of the power of affection, for "love is strong as death"; it never fails. Old age does not rob the man of faith of divine love; and what wealth there is in brothers and sisters of the fatherly and motherly age retaining spiritual affection in full fervour for the younger, and withal knowing exactly the mind of God about them -- able to tell, able to discern the children of God, where nature fails!
Nothing is more blinding in the things of God than nature. So that Jacob at the advanced age of a hundred and forty-seven years has maintained freshness of affection for the young, and discernment, where nature would blind him, as it blinded his father Isaac. Nature did not blind Jacob. He was able to say, "I know it, my son". He knew which was the elder and which the younger, and he knew the mind of God about both. He blessed them both, the Spirit of God tells us in the New Testament, @Hebrews 11:21; but he put his right hand upon Ephraim's head and his left upon the head of Manasseh, against the wishes of the most powerful man outwardly in Egypt, next to the king. We must not think it was regarded as a trivial matter by Joseph; it was not. Jacob's action was regarded as "evil" in his eyes, and what was evil in the eyes of a man like Joseph in Egypt was something to be stopped, and he sought to stop it. We have to learn in our old age to go against the current, and maintain the mind of God. As we grow older we are apt to give way to
{409}
the more powerful features that are coming up, but not so with Jacob. The words of Joseph, who was lord of all Egypt, were: "Not so, my father", taking hold of his father's hand to remove it from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's head; but Jacob *refused*,  saying, "I know, my son, I know ... truly his younger brother will be greater than he". The hand of the patriarch is not to be turned aside by the demand of his son in the carrying out of the will of God, although that son was very great.
That is what I had in mind as most needed and important at the present time; that God would put it upon the brethren to develop the fatherly and motherly instincts, and to maintain the affections proper even in old age, so that the will of God goes through unimpaired. Then, to go a little further, you see in Jacob how he gathered his sons together to listen to Israel their father. It is not now a question of young people brought to one, so that he might express his love to them and the mind of God about them, but here is definite initiative on the part of the patriarch. "Hearken unto Israel your father", he says, and I will "tell you that which shall befall you in the last days"(@Genesis 49:1). What an advantage to have a father like that! And he hesitates not to tell them all the truth. Sons of his though they were, he tells them all the truth. It is necessary that we should have the whole truth told us; it is no love to withhold the truth from the brethren. And then we are told that he *blessed*  them. Everyone of them was blessed -- such is a father; he cannot think of the saints otherwise than that they should be blessed. It is the true fatherly instinct that the young should be blessed; and so he blessed each of them according to his blessing. Jacob as dying was in the mind of God.
Now I come on to the ministerial side. God is greatly helping us on this line, and there are many now, thank God, who are able to serve in the truth, but there are
{410}
not enough. The need is great. The need of pastors and teachers especially is urgent; and the Lord would thrust out qualified ones into His field. I want to show how the ministerial feature is seen and developed, for God loves development in His people; He loves full fruition, whatever phase it may be; the apostle says, "that we may present every man perfect in Christ", (@Colossians 1:28). Moses represents the ministerial side; he is, indeed, called in the New Testament, "a ministering servant", (@Hebrews 3:5). He is said to have been faithful in all God's house. What a word that is! What marks the minister, as I said at the beginning, is love of the truth. The Spirit of God is said to be the Spirit of truth. Christ is said to be the truth objectively; the Spirit in John's epistle is said to be the truth, as I may say, subjectively. He maintains it here in the saints; He is also the Spirit of truth; and one is pressed to say a word as to this because the need for ministry is great, and, although there are a goodly number in the service, more are needed. But we need to have our eye on what God regards as a perfected servant, and that, I think, is set out in Moses.
What is to be observed is that his eyesight was good; we have often remarked on that: "His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated", (@Deuteronomy 34:7), and he was able to *go up:*  that is to say, he was a man of energy in spite of his advanced years; he "went up ... to mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah" -- as Deuteronomy puts it; he did it. The suggestion is that in the servant there is to be no giving in or lapsing into lethargy or quiet restfulness. I am not speaking of what is physical, but of spiritual energy. The Lord would put it upon those of fatherly and motherly age, as I was saying, to retain the strength of affection; and He would put upon the ministers -- the same persons, as I may say -- the necessity for energy in regard to the whole scope of God's thoughts for His people, and in regard to the freshness that belongs to ministry.
{411}
If we take chapters 32 and 33 of Deuteronomy together, we see something cognate with what we find with Jacob, that is, a faithful setting out of the history of the people in chapter 32, and then a beautiful pronouncement of the blessing of each of the tribes. Moses is called a "man of God" in chapter 33. I do not suppose there is any title that is so to be desired in the service of God as that. It is applied sparingly in Scripture, only to Timothy in the New Testament. It is applied to Moses and to David, and I do not think there is any character a minister should aim at more keenly than that of a "man of God". That is, in our service, to think for God, and at the same time for the people, to maintain the truth at all costs -- "love of the truth", as is said, @2 Thessalonians 2:10, and in ministering it, to minister it in freshness. As you will observe in the beginning of chapter 32, Moses says, "Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass: because I will publish the name of the Lord: ascribe ye greatness unto our God. He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he", @Deuteronomy 32:1 - 4. It seems to me that this has a voice for all who minister. If I call the heavens and earth to hear, I cannot be given to repetition, I cannot be given to staleness: heaven knows if I am *merely*  repeating, and earth knows, though the present audience may not know. Moses would remind us that ministry is to be always in freshness; and in its freshness it is to maintain the rights of God at all costs. The truth must be maintained. In no way can we serve the saints better in ministry, than to insist on the truth; that is chapter 32. Then, on the other hand, to set out in the clearest manner the mind of God about His people, for God's heart is full of blessing for His people. He lavishes it upon them. Let the servant
{412}
be in the hands of God, and there will be abundance and freshness of matter, and ability for the setting out of the great thoughts of divine love about the saints. Chapter 33 sets out God's mind about the tribes; then chapter 34 sets out the great features of the land, the extent of the land seen by the eyes of this same minister, as shown him by Jehovah. Moses valued it, requesting earlier: "Let me go over, I pray thee, and see the good land that is beyond the Jordan, that goodly mountain and Lebanon", @Deuteronomy 3:25.
Now I come on to David, and, as I said at the beginning, we shall see that the king is concerned about the house. That is to say, kingly qualities imply moral greatness, and that I regard any greatness that I may have, whether it be moral or official, just as a means to an end. I am not speaking of these three features as belonging to three different persons; they are three features of the same person, and the kind of person that is so needed, so essential to the present exigency. If I have moral power, affording me it may be some little official position -- although officialism is really out of place today -- what is the intent of it? It is a means to an end; it is a means to the house -- that is David. His great thought was the house; he loved the place of God's habitation, the place where God's honour dwelt. How is that to be reached? How is the house to be brought about? By kingly power and resources. This is strikingly seen in David, as typifying Christ, and it is to be reflected in us all. Any little bit of moral greatness that one may have is just a means to an end, and there is no greater evidence of true greatness in a person than that. *The greatness*  is not an end. Great as the kingdom and our service in it are, they are not the end; they are a means to an end, and that end is for God -- that He should have a dwelling-place. That is God's idea for us; and as honestly received by each, it wipes out at one stroke all ambition and pride amongst the people of God in His service.
{413}
So that what you find with David is that at the beginning he is marked by personal greatness, for the thought of a king is that he is a man that is *able*,  the official comes afterwards. The introduction of David in Scripture is most beautiful. The first description we have of him in @1 Samuel 16 is intended to attract the heart; that is the first thought. A brother, if he is to be morally great amongst the saints, is first to be *lovable*. I am not to climb into prominence by my ability; the first thing is personal lovability. That is the idea, that one is loved; a man like David is bound to be loved. Samuel said to Jesse, "Are here all thy children?" There is yet one, he says, "and, behold, he keepeth the sheep". And Samuel said, "Send and fetch him; for we will not sit down till he comes hither", @1 Samuel 16:11; and as he arrived, Jehovah said, "Arise, anoint him: for this is he"(@1 Samuel 16:12). But that is not all. "Now he was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance"; he was of a lovely appearance. The idea is that he was attractive. The attention of everybody there could not but be riveted on that young man. I suppose Jesse never saw such beauty in David before, as he saw when Jehovah called attention to him; and there he was in the midst of his brethren. I suppose they, too, never saw such beauty in that young man before!
Well, that is the thought. God will call attention to a man as to his personal character first -- what he is. Then the next description we have of David is by a young man in Saul's service. "Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse",(@1 Samuel 16:18) and he plays well. Some of us have been engaged with that today. It was inherent in the man, as I may say. Although a shepherd by occupation, he knew music, he knew how to play well. He was a valiant man, too, and a man of war, and of good presence, and Jehovah was with him. That is the second introduction to David. Need I say that all the qualities of kingship were there? But the kingly qualities are not the first presented; the lovableness is the first thing
{414}
presented in David. So that one becomes an object of affection to the brethren, and then one's ability comes into use. David served even a Saul! It would be most difficult to serve persons like Saul, one affected by an evil spirit, but David served him acceptably, such was his moral greatness.
Proceeding now to the closing moments of his life, we shall see that in these he is equal to all this. It is the full development; his heart is still full of the house of God. His heart was on the house from the time when he said, "I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the wood", (@Psalm 132:4 - 6), and he brought the ark to Zion. That was the great burden of his life; his kingship was subservient to that, to make a place for God. What a great thought, to have any part, however small, in making a place for the habitation of the mighty God of Jacob! So, from the time he saw the sheathing of the sword at the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, until this chapter 29, he is full of the house. It was the great end and result of his kingly power and resources.
But what I want to show further is what is most important for ministers. As we get older there is a tendency to assume priority, and to set up a little throne and refuse anyone a place near it. Now that is the very disposition that David did not have, because he made Solomon king along with himself. He did not say to Solomon, You wait, do not come into power till I am gone. True greatness in the elders will make ample room for the younger; the more ability the better. So that David made Solomon king, chapter 23; and we read here, chapter 29, that he was made king "the second time". I ask the brethren to examine these chapters, and see how much is made of Solomon being made king. You say, why do you speak of that? Just because of the importance of the elder making
{415}
room for the younger, that is, for those in whom moral greatness appears. They will only enhance us; they will not interfere with our ministry. The more royalty the better; and Solomon had true royalty. It is said that Jehovah loved him; he was loved from his youth; like David, he was lovable; Jehovah loved him. He was loved of his father and mother, too. So, throughout this section, from chapter 22 onward, the Spirit of God dwells upon the fact that Solomon the son of David is king; and David is perfectly restful in the kingly position of his son alongside of him.
So these three features, dear brethren, as I said before, are intended to attach to each, and God would press them upon us so that the testimony should go on. There is no idea at all of any interference with the carrying out of the will of God. As one generation passes away, the coming generation is to carry on the service, and it is the intention that they should have every possible advantage, and, on the other hand, it is imperative they should be in suitability and seemliness in their service. Solomon was made king by David, and he sat on the throne with David, so that we have the father and the son exercising royal power together, and all with a view to "the palace". Beloved, let us have in our hearts the thought of the *palace*,  @1 Chronicles 29:19. If there is to be a palace for God we need all the help that God has provided to this end. The building was to be "exceeding, magnifical", and David had that in mind. He says: "Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine; thine: is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all". How powerful and beautiful is that language! And how fitting it is for us, in any little place or work He has given us, that it should be always fully owned that it is He who is providing and doing all! May God bless these thoughts to us!
