{1}
PRIESTHOOD IN APOSTATE DAYS
@Revelation 1: 5, 6; @Revelation 5: 10; @Revelation 20: 6; @Malachi 2: 1, 4 - 7
These scriptures treat of priesthood. They treat of it as it should appear in our times; not that there is any change from earlier times, but as time brings about changes, God meets these by stressing certain features. We have in these scriptures the features of priesthood that should especially appear in these dark apostate days. As evil men arise and seducers wax worse and worse, God stresses His truth, giving edge to it; in no way does He weaken His truth, in no way does He lower the standard of it to meet by way of compromise the opposition that has appeared. His word, we are told, is as a two-edged sword, and God gives sharpness to His truth as exigencies arise in the history of His people. While this may tend to smallness and what is outwardly despicable in those who hold to the truth in this way, there is what God regards as a testimony, a very great matter with Him. The Lord Jesus told the leper to go to the priest and show himself and offer the sacrifices required by the law for a testimony to them. Whether they will hear or whether they will forbear, we are told, the testimony is there; and God will be able to say, when He enters into judgment, which He is about to do, with the world in general, with nations severally, with states, with towns, with villages, and with men, that in no case has He left Himself without witness. Whether it be to a monarch or to a slave, God will be able to say, "Thou knewest all this" (@Daniel 5: 22).
Now the book of Revelation, as the word means, is an unveiling of conditions and happenings so that we might see them beforehand; indeed, the book is written to us, as the address in the beginning of the paragraph which I read indicates -- "John to the seven assemblies which are in Asia", meaning the whole
{2}
responsible body. It is therefore in the library of the assembly to be read. No book in the christian library should he left unread; but above all this one should be read; there is a premium attached to it. And so the apostle Paul in his closing moments, when the outlook was dark, directed Timothy to bring the books and especially the parchments. Even he, in those closing moments when there was such pressure upon him, thought of books, as also did Daniel of old when he said, "I Daniel understood by the books" (@Daniel 9: 2). So that it is not only the library and the reading but the understanding -- "Blessed is he that reads". Later on in this same paragraph John speaks directly to us, and introduces this great thought of priesthood in his address. "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father". That is to say, he intimates at the very outset of this wonderful book, that God has a system of things; He has a kingdom made of persons that have been washed by the precious blood of Christ, trusted persons, and the individual members of this kingdom are priests unto God.
Then in chapter 5, we have a similar word, but not the same. We have the living creatures and the elders singing a new song. It is a poetic matter, and they are singing about others, who out of every tribe, tongue, and nation have been redeemed or bought with the blood of Christ; that is, He has a right over them; He has bought them. They are not said to be a kingdom; they are said to be kings and priests unto God; that is, the thought is extended universally. In chapters 1 and 5 the bearing of the priesthood is Godward, unto God, as if God were to say, 'Whatever you are going on with, whatever coldness, indifference, or callousness marks you, I have priests unto me; I have not given up my thought at all'. He would say of Aaron that he was to minister unto Him in the priest's office; that is, it is an office, and the ministry is to be carried on by
{3}
priests in that office. So it is now; however few or many, God here intimates to us that He has His priests; they are unto Him.
And then in chapter 20, we have again people risen and reigning with Christ. They also are said to be priests -- not to God, but of God. I want you to follow this, dear brethren, because it is this latter passage that I desire to open up a little. We must have priesthood *to* God, before we can have priesthood *of* God; that is, God has priests, those that belong to Him, they are characteristically His, for their ministry is towards Him. They live and reign with Christ, beautiful and glorious thought, they live and reign with Christ a thousand years, but they are priests of God and of Christ.
Now I will go back for a moment to chapter 1, so as to bring out the position of the kingdom. He has made us, we are told, a kingdom. Kingdoms rise and fall, you know. The greatest of all kingdoms in the history of this world as regards fame and longevity and power, was Rome. We read of its decline and its fall. The writer of that book, himself an infidel, did not understand the book of Revelation. Rome is coming up again, and all the world will marvel at its head, wonder at it. Solemn consideration for us who know the truth of what is coining! The head of it with all his power and his fame will be taken alive, we are told, and cast into the lake of fire, with his prime minister, the second beast. He is taken away before his army is destroyed. Such is the power of God as seen in dealing with evil. It is only a matter of time, beloved friends. The powers that be are ordained of God. We have to understand the difference. We are to pray for them; we are to be subject to them -- but the people of God are never enjoined to be subject to this great power of which I am speaking. What a time they will have! Think of the conflict, the open opposition, and the greatest power operating against a few saints of God! What affliction! What suffering! Hence those
{4}
who suffer through him are seen amongst these priests, in chapter 20, who live and reign with Christ a thousand years. They are specially noted. But then here is this kingdom. Not only is there a priesthood, but a kingdom. He has made us a kingdom (verse 6). I want you to notice that, for it is a matter of power. There must be power, and a kingdom, above all institutions, must be supported or it falls; it becomes a misnomer. The kingdom of God is in power, it says. Well now, a kingdom guarantees protection for those that form it. Even a criminal ordinarily is protected to a point; that is, until justice is meted out to him, and that requires power. The principle of it is that it secures the saints; it secures the rights of the saints; it protects them; it secures their territory, so to speak; it secures the territory of God. God has made us such a kingdom. It is not merely to honour us. He needs such an institution as that. How can we carry on, beloved, without it? So, in the gospel of Matthew, you have the kingdom first as the support of the assembly, and then, with the assembly as its capital or metropolis. That is the position in Matthew. The assembly is supported by the kingdom. We are told that the kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. If that prevails, what a state of things! We shall have a functioning assembly under those circumstances, and we shall have room for functioning priests, too. Matters come up for adjudication. A general procedure may seem right and the result reached may seem right.
To refer to this country (U.S.A.) by way of illustration. There are two great branches of the government, but they may be found to be defective. Then there is the Supreme Court. It is an independent body, an independent institution, inaugurated doubtless for safety. Such is man's way of patching up things as best he can, but still you have in it an illustration, because that court has the final word. The sons of Aaron, we are told, had the final word, whatever the
{5}
controversy was; assembly actions may prove invalid. I only speak of that, beloved, in a general way, so that we might see how the kingdom maintains the assembly and the means that God has instituted by the way of safety so that His will should prevail. The priests will think for God. The sons of Levi were to be wholly apart from natural feeling. It was the sons of Levi "who said to his father and to his mother, I see him not" (@Deuteronomy 33: 9). They were wholly apart for God. How important it was that there should be such, for at their mouth was to be every decision. Their word was to be final, and so here, He has "made us a kingdom", but also "priests to his God". Think of an enactment in the kingdom, an administrative action, and the priests of God turn to God; they are priests unto God. Look at them there! They have the burden of this action upon them. Is it of God? Will they think first as of God? They go in unto God. They are unto God, and God must come first. When I went into the sanctuary, says a great priest, my mind was all changed. So it is very often. You see how safety lies, dear brethren, in going in unto God. The same people that form the kingdom are the priests. He has "made us a kingdom, priests" -- not 'and priests'. That is to say, those who form the kingdom are the priests. How important that is! Priests unto God. You will have to come to Me before anything can be enacted to satisfy Me, says God. You say it is an assembly action. Very well, but God says, You have to come to Me about that. Priests unto God. That is a great matter, beloved brethren. Then it says, "to him be the glory". Very well, you would expect that from the thought of priests; priesthood is maintained; is that not the first thing? "And made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father: to him be the glory". Everybody in there says, "Glory". There is no partiality in there; no unholy thought in there. No, beloved friends, the holy presence of God permeates it and fills my soul as I
{6}
go into it, and I begin to look over things. You see, there is safety in all that.
Well now, in chapter 5, as I was saying, it is priests to God again, but in a wider sense. We have the living creatures first in this chapter. We might wonder why that is. It is a chapter of energy; that is the secret of the chapter. We need energy in the things of God. But they sing a new song; when I admit the thought of something new I say, 'Well, the way we have been doing things may not be just right'. We always need the principle of revision, being what we are. The constant tendency, beloved brethren, is declension towards the world, worldliness, worldly-mindedness: men admit this thing and that thing, and it seems nothing at the time, but in the aggregate, we have adulteration; so we need revision. It is very wholesome to look over things, you know, and see what happened. You say, 'Well, this was done before'. Well the book of Jeremiah tells us that at one time he was arrested, and what were they going to do with him? An old man said, 'Such and such a thing happened in the days of Hezekiah and the person that was to be prosecuted or put to death, was not put to death'. This was in favour of Jeremiah. Others said, 'Such and such a thing happened in the reign of another king and he *was* put to death;' so where are we? We need revision. This information does not help. It is not balanced. It is balance in a way but we have nothing. What are we to do under those circumstances? Well, beloved, they sing a new song, we are told here, and there are twenty-four elders, and four living creatures, the very pick of the results of the work of God. But you see, they sing a *new* song; they remind us that things must be always fresh and new. They are talking about others, that God has bought others. You understand they would say, Look here, God knows you, from every tribe, and kingdom, and nation, He has bought you with the precious blood of His Son, and He has made
{7}
you kings and priests unto Him. So you see, beloved, how God comes into the matter again on the principle of revision, as I might say.
Then in chapter 20, we have a risen people. It is a glorious chapter. There are really three classes mentioned in the resurrection; they are on the throne, and they are all said to be priests unto God, priests of God and of the Christ. Are they not representative? They are. It involves, as it were, that they are of God, but they are representative here; they live and reign with Christ a thousand years. What perfection is represented in these priests! I can understand priests coming to any particular part of the earth in that thousand years. A matter comes up for adjudication. Will you not have a perfect verdict? Ah, yes! Everything will be as perfect as God is, speaking reverently. The assembly is said to grow into a holy temple in the Lord. That is what will mark the millennium. Everything will come out in the temple, and they will be exactly according to the mind of God. What a glorious order of things that will be! It is in prospect, and we ourselves are amongst them. We come first, as a matter of fact, in this category in chapter 20.
Now this expression, "of God and of the Christ" I want to link on with Malachi to show you how priesthood works out. I am speaking of it now, dear brethren, because it is so important at the present time that this element of priests of God and of the Christ should have its place, and the description that we have in this last book of the Old Testament is very significant. It is a fuller description; it is a description that you do not get anywhere else; not that you do not get the description of priesthood -- you do; in @Exodus 28 and 29, and @Leviticus 8 we have priesthood as it was primarily established; but in Malachi we have to do with dark things, with apostate days, corresponding to Revelation, as I have been saying; hence, we have particular features of the priesthood stressed, and Jehovah says,
{8}
"Now, ye priests" [whoever you are] "this commandment is for you". In this book, dear brethren, it is remarkable that God says in verse 4 of the last chapter that the law of Moses "which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel" should be remembered; it was not simply for the remnant, but for all Israel; that is, the law is in full force. People say, Well we must change to meet the times. That is the great bane of christendom. It is compromise to meet the times, and christianity is well nigh lost; priesthood certainly is. Malachi says, 'Now look ye, here is the law, and it is not only for the remnant'. There is no law for the remnant. Properly it is the law which He commanded at Horeb for all Israel. You see where we stand. What a magnificent position on the one hand, but how serious on the other. And who are to be trusted in regard to this great matter?
The law, in @Deuteronomy 33, is said to be a heritage. It is not an irksome obligation, a code; it is a heritage. Every man who loves God sees that it is a heritage, and we want it; and the priests¬ business, dear brethren, is to see to it that it is maintained, and so you have this description.
There are eight items in the description, and the first one is that Jehovah said, 'I made a covenant with Levi at the beginning. I made a covenant with him of life and peace;' that is to say, 'I set him up like a Supreme Court, independent of all other influence. I set him up with an income. I made a covenant with him of life and peace'. And then He says, "And I gave them to him that he might fear; and he feared me, and trembled before my name". It says elsewhere that the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. God has great regard for those that fear Him. He says, "but to this man will I look: to the afflicted and contrite in spirit, and who trembleth at my word" (@Isaiah 66: 2). Trembling at the word of God brings in divine protection. "I will not be afraid:" says another, "what
{9}
will man do unto me" (@Hebrews 13: 6). If I am standing for what is of God, I can well leave it with God. Levi trembled at God's name. He feared the Name. One might speak for a long time on that word "Name;" it is very significant here. It enters into the whole system that God has inaugurated. Levi says, 'I fear that'. A man goes out into the camp and strives with another, and he blasphemes the Name. He is stoned. The Name is supreme and represents God. Of the angel sent to Israel, God says, "Be careful in his presence ... for my name is in him" (@Exodus 23: 21). We profess to be gathered unto the Name. Let us be sure that it is so; let us not enact anything contrary to the Name. How easily we carry our own wills into what is outwardly in the Name. Oh, but it is loathsome to God. Levi feared the Name. He would not allow anything that would dishonour that Name. Phinehas saved the people. He turned away divine wrath from the people. What a wonderful incident! Another mighty man of David did that. It is a priestly service to appease the blessed God, and Phinehas saved Israel. God says, "Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace! And he shall have it, and his seed after him, the covenant of an everlasting priesthood" (@Numbers 25: 12, 13). Phinehas had been with God and He brings it in here and now He just finishes the catalogue of things, the line of things.
I have spoken of the first, the covenant; the second is the law. "The law of truth was in his mouth, and unrighteousness was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and uprightness, and he turned away from iniquity. For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they should seek the law; for he is the messenger of Jehovah of hosts". Think of a great office like that, dear brethren! Think indeed of what God has in mind that there should be here a representation of the covenant, a messenger of it. How can that come about, save by these features in us of priesthood.
{10}
The position of a particular covenant with a priesthood and life and peace. There is a messenger of it, meaning that there is one who can present it to us; there is one who can unfold it to us and amplify it to us. What a great service that is! I believe God is helping us on that line, opening up the covenant to us as it is exemplified in and enters into the Lord's supper. I am now speaking of the principles of priesthood as they are emphasised in these last days as meeting the general apostasy and darkness in these days. The covenant is first. He trembled before God's name and the law of truth was in his mouth. That is a great thing to have in one's mouth. One would be thankful if one could always keep truth there. It is the "Spirit of truth" in John's writings. I want to point out the law of truth. I may say true things and the law may be lacking in them. The law is the spirit of truth, so that I convey the truth, not only in words, but I give the impression of it wherever I go. It says, "unrighteousness was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and uprightness, and he turned many from iniquity". Now this brings me to what I may call *influence*. "He walked with me in peace and uprightness". He walked with God. The Lord says to the disciples in @Matthew 28: 19, "Make disciples of all the nations" -- *make them*. I do not know of any order given to men so great as that: "Make disciples of all the nations". That is what enters into this. How can I make a disciple? By walking with God in truth and uprightness. That is how it works out as you read here, "He walked with me in peace and uprightness, and he turned many from iniquity". We have troubles amongst us or we have persons who need help, it may be. We complain about them and maybe rightly so, but then complaints will not do anything. Complaints will not make a disciple. What am I doing? Have I ever made a disciple in my life? If I have not, I have no right to complain. It is a question of example, of influence. It says, he
{11}
"turned many from iniquity". What a service! That is what we need. It is the influence that is needed. Can I serve any better than he? Can I make the man better? Can I show him anything better? Am I any better? If I am not, what am I talking about? God puts this upon us. How many there are who need to be turned from iniquity, mixed up in the various denominations of the world, for it is of the world. Our brethren are there and we need to turn them away. How can we do it? Firstly by example, by moral influence, and that is priesthood. That is what God is speaking about. He says, 'It is not new, it is Levi'. The *kind* of thing was there. He says as it were, I did not emphasise it so much, I am doing it now. It was there. He brings it forward now. He "turned many from iniquity". A book will be kept in heaven about Levi. What an honourable book it will be! What is it written for? -- that I might fit into this. We have been made a kingdom, priests to His God and Father.
And then, the last passage I read in Revelation says, "priests of God and of the Christ", so that we are really representative. And then it goes on to say in Malachi, "For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they should seek the law". Now you see, dear brethren, the priests are unfolding the law. We have a case in hand, What is the law? What does the Supreme Court say? What does the constitution say? What about the law? That is the idea. The first thing is the law governing this matter. We will never be right if we do not consult the law, and who is to consult it? The priest. The priest's lips keep knowledge -- a great contrast to the poison of asps under his lips. I think the priest has a divine knowledge. It says of Deborah that they came up to her for judgment. So the true priest is able to tell you what is the law governing the case and this is the first consideration. Oh, you say, 'You deserved it', but what do
{12}
*you* deserve? You are making God suffer, if you are transgressing the law. Let us not be found guilty of it. Come to the priest. Find out what the law of the case is. That is the first thing. They should seek the law at his mouth. Will anyone escape God? No; but God is more concerned about His law than He is about me personally, not that He does not love me, but His law is eternal. The universe must go to pieces without a law in it. The law is the fixed principle. Without the law, things will go to pieces, and so in the assembly, "The priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they should seek the law".
Well, these are great things; they are not mere theories. I am speaking to believers to whom this applies, as to myself. It is a wonderful thing -- priesthood, and it finishes up with this, "for he is the messenger of Jehovah of hosts". Yes, that is what he is, whatever we may think of him. Take a man like Jeremiah. I have been greatly encouraged in reading Jeremiah's prophecy. What a sufferer he was, every day something new from God. The poor man was persecuted every time he gave a message from God but he never turned aside; he felt it. Even when the remnant goes aside in self-will to Egypt, he comes with them and keeps talking to them. The whole position is kept before the people and there they are persecuting the poor man. I can imagine him there and what came out of the mouths of this rebellious people. He was a messenger of the covenant to them all the time; and so it is with any of us, as we carry out these great and beautiful traits of priesthood in these dark days. God has a messenger, one who, as it were, represents Him and the covenant. For that is the point to make clear so that the saints should be in the enjoyment of it and that things should be maintained as I said before, according to the law. Well, I have been very simple and I suppose some would think very plain, and I hope I have been. We are living in a time when
{13}
the densest darkness prevails, and when God is insisting upon His principles. We have a meeting and principles come out there, but when we come to apply them that is the difficulty. God is insisting on the priesthood to interpret the thing so that His mind is carried out. Thus the rights of God will be maintained and the assembly will be kept clear for God. God dwells in His house, and nothing will escape His eye. He says, "The righteous Jehovah is in the midst of her: he doeth no wrong. Every morning doth he bring his judgment to light; it faileth not: but the unrighteous knoweth no shame" (@Zephaniah 3: 5). That is our position. May the Lord help us for His name's sake.
{14}
"YOURSELVES"
@1 John 2: 27; @John 13: 35; @Mark 9: 8
In thinking of this meeting, dear brethren, and taking account of the occasion of it, these verses came into my mind because of the word "yourselves" or "themselves".
The apostle John in his epistle speaks in this way, as the matter of spiritual teaching came before him. He begins the verse with this pronoun *"yourselves"* as if to rest on that word before proceeding to speak of the Spirit as the anointing; so we should ponder or dwell on the great distinction by which heaven marks us off, that is christians, from the world. Many christians do not accept the distinction which God has put upon us as marking us off from the world. The idea arises in Exodus where we have the plague of gnats or lice inflicted on the Egyptians. The thought in that plague is life, but life in creatures which are not regarded as desirable, but as despicable and peculiarly objectionable. These little creatures were inflicted upon the Egyptians as one of the plagues in order that the world should loosen its hold on the saints, on the Israelites. That plague is never said to have been withdrawn; others are, and this means, spiritually, the continuance of the saints here on earth according to the will of God, however objectionable they may be. We are not withdrawn from the world until the will of God requires it; the Lord prayed for us saying, "I do not demand that thou shouldest take them out of the world" (@John 17: 15). Some, as they get old, wish to go to be with the Lord; this may he sentiment, or feeling, or from suffering, but the safe thing, dear brethren, is to accept the will of God. That is, as our birth is on His calendar, so is our death, if we are to die. If it be translation, or if it be quickening on account of God's Spirit which dwells in us, that also is on the divine
{15}
calendar, and will not take place until the time appointed. This chapter speaks of those who do the will of God, and they abide for ever, whether it be down here or in heaven, they abide for ever. Doing the will of God implies that we recognise His will in regard to our histories, whether it be births, new births, or our dissolutions, or our translations into heaven as quickened by the Spirit. Quickening of our bodies by the Spirit, I may say here, dear brethren, refers to our living bodies; rising refers to our dead bodies. Whether it be the one or the other, all is a question of the will of God.
And so the plague of gnats or lice is not said to have been withdrawn; obviously because God intends that His people should continue on here at His will, whatever the world may think. They do not like us. The two witnesses in the book of Revelation witnessed to this fact; they witnessed so many days and at the end of that time they were slain, but it was not until the end of that time, the end of the allotted time. They were slain; as soon as the world's hand is released it will inflict persecution upon the people of God.
Now this is very important as to the plague of gnats because it typically is the saints now as living. They lived; they were formed of the dust of the earth and made to live. The dust of the earth is not appreciated by this world at all. They said, "Away with such a one as that from the earth, for it was not fit he should live" (@Acts 22: 22), but Paul did live for many years after. It is a question of the will of God, whatever the world may think. And then after that plague we have this distinguishing mark -- "I will put a separation", says Jehovah, "between my people and thy people" (@Exodus 8: 23). The word may be translated 'redemption', which would imply that the rights of God were asserted in claiming this people. What a precious thing that is! But Jehovah would say that His people were distinct from the Egyptians in the way of life. They
{16}
were marked off. And so John speaks thus; he says *"yourselves"*. One can understand how in his affections for the saints, the apostle would rest in that word *"yourselves"*. How precious it is to be in that class, designated formally in this way, "*yourselves*", a class by yourselves. Let every young christian here understand it: "*yourselves*".
And another thing is, as you rest in this great fact, this distinction, you do not need that any one should teach you. I need not say that this word "teach" does not refer to ordinary grammar or high school education. Such education is necessary today at least in order that young persons should get a livelihood. We ought to be simple and sober in our interpretation of Scripture. God is practical in all He says, and Scripture is practical; so that what I have to say about this teaching does not refer to children going to grammar school or high school, but rather spiritual teaching, that the young christian is notified here that he does not need that any one should teach him. Now that word "one" has also to be understood. It is used very frequently in Scripture and very often refers to christians, and indeed, refers to Christ Himself; He is called a Man; so that it does not mean that we cannot be taught by man spiritually, for John was a teacher and he was a man. But we are not to be taught by men as men. An unconverted man may go to a college or seminary or university and acquire what is called theological training, theological ability. That is what is alluded to. You do not need any such teaching. That is what is meant. The Spirit of God foresaw that such ability would be in great demand, and it has become in great demand in the history of the assembly. It has taken a very great place, and children and young boys and girls, young men and young women are greatly exposed to danger from natural ability in that sense. The apostle is concerned in saying *"yourselves"*. Rest in that. You do not need that teaching. So that young
{17}
people, going to high school particularly, are to be warned against this insidious influence that is so prevalent; that whilst you may learn physical things and practical every-day things in order to acquire a livelihood, you shut out all teaching that is regarded as spiritual, from such men. Such teaching as God intends for all young christians, is by the anointing. The apostle uses this word, undoubtedly, with great skill and great spiritual understanding. Instead of saying the Spirit, he uses this well-known word, "anointing", or "unction", which always gives distinction to the person or persons concerned; so it is that the young christian is notified here that he has that distinction; even over against his most learned teacher or professor he has that distinction. How often it happens that a child of some christian household, brought up in the truth, born again, believing the gospel and having the Spirit, can say what is far beyond anything that the most learned unconverted professor can say. He has the anointing and as he speaks the dignity is there, and what a thought it is for you young people, you young children going to school, that God has put dignity upon you that the most learned of your teachers has not. I am not saying that there are not teachers who are christians, but I am using the words as Scripture uses the word "one". As the apostle had to tell the Corinthians, they were partisan, they were just like men; that is, natural, unconverted men. The young child in the school may be able to speak of Christ; to speak of God, and the things of God in such a way as the most learned teacher cannot understand. The natural man does not understand the things of God, "he cannot know them because they are spiritually discerned" (@1 Corinthians 2: 14). Only he who has the Spirit of God knows the things of God. And that is what John has in mind.
Now, he says, "And *yourselves*, the unction which ye have received from
{18}
him abides in you". May each question himself as to whether he has received this precious thing called "the unction". "The same unction teaches you", it says, "as to all things". The Spirit of God is here, dear brethren, for that express purpose, and particularly now. I speak to the little children because they are addressed in this section of the chapter. The Spirit of God is here with you to teach you, as the apostle says. "But as the same unction teaches you as to all things, and is true and is not a lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him".
Now, you see the force of the word "lie" here. It alludes today to what is called modernism or other such terms -- very attractive, very flattering to men, especially the term called 'higher criticism' -- very flattering. But it is a lie. The apostle John here, by the Spirit, is telling us that the anointing teaches us of all things, and is truth, and is not a lie. You cannot get it anywhere else, but by the Spirit's teaching. All human teaching is permeated by the lie. There is a lying twist in the best of it; hence, dear young people, the importance of understanding the dignity of the word "unction" here, and knowing that you have received it. It speaks to christians, little children, of Christ, as verse 18 tells us. This paragraph, beginning with that verse, is for the little children, spiritually. It is addressed to them. It is a dignifying thing, and it teaches them of all things, everything relating to God; all moral things that you need to know in relation to God and His things, and in which you are to be taught, and rightly taught by the Spirit. Otherwise you will drink in the lie, you will drink in the falsehood, and as you grow up it will increase.
Now, that is the first thought I had in mind, dear brethren, in regard to *"yourselves"*. I do earnestly ask you to rest in that, the distinction God has put upon yourselves, although you may be very young in the truth, that you may be entirely apart from human
{19}
teaching, from what man provides in the things of God. The anointing is here, as the Lord says, "The Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, *he* shall teach you all things, and will bring to your remembrance all the things" (John 14: 26). What a thought that is, beloved brethren, that a divine Person is here, actually here, carrying on this wonderful service day and night. What an incentive that is to put yourselves in school, whatever way He teaches, whether it be in Bible readings, or addresses, or private reading, or prayer, or printed ministry. What an incentive it is to go in for it and refuse all else!
Well, now, I go on to the scripture read in the gospel of John. "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves" -- *yourselves*. This section of John's gospel contemplates the Lord Jesus about to depart out of this world to the Father. The chapter begins thus, He is going away. It is said that, having loved His own which were in the world, He loved them to the end. They were in the world. Later He says, "I do not demand that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them out of evil" (@John 17: 15). They are in the world, *in* it, but not *of* it. We are always to understand Scripture textually, and when the Lord says His own, which are *in* the world, He means in the world, but not of it. Some are in it and of it, but the christian is in it and not of it. That is the Lord's thought, and so the word "yourselves" again contemplates us in distinction. "Love amongst yourselves" is not what is called universal love or love merely for humanity, but it is amongst yourselves, which means christians, disciples of the Lord Jesus. "Love one to another", of course, is the idea too, to a point, but I am sure that "love amongst yourselves" is the fuller and better translation, because it contemplates us as a class, "yourselves". Christians are in a class, which is to be known in this world as disciples
{20}
of Jesus. You understand that what I have been speaking about already from John's epistle enters into this because what I know I have learnt from someone. The disciple is one who has learnt from another, and John makes much of the Lord's teaching. The first disciples that are spoken of as following Jesus in this gospel call Him Teacher, and they say, "Where abidest thou?"
Some are willing to go to a meeting like this, listen to a word and enjoy it in measure, and that is the end of it. Who the speaker may be, or where he abides is a matter of little consequence. That is to say, you do not wish to go further. Now, the divine idea in all these matters is that if I receive anything of God, whether it be teaching or whatever it be, I go further. That is what God loves; that you do not rest in what is just presented. You go further. And so the two disciples that heard Jesus speak, of whom we often speak ourselves, "followed Jesus" (@John 1: 37). And it says that He turned around and saw them following -- a beautiful sight in His eyes -- disciples following Him. He says, "What seek ye?" not 'Whom seek ye', but "what;" that is a challenge to our hearts. What are people seeking? What is your objective? What are you after? When you come to a meeting like this, what is in your mind? Is it a question of soul education? Is it a question of knowing more about God, or is it a matter of hearing someone that you have not heard before, for we do love variety in that way, which is of little value. Indeed, the Lord challenged them. He says, "What seek ye?" They say, "Rabbi". They expressed what was needful in their hearts; they needed instruction, and that is the dire need of the moment, beloved brethren, amongst the saints of God. I do not mean those that we know immediately here, but generally. But God says, "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge" (@Hosea 4: 6): a most serious matter.
{21}
And so the Lord says, "What seek ye?" They say, "Rabbi (which ... signifies Teacher), where abidest thou?" That is not merely a matter of coming into contact with a person of distinction; we want to know where you abide; we want to go further. Oh, I do urge those young people here, if you hear anything that helps your soul today, go further. There is more beyond. It is only an incentive, an indication to you. They say, "Where abidest thou?" He says, "Come and see". He never gave them the house, or the street, or the number at all. It is all spiritual. He says, "Come and see", and they came to where he abode and remained with Him that day for it was about the tenth hour. It is as if the Spirit of God would rest in it. It is enough to satisfy them, at least for the moment, as to what the abiding place was like. Would they go back again? Yes, indeed, beloved brethren, they would go back again. It is to open up the great abiding place of Christ. He says, "In my Father's house are many abodes; were it not so, I had told you" (@John 14: 2), as if to say, 'You have already asked about it and I am telling you now that My Father's house is transcendently great and there are many abiding places in it, and I go to prepare one for you'. What a thought that is! You see the point is, let us go further; let us go in for the thing completely. John opens up the great eternity to us; that is what he is after. Let us then go further.
And so one of the most distinguished disciples at the end of the gospel is Mary Magdalene. There are several Marys in the New Testament. Mary Magdalene is outstanding: out of her, we are told, had gone seven demons. What a history! What a monument of grace! But one of her last recorded words is "Rabboni". She says to Jesus, "Rabboni" which means 'my teacher'. That is to say, she has appropriated what is available. What a great fact that is! How much is available to us and we should appropriate it fully and go to the end
{22}
of it. God is the end of everything for the christian, and John's gospel is to lead us to God; the Lord says, "My Father and your Father ... my God and your God", a Man speaking thus to men here. Dear brethren, that is the great end.
And so the Lord, as I said, stresses the word 'disciples' in this gospel; He says, 'Now it will be known by all that you are my disciples, if you have love'. They had had the teaching. I am coming now to another side of our position. We have had the teaching, but teaching does not mark us off to any great extent; we want the love. We want it amongst us, dear brethren. Someone has rightly described love, as set out in the epistle to the Corinthians, as the picture on the wall. It is a cold thing, is a picture on the wall. It is a description of love in the abstract, but you know you cannot get love like that. Love is in persons. There were no persons evidently that the apostle could call attention to in that company at Corinth that depicted love. He had been there himself; he sent Timotheus there and there were many devoted men and women there, doubtless, but as a general fact love was an abstract thought in the assembly at Corinth. Love was no doubt well and often spoken of, but it was not among themselves. "Love amongst yourselves" was not true of the Corinthian saints. But generally, as coming in among the brethren, you are made to feel this wonderful thing called love. It is there; it is not a question of being in *some* of our brethren; it is among the saints as such. What a great thought that is for New York: yourselves, love amongst yourselves.
Now in that picture on the wall in the letter to Corinth, we have a very accurate description of love, but, as I said, it is abstract. But we have there an accurate description of it, and one of the things stated is that it never fails -- never -- a very strong statement. Knowledge fails, teaching fails, prophecy fails, but there is one quantity, one quality which is to be
{23}
amongst us in quantity which never fails, and that is *love*, dear brethren, and as having it we are distinct as disciples of Jesus. No doubt many christians come to the meetings held in this room and other rooms in this city, and see that there is a great deal of light and that there are brothers who are able to unfold the Scriptures. Thank God for them! May their ability be increased! May their proficiency be increased! People are impressed with that. But then in the letter to Corinth, the apostle goes beyond that, and distinguishes prophecy above all other services or gifts. He speaks of a person coming into the meeting (an unconverted person, an unbeliever or a simple person, not an opposer); whatever may have brought him, he has come in. The devil did not bring him in, you may be sure of that. He came into the meeting, and the brethren were prophesying, and the apostle says he will fall down and say God is in the midst of you, or amongst you, of a truth. It is the same preposition as "Love amongst yourselves". God is in you -- oh, what a great fact that is! God is amongst you. But He is amongst you in the way of conviction, in the way of searching out your heart, in the way of searching out your history, and exposing you to yourself. That is what is meant; prophecy has that power, that effect on man. God is amongst you, the man says, and he falls down. But love, beloved friends, is peculiar. The point is not that the person falls down; rather that he stands up. The presence of God is mighty. It brings in conviction. The presence of God is bound to bring in conviction for God is light: as brought to us through prophecy it convicts and what an important service it is when the person falls down. Cornelius fell down when Peter reached him; it was by prophecy, but Peter says, "Stand up". That is what love does. Love will never accept the adulation of men; love in a servant -- never! If a man falls down and repents before God, good and well. He is falling down before God; he is convicted
{24}
of sin; he acknowledges it to all, but what will love do? Love will lift him up. That is what love will do. Love in God will do it, for love is of God; and it will do that -- it will lift him up.
Well, that is a great matter; a quality here in quantity amongst ourselves to lift up the sinner. Prophesying brings him down; love builds him up. Have love amongst yourselves so that brothers and sisters may come into this hall, where God has often been spoken of. We may well thank Him for the hundreds of addresses and readings, in which the Spirit of God has had part, and which have been given in this hall. But then love is the point now. It is not only when the meeting progresses; not only in the meeting; that is where it shines, but love is seen where we meet each other casually: "Love amongst yourselves". These christians loved one another. History tells us that is how they were marked off in the early days. See how these christians love one another. And so while prophesying may bring the sinner down, love will raise him up; love will set him among princes; love will make the most of him; it is a most important thing, to make the most of one another. Whatever quality another has, make the most of that -- do not make the least of that, of what he has, but make the most of what a brother has. That is love and it will be observable -- love amongst yourselves. It is always there. It may be in the business place, or when we meet one another on the street, or where things are contrary, but love never fails. One marked by love never fails to stop to speak to the christian, whoever he may be, master or employee; love in the master is the same as love in the employee. Love never fails. It will help the employee to be that, for the moment, and the master may have to maintain his place for the moment, but love is the same. It is amongst yourselves or ourselves, meaning master and servant, parent ant child, husband and wife, brother and sister, slave and
{25}
master, whatever our occupation or calling or circumstances, it is love amongst yourselves. You will be known, says the Lord, as disciples of mine, in that ye have love amongst yourselves.
Well, now there is just a final thought in @Mark 9. Mark, dear brethren, is the shortest of the gospels and that is not an accident. He is the levitical gospel writer. The point in his gospel is instruction for those who minister, and he is brief and always explicit and to the point. He raises a point quickly, and presents it quickly and briefly. If you are interested, says Mark, you will look somewhere else; you will get more. In no sense do I intend to confine you to what I write; if you wish to inquire further, you will find it in such and such a book. If you want to inquire, the Spirit of God always permits inquiry, and never wishes to limit us; yet it is needful not to occupy ourselves at too great a length, nor to wear out the saints of God by long perorations or prayers, but to be brief and come to the point, saying nothing that is without meaning. And so, as he says here in this graphic way, the cloud was there and the voice addressing them; as Peter tells us later "such a voice". Then Mark says suddenly that the whole scene is changed. They look around and they saw no one, but themselves alone with Jesus. That is to say, four persons. There are four persons; there had been six: Moses and Elias and Another, if I may so speak reverently -- the Voice from heaven was another Person -- a scene of seven on the mount, and what volumes, beloved, could be written, and have been written on this wonderful mount of transfiguration! How much entered into it! Mark gives it to us in a few verses, and lest there should be any sentimentality about it; lest there should be any, like the servant of Elisha, in after years dwelling and hobnobbing with an unconverted man about the sayings and doings of the prophet; lest there should be anyone in that way governed by sentimentality or
{26}
natural feeling, Mark just says, "And suddenly having looked around, they no longer saw anyone, but Jesus alone with themselves". Oh, think of that company! Three of them have gone; God Himself has ceased to speak, the voice has ceased from heaven, and the cloud has gone; Moses and Elias are withdrawn -- the bare mountain rocks are there and three persons and Jesus are there. That is all. Mark would say, That is all: Jesus left with themselves. That is all. Is that all for you? Are you going to leave it with that? Mark does not intend to leave you with that. He presents it quickly so as to keep it in a small compass. Do you think it was left to Mark to say how long his gospel should be? No, Mark was just an instrument. The number of chapters were allotted to him. I say that, but chapters are a modern thing; these gospels were written without chapters and verses. We know that these sixteen chapters have been divinely ordered of God. And Mark had to put these divine writings into these sixteen chapters. It was not it was a matter of paper, but a man of God writing as it was revealed to him. He was inditing for God, so to speak. This is all you have to say about this transcending event; that is all you can say -- that is said to Mark. He puts it in briefly; he leaves nothing out that the levite should know, and should the levite stop there? No, the levite's business is to open up what is in this verse, and what is involved in these four persons: Jesus alone with themselves.
Three brethren, shall we say, together for a prayer meeting. Alas, for the smallness of our prayer meetings! -- the brethren sitting home lazily while their brethren are together for prayer. But there are three, meeting with Jesus alone with themselves. That is what Mark would show to encourage the levite, that he should not be discouraged with smallness of numbers. After this transcending event on the mount, there is Jesus alone with themselves. It is not that they do not
{27}
wish to see more; they look around to see more, but they do not see more. Alas! We often look around to see more at our prayer meetings, but we do not see more -- the brother is sitting at his home lazily. Bear the words of exhortation. But if we do not see any more coming in we are encouraged because it is just the three alone with Jesus. Let us be encouraged, dear brethren, with this view that Mark gives us of Jesus alone with themselves. That is the history of christianity from that day to this, in one sense. Man has sought to add to those three disciples with Jesus, man's paraphernalia, ecclesiastical and otherwise, but they have detracted from the beautiful scene that Mark depicted here -- Jesus alone with themselves. Let us face this, and be content with the smallness, if necessary. If the door does not open, at our meeting for prayer, let us be encouraged to go on -- Jesus is with us, Jesus alone with ourselves.
May brethren in New York, in our meetings, find this and be encouraged in it to go on. Mark would encourage us with a few words to go on -- "Jesus alone with themselves".
{28}
THE GLORIFICATION OF CHRIST AND WHAT IS HERE FOR GOD
@John 7: 39; @John 17: 1 - 3; @John 12: 16
You will have observed that the scriptures read present the glorification of Jesus, and consequent upon that, what is here for God. John speaks more of the glorification of Jesus than do the other evangelists. Parallel with this he speaks of what is above and what is heavenly. As inspired by the Spirit he presents things already known, at least in principle, and presents them formally. The impressions received may be at times without special recognition of what is in mind on the part of him who receives it, but impression after impression is received so as to build up the truth informally, and at the same time uniformly. The writer says of Christ, "of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace" (@John 1: 16).
One can see how John would understand that this experience of wave after wave of grace from Christ would maintain freshness in the saints, and prevent hardness and legality. Some of us have been speaking of the great care with which the assembly at Philippi was initially guarded against Jewish influences, and this gospel has pre-eminently in mind to guard the saints and to deliver them from what is Jewish and from what is legality. So you can understand how wave after wave of grace going out from Christ, from His fulness, has the effect of spiritually moistening the saints, elevating them too in their service and responsibilities. He then adds "we all have received", for that is another principle with God, what is available is only effective *as received*. The suggestion is that the saints are maintained by the action of grace, "grace upon grace", but it is of Christ's fulness.
The apostle says that "grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ", suggesting, as the verb is in the
{29}
singular, that the two ideas are presented together. That they "subsist" suggests that they are never to be abrogated, never to be withdrawn, never to be unavailable during the dispensation, and are never to be separated. His fulness shines out thus, "we all have received", says the apostle, "grace upon grace". In that way we are preserved from Jewish influences, and by this I mean from legality. That is to say, preserved from taking on things or principles, right in themselves, without the grace that belongs to them. John's gospel is, above all parts of Scripture, intended to guard against legalism and against Jewish influences; and that can only be effected by the operation of what is in Christ, of His fulness. He has gone far above all heavens that He might fill all things, including all persons. It is in the apprehension of that exaltation that the saints receive grace upon grace without limit. If there be a lack of grace the soul is hampered. Elsewhere we are enjoined to come boldly to the throne of grace. If you go to the throne of grace you will never fail to obtain what you go for, "Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help" (Hebrews 4: 16).
I am speaking particularly now of the need of being delivered and preserved from that feature of Jewish influence, legality, so that the service of God, as administered and carried on, is in the liberty of grace and also in the understanding of the exaltation of Christ, and of what is down here for God; there is no lack in the supply, it is grace upon grace. One can trace these things throughout the gospel, but I confine myself now to the glorification of Christ; all hinges on that, and I would call attention to the hesitation that there is to go the whole length of what is divinely indicated for us. John would insist that christianity, divinely conceived, corresponds with the full height of Christ's position in heaven. Think of what we are
{30}
brought into in that way; whether it be Godward in the service of God, or as experiencing His service to wards man, all is to be in keeping with the position of Christ at the present time. What may be in the millennium is another matter, but for the moment John's ministry is to maintain the saints in keeping with the full height of the present session of Christ in heaven.
It may be said that what is there has never been experienced by us, but indeed the Lord Himself says, "If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe?" (@John 3: 12). In those remarks He graciously considers our tendency to limitation, to dropping down to the level of earthly things, and it is admitted that heavenly things are not so easily taken on as earthly things. Then the Lord says, "no one has gone up into heaven, save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven" (verse 13). That was true at that time, it refers to His inscrutability, that whilst down here He could speak of Himself as in heaven; and mark you, it is "the Son of man who is in heaven", not who has gone up to it, but who is in it. The preposition implies that He belongs to the place, and hence He only is competent to speak of what is there. I am seeking to point out what christianity really implies, how it is intelligible to us, and how it is possible for mortals to have part in what is heavenly.
The apostle says, "It is not of profit to me to boast, for I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows;) such a one caught up to the third heaven" (@2 Corinthians 12: 1, 2). We have often commented on this remarkable event, but I bring it in here to show the possibility of reaching the heavenly at the present time. He says "whether in the body I know not,
{31}
or out of the body I know not", but still he was there. How he knew it was the third heaven we are not told, but he was there. He changed the word in the second reference, and called it paradise. How did he know it was paradise? It is plain enough he was capable of knowing the place. It is always a mark of intelligence when we can name what we experience. Why should we have a third heaven? Is it not plain that the idea of the third heaven is proved by experience? It is not a mere abstract thought of something believed in testimony, the thing is proved. If proved by one man, one brother, or one christian (for it is not the apostle that is presented to us, but a *man* in Christ), the thoughts are open to every true christian. To my mind the inference is perfectly plain, that the thing is proved by a man, a brother in Christ. There can he no doubt that the word *man* is used to convey the idea that he was in his full consciousness. Consider that experience -- that it is brought down here, and belongs to the treasury of God which obtains here by the Spirit. Thus the idea is proved and experienced by a christian. The first heavens are spiritual in their bearing, the second heavens would be more spiritual, and the third heaven would give the intensity of the thought and the idea that the thing is proved. There is a wondrousness in the revelation that he speaks of here, things not allowed to man to utter; but still he hears them, human ears heard them, and he keeps them for they belong to the treasury of God and he himself was a treasurer. There were treasuries in the temple of which David had the pattern (@1 Chronicles 28: 11, 12), and Paul was one pre-eminently qualified to keep this wonderful treasure for fourteen years without mentioning it; but it was there, and it entered into the wealth of the apostle's and the brother's ministry. I want to press upon you that the thing is a reality; the idea of heaven is a reality and within the range of man, of the believer.
{32}
The grace side is particularly seen in @John 7. It was the last day of the feast and the Lord stood and cried saying, "If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink. He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". These are the Lord's own words, quoted by the Spirit of God; and then the Spirit, as if to make plain what is meant, adds this verse which I have read. "But this he said concerning the Spirit, which they that believed on him were about to receive; for the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified". What is intended to be conveyed is the magnificence of christianity, as here in this world, which is consonant with the glory as in Christ Jesus in the glory, and the Holy Spirit here in relation to Him thus glorified. What is up there in the way of grace is down here, not merely in the doctrine of grace, but in a manner answering to rivers flowing out.
If we refer to @John 7: 38 the Lord says, "as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". The Scripture says it, yet no one can point to the actual passage that says it in so many words. The Lord is obviously calling our attention to what Scripture means, what is said in effect, and it has as much force as a direct saying. The subject begins with @Genesis 2; but I am thinking particularly of the man in @Ezekiel 47 as applying now where there is need of healing amongst us. That chapter speaks of rivers flowing out from beneath the altar of God; and the river was measured and measured, and *measured* by the man with the measuring line, but every time it is measured its depth is proved by the prophet. The idea is that christianity is something to be proved. What is presented to man in testimony is proved to be what is said. Ezekiel is called upon to pass through and he passes through, and so proves the thing. Finally he cannot go through, he proves the infinite depths of the river of grace; but what an impression it would
{33}
make upon him, and also upon us! It is intended to affect us and make us like God, like heaven. The idea is of grace coming down from the source as an influence for healing to man; and then again of the rivers of grace flowing out through the saints, flowing out of their affections. So that if there be a case calling for discipline and the like, grace comes in; it is a question of grace reigning through righteousness, and the effect of that in the discipline is that there is healing. What good is discipline if there is no healing? For the moment we may have recourse to the exclusion of the person not fit for fellowship, but what about the person involved? How dreadful for a christian to have the thought of getting rid of another christian! How dreadful a thing that is! It is foreign to the principle of grace. Hence you find that in the river there is healing power. By the Spirit of God, speaking of its great healing powers, it is called the "double river". It flows towards the east, and wherever the double river came there was healing; in dealing with the most difficult cases there should be healing. Scripture says, "that rather it may be healed" (@Hebrews 12: 13).
Here we have healing from the river flowing out in the desert, flowing into the sea hitherto marked by death, but which is healed. It refers to a state of things seen in the saints, but is there no way of dealing with that state? Is it not a shame that it cannot be dealt with? Where is the double river? Are these rivers flowing out? Have they no power of healing? The Spirit of God tells us of that river, and it is but a symbol of the one of which I am speaking, and in it there was healing. Undoubtedly the Lord has this in mind when He says, "as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". It is a question of the magnitude of the believer in this arid world. As some of us have lately been seeing in Philippians, the apostle yearned after the saints "in the bowels of Christ Jesus" (@Philippians 1: 8). Think of such an expression of these yearning
{34}
feelings and desires in a christian for the preservation and deliverance of another! "That rather it may be healed" -- how is it to be healed? By this great power of grace coming in from an exalted Christ.
Now we will pass on to chapter 17, in which the Lord speaks of His glorification just before it took place. That is another point with John, things are on the divine calendar, for the Lord says, "the hour is come". Nothing happens by chance, the hour is determined by the divine will and counsel, so He says "the hour is come". Had not that hour been anticipated in heaven? Oh yes, but the Lord in speaking to His Father knew that everything synchronised with that hour; all was finished on His side, and now the hour had come and He says, "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee". He is still thinking of His Father, and as we follow down this chapter we see that He specifies the kind of glory that He sought. "And now glorify *me, thou* Father, along with thyself, with the glory which I had along with thee before the world was". That is another thing, it is a question of His deity, of His part with God -- "being in the form of God". But in this earlier verse, He is thinking of being glorified in keeping with the great administration which the Father had put into His hand, and which would now be exercised from heaven, where He would be in a position to glorify His Father. He could not do it save as He would have all things under His hand; so as Peter says, in connection with the coming out of the Spirit, "Having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear" (@Acts 2:33). It was by the presence of the Spirit down here through redemption. He would glorify the Father -- "that thy Son may glorify thee", and then He adds, "As thou hast given him authority over all flesh, that as to all that thou hast given to him, he should give them life eternal". The giving of
{35}
eternal life is from that altitude, and to those whom the Father had given Him. It is all a question of counsel, of selection. God has His numbers, He has His calendar for His time; but He has His numbers, and it is only to as many as He gives to the Son, to whom He gives eternal life. As glorified in heaven by the Father, this distribution of eternal life is going on through the Son; "that as to all that thou hast given to him, he should give them life eternal". Maybe someone here has not received it. In @john 3: 16 we read that God decreed it, "he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal". In chapter 17 it is not *whosoever*, but it is *whom the Father has given Him*. The "whosoever" must fit exactly with the election and the selection. What a great thing it is to be among the elect, to be given by the Father to the Son, so that He might give them life eternal! Then bearing upon ourselves, in His concern about the present time, (although He has the millennium in His mind) He tells the Father, "this is eternal life, that they should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". These two thoughts are very important for us, firstly to deliver us from idolatry. The knowledge of the true God and of the true Man, "Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent", is to set me up here in the apprehension of Man according to God, "Jesus Christ", not "Christ Jesus". A Man here, as I apprehend, and the knowledge given that I might be formed in this great thought of manhood according to God. I am delivered from idolatry and held in righteousness in the knowledge of Jesus Christ whom God has sent, as here for the will of God. It is "Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent", not glorified in this particular sense, but a question of the great thought of eternal life in its application to us; how are we constituted by it in the presence of idolatry and lawlessness -- a most important thought in connection with what I have been saying about the rivers
{36}
of grace; freeing us not only from judaism but from idolatry and lawlessness. That was what the Lord had in mind in glorifying the Father, that He would bring about persons like Himself down here. That is what God is aiming at at this very moment, that in the light of these thoughts we might wholly correspond down here with what is up there.
Then the final thought is in chapter 12, which refers to our knowledge of things. It says, "his disciples knew not these things at the first; but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written of him, and that they had done these things to him". This is a great feature of the glorification of Christ, and the outcome of it is that we understand. The Lord says, "How is it that ye do not understand?" Things are presented to us again and again, and the question is therefore, "How is it that ye do not understand?" John says, "And we know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding that we should know him that is true" (@1 John 5: 20). It is said by the apostle Paul that we have the mind of Christ, and moreover that the Spirit searches all things. The question therefore is very pertinent, "How is it that ye do not understand?" Is it due to some bias, or to some dark part? Is it some reservation in one's outlook? Christ has gone up far above all darkening influences, far above all heavens. He never could be dark, I need not say, but I am speaking now of the way things are put in Scripture. The Holy Spirit has come out unhampered, and herein is the power for our understanding; but mark you, not simply that He is here, but that He comes from a glorified Christ, that is the point. It was after that Christ was glorified that they understood. According to @John 2: 19 - 22 they did not understand how the Lord could raise His own body. He says, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up". The Jews replied, "Forty and six years
{37}
was this temple building, and thou wilt raise it up in three days? ... When therefore he was raised from among the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and believed the scripture and the word which Jesus had spoken", meaning that His resurrection was an answer to that, for He did raise His own body and it was manifested that He did it. Mark you, they believed the scripture and the word that Jesus had said. Sometimes brethren hesitate to read the Old Testament in their Bible readings, but John constantly stresses the importance of the Old Testament, and in view of these last days, how important it is that we should read the Old Testament. So after He was risen they believed the scripture and that He had said this. @Luke 24: 27 says, "he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself". That is, the scriptures became intelligible after His resurrection, but in that particular setting resurrection was not enough; it was the glorification of Jesus. This shows how certain things require more spirituality than others. It is not only that Christ is risen but that Christ is glorified. He has gone into heaven, indeed as Paul says, He has gone "up above all the heavens" (@Ephesians 4: 10), and in Hebrews it says He has "become higher than the heavens" (@Hebrews 7: 26). Is that for nothing? Is it not to impress us with His exaltation, with His elevation? -- so that we may become uplifted in our thoughts, and see to it that what is here is in keeping with what is there. This is to enter into the whole spiritual position, we are morally to be entirely above any kind of current religion and human thoughts. In verse 12 of this chapter it says, "On the morrow a great crowd who came to the feast, having heard that Jesus is coming into Jerusalem, took branches of palms and went out to meet him, and cried, Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel. And Jesus, having found a young ass, sat upon it; as it is written, Fear not, daughter of Zion:
{38}
behold, thy King cometh, sitting on an ass's colt".
I bring this before you in regard of our understanding, that we may read the Scriptures at our Bible readings in the light of the exaltation of Christ, and that we may become heavenly, morally elevated in the way of our activities and relations with one another.
{39}
THE KINGDOM AND SUBJECTION
@2 Samuel 8: 1 - 18; @2 Samuel 9: 1
J.T. It was in my mind to give the Lord opportunity by the Spirit to bring out something of the kingdom seen here in type, the kingdom of God exercised by David, that is by Christ: how the thought in it is not extinction but subjection. In the wars of Canaan in Joshua extermination was in mind but here it is subjection, with the result that the nations spoken of, representing certain features of the flesh in man, are subdued and become contributory -- they bring gifts. Then another thing to he noticed for our instruction is the thought of sonship. In chapter 7, Jehovah says to David: "I will be his father, and he shall be my son" (verse 14), and his exploits or service in this chapter link on with this liberty, so that the son is king.
P.S.P. Would you mind saying what is the difference between the thought of extermination in Joshua and what we have here?
J.T. What is in view in Joshua is the complete extermination of the enemies representing spiritual wickedness in heavenly places. There was no idea of subduing angels in heavenly places: they had to he cast out. But in the kingdom under David it is subjection, so that men are subdued and brought under his sway, and as brought under his sway, they are contributory; they bring gifts.
A.H.B. Is this more on the line of grace?
J.T. That is what comes out: that is why I suggested the next chapter. Nations are subdued and David's realm is set up, an ordered state of things set up by Christ. Then David said: "Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan's sake?"
Ques. Why does the Philistine head the list of the enemies?
{40}
J.T. The Philistines are the most difficult to subdue, and what is stressed about them is that he smote them and subdued them. His smiting was effective. We may smite our brethren or persons who have done us harm, but we may not subdue them. He took the power of the capital out of the hand of the Philistines. There was rule from the centre.
Ques. Does it mean a new centre?
J.T. I think so. The new centre had already been introduced in this book; Jerusalem is the centre. He took the power of the capital. That was a great exploit, because the Philistines had been a particularly difficult and aggressive enemy of the people of God. Their oppression was most rigorous.
Ques. What have you in mind in speaking of the presents?
J.T. If there are no presents, you get professed subjection.
Rem. I was thinking of the man in the gospels. It says that he was so violent that no man was able to subdue him. The Lord comes into his life and he is entirely subdued, sitting at the Lord's feet, clothed and in his right mind. I wondered whether that would be one who would be contributory as having been brought into subjection to the Lord.
J.T. That is a fine example of subjection. He is intelligently so: he is sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind -- material for the assembly.
E.D. What feature do the Philistines represent?
J.T. That feature that is in the land, taking up the place of privilege without going through death. They are marked by bigness, giants: alluding, I suppose, to what we have in christendom. They are the most difficult, they have a place and they know it. The Moabites, Syrians, Ammonites, and Amalekites are not in the land but the Philistines are, and they are occupying professedly the same position as the most spiritual, so that they are difficult men to overcome.
{41}
W.J.S. David's first encounter was with a Philistine.
J.T. He was a tremendous man -- his height was six cubits and a span. David smote him with a sling and a stone. He is brought down by the word of God. We read that the Israelites went down to the Philistines to sharpen their weapons (@1 Samuel 13: 20). It is a sad thing if we have to take our tools down to the Philistines to be sharpened. We do not imitate them or borrow from them, but we have our own weapons and the Philistines cannot stand against them.
David made no mistake. He did not beat the air. He smote the Philistines and subdued them: his smiting was effective. The Son exercises the power of the kingdom.
Ques. What is your thought in that connection?
J.T. Christ the Son is King. @Psalm 2 brings that out. The Lord is set as King upon the holy hill of Zion, but then He is the Son -- "Thou art my Son; *I* this day have begotten thee". David is in the light of sonship in chapter 7 and he moves accordingly. He went in and sat before Jehovah. He took up his liberty and used it.
A.C. Did the Philistines bring any gifts?
J.T. They yield rights, they yield the power of the capital, or it was taken out of their hands. The saints are delivered from this kind of enemy.
The Moabites are not in the land but they represent another phase of the flesh. The Moabite is a religious man who stands in relation to us outwardly. Moab represents pride. The prophetic word about him is that he is very proud. Moab is not emptied from vessel to vessel. He has not come under the discipline of God. He may have so much money that God cannot touch him.
Rem. There is one full line to keep alive.
J.T. God discriminates. There are certain to be kept alive. A man may be a Moabite through his means,
{42}
his learning, or ancestry: God cannot touch him through discipline, yet there may be something there.
God discriminates and in his severest dealings with us He is infinitely fair, He is a God of measure. David comes in as carrying out the will of God.
N.K.McC. So in the prophetic word you referred to in Jeremiah you get, "I will turn the captivity of Moab at the end of the days, saith Jehovah. Thus far is the judgment of Moab" (@Jeremiah 48: 47).
J.T. "Thus far" are the words of Jeremiah. The matter is not ended either with Moab, "thus far". It is a very good point to be reached that he is turned. It brings out the fairness of God in His severest measures, "One full line to keep alive".
Hy.G. Does this thought of the lines correspond with what you get in @2 Corinthians 2: 16, "To the one an odour from death unto death, but to the others an odour from life unto life"?
J.T. Very good. God is glorified in the testimony of the Old Testament.
It says in that chapter in Corinthians, "But thanks be to God, who always leads us in triumph in the Christ, and makes manifest the odour of his knowledge through us in every place" (verse 14). God led them about, so here it is with David.
Ques. What would you advise us to do if we find that we are not being emptied from vessel to vessel? I suppose Moab is an element in itself.
J.T. It is pride, big or little. Pride keeps God out.
Abraham made room for God in his offering. He made way for God to come down and He passed through the pieces. In all our calculations we should make room for God. He expects us to make room for Him, so that He does not come up against a barred door.
"Moab ... hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity: therefore
{43}
his taste hath remained in him, and his scent is not changed" (Jeremiah 48: 11).
Ques. Is that why God brings in a drought upon them? "Come down from thy glory and sit in the drought" (@Jeremiah 48: 18). I wondered whether that is the means God would use to reduce this natural pride.
J.T. The circumstances of the saints may be favourable, may be easy, but how long are they going to last if God puts his hand upon them? God can always reach the things.
J.O.S. Is there some thought that Moab would eventually have a link with the people of God? "Thus far is the judgment of Moab". He is turned in the end through discipline. Is there some suggestion in @Psalm 60: 8 that Moab comes into the place of privilege? -- "Moab is my wash-pot".
J.T. A wash-pot is a very useful thing. That section in Psalm 60 is also in @Psalm 108. It is in a military setting in Psalm 60 and a worshipful setting in Psalm 108. You know the circumstances under which Psalm 60 was composed: take it out of that setting and put it in Psalm 108, worship. That psalm is set in the last book of Psalms, Hallel, where God is praised, everybody is called upon to praise God.
The Syrians are also connected with the saints: they have a sort of hereditary place. Laban, the Syrian, was related to Isaac's wife, Rebecca. Links of this sort, based on what is historical, have no value whatsoever morally; they induce opposition.
Ques. Is the sect of the Pharisees in @Acts 15 on the same line? They have a position and cling to it, using it against anything that the Lord is doing at the moment.
J.T. It is typical of any element in the flesh that assumes priority through age or whatever it might be. Some old brothers have lost spiritually in this way. There can be no claim on the line of age.
{44}
It says, "David smote Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his dominion by the river Euphrates". These are people at a distance and will be troublesome later if not now. You might say they are so far away that they are not worth troubling about, but David goes the whole way. "And David took from him one thousand seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen; and David houghed all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for a hundred chariots". He is discriminative.
Ques. Referring to what you have said about the Syrians and those who are a long way off, would what Paul says in @Acts 20: 29 apply; "For *I* know this, that there will come in amongst you after my departure grievous wolves, not sparing the flock"? Would it be like David here dealing with things as far as he could?
J.T. We have to be concerned about the utmost limits of the territory. We must not let one idea go. We allow things which seem to be so distant just to drag along. It was a long way off, but David went there and overcame them.
A.V.P. What is the thought of the garrisons?
J.T. Garrisons mean that God has here certain people like David holding the ground. Garrisons are to keep these things down all the time, otherwise they will rise up again: one subjugation is not sufficient. A garrison is to maintain a state. Whatever God has reached is not to be destroyed.
The Syrian seems to be prominent in his attempt to overcome the particular vessel or servant the Lord is using; that element has to be met. At the end of Corinthians there is an attempt to discredit Paul as the one through whom Christ is speaking.
The Syrians of Damascus came up to help Hadadezer. Damascus has an important place: being one of the oldest links with Abraham and his servants. They were that kind of people. The link would be that they
{45}
were both Syrians, and the one could not do without the other.
Ques. Is there any reason why David smites twenty-two thousand Syrians, yet in the previous verse he takes from Hadadezer horses for a hundred chariots?
J.T. He takes their power in the first case but in the second case the men are destroyed.
Ques. If the Syrians were enemies, under what circumstances would David receive gifts from them?
J.T. The Syrians are subdued, christians are subdued. There are results if a christian is subdued; otherwise he is not used. Saul says to the Lord: "What shall I do, Lord?" He is subdued. The Lord knew from the beginning what was in Saul of Tarsus and all the features, such as devotedness and faithfulness, that could be brought in for the support of the testimony were carried over when once he was subdued. He had been faithful in what he had begun with, and that principle was carried over.
The Syrians became David's servants and brought gifts. David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer and from the cities of Hadadezer exceeding much bronze.
You get results here. David dedicates everything to Jehovah. That is what we should notice; that all this is to enrich the house of God; the yield is for God -- everything is for God. It is seen more fully in 2 Chronicles where David carries on this thought, the end in view being the house of God. That is what the Lord is aiming at now in the gospel and in all His service -- subjugation and enrichment.
N.F.A. The Lord would encourage us to look for results from the preaching.
J.T. That is the idea. The epistle to Romans for us is the great gospel epistle, but at the end the apostle reminds us of something that is very great, the mystery.
A.W.R. "For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen"
{46}
(@Romans 11: 36). Would that be the end in view in the gospel, the kingdom fully secured for God?
J.T. Matthew was a man of substance in a material way and after the Lord called him, he made a great entertainment for Him in his house. That is carrying substance over.
You see that in many instances. Zacchaeus was a rich man, little in stature, of great potential value and he wanted to see Jesus who he was. A very fine thought! He climbed up into a sycamore tree to see Him. He will never make anything at all of you up there looking down on Him. Rich people often look down on the Lord; riches are most blinding. The Lord looks up at this man and He calls him by name; he is known potentially. We have no historical account as to whether the Lord had seen him before. In gospel meetings the Lord knows who is there. Paul says: "I endure all things for the sake of the elect, that *they* also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory" (@2 Timothy 2: 10).
Zacchaeus wanted to see Jesus who He was. The greatest Person in the universe -- why should I not want to see Him?
The Lord says to him: "Make haste and come down, for today I must remain in thy house". Things must have been ready in his house, for Zacchaeus received him joyfully. He was not at all inconvenienced in his mind, he was called to receive Him as He ought to be received. "Make haste and come down", and he made haste and came down and received the Lord joyfully.
Zacchaeus tells the Lord what he did and if he had taken anything from man by false accusation he restored it fourfold; he was righteous in a practical way. He did not do it always; he would never have been a successful business man if he had. The Lord calls him a son of Abraham. He had come down and made his confession. Every business man ought to be faced with the challenge as to how he is getting his money,
{47}
paying his debts, giving full value and even more.
Rem. The house was the great burden of David's life.
J.T. All this service of subjugation that David undertook ends in wealth for God; that is the idea. David made him a name after he returned from smiting the Syrians in the valley of salt, his own exploit. The Edomites all became servants to David.
Rem What is the thought in dedication?
J.T. That would mean that he could not go back on it. If you dedicate a certain amount of money to the Lord, you cannot change your mind, *you ought not to do so*. There is to be no recalling. There is the dedication of persons like Samuel; he was not to be recalled.
Ques. Is the principle seen in the psalm: "I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments" (@Psalm 119: 106)?
J.T. That is the idea. There is no recalling of a dedicated thing or vow. It is also seen in Jephthah's very rash vow.
"Jehovah preserved David whithersoever he went". He had confidence in him. David moved on his own initiative. The question might be raised as to turning to the Lord first. If it is right to do a thing, do it. I am not saying we should not pray about it; of course, you bring the Lord into everything.
Paul looked forward to going to Rome and James supposes that you might go into a city to spend a whole year there and traffic and make gain. He does not speak of weeks, it is a whole year: but it is if the Lord should so will and we should live that we do this or that. Paul stayed at Corinth eighteen months. He could not take on any other engagement. The Lord did not tell him to stay there; He told him that he had much people in the city and he stayed there to get them. That is intelligence.
The Lord is with him in his service -- a matter of confidence. Paul says: "We shall live with him by God's power towards you" (@2 Corinthians 13: 4).
{48}
In verses 15 to 18 we have David's cabinet, his officers; everything is fixed now. Then David says: "Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul?" What a pleasing thing it must have been that he could do that! He could seek out one of the house of Saul.
Ques. What would answer to what you have been speaking of as the cabinet?
.J.T. An ordered state of things, established in Christ, worked out in every local company where the Lord is seen.
Ques. "Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites;" who would they represent?
J.T. They are the runners and executioners, bodyguards for the king, looking after things and seeing that there are no hostile attacks. Everything of an evil character was dealt with. Only as these elements are subjugated are we able to look out on our enemies. If you are concerned about this or that, you are not able to exploit grace. It is a great moral thing to be able to overcome evil with good. Very often discipline is executed with personal feeling; there is no question of a brother being spiritually saved but only of getting rid of him; that is a very terrible thing.
This chapter really is to gather up the whole scope of David's reign.
Ques. Was David's desire to obtain spoil for God?
J.T. That was the underlying thought with him all the time. He comes to light as one who moves on his own initiative as seeking to serve the Lord. If we are subject and obedient, we may be taken up and great things may be done by us. David's sons were chief rulers. That gives the idea of subjection and affection, the family side; they were persons in relation to him.
Ques. Is that necessary before the gospel can go out effectively as suggested in the next verse?
J.T. You have order. David can show grace. The result is that Mephibosheth is brought into sonship, and set up in an ordered state of things.
{49}
THE SEAL OF THE LIVING GOD
@Revelation 7: 1 - 17; @Revelation 11: 3 - 12
J.T. The principle of life is interwoven with all these scenes. The living creatures indicate creation made to live. In chapter 5, the living creatures seen together come before the elders, showing that life leads, being energetic, in relation to the Lamb and in relation to the prayers of the saints. The chapter further says, "And every creature which is in the heaven and upon the earth and under the earth, and those that are upon the sea, and all things in them, heard I saying, To him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb, blessing, and honour, and glory, and might, to the ages and ages. And the four living creatures said, Amen" (verse 13), showing that there is sympathy seen in the result of redemption.
We read in chapter 6 of the opening of the seals, and here we see again the activity of the living creatures.
Then, in this chapter, we have the seal of the living God upon His bondmen. The thought of life enters into the idea of bondmen. We are not free agents. I am speaking now of the chapter in its moral application; that is, to ourselves. The bondman is entirely at the will of Another. There are one hundred and forty-four thousand bondmen sealed; so that you have a large number governed by the principle of life, serving in relation to one another as bondmen, entirely under the hand of the Lord. He manipulates according to His wisdom, which shuts out the idea of free independent action in service. According to this, no one can take that ground.
Ques. In the twelve tribes, does the principle of life come into view?
J.T. Yes, they are sealed with the seal of the living God. The twelve sons of Jacob came in in the most
{50}
incongruous circumstances; there were four mothers, two of whom were slaves in the household. So the setting of the twelve is to remind us that God can work out what it represents, in spite of conditions. He works sometimes because conditions are favourable, but then He shows what He can do when the conditions are adverse. The number one hundred and forty-four thousand, is the idea of *twelve* greatly expanded, corresponding somewhat to the heavenly city, which is the thought in the most expanded way. The city is a cube; the principle of twelve is there, as you might say, substantially. Here it is seen in a number with the seal of the living God on their foreheads.
A.N.W. Say a word about the seal of the *living God*.
J.T. Well, that is what I had in mind as to this chapter: it is a seal conveying the idea of life. There are other stamps of ownership; for instance, the rising in modern times of trade unionism and secret societies, all of which are marked rather by the stamp of moral death; whereas, here, it is the seal of the living God, the principle of life entering into the ownership. There is nothing corrupt or which would cause decay in it. It is the idea of life in the midst of death, and that in the most conspicuous place, the forehead, involving intelligence.
Ques. Would the Spirit of God answer to that today?
J.T. That is how we are sealed. "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts" (@2 Corinthians 1: 21, 22). Here, it is bondmen of God, showing that we are held for service at His will and not our own. The setting in the number twelve means that I am to serve with others, and that the service is to be mutual. Serving with others is a great matter. I can never serve individually according to God, unless I start with others. The principle is to get one's setting in relation to the
{51}
brethren. Saul says, "What shall I do, Lord?" (@Acts 22: 10). Being an energetic man, he had the thought of doing something. An energetic man is apt to do things without considering whether they should be done, but the Lord, replying, said to him, "Rise up, and go to Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things which it is appointed thee to do". The greatest servants have to learn from others; so did Saul. He found his setting among the brethren at Damascus.
S.W.P. Like Timothy who came with the brethren.
J.T. Philippians shows how the spirit of the bondman worked out. The apostle addressed himself to them as a bondman.
R.A.L. Would "Let this mind be in you" (@Philippians 2: 5) refer to how their intelligence was to be affected?
J.T. Yes, that we are to be brought into accord with the descending mind of Christ. "Who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form" (@Philippians 2: 6, 7). It is a *bondman's* form. That is the thing to get hold of. He "humbled himself", we are told in verse 8. This chapter in Revelation is to bring out that we are to serve *with others*, not simply a local company, but a large number, including all the tribes of Israel.
A.N.W. The Thessalonians are said to serve "a living and true God" (@1 Thessalonians 1: 9).
Ques. Is there anything in the thought that Dan is left out and Manasseh introduced in this number?
J.T. It shows that God has a right to change, in that way; but He retains the twelve. He may pass you by and He may pass me by, but He never loses the principle upon which He is working. He leaves out Simeon in @Deuteronomy 33, but He has the twelve, nevertheless. Here, no doubt, it has antichrist in view, for Dan brought in that principle early. Later, it is said, he leaped from Bashan. A man with a spring
{52}
like that can well afford to be out of sight in the ordering of God, who always acts according to His own will and in perfect wisdom.
J.W.D. In the idea of bondmen, do you include all the saints?
J.T. It is saints taken up in that light. As the Levites were taken up in service from a month old, so I have to grow up amongst the brethren and learn how to serve, not only amongst my local brethren, but in relation to all saints. Twelve is the administrative number -- a number that is wonderfully divisible; in fact, the most divisible of the lower numbers. It means that the Lord can manipulate us according to His pleasure. Saul was told to go into the city and it would be told him what he must do; not a word was said about who would tell him. We never hear of Ananias save as sent to Paul. It is to show that I have to submit to persons who may seem to be much less than I am and learn from them, which is an exercising matter.
J.T.Jr. Ananias should not be ignored.
J.T. The Lord had designed that Saul should get the instruction from him. The point is, Saul was told to go into the city -- not specifically to Ananias.
Ques. Would you see the principle of bondmen carried out in the assembly at Antioch? They were serving in relation to one another. You have certain of them mentioned in @Acts 13.
J.T. Yes, five of them; one of the greatest lessons for us to learn is how to serve in relation to others.
J.T.Jr. Saul is last on the list there.
Ques. How does this compare with those mentioned in @Acts 8 that were scattered abroad, of whom Philip was an example?
J.T. Philip had place among the seven in chapter 6; in that respect, he was not a novice; coming under the authority of the apostles, he had already been in harness; but then there were those who, having been
{53}
scattered, went down to Antioch. They did not scatter themselves; they did not take the thing into their own hands, and go hither and thither. They were sufferers for the truth; they spoke of the Lord whose hand was with them. That settled the matter. A great number believed and turned to the Lord.
R.A.L. "*I* am in the midst of you as the one that serves" (@Luke 22: 27).
J.T. That is the point. When an apostle, who was to take the place of Judas, was to be appointed, he was to be one who could serve in relation to the other eleven; therefore the word was that he must be one who had "assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us" (@Acts 1: 21, 22); that is to say, he was to be one who had seen how Jesus had moved in and out in relation to others -- in relation to those in whose midst He had served. No one can serve unless he realises how to serve in relation to others -- unless he realises the principle centering in the number twelve.
A.N.W. In expanding the service, it is evidently essential all the time to maintain the right relation locally.
S.J.H. In connection with the golden bowls, you have referred to the prayer meeting. How do we get an outlook beyond what is local so that a man is expanded in his outlook?
J.T. Watch the prayers of the saints anywhere. As you are with God, you become greatly enlarged; a wide outlook comes gradually. You can understand how in Israel the outlook became enlarged; at the outset, each would be tribal, but he would be enlarged. Paul says, "to which our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night" (@Acts 26: 7). That is the idea, "*our whole twelve tribes*", and they are serving well; God is doing great things with such.
{54}
Ques. Why did Paul not go up to Jerusalem? He says that he went to Arabia: "Nor went I up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me; but I went to Arabia, and again returned to Damascus" (@Galatians 1: 17).
J.T. He brings that out to show that he was not an apostle by human appointment. In Arabia, he would learn what the flesh is. When converted, he said, "What shall I do, Lord?" If the Lord had wished him to serve apart from the brethren, He would have told him what he was to do, but He sent him into the city; there he came into fellowship, so to speak, and there he began to serve. As a matter of fact, he was not sent out to minister until he had been a year in Antioch; in the meantime he had been in Jerusalem.
J.W.D. Do we not find out what particular service we, individually, are qualified for?
J.T. I think we do. The Lord would help us to find out what we can do best; gradually it comes to us, but it takes a great while before one is fit for a commission. The apostle Paul, after all his previous experience, did not get it until he was a year at Antioch.
A.H.P. In the Old Testament would the Levites serve to set out this principle? As set around the tabernacle and in their relation one to another, there would be a universality of their service.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. The angel mentioned here, who had the seal of the living God, was ascending from the sun-rising. What would you say about that?
J.T. There is a suggestion of hope in it. The Lord would come in from that point; service has the outlook of the coming of the Lord. We are to "abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit" (@Romans 15: 13). What I am doing, I am doing in the light of the coming of the Lord. The Jewish remnant will be looking out for Him -- not seeking to reinstate themselves as a nation with a place in this world, as the
{55}
Jews are trying to do now. "Lift up your heads, because your redemption draws nigh" (@Luke 21: 28). There was hope there. The Thessalonians were waiting for God's Son from heaven.
A.N.W. Anna was serving in that light, day and night; she was of the tribe of Asher.
J.T. She spoke of Him to all that looked for redemption. There was hope, and she ministered to it.
Rem. In @Mark 13: 34 we have the parable of the man giving authority to his bondmen, and to each man his work.
J.T. That is the idea covering the present time; all is in view of His return.
S.J.H. Does this sealing in @Revelation 7 include all believers today?
J.T. Oh, I think it is for all. There were twenty-three thousand Levites taken up for service from a month old: only eight thousand were in service, but they were all held.
S.J.H. Sisters and brothers, too?
J.T. Yes, all are held for service today. Each, so to speak, is to have the seal of the living God in his forehead. The word "living" suggests that the idea of life is in each of those sealed.
Angels are seen in this great transaction; the winds are held up; everything is favourable to those sealed. And another thing, from God's point of view, the number suggests that there is not to be one more, or one less than what is in His counsel; whereas in the second part of the chapter a "great crowd" is mentioned, not a number. The second part of the chapter is to bring out that there are those who, in a spiritual sense, help themselves. In the first part of the chapter, we see that God takes up certain ones and seals them with His seal; but the second part of the chapter shows that there are those who take advantage of what is available from God and use it; that is the other side.
{56}
Ques. One underlies the other?
J.T. Yes, the number must underlie that. However many people may be converted, they must all conform to the principle of election.
J.W.D. That is why Judah comes first?
J.T. Yes, it is the sovereign side.
Ques. Will you say a word about the command to the angels in bringing judgment? They were ordered not to hurt the earth and the sea.
J.T. That is to show that, providentially, certain things are held up so that something may happen in the way of service.
G.W.H-n. How would you conduct yourself where local disunion is found?
J.T. Philippians indicates the way of adjustment. Although the Philippian assembly was sympathetic with Paul in the gospel from the very beginning, yet there were at least two sisters there who were not united; so that the apostle entreats, "That ye may think the same thing, having the same love, joined in soul, thinking one thing" (@Philippians 2: 2), and "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus" (verse 5) -- the descending mind. If one goes down, he makes way for unity. I think recovery is always on the principle of leadership; the leader is one who goes down, who follows Christ. The nearer we get to the bottom, the less cause there is for contention.
Ques. It is not that you sacrifice what is right in going down?
J.T. You cannot do that. You must make righteousness your leader, but you can afford to go down; and if it be any personal matter, you can afford to waive that.
Rem. In Corinthians, they were on the principle of gong up.
J.T. Yes, it was a question of being big men, of comparing themselves with themselves. "But these, measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing
{57}
themselves with themselves, are not intelligent" (@2 Corinthians 10: 12). What one finds is that many of these differences arise because of personal preferences; persons are made more of than principles. If we get the principles right, the persons will find their relative values and positions.
A.N.W. According to 2 Timothy, a believer who is on individual lines is not following divine principles.
J.T. I am sure that is a very important thing, because if I have man before me instead of principles, I will be influenced by personal feeling. Of course, Christ is the embodiment of the principles, but then we are to "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart" (@2 Timothy 2: 22). As you say, it is "*with those*".
R.A.L. "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God" (@Romans 12: 1).
J.T. That is our intelligent service. Then the apostle says: "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me, to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith" (@Romans 12: 3); and then he goes on to say, "We, being many, are one body in Christ" (verse 5). That is the way unity is reached.
A.N.W. When I am asked why I cannot do certain things, I give a living answer; I have the seal in the forehead.
J.T. There is something about life wherever you may see it, even in a natural way, that is very attractive. The Lord says, "I am the light of the world; he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life" (@John 8: 12). The evidence of life in service is that a man's affections are active in his care for the saints. I think the seal of the living God in a man's forehead involves that thought.
{58}
This "multitude" is very interesting; they are people who do for themselves. God has provided a means of cleansing, and they use it. There are those who claim that they are not being cared for, but these do for themselves. "These are they who come out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb". They *have* done it; they appropriate what God provides.
Ques. Is that energy of life?
J.T. Yes; this is one of the features, that one appropriates what God provides; he does not wait to be served. Then other features come in. *All* the angels are attending. "And all the angels stood around the throne". The angels are "ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation" (@Hebrews 1: 14). The thought is that the angels will be attendant on persons such as that; all heaven is deeply interested in them.
A.H.P. What do you understand by "white robes"?
J.T. I suppose, their circumstances; that in which they appear. Palm branches would represent victory, for these people had come out of great tribulation. They are victorious believers. Amongst the saints, there is much of the "groaning lizard" element, people who groan and think others should act for them, and they groan because others do not act for them; whereas, the angels are great ministers, and they are all present here in relation to people who act for themselves. These people are already victorious, and there is not a word said about their having been helped.
S.J.H. They are overcomers.
J.T. Exactly. It says, "And they cry with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God who sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb. And all the angels stood around the throne, and the elders, and the four living creatures, and fell before the throne upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and
{59}
power, and strength, to our God, to the ages of ages. Amen". And then one of the elders inquires from John as to who these are, and he says, "My lord, *thou* knowest". Then it says: "And he said to me, These are they who come out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple, and he that sits upon the throne shall spread his tabernacle over them. They shall not hunger any more, neither shall they thirst any more, nor shall the sun at all fall on them, nor any burning heat; because the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall shepherd them, and shall lead them to fountains of waters of life". What we may see is the great expansion of divine interest shown in these believers in white robes; their character having been stated. The fountains of waters of life are to maintain them in the freshness of power in which they appear.
J.T.Jr. A change had taken place in them; they had washed their robes. Jacob said, "Cleanse yourselves, and change your garments; and we will arise, and go up to Bethel" (@Genesis 35: 2, 3). His house would then be different from what it was before.
J.T. The change is from the inside.
Ques. Does that make it a very individual matter?
J.T. It does. You like to see the brethren help themselves. I am sure there is a word there for us.
Ques. Would this provision of God be the expiatory work of Christ?
J.T. Yes, and the sinner, by faith, avails himself of it. In @Revelation 1: 5, Christ does the washing. "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood". Here, the needy one does the washing. "These are they who come out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes". In both these instances, it *has been done*. In @Revelation 22: 14, it is a continuous thing; it is *being done*. "Blessed are they that wash their
{60}
robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city". It is not for those who *have washed* but those who *wash*. You are never otherwise than washed, and that gives you the right to the tree of life and to go in by the gates; it gives you inherent right.
J.W.D. It says, "the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin" (@1 John 1: 7); it is not 'has cleansed'.
J.T. Its efficacy is in view, but am I using it? Chapter 22 is not washing by blood, but by water. The blood came out of Jesus¬ side, but so did water. I think chapter 22 is water washing; by it, I am kept purified.
Ques. Would self-judgment be the same thing?
J.T. It goes with it, but the washing of the water is by the word. I may judge myself at twelve o'clock, but I have to wait for the evening to be cleansed; self-judgment is not all. There is an after effect that I must not forget, and that has to be removed by the water. The water and the blood are both applied. "This is he that came by water and blood, Jesus the Christ" (@1 John 5: 6). Blood is *judicial* cleansing; it satisfies the conscience before God, but my *practical state* has to be dealt with, and that is what is alluded to in chapter 22 and which gives you the right to the tree of life. It is not simply a question that I was converted five years ago; it is a question of my present state if I want to come into fellowship: not that *I have washed*, but that *I wash*. If a brother or a sister is seeking to be in fellowship, we do not patronise them. If they are washing, they have a right to the tree of life. It is present continuous action, and that is what gives one the right to be among the brethren in fellowship, the right to the tree of life, and the right to enter by the gates; nobody can question his right.
Ques. Will you say a little more about being unclean until the evening?
{61}
J.T. If you do something during the day that is not of the Lord and which affects your conscience, you judge it; of course, you *should* judge it immediately. Peter went out and wept bitterly, but he had to wait, so to speak, till the evening for full relief. Take the case of the leper; there was a great deal more than washing needed; there was the anointing with oil, and shaving, and standing outside his tent door for a while before he could enter into the presence of God; so that, "unclean until the even" means that I have to suffer a certain consequence or penalty for the sin and the dishonour that I have done to the Lord. I may know forgiveness, but I am unclean until the evening.
R.A.L. Does it mean actually the evening?
J.T. It is a certain process that has to be gone through.
S.J.H. Does it connect up at all with the evening sacrifice?
J.T. Under certain conditions, it would. The evening lamb in @Numbers 28 is equivalent to the morning lamb; it is the same age, and the accompaniments were to be the same; this means that in the evening I am supposed to be equal to what I was in the morning. If something should happen during the day to make me unclean, then I am not equal to it; therefore the point is to maintain the spiritual level throughout the day, and walking in the power of the Spirit enables me to do it.
A.H.P. It would be wonderful to be able to speak about the brethren as one of the elders answered John.
J.T. Yes. The inquiry from the elder is to bring all these facts about saints out. He knows what marks this redeemed multitude, and wishes to bring it out, and so he asks John who they are, and John says, "My lord, *thou* knowest". They represent a result of Christ's death not hitherto spoken of. They are seen now as before the throne, and the Lamb shepherds them and leads them to fountains of waters of life.
{62}
Ques. Being led would entail submission?
J.T. Quite so. He leads them to fountains of water; they are maintained in freshness; the Lord would ever maintain us in freshness. You will observe here, that they are before the throne. "Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple, and he that sits upon the throne shall spread his tabernacle over them". Much stress is laid on what they are and where they are, and the consequences of that: how God looks after them. He spreads His tabernacle over them. How beautiful it is! You feel, as in the assembly, that God is spreading something over you. And the Lamb leads them. As we sit down at the Lord's supper, the sense of the Lord's authority and the spreading of the tabernacle over us make us restful. If there are several present and only one loaf and one cup, considerable time is consumed, but it is delightful to be sitting, as it were, under the tabernacle of God, so that the time is not long. And then it says, the Lamb shepherds them. "They shall not hunger any more, neither shall they thirst any more, nor shall the sun at all fall on them, nor any burning heat; because the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall shepherd them, and shall lead them to fountains of waters of life".
Ques. All this is while they are before the throne?
J.T. Yes, it never loses sight of that. The throne is the great central thought in chapter 4, and it gives character to the succeeding chapters.
Rem. The rights of God, I suppose.
J.T. Exactly. I think we might just touch on chapter 11, to show how this thought is carried through; that where you have bondmanship, and life marking bondmanship in the one hundred and forty-four thousand, you have testimony; the *two* witnesses imply adequacy of testimony. But they are wonderful witnesses furnished with power to enforce the rights of God, and they suffer death, martyrdom; and having
{63}
died and been slain for the testimony which they bore, the spirit of life from God came into them, meaning that we are honoured where we suffer. It is as sure as anything that if I suffer in the testimony, I will be honoured there by God; so we do not need to look for honour from one another; we shall be honoured where we suffer.
S.J.H. The two are a subdivision of the twelve?
J.T. Exactly; divide by six and you will find that result. The scripture, in its prophetic setting, alludes to the testimony that will be rendered by the remnant, and which will involve persecution. It goes on for twelve hundred and sixty days; nevertheless, they are not slain until the testimony is over. God does not allow the persecution until the testimony is over. What that persecution might be now, is a question for each one to discern. The authorities are not persecuting us now, but the enemy finds a way to get in amongst us. The keenest kind of suffering may arise from a brother. We may persecute one another without meaning it, and cause real suffering.
Ques. Why are trees spoken of? It says that the angels were restrained from hurting the earth, and the sea, and the trees.
J.T. The symbol means that God is discriminative in what He does. Trees would allude to prominent personages that God may be using providentially. The earth is an ordered condition of things. It is a question of order here, and there is no upheaval; the sea is kept under, too. Accordingly, in this restriction, the Lord is making way for His servants, which is very comforting. In @chapter 6: 6 it says, "Do not injure the oil and the wine". That is under the restriction of God, and we ought to recognise that God discriminates and restrains; He allows just so much.
J.H. What character is this testimony today? Here it seems to be in the nature of plaguing the people.
{64}
J.T. It has the character of Elijah's ministry, corresponding to what is said later, "Behold, I send unto you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and terrible day of Jehovah" (@Malachi 4: 5). These witnesses have great powers, you will observe. "And I will give power to my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and sixty days, clothed in sackcloth. These are the two olive trees and the two lamps which stand before the Lord of the earth; and if any one wills to injure them, fire goes out of their mouth, and devours their enemies. And if any one wills to injure them, thus must he be killed. These have power to shut the heaven that no rain may fall during the days of their prophecy; and they have power over the waters to turn them into blood, and to smite the earth as often as they will with every plague. And when they shall have completed their testimony, the beast who comes up out of the abyss shall make war with them, and shall conquer them, and shall kill them". They have means of carrying on their testimony, power in themselves, as often as they will. It is remarkable. It reminds you of the Lord conferring power upon the disciples. "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained" (@John 20: 23). It was *full* power as to the matter mentioned.
Ques. Why are they clothed in sackcloth?
J.T. It shows that they *felt* the general conditions; they were not only telling people what to do; they felt the things themselves.
Rem. That is what always marked the true prophets.
J.T. Quite so. You see that right through the Old Testament. The prophet Jeremiah, particularly, feels the thing which he rebukes in others. The bodies of these witnesses lie upon the street of the city for three and a half days, and then we have a most remarkable occurrence. Their enemies rejoice, but *the spirit of life from God* enters into them. "And after the three days
{65}
and a half the spirit of life from God came into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon those beholding them. And I heard a great voice out of the heaven saying to them, Come up here". What a victory that is -- what honour! "Come up here". They stand up; they are living in the spirit of life from God. Can their enemies kill them again? -- Not any more than they can kill Christ again. They are standing on their feet risen, and now heaven calls them up. Heaven thus wonderfully honours them. I think we ought to be encouraged in bearing testimony, that God will honour us where we suffer.
S.J.H. Is this similar to the saints being called away, but their enemies do not see *them*?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord's enemies did not see Him after He arose. I think it is an exceptional way of showing how God honours those who suffer in the testimony. In whatever small measure we suffer in the testimony, He will not fail to honour us.
{66}
THE MILITARY AND LEVITICAL POSITIONS OF THE SAINTS
@Zechariah 6: 12, 13; @Luke 4: 16 - 27, 42 - 44
The public position of the saints here may be described under two heads, the one military and the other levitical. Both positions are typified in the book of Numbers. I have read these scriptures in order to enlarge on these two thoughts, especially to show that the military position, viewed as it is in Numbers, initiates the order of local responsibility, whereas the levitical position is not local but general or universal. From the passages I have read I hope by the Lord's help to show that the key-note is the Lord Himself, as indeed every truth in some way or another is exemplified in Him, for He is the pattern for us in every relationship.
Now in the book of Numbers when the males in view of military service were to be all numbered from twenty years old and above, they were enrolled according to the standard of their father's house, and as enrolled each was to pitch by his own standard according to the ensign of his father's house; whereas the Levites are numbered from a month old and upward, and they are not called upon to take up a position in a military sense. Their function was to look after the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness. Their directors were priests; they were to come under the supervision or direction of Aaron and Aaron's sons, who would allot to each his duties. These levitical services rightly understood and acted upon shut out idleness and lukewarmness, for every moment of their working time is filled up and filled up profitably. There is no time to lose, dear brethren. The time is short, and God would have us employed according to these services which I have alluded to.
{67}
Now, what we find of the Lord is, as we see in this passage in Zechariah, that "he shall grow up from his own place;" the reference is to the Lord Jesus Christ as the Branch. He grew up in His place, that is, He never sought to alter His circumstances, and He fulfilled every obligation according to God. At the age of twelve He intimated, as having been in the temple with the doctors, that He was about His Father's business but it is said also, that He returned to Nazareth with His parents and was subject unto them. You will notice that the word Nazareth is used. He went down with them and came to Nazareth and was subject unto them. Nazareth did not afford that which youth would naturally seek after. It was not a city of any repute. It was, I judge, such a place as would be a test to youthfulness, and so, dear brethren, it should be an exercise with us that as under the government of God we ought not to alter our circumstances. It may be that they do not afford the gratifications that we might seek after; other places might seem more attractive, more interesting, it may be indeed that we are sure there would be special advantages in other localities. But look! It says, "He went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was in subjection to them" (@Luke 2: 51), that is, to his parents. We see thus the perfect humanity of the Lord Jesus Christ. It was remarked by one later of Nazareth, "Can anything good come out of Nazareth?" (@John 1: 46). The answer was "Come and see", but the remark clearly indicated that Nazareth was not a city of good repute. Well, the Lord grew up there, He grew up in His place. That is the point that I think we should lay hold of. Where He sets us in His perfect wisdom and ways, our wisdom is to abide there, to be content there, and in contentment coupled with godliness to grow up spiritually. "Piety with contentment", we read, "is great gain" (@1 Timothy 6: 6). It is said to be profitable for all things, but coupled with contentment is great gain. Now I would dwell on that point, because
{68}
I think it is a point of the very greatest importance for us -- that one should be content where one is, provided that position is divinely ordered, and if we in any way walk with God, we should have no doubt of His mind on that point. The Lord will not leave us in the dark. For my own part I would fain not be in the dark in regard of anything, nor is it necessary that we should be. There may be details that we do not understand, but in a general way there is no need that we be in the least degree puzzled. "The Lord will give thee understanding in all things" (@2 Timothy 2: 7).
And so the people as having been brought out of Egypt were regulated according to their father's house; that is, each man stood up for God where he had been brought up -- in the circumstances in which he had been brought up. The young men of the tribe of Reuben would all be known to each other in a general way, and each would have to qualify spiritually in the presence of those amongst whom he had been brought up -- a very great test! And so all the other tribes, each man under the eyes of his father, under the eyes of his mother, and under the eyes of all his relatives. All that involves very great exercise. There is no room for show under those circumstances, for you are too well known to put on. And so, dear brethren, the Lord exemplifies this in the most perfect manner, "For he shall grow up before him as a tender sapling, and as a root out of dry ground" (@Isaiah 53: 2). There were no springs in the desert for Him, no natural springs; there was nothing there that He drew upon, and so we have to learn not to draw upon our natural resources but upon God. Every bit of sap has to come from Him. He grew up as a root out of dry ground. Think of that! He was cast upon God from the outset; all His springs were there, and so He sets forth the thought of God for every one of us.
In the history of Israel Satan appears at the outset of the wilderness position; Pharaoh said in his heart, "the wilderness has hemmed them in;" that is to say he
{69}
reckoned that the people of God could not grow up in the wilderness. Satan met the Lord thus in the wilderness. The devil says, Now you must have bread, you must have material nourishment in the wilderness. The Lord says, No, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God". Now all that is available for the believer. Every word that proceeded out of the mouth of God is available for the believer and available just where he is. He has not to move for it. Jehovah told Moses that Pharaoh says, "they are entangled in the land, the wilderness has hemmed them in" (@Exodus 14: 3). He meant that they could not live in the wilderness.
<blockquote>Art thou weaned from Egypt's pleasures? <br>God in secret thee shall keep, <br>There unfold His hidden treasures, <br>There His love's exhaustless deep. (`76:5) </blockquote>
Satan knew nothing of these. What did he know about manna? He had never heard of it before. What did Pharaoh know of manna? It was a new thing. Think of the resources that are in heaven! And so the manna falls and more than that, God had other resources, but that was the one great provision God made for His people, so that Pharaoh was utterly deceived when he thought that the people of God could not live in the wilderness. On the contrary, the wilderness was the way to the land of Canaan.
We need not dread taking up a position for God. He will not leave us, and the resources will be available for us. Wherever it be that you are located in the government of God all the resources of God are available to you, even though it be an outpost. There is no place in which He will not provide, and there are no possibilities of cutting or severing your communications. God has His own way of sending; even at the lion's mouth. Paul could say, "I was delivered out of the lion's mouth. The Lord shall deliver me from every wicked work" (@2 Timothy 4: 17, 18). He had not the least
{70}
dread of any consequences. He was in the position in which he had sustenance. That is the point.
Let us not think that it is an easy thing to be in the flesh. As I said, the Lord grew up in Nazareth; there was nothing there for the flesh, not that He needed it, but He is an example for us. As a matter of fact Satan does not understand Christ. The Lord Himself said: "the ruler of the world comes, and in me he has nothing" (@John 14: 30). There was nothing in that blessed Man Satan could touch. Man shall not live by bread alone. Now He is the manna of our souls; the soul is nourished as we dwell on the perfect dependence of that blessed One, especially as He met Satan. "Man doth not live by bread alone, but by everything that goeth out of the mouth of Jehovah doth man live" (@Deuteronomy 8: 3).
Now do you read the Bible in that light? Heavenly men, typified of old, were marked by a tent and an altar. An altar recognises God; the tent indicates that the occupants were just strangers. So the word of God is nourishment; Peter speaks of it as the sincere milk of the word by which we grow up to salvation. The word is not only the New Testament, it is the Old as well, every word that goeth out of the mouth of God; indeed there is much more that the Holy Spirit would suggest to us. The word of God is living. We can read much between the lines, if you understand what I mean; the apostle John said, "I suppose that not even the world itself would contain the books written" (@John 21: 25). There is not one thing that Christ said or did but will in some way stand. The more scriptures we read, as we carefully meditate on the things, the more nourishment we shall obtain for our souls. The apostle said to Timothy "give thyself to reading".
The letter to the Corinthians is addressed to the church of God which is at Corinth. Mark you, it is to the assembly there in that town or city, and then it adds, "with all that in every place call on the name of
{71}
our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours" (@1 Corinthians 1: 2). There is therefore a bond for us in the lordship of Christ, but it is a bond of affection with each other, that is to say, it is the bond that holds the church together, "all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours", and that, "ours" includes every believer. Whatever the conduct of any of the tribes, or any family in the tribes might have been, faith always included the twelve. So in writing to the Corinthians the apostle holds to all that in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. In those days things were very real; calling upon the name of the Lord Jesus meant more then than it does in our day. The apostle has to add in writing to Timothy, "with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart" -- with those whose hearts are pure. Paul contemplates a difficult day, and the necessity for the military position; and so he writes to Timothy, "Thou therefore, my child, be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus ... Take thy share in suffering as a good soldier of Jesus Christ" (@2 Timothy 2: 1, 3). The more extended your position, the more it outflows into the enemy's territory, the greater the need; so take thy share in suffering. One may let others take all the suffering. Take thy share. While I dwell on this point I am impressed with the importance of it. How it enters into the Lord's position as growing up from His own place. He grew up there, and in growing up there, it is said that He shall build the temple of the Lord. You may think that if we go afield and do exploits we shall get a crown, but God attaches great importance to the patience of growing up spiritually in one's place. An ox indicates patience and endurance, so there is great value attached to one growing up patiently and steadily in his place, having before him the testimony of God. The crown is for him; we read, "Behold a man whose name is the Branch; and he shall grow up from his own place, and he shall build the temple of Jehovah: even he shall
{72}
bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne". These statements all refer to Christ and Christ is an example for us. The "Branch" suggests dependence. Every disciple of Jesus is marked by prayer -- by dependence. In Luke, which is the great gospel of dependence, we are told that when He was praying in a certain place, when he had ceased, one of his disciples said to Him, Lord, teach us to pray. Jesus was dependent on His God in public service, and so His disciples say, Lord, teach us to pray; a very good request to ask the Lord for! Dependence here, not position in this world.
In turning now to Luke 4, I want to show that the Lord in taking up His levitical service is not local. He went to Nazareth where He had been brought up, but He was now engaged in service. They would bring in local ideas. I want to show, dear brethren, on the other hand how we ought to be on our guard against local feeling.
Well, the Lord having come to Nazareth, entered, as it was His custom, into the synagogue on the sabbath day; for He did not change His custom when He came to His own town -- He was not governed by locality -- it was His custom to enter into the synagogues elsewhere. Here in entering into the synagogue He is marked by perfect grace. He takes the Scriptures which were given to Him, and having received them He found the place where it is written, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me". He knew them; we must not conclude for a moment that He opened at @Isaiah 61 accidentally, as we speak. He did not. He opened it with intelligence, He found the place and He read. I never tire reading these verses. He stands out there practically as the Levite, and began to say to them, "To-day this scripture is fulfilled in your ears". Having read the scriptures, He rolled up the book and delivered it to the attendant and sat down -- perfect rest -- every movement full of grace -- and as having sat down the
{73}
eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed on Him. He became attractive. The levitical work that He is carrying on, is carried on in perfect grace.
Now they say in their hearts, Is not this the son of Joseph? The language of their hearts is, we know your name; and *naturally* we all think like that, but the Lord would bring us on to *spiritual* lines. He never acted on local lines. He always acted from His own point of view, hence it says, "there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elias ... and to none of them was Elias sent but to Sarepta ... to a woman that was a widow", and so too in the days of Elisha the prophet, Naaman the Syrian alone was cleansed although there were many lepers in Israel at that time. We have to learn in levitical work that the point of view is universal; the work of the levite -- his business -- is in relation to the tabernacle. No doubt each has his own work. Paul said, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do", and the Lord gave him his work in due time: "taking thee out from among the people, and the nations, to whom *I* send thee" (@Acts 26: 17). That incident indicates how the Lord takes up levites in His own perfect way, bringing in the sovereignty of God and showing that God is acting universally.
I want to go on now to the end of the chapter (Luke 4) where the crowds thought that He should abide there and not go from them. It says, "When it was day he went out, and went into a desert place, and the crowds sought after him, and came up to him, and would have kept him back that he should not go from them. But he said to them, I must needs announce the glad tidings of the kingdom of God to the other cities also, for for this I have been sent forth". Levitical work is not local; it is universal: "To the other cities also, for for this I have been sent forth". He was sent to preach the kingdom of God. The epistle to the Romans has a universal application. The Lord declined to accept a local position in His levitical service. He had exemplified local responsibility for thirty years, and now
{74}
He is anointed by the Spirit to preach. His work is to preach, and to preach where He was sent. And so, dear brethren, we thus are kept as having Christ for our model, whether it be in our position locally, or whether it be in service levitically.
I might remark here before closing that wilderness warfare in the main is defensive warfare, Canaan warfare is aggressive. Locally we do not attack; we are set to defend. There are exceptions I admit, but generally speaking, the position of the saints in the wilderness is defensive. The point is to occupy the position, and I apprehend that it is all implied in calling upon the name of the Lord. Hence when the time comes that evil shows its head in our circumstances, we depart from it. We simply withdraw from it. There is no such idea in Canaan as that. Ephesians treats of heavenly warfare. The whole church is in view there, so when Joshua was outside Jericho, it says: -- "that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man before him with his sword drawn in his hand. And Joshua went to him, and said to him, Art thou for us, or for our enemies? And he said, No; for as captain of the army of Jehovah am I now come" (@Joshua 5: 13, 14). Christ is known spiritually in relation to the whole host of Jehovah -- the whole assembly. "Our struggle is not against blood and flesh, but against principalities, ... against spiritual power of wickedness in heavenlies" (@Ephesians 6: 12). The heavenlies are Satan's stronghold. When the disciples came back after being sent out two by two, and say, the devils are subject to us, the Lord says to them, "In this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you; but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens" (@Luke 10: 20). Let us be on our guard, dear brethren, about giving way. If we give way one bit we shall give way another bit.
Ephesians is, I may say, general. It is for attack, whereas Numbers and Corinthians deal with what is local -- the divine economy locally. Romans makes you
{75}
a military man; you are exhorted to put on the armour of light, but that epistle helps us also in regard to levitical work. Paul exhorts and says to every man, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly. Romans gives us our place levitically, but it subdues us so that we must think soberly according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. Corinthians teaches us *how* to serve. In @1 Corinthians 14: 40 the apostle says, "Let all things be done comelily and with order", and in verse 26, "Let all things be done to edification;" for five words spoken with the understanding edify more than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.
{76}
ENLARGEMENT
@2 Corinthians 6: 11 - 18; @Genesis 9: 26, 27; @Numbers 3: 9, 10
These scriptures, as you will observe, speak of enlargement. The passage in 2 Corinthians has a particular voice to those who gather in the name of the Lord Jesus, and call upon Him. The Corinthian saints, in the two epistles written to them, are contemplated as peculiarly representative of the assembly of God; they are addressed as the "assembly of God which is in Corinth". Finally the assembly will be in heaven and will remain there, it never comes back to earth; it comes down in relation to earth, but in principle remains in heaven. In the meantime it is here in testimony, not only the individuals, beyond number, who compose it. We cannot number them; it is an immense idea; the symbolic allusion to the saints indicates immensity, though according to the measure of man. We read of those who "have washed their robes, and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb", and it says that no one could number them, that is, the number of those whom God has saved and will save is immense. Young people do well to remember that. That, in result, God will have an immense number, but in the meantime, the assembly is here representing it. *All* the members of the assembly have not been on earth at one time, and will not be till the Lord comes when the dead are raised and the living changed, then all will be together on earth if only for a moment prior to being transferred to heaven. But now all the saints on earth represent that thought and those at Corinth are addressed in the epistle from which we have read as the assembly of God which is in Corinth. Note it is the assembly *of God*, it is of God in a moral sense and representative of God; the apostle adds in the first epistle, "with all that in every place call on the name
{77}
of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". It is a universal thought, and contemplates all saints on earth at any given time.
The apostle Paul went to Corinth according to the historical account after visiting Philippi, Thessalonica, Berea and Athens, and at Corinth the Lord says, "No one shall set upon thee to injure thee; because I have much people in this city" (@Acts 18: 10). So he remained there eighteen months, one of the longest periods that he stayed in any place. He spent three years at Ephesus, and a year and a half, as was said, at Corinth, and a large number were converted there and received the Holy Spirit, and were formed into "the assembly of God ... in Corinth". Then the apostle left them, in order that he might labour elsewhere, and they became very naughty after he left, for christians, true christians even, are capable of becoming unruly and worldly, and followers of men, sectarian, as took place in Corinth. There was no open division, but internal cleavage, parties following certain persons. Paul transfers the thought to himself and others, to convey what he had to say on this matter. One was "of Paul", another "of Cephas", others were "of Christ", as if to make their party more acceptable. So today there are those who call themselves the 'Church of Christ', as if that precluded the sectarian idea, but it does not. The Corinthians were jealous of the apostle and spoke contemptuously and disparagingly of him, and yet whatever they were as nominal christians they owed to him.
In view of all these things that existed, the first letter was sent, and it convicted them. Then in the second letter we see how affected Paul was on hearing the good news that they were on the way to deliverance from what had marked them, and had brought them into bondage. In chapter 6 he speaks of himself, recognising it was a humbling thing to do, but necessary in order to defend himself as God's minister. So in chapter 11 he recounts his sufferings; he says in effect,
{78}
I am ashamed to do it, but am compelled to because of your conduct. He would prefer to leave those praiseworthy things till the day to come, but has to bring them forward on account of those refractory disciples. He mentions some thirty-seven things as to himself before we come to these words, "I have become a fool" (@2 Corinthians 12: 11). Was he egotistical then? Never was man less so! "I am crucified with Christ" he says in another place, not only my sins and state dealt with, but I have been dealt with. He could speak of himself as worthy of crucifixion. "No longer live, *I*, but Christ lives in me" (@Galatians 2: 20). He said this to bring out what christianity really is as seen in one man, and if in one, in any number. "Our mouth is opened to you, ... our heart is expanded", he says. "Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your affections". Although his first letter had effected much, yet the Corinthians were straitened in affection. They were still addressed as the assembly of God, they had full status as we all may have, and yet our affections may be narrowed up, and that was the position here. The apostle would say, Our mouth is open, but I am not so sure about *you:* if I am not speaking freely to you it is because of a state in *you*. He could say a great deal about them in the next chapter, he was more than overjoyed in what he heard from Titus as to them, but here they were narrowed up in their affections because there was wickedness among them. So he says, "let *your* heart also expand itself". He speaks as unto his children, and this in a peculiarly affectionate way; he has not a thing in his heart but their good. They might have had ten thousand instructors, as he told them earlier, but only one father, and he had a moral right as such to appeal to them. He had set the pace, so to speak, as regards enlargement, and he says, be ye also enlarged. He speaks about what would cause restricted affection spiritually in the following verses, "Be not diversely yoked with unbelievers", and so on. In those
{79}
days an unbeliever was simply one who did not believe in Christ at all, there are many today who are idolaters. The world has become christianised, five hundred million of its inhabitants are christianised, but that does not mean they are all converted. Not at all, nor indeed did it ever mean that, for Simon Magus was in the bond of iniquity, though professing to be a believer in Christ, and millions and millions of people nominally christians belong to that category. So it says, Be not diversely yoked with such. You may have a christian allied to an unbeliever in marriage, or business, or companionship. In each case the unbeliever has the best, but the believer has the worst and suffers accordingly. The apostle brings forward five sets of things which are against each other. "What participation is there between righteousness and lawlessness? or what fellowship of light with darkness?" None. "And what consent of Christ with Beliar, or what part for a believer along with an unbeliever?" None. And there is nothing in common between the temple of God and idols. These things are all opposed to one another, and then the apostle says, "for *ye* are the living God's temple". They are still owned as the temple, what an incentive for them to keep away from what would nullify this! God says, "I will dwell among them, and walk among them". Think of the beauty of that! You remember the first walking of God. It was not among christians, nor with Adam and Eve, for they were not available; it was in a garden. Adam and Eve were hidden away in their sinfulness. Now we have these christians viewed as God's temple, involving holiness, and then comes the great appeal, "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord ... and *I* will receive you".
Now I wish to turn to the thought of enlargement in the Old Testament. I want to speak about Shem, Ham and Japheth, and then about Balaam's first great prophecy. The word Shem means *name*, a person of renown, that is what he is to be in the purpose of God.
{80}
Ham signifies black, and Japheth enlargement. They represent three heads of races, each being a son of Noah, and all blessed. Some think that what we call the African race is existent on account of this curse on Canaan. But Scripture does not say, Cursed be Ham, Ham was blessed (@Genesis 9: 1), and God never reverses blessing. So the Spirit of God carefully avoids pronouncing a curse on Ham, it is on Canaan, the inhabitants of the land of Canaan who were to be destroyed. The great continent of Africa is peopled by the descendants of Ham, as are other parts also. I wanted to speak of Ham and particularly of Japheth.
Noah comes forth from the ark and approaches God in the spirit of sacrifice. He took of every clean beast and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar. He was utterly unselfish, taking of every one, and Jehovah, we are told, smelled a sweet odour, or a odour of rest, and said, "Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease". The seasons we so value -- for the fruit of the earth depends on them -- are all the outcome of that sacrificial service of Noah. We ought to thank God for that, every time we eat our food. And this will continue, it is irrevocable, being founded on Noah's sacrifice; it is a question of what Christ is sacrificially. This great servant was a man of faith, and faith always anticipated Christ, hence all these material blessings which we enjoy every day come through Christ. Men go into restaurants, millions of them go in constantly and hardly one bows his head to God. The prodigal said, I have sinned against heaven -- he gave up giving thanks to heaven, if ever he did it. We know the later history of Noah. He planted a vineyard and drank of the wire. It would appear that he did not know the power of the grape. The Spirit of God is infinitely fair, and presents everything to us as it stands. It shows what a saint of God may do. Some who turn aside are not fully restored,
{81}
but Noah becomes a worshipper and says, "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem, and let Canaan be his bondman. Let God enlarge Japheth, and let him dwell in the tents of Shem". Now this is not exactly a prayer. As far as Japheth is concerned, Noah rather rests on his name meaning enlargement. *Let* God enlarge Japheth -- no doubt implying He would do it, for it is prophetic, but Noah does not ask God to be Japheth's God. He may be enlarged under the government of God, and yet fail of entering into relationship with God. Shem is already in relationship with God, "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem". Is there any one here who has not a God? I would not be without a God for a second! In Him we live and move and have our being; as creatures we are entirely dependent on God for the food we eat. But it says of those who enjoy these things and yet are reprobate, that God gave them up -- He would not be called their God, whereas He is not ashamed to be called the God of such as look for a heavenly country. Is there anyone who cannot speak of God in that sense? A God you know, and who knows you, to whom you speak day and night. One you have learned to know in Christ!
Now Noah does not say anything about Japheth's God, he simply speaks of his enlargement, but if his blessing is to be realised, what would be the end but that he should have a God? He represents the people of Europe, Northern Asia and America, in fact all the outgoings of Europe except the Jews, Chinese, and so on. All the inhabitants are descendants of Japheth. So we see how the enlargement has taken place. But are they in relation to God? -- that is the enquiry. And it comes home to all of us -- what about our God? Shem includes a numerous part of the race, the inhabitants of Asia, China, and others. Is God more to them than to Japheth? Not now, but you will notice that in the case of Shem, his genealogy is given twice. First you get it alongside of Japheth and Ham in chapter 10, and then
{82}
again in chapter 11 after the scattering. And why is this? To bring out the name, the secret of his God. Abraham is in mind, Isaac is in mind, and Israel and Christ, and christians too are in mind, for all christians are sons of Abraham. Every one of us is transferred from our racial head to Abraham our spiritual head, and that is to subsist. So Noah's blessing of Shem was an excellent foundation, for it refers to God entering into blessing with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. That comes directly to every christian, first, because they come out. God called Abraham out, and he came, not knowing where he was going, but he believed God. God became his God, as He became the God of Isaac and Jacob. He speaks of Himself thus. So every true christian comes under that, as Paul says, "my God". May God grant that no one here may be without a God -- a personal God whom you know. He does not know every one in that sense, greeting him and calling him by name as He did Abraham, "I know him", He said. I beg of you to get into relation with God if you do not know Him. The gospel brings you into that relationship. Japheth was to be enlarged, and as without a God, he would typify persons doing well in their business, or enlarged personally by education, outstanding sort of persons. What is it all for? Can any of these things be made subservient to the testimony? Persons who take up these things in order to make themselves great in the world are cursed. Children of believers lay themselves out in this way, and these things become a curse, and those governed by them turn their back on God's people. Japheth is being enlarged in this way, and yet he has not a God. There are rich men in this world; there are thousands of millionaires in the world; they got their wealth through God but they use it to make themselves a name and they leave God out; their money is their god. Shem was blessed but he was not enlarged; the mention of his name evokes a note of worship from Noah. "Blessed be Jehovah, the God
{83}
of Shem". How delightful that one should speak of me in this way! Esau came in after Jacob was blessed and uttered a bitter cry, for the blessing of Jacob was irrevocable -- "also blessed shall he be" (@Genesis 27: 33). That blessing stands and it belongs to every believer in Christ. Enlargement is not given to divert you from God, but to provide you with the means for sacrifice. I can sacrifice to God, to make much of Him, not of myself.
I read Numbers to show how it works out in Israel. Balak hired Balaam to curse Israel, and Balaam accepted the offer to come from the far East to do this nefarious thing; he was really an agent of the devil. But God met him and forbade him, and instead of cursing, Balaam was caused to bless. "Lo, it is a people that shall dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations" -- that is the same principle as the apostle developed in @2 Corinthians 6; we christians are to dwell alone. I say this to every young person; his heritage is christianity, but with this divine requirement that we dwell alone. You say, We are very few. Yes, but that is not always because we dwell alone. We are narrowed up, we are not energetic enough in the gospel, we are not attractive enough to other christians. It is a certainty that if true to the principles we profess, our allegiance to Christ will result in hatred by the world even as the apostle John said, "Do not wonder, brethren, if the world hate you" (@1 John 3: 13). But persons in whom God is working will be attracted, and if there is no such attraction, it is time to enquire whether we are narrowed in our affections, and the secret of that is earthly-mindedness. Balaam says, "For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the hills I behold him: Lo, it is a people shall dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations". Now this was not a command, Balaam was not commanding the people, they were not within reach of his voice, but he saw
{84}
Israel in the distance, he saw them in their order and beauty, and he is saying prophetically that they *shall* dwell alone. It is a question of the mind of God. Let it come home to us. The apostle says, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. If affiliated with the world, we shall be judged with the world, that is, christians are judged with worldlings. Israel is not to be numbered among the nations. We are very few, you say, but the prophet goes on, "Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?" and that question is without an answer. No one can count them. God will bring them out like men from the dead, according to Ezekiel, and they will stand on their feet, an exceeding great army. I would prefer to believe Balaam's prophecy rather than to go by what I see. God brought Abraham out and directed him to look to the stars. No astronomer ever got such a view of the heavens as did Abraham. Astronomers are only guessers at best, though I am not despising them as they know far more than I do. God calls every star by name. Are they there for nothing? No, they are to do His will, not a star that is not doing His will. So God asks Abraham to number the stars if he is able, and adds "so shall thy seed be". You cannot understand that, but you can believe it, for it is God who cannot lie who speaks. If the number God has in His mind are to be blessed, you do not want to be outside of it; it is large enough for the mind that craves most for society. The prophet has to say, and I trust no one here will have to say it, "I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh" (@Numbers 24: 17). He had to confess he was a lost man, and he is. He was slain as a wicked man, he will never have a part with the blest, yet he desired it when he said, "Let me die the death of the righteous". He never realised this -- a most solemn matter!
{85}
But I speak of christians dwelling alone among their own people and not numbered among the nations, not affiliated with the world. When you die you will be put to sleep by Jesus. You want to live apart and have to do with the myriads of the redeemed. There will be enlargement enough -- riches, honour and distinction in that world, and companionship in glory.
<blockquote>Nor what is next Thy heart <br>Can we forget; <br>Thy saints, O Lord, with Thee <br>In glory met. (`160:8) </blockquote>
We shall see them and be with them and of them, an uncountable number as far as we are concerned, and all blest.
{86}
THE ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE OF SPIRITUAL STRENGTH
@Mark 1: 6; @1 Peter 1: 13; @Ephesians 6: 14; @John 13: 4, 5
What I had in mind is spiritual strength and how it is to be acquired and maintained.
You will remember that David is said to have had certain mighty men. In Chronicles a list of them is given at the beginning of his reign; they were said to be men that he had, and they came with a perfect heart to make him king. They were valiant, and at the beginning of his reign moved, not as a body of mighty men, but "with all Israel". Their might no doubt would be an occasion of communion between them, not to make them partisan or specialists but as seeking to make David king and to maintain him with all Israel. They were men with a universal outlook. In the second book of Samuel a list is given of David's men at the close of his reign, the same names generally are mentioned with certain variations, but the suggestion obviously is, that as a type, the chapter in the second book of Samuel points to the end of the dispensation in which we are, as if to afford inspiration for those of us who are in these last days to acquire this strength and maintain it, and to use it not for our own prominence or distinction, but as it were to make David king "with all Israel", and to maintain his place in the kingdom. This is what I have in mind, dear brethren, in reading these scriptures, and I do not believe I am aiming too high for there is latent strength in this company, spiritual strength, active strength, too, but it is more latent than active. Whilst latent strength is right up to a point, it is useless beyond that; when need exists and it does not come forth it is useless. Deborah reviews the position in her days in her song and dwells on certain who came forth to the conflict and others who did not. Not that they could not, not that they were not men of war, or men of valour, but
{87}
they were neglectful of the need. God gave the victory without them but they lost much, and so it is always. The Lord always puts in His claim in the conflict and the conflict is not spasmodic, it properly continues as @Ephesians 6, from which I have read, shows. There are special attacks of the enemy, and special defence, but the conflict is continuous. Hence there is a need for all to be on the alert and ready, as the apostle says, "Thou therefore, my child, be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus" (@2 Timothy 2: 1), and goes on to point out to Timotheus that no one enlists to be a soldier and retains his own interests; he is concerned about him who has enlisted him to be a soldier. So that we are all as it were under arms, ready to be called out, ready to be called into the conflict. We are not weaklings, we are to be strong in grace, we are to be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus, and as he says elsewhere, "quit yourselves like men; be strong" (@1 Corinthians 16: 13).
Now I selected John the baptist first, having in mind to connect my remarks with the idea of a girdle, or that by which we are girded, believing that, as these and many other scriptures indicate, a girdle implies the conservation of strength. It is one thing to acquire strength, and it is another to conserve it. Strength, I need not say, lies in the Spirit of God; it is He that affords us power, but then there is that which we call moral power which is also needed. It flows from a man's integrity, from a man's godliness, from a man's adherence to right principles, from his maintenance of a right spirit. These are moral qualities; they are, as it were, attributes. The Spirit is the power inside, inwardly, for we are to be strengthened, we are told, by the Father's Spirit in the inner man. But in the actual, or dynamic, power, there is also moral power; this is a very important word because it alludes to what is attributable to a person, certain qualities, and by which he has influence for good. The Lord told His disciples
{88}
to go into the world to make disciples of all nations. That alludes to power not only what is called dynamic, but what is called moral, the power of influence with others for good so that disciples are made, "make disciples of all the nations". Now this word is particularly for young men, but this includes young sisters, too, for when John wrote his epistle to the fathers and young men and the little children he had in mind all, not just the males; he meant all the family. When he says fathers, he does not exclude the elder sisters; when he says young men, he does not exclude the younger sisters; we know that women have done exploits as men have, according to the Old Testament and the New, too. And, of course, when he says little children he includes all. In the first epistle he alludes to all the saints but he has a good deal to say to the young men. He says, "ye are strong", not 'ye should be'. I am speaking now of latent strength; the apostle would stress that "ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you" (@1 John 2: 14). That is the weapon is first used against oneself, for it is a two-edged sword, and then against others, for one is only effective in the word of God in applying it to others, in the measure in which one applies it to oneself; "the word of God abides in you". If the word of God abides in one, it means it is restful there; there is nothing to disturb it so to speak. Hence it indicates a very advanced state if the word of God abides in young men. Then the apostle goes on to what confirms me in the thought about the girdle on the loins. The girdles are not always said to be on the loins; in the Revelation they are said to be on the breasts of the Lord Jesus and of certain angels who came out of the temple. The presence of golden girdles on the breast means that the Lord, or these angels in @Revelation 15, could not carry on their service in the liberty of love but on the principle of judgment. Here in John's epistle the young men are enjoined not to love the world. In spite of our strength we are exposed to the world and
{89}
the world attacks us, Satan being in it, through our affections. He says, "love not the world;" that is a love that, I might say, belongs to the lower affections, that which is capable of linking on with what is low morally; so it says, "love not the world, nor the things in the world". Many a young man, who has developed this quality of being strong and with the word of God abiding in him, enters into marital and household relations and his wife perhaps urges him into certain things that he would not have entered into, or the children are considered and certain things are taken on on their account. One thing after another comes in and the power weakens, all because of the want of the girdle of leather or skin. "Love not the world, nor the things in the world. If any one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him; because all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father" (@1 John 2: 15, 16). These are very subtle things. Think of the pride of life in a brother who at one time had power in his soul; he has got a better house, a better car, everything is increased from that point of view, but the power is lessened.
Now that is what I had in mind, dear brethren, and John the baptist affords in that illustration a type of this; he was a peculiarly abstemious man, no man more so except perhaps his great prototype, Elijah. He was in the deserts, we are told, not only desert but deserts, as if he deliberately took up the idea of desert in its variety of meanings, and took on circumstances which would disallow and wither up the flesh; the desert is what negates the flesh. That is John the baptist, and so we are told that he was here, told what he had on, a leather or skin belt. Leather I suppose is prepared from skin; the word "leathern" is used in Matthew. It is skin, only dressed, a material that is of great distinction in the Scriptures, because it is the first material employed for human clothing, God himself having used it to make clothes; so there is a spiritual significance
{90}
alluding obviously to death having preceded in some being. It would be, in the sense of which I am speaking, the girding of oneself with the witness to the death of Christ; I mean it is a public profession. In the types referring to leprosy, skins have a place, leprosy may break out in these skins (@Leviticus 13: 48), and so a leathern belt, or girdle, indicates a public profession, but with John the baptist you can see it was a very real thing. He was girded about the loins with this girdle of skin, it was not on for an ornament. Girdles are sometimes spoken of in Scripture as used for ornament but this was not for that, it was ornamental in a moral sense, for what can be greater round the loins than what denoted the death of the Lord Jesus. How sobering, how solemnising that belt would be as looked at at any time! Accompanying this was the clothing of camel's hair as you will observe, I suppose alluding not exactly to the death of the camel, but to the shearing of the camel, the hair in that sense yielded up in a docile way, in a domesticated way, in the Spirit of Christ. This clothing has come in in that way and it would surely speak of the creature, what it is, and if there is one thing that marks a camel, it is reserve, latent reserve. What you can say of a brother who is camel-like is that he has something. The camel has a reserve supply of water, very important in an arid desert; how much more so, dear brethren, in the arid desert through which we are passing. We say that brother has something, and his belt is in keeping with it, the question therefore is, can we tap this reserve that he has, for there are those who have things from God and the brethren get no benefit from them. One of the most painful things that one finds, and one has experienced it considerably, is dumbness in the brothers, inability to take part profitably amongst the brethren; yet we know they have something.
Further, John is said to have eaten locusts and wild honey as food. These locusts are evidently wilderness
{91}
creatures, and valuable thoughts to us; he is not buying these in the market evidently. I suppose the idea is that they are acquired according to what the man who dwells in the deserts is. Then he ate wild honey; there is much of that abroad in a spiritual sense; what is wild but good in itself has a very great significance. The idea is that the wildness is to disappear by being brought under control. John evidently managed to bring under control something that he could use. This power for subjugation and getting what is really good is very important amongst us, for honey denotes what is mutual. But then I am speaking of the girdle and how in keeping with all these things it is; it keeps the affections, the natural affections, the most powerful affections under control. Now one of the greatest requirements that I know of for a young christian to begin with is the ability to acquire power to control the most powerful affections he has. It is by the Spirit, of course, but then this girdle denoted that death had taken place; these affections deserve death so that we are to mortify our members which are upon the earth; those are what are near to the earth, what are capable of being overpowered by the earth. We are to mortify them as it says, "if, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live" (@Romans 8: 13). These are great facts for young brethren, young brothers and sisters, at the present time, for if we are to be in the condition of strength, if we are to conserve it, if it is to be taken up and used as occasion demands, then this girdle of skin is to be worn with its accompaniments.
Now I speak of John as a sort of general representation of what I have in mind and I proceed to speak of the specific spheres in which such a person is found; the first is that of divine government. Peter's two epistles deal with the government of God. It is important to read them in this light because they have a wide field as you will observe. God deals with the good and the bad, and the bad found with the good in the
{92}
christian is dealt with as bad, for God has no regard of evil in the christian. He thinks it is just as bad in a christian as in an unbeliever, or worse, and He deals with it accordingly. He deals with it in love. Peter, speaking of the judgment of God, says, "if the righteous is difficultly saved, where shall the impious and the sinner appear?" (@1 Peter 4: 18). So he says that judgment begins at the house of God, a most solemn matter, and Paul, confirming this, says, "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep" (@1 Corinthians 11: 30), that is, they did not judge themselves. If we judged ourselves we should not be judged with the world. God abominates the idea of dealing with His people as He deals with the world, but He is obliged to do it, unless we judge ourselves. So that Peter, who addresses himself to certain of the dispersion, deals with the judgment of God. Why were they dispersed? It was the government of God. What dispersed them? the Romans, of course, and other powers; the prophets are full of it, speaking of God using instrumentalities to disperse them, it was the government of God. And the apostle goes on to mention the different provinces in which they were, showing that God knew where they were, although dispersed; the Lord knows those that are His. Peter points out the truth of the gospel, telling them wonderful things that the angels desired to look into, and that it was revealed to the Old Testament writers that the things they ministered they did not minister unto themselves but unto us. He then goes on to say, "Wherefore, having girded up the loins of your mind, ..." That is the point he makes, the loins of the mind, and this, the second head under which I am speaking, enables me to speak a little to the young and to parents in relation to the mind. The mind is a wonderful faculty, I suppose the most wonderful that man has. In the ordinary course of the development of the truth in the believer's soul, he arrives at a point where the mind is under control, "*I myself* with the
{93}
mind serve God's law" (@Romans 7: 25). This is a great victory: the mind is to dominate. Then we are enjoined, "And be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God" (@Romans 12: 2). The renewing of our minds is so that we have them, dear brethren, under control, and so that the Spirit of God can use them. Indeed it is said elsewhere that we have the mind of Christ, a kind of faculty, as it were; through the wonderful process through which God passes us we acquire what may be compared with the mind of Christ, that kind of mind.
Well now the devil is aiming his attack at that kind of mind in the young. I believe the most deliberately laid out plan in all the machinations of our enemy, is this attack on the mind in these modern times. One has thought of it a lot, and seen a good deal of the effects of it. In a broad way the anti-christian leaders of the world are aiming at getting the children. That is the plan, a well laid out plan, it may take years to succeed but it is a well laid out plan from that point of view. The Lord would use the parents to combat this. I believe that the Lord would lead us into a correlative but opposing plan to all this, that is, the parents should understand the enemy's strategy which is working in the schools, in books and magazines, in cinemas, and alas! in the pulpits of christendom. It has to be owned sorrowfully that they have been enrolled in this great movement in these last days. All these agencies are employed and all aim at the mind. And so we are enjoined here in view of all these things, the government of God controlling them, too, we are enjoined here to gird up the loins of our minds, "and hope with perfect steadfastness in the grace which will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ". Grace is supplied, it is a time of wonderful grace, and it is for fathers and mothers and elder brothers and sisters to take on this and to see what is current and
{94}
meet it; the Lord would be with us in checking this terrible onslaught against the mind, inducing the corruption of the young. We have, as it has often been remarked, in Elisha's ministry, an antidote to this very thing here. The wild gourd was put in to the pot, unknowingly it may be, it was a lapful so it belonged to the lower affections. It was not carried in intelligent affection at all; it was a wild thing, man's product utterly unsubdued. It goes into the pot, and is provided as food for the sons of the prophets. Elisha meets it when it was detected; the poison was detected as it is today; the Lord has pointed it out, and I am pointing it out to you tonight. I have not any hesitation but that I am saying what is right; the poison was discerned, and the antidote was the meal. Elisha says, "Bring meal". He put the meal into the pot; that is, he is a person who cares for things, who loves God, who loves the truth, and loves the young people. It is urgent with the young that this terrible attack should be met. It is to be met in the minds and in the affections of the young, and of the old, too, of course, for the poison is found in the things we read in the newspapers and magazines. The things that are current all tend to feed this in the old and the young so that the word is gird up the loins of your mind, it is like the tucking up of the affections, of the mind. It is a figure, of course, the 'loins of the mind'. "Wherefore, having girded up the loins of your mind, be sober and hope with perfect steadfastness in the grace which will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ".
Well now I go on to the next point; it is in Ephesians. Ephesians contemplates the conflict too. It is the heavenly side, more for the elder brothers and sisters of course. Ephesians contemplates an advanced state of soul, advanced spirituality, and the apostle calls attention to the character of the warfare. It is not, he says, with flesh and blood, it is with principalities and powers in the heavenlies, the universal lords of this
{95}
darkness. I have been speaking of darkness in detail in schools and books, and this is a question of the lords. We had yesterday the lords of the Philistines; they were lords of darkness. They were those that watched what happened with the milch kine, and went back home. Here it is the universal lords of this darkness, the darkness that we have to face, the heavenly side of the conflict, and so the apostle says, "Take to you the panoply of God". It contemplates grown men who take on the panoply, or whole armour, of God that they may be able to withstand; there is no other way. The first part of the body he touches is the loins, other parts then come into view: the breast, the head, the feet; all are to be covered with the armour. There is no armour for the back as has often been remarked. It is a question of conflict, of standing up against the enemy and the first part of the body that is mentioned is the loins. Have your loins girt about with truth. Here it is not exactly the thought of leather; that is one that includes the death of Christ. Of course we must have the death, resurrection and the ascension of Christ always before us. Some do not go beyond the death of Christ in the gospel, others do not go beyond the resurrection, but the full gospel goes on to the ascension; we must have the whole truth, and that is the girdle. The Lord says, "I sanctify myself for them, that they also may be sanctified by truth" (@John 17: 19). He meant to say that He was not only about to die and rise; He was going up into heaven, He was going to be sanctified there in heavenly glory, that is set apart as the representative of God's eternal counsel for us. Wonderful thought in relation to Christ as He is now. So we would be in correspondence with Christ as He is now, and would be sanctified by truth, not by a part of it, but by the whole truth; so the apostle says here -- having girt about your loins with truth. It is the full thought I believe of truth, that the affections are all kept under control, not only in a legal way, not only
{96}
because it is right, but by the power of the truth, the greatness of the heavenly calling, the attractiveness of Christ up there, so that we are here invulnerable. What can the devil do in these circumstances? He may attack us at the loins but we are invulnerable; they are protected, they are under control by truth. How important therefore are our Bible readings, how important the careful and prayerful reading of the Scriptures and all spiritual ministry, as is said in @1 Timothy 4: 6, "the good teaching which thou hast fully followed up". We should be so entirely controlled in our affections by truth that we can say, as one of old did, "Even in the nights my reins instruct me" (@Psalm 16: 7). You will say the Lord instructs and the Spirit instructs, but David says there, "my reins instruct me", that is, the affections are thoroughly kept and pure so that you can commune with yourself and your reins instruct you; as your mind is free the truth comes into it and you are instructed. It is a very remarkable thing. Elsewhere it says that one calls upon all that is within him to praise God. The point is that the lower affections are kept and controlled and purified and held in the power of the Spirit. The Lord said, "whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him shall never thirst for ever, but the water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life" (@John 4: 14). These are all subjective thoughts but they are wonderful; they make you perfectly invulnerable to the attacks of the enemy.
Then there is the well known thought of serving the saints. In John the baptist we have the general thought of the girdle, affecting every christian. In Peter we have the mind girded in relation to the government of God here, the loins of the mind girded; while in Ephesians the loins are to be girded in relation to the heavenly conflict. Now there are the saints. I reserve these thoughts to the close, not the
{97}
least because they are the last, for they are really the greatest, because it is the Lord Himself who is girded. Not, indeed, that He is not so regarded in the Scriptures for it is said in the Old Testament that He is girded about the loins with righteousness, and faithfulness is the girdle of His reins. He is now seen girded with the linen towel. And what is this for? The chapter begins with the thought of His love: He, "having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end". It is continued, sustained love. There is no idea -- far be the thought -- of deterioration at all. In the great image that Daniel describes it begins at once, but there is no deterioration in Christ. Every bit, every part of His person is in perfect keeping, perfect symmetry, quality, and order so that He is altogether lovely; there is no deterioration whatever. His own are in the world and they would sometimes be very unlovely, alas, but He knows and He loves them until the end, and that is this chapter, and so it says He laid aside His garments, His personal dignity. I am speaking now of the Lord as an example for us; indeed, He says here, "ye also ought to wash one another's feet". I speak now of the girdle that is used to gird one in serving the saints. It is a linen towel, it is mentioned twice, mentioned in two verses. We have spoken of linen, which appears in @Leviticus 16 in a striking way both in regard to the clothes of the High Priest and the girdle, meaning that the Lord Jesus in entering into death was infinitely sober and calculating. He felt everything, but He gauged everything, He was perfectly balanced in His mind, not one thing outweighed or eclipsed another; the linen marked Him throughout. Now that is what enters into the service of the saints. If one has a little ability to serve the saints, the enemy knows about it and will attack him in view of the ability. He will make use of the very ability which the Lord has given him, to damage him. Hence the need of sobriety,
{98}
that is in service we have to measure things as it says in @Romans 12: 3, "For I say ... to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". He is only one amongst many and he is to be calculating and measuring things, measuring what he has, and what others have, and also to see that what he has is given of God, "as God has dealt to each". It is not merely his own, it is to be used for God, and for the saints. That makes one very little in his own account. It makes the saints very great that whatever he has is for them. There would be no gift from Christ in heaven or from God, were it not that the saints are here, as it says, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. So the linen towel, dear brethren, means that the one standing at the desk and seeking to serve the brethren is not at all above them. I am not now speaking of the account the Lord takes of them. He has His own estimate of each servant, but I speak of what should be in the calculating mind of the minister. So the Lord deliberately laid aside what would dignify Him and what properly belonged to Him in order to take this towel with which He girded Himself, and it is specifically said to be linen. We have it clearly before us as a material that is absorbent and that is the antidote to heat or sweat. It is said about the priests that they were to wear no garment that produced sweat, so that one is perfectly calculating and soberly thinking of God, and of Christ, and of the Spirit, and of the saints in all that he is doing. He has his little bit to do and he is doing it in relation to all else that is done; the work of God is one and it is all to the edifying of the body of Christ. The Lord girds Himself with a linen towel, and pours the water into a basin; it is beautiful to see that it is a portable vessel; it is not like the sea at the temple which held three thousand baths. It is more like the lavers on
{99}
wheels -- they were portable; they could be used, utilised in love, so that you can visit a brother or sister to wash his or her feet and in doing so you are less than he or she is in your own mind, because that is the principle of service. And so the Lord poured the water in Himself; He did not call on anyone to do it, did not call anyone to help Him. He did it Himself and no doubt they were lying about the table as was customary. He went round and washed them one after another. There is not one here who has not heard of the feet washing, it is one of the most spoken of items but perhaps the least known. The more you look into it the more marvellous it is that the Lord of glory should be doing this, and doing it in order that we might be able to do it. He would show you how to do it and particularly in view of the fact that your affections are under control; your ambitions, whatever they may be, are all under control in the most calculating way so that you are useful in the divine service, serving as Christ served. After He did it He said, "Ye call me the Teacher and the Lord, and ye say well, for I am so". I hope everyone here calls the Lord Jesus, Master and Lord. I hope there is not one here so insubject or independent as to refrain from calling Him Master and Lord. Now He says, "If I therefore, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet". I am referring not so much to the washing as to the towel and to the girding so that you may see that the affections are to be under control, affording no room for natural ambition or pride, or personal prejudice at all. We are to be governed by love -- "having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end". He loved them where they may have been very unlovely. We love the saints; we clothe them with affection whatever their incongruities; our great aim is to remove the incongruities so that the saints may stand out in their beauty under the eye of Christ.
{100}
"COME NOW"
@Isaiah 1: 18; @Isaiah 41: 1; @Isaiah 43: 26; @Isaiah 50: 8
In these scriptures God is inviting men to draw near, to get into close relations with Him; the invitation is presented without any conditions as to the persons. It is not to persons who are known as believers; it is an invitation to all, for God would accord liberty to all classes of persons. He has no doubt of course as to the result. David, a great sinner, after he had sinned, said to God, "Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done what is evil in thy sight; that thou mayest be justified when thou speakest, be clear when thou judgest" (@Psalm 51: 4). David understood that God would prevail, and He prevails in grace now; it is His greatest victory. He will prevail in judgment too. So another sinner, Jacob, says to Him, "I will not let thee go except thou bless me" (@Genesis 32: 26). Now Jacob had been brought up in an excellent household, his father was Isaac, a man of faith, and his mother was Rebecca, a woman of faith. He left his father's house, not clandestinely or with any double motives, but under orders, but he remained away too long. On the way back, we are told, a man wrestled with him; this involved the close relations that I have suggested. He wrestled with him till the dawn; it was night when the transaction took place. This is so with many young people who leave their father's house, and go into distant lands, in some instances to escape the consequences of sin. But there is no escape from God; even if one could go down to the depths of the Pacific or the Atlantic. God intimates in the prophets that no one can get away from Him. A few thousand miles is nothing to Him. In many instances God has wrestled with such people, and in this case we are told a man wrestled with Jacob, until the rising of the dawn. And Jacob wrestled with Him; that was the saving part of
{101}
it, he was not in a hurry to get away from the wrestling; it was close grips. The man wanted to get away from him. That is, he would bring out what was in Jacob's mind, for Jacob really had been horn again as we say; he had the real thing in his soul, although he had allowed it to become very beclouded; the real thing was there, and wherever that is, there is hope. The gospel indeed is for such. So on that memorable night of Jacob's history God was concerned to get him, for the man who wrestled with Jacob was no less than an angel, no less than God. God was there Himself, wrestling in close grips with that sinner. He would set him free in his soul, for Jacob was in great dread of his brother, as men of this kind are, anxious to get away from him, from the consequences of what had preceded. Indeed Jacob had fled from the face of his brother, for he had incurred Esau's hostility. So it is with many who flee their country, their homes, their birth-place, as if they could escape responsibility, but they cannot do it. God met Jacob on the way and he had to do with God. He thought he had to do with his brother Esau, and that Esau would carry out his threat to slay him, but it is more serious to have to do with God than with Esau, or with the magistrate, or the judge or the jury. God met him and wrestled with him, and when He said "Let me go, for the dawn ariseth", Jacob says, "I will not let thee go except thou bless me". There was nothing more delightful to God in that transaction than those words. And Jacob was blessed.
Now I want to connect that with this verse in Isaiah, for what I have been speaking of enters into this verse. The first thing is the approach on God's part to a sinner. He says, "Come now, let us reason together". It is not come tomorrow, or any day during next week, or make a date; it is "come now". That is God's way. If things are to be done, do them. So He says, "Come now, let us reason together;" what
{102}
has God in mind? Surely you would say the sinner has in mind that his sins should be washed away, but no, *God* has that in mind. That is what He has in mind in this proposal: in close quarters with any sinner here. He has it in mind to settle the sin question, it was settled for Him centuries ago, it has been settled for God, but He has in mind that it should be settled in your soul now. "Come now", He says, "let us reason together". "Come now". Why should you not come. There is no matter so important; if all the matters that you have ever had, or ever will have, were all put together, they could not be compared with this matter of having the whole question of your sins settled. That is what God has in mind in this proposal. Now is there anybody here with sins on his conscience? It may be a christian here with sins on his conscience, for christians do have unconfessed sins. You remember the woman in the gospels that Luke tells us about; she was bent over for eighteen years, she could not look up to heaven. The Lord says, Satan did that eighteen years ago; something happened eighteen years ago, and Satan got the advantage, and caused that woman to be bent over like that. Now there are many christians like that -- yet the Lord says, She is a daughter of Abraham, she is a royal person, she belongs to the family of faith, but that which happened eighteen years ago has never been settled. Somebody here might be like that, and God has in mind that the matter should be settled in this meeting; it should be settled now, and in order to settle it, He says, I am here to reason with you, let us reason together. What beautiful grace! What condescension on the part of God to draw near to you! He makes this proposal having in His heart nothing but the solution of this sin matter. Indeed He tells us "though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool". Is that not a wonderful proposal? It comes home with great force at
{103}
the present time, that if there is anyone here with sins on his conscience, now is his opportunity. God is here now; His eye is upon you now, and it is for your blessing that this transaction should take place, that the burden that has been resting upon you all these years should be removed tonight, that you, as a forgiven sinner, should be able to look up to heaven and trust God. Indeed we are told that "if we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness" (@1 John 1: 9).
Well now, I pass on to the next verse, which is in chapter 41. My subject is God drawing near, so that *you* should respond in your need, as a sinner, and have matters settled with God. He will give you every opportunity to state your case. God, of course, has the right to be arbitrary, but He is wonderfully gracious, and comes down alongside the sinner, and says in effect, Now look here, tell me what is in your mind, let us reason together, reason these things out, set out your case fully, and I will listen to you. And so in this chapter, He says, "let the peoples renew their strength: let them come near; then let them speak". He says, I give you every opportunity to come near, renew your strength, if you think you are in the right, if you think your course has been right, if you can show that it has been right I am ready to listen to you. Let the people renew their strength, it is God graciously coming down, dear friend, to your state. Is there any matter, especially this sin matter, any matter that attaches to you that is causing concern to others, or to yourself? He says, Now strengthen yourself. He said to Job, "Gird up now thy loins like a man" (@Job 38: 3). It is God in grace giving you full scope to set out all that is in your mind, with a view to settling the matter. He alone can do it, it is a matter between Him and you; it may also be a matter between you and others, but it certainly is a matter between God and you. With Job it was a matter between God and him;
{104}
earlier it had been a matter between Satan and Job, then it became a matter between the three friends and Job, and then between Elihu and Job, but now in the end it is a direct matter between God and Job, and so God says, "Gird up now thy loins like a man; and I will demand of thee, and inform thou me". God is going to put questions to him. Think of the grace of God, coming down to a man like that, giving him full opportunity to plead his own cause. Job had done this earlier, but as God proceeds to speak, he says, I have nothing more to say. The victory is won, not only for God, but for Job. So now He says to the people, "Come near". O! beloved friends, do not stay away from God whatever you do. He opens the door to you in this wonderful verse, and He says, "let the peoples renew their strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us draw near together to judgment". Now it is not only a question of your sins, as in verse 18 of chapter 1, it is a question of judgment. The first great question is the sin question, as I said before, have that settled in your soul; it has been settled for God, and for myriads of God's people hundreds of years ago, but it is not settled for you yet. For some of you tonight the matter is still unsettled, and God would bring home to you the cleansing power of the blood of Jesus, saying, "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool", and all is through the precious blood of the Lord Jesus Christ which He poured out in love for us on Calvary's cross. But now it is a question of judgment, and as you will observe in the following chapters to the end of chapter 48, God is speaking not only about the judgment of certain individuals, but also about the judgment of the world, the judgment of the earth, that is, in the sense of government. He alludes to Cyrus here, and He refers to him as the righteous man from the east, a figure of Christ. That is, God is now calling attention to what
{105}
he had in His mind in regard to the earth and in regard to the universe, and He would allow you to open up your mind as to things. It may be you are a politician, a man who has a great interest in politics and international and world affairs, and God would say to you tonight, If all these things are in your mind, I would like to talk to you about them. I have been talking to you about your sins and how they can be settled to My satisfaction and to yours by the death of Christ, and I am ready now to speak to you about the government of the world. And if He does that, if He unfolds to you what is about to happen, then it is no question of the British system, or the American, or the Spanish, or the Italian, or the Japanese. It is a question in His mind of what is going to stand, and that the government of the world is going to be in one Man's hands. That is what God intends, and the apostle Paul told the Greeks in the city of Athens on Mars Hill, that "He has set a day in which he is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed" (@Acts 17: 31). Now that is an unfolding of the future, that is the settlement of this whole international matter, and it raises the question of where I am to be when that takes place. Where are you to be? Suppose you turn a deaf ear to chapter 50, verse 8, how is it going to be with you when the Lord comes and takes up the reins of government here? Where are you to be? Well, if you are a rejecter of the gospel, I have to tell you that He is coming with His holy myriads, and that those who obey not shall be punished with everlasting destruction from His presence (see @2 Thessalonians 1: 9). God has appointed a day, it is fixed on the divine calendar, and it is going to happen on that particular day as sure as the sun rises tomorrow. He has fixed it, fixed a day when He will judge the world in righteousness by that Man whom He has ordained. Where are you to be? Are you ready to face this serious matter that you are
{106}
not going to have any place on the earth when the Lord Jesus is in charge of it? You certainly will not have any place in it. He will punish with everlasting destruction all those who do not believe the gospel. You may say, I do not believe in everlasting punishment, but that does not alter the fact. If everyone in the world did not believe in it, it is true nevertheless. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed "from heaven, with the angels of his power ... taking vengeance on those who know not God, and those who do not obey the glad tidings of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@2 Thessalonians 1: 7, 8). Are you ready to take issue in that way and let things drift along until that day? How serious! In this verse God says, "let the peoples renew their strength" -- I am going to talk to you about this. He has called this man from the east, a righteous man: in type that is Jesus, and He is going to have complete charge of all government. Then I would call attention to the last sentence of verse 4: "I, Jehovah, the first; and with the last, I am HE". That word "HE", which should be written fully in capitals, refers to the deity, it is the Name of God. That is to say in this argument, in this matter to which He is inviting you, He is speaking to you as in the deity, that is God Himself in the absolute. There is no question about it, He will do this thing, and where are you going to stand? So this verse in chapter 41 is a most solemn thing, for "He has set a day in which he is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed" (@Acts 17: 31). The apostle has already said, "God ... enjoins men that they shall all everywhere repent" (@Acts 17: 30). As much as to say, that God does not wish that anyone should suffer, that anyone should be judged in that day and so He now enjoins that all men everywhere shall repent. Who is the Man whom He has ordained? It is Jesus, whom He has raised -- "giving the proof of it to all in having raised him from among the dead" (@Acts 17: 31). No great warrior or leader of men ever had this place.
{107}
From this point of view it is God showing His delight in this Man. He died for us, as it says, "who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification" (@Romans 4: 25), as if He died on our account, and was raised on our account. But when we come to @Romans 6: 4, we are told that He was "raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father", that is, the Father delighted in Him. In that delight He sets Him over all the earth, over the universe, indeed He has appointed a day with that in view. Well now, that is this verse, and it is God speaking in absolute supremacy as the Creator and Upholder of all things, the First and the Last and He says, I am doing this. I do urge anyone here who has not settled these matters to do so now. He is inviting you to go into them all with Him in order that they may be settled in your soul.
I go on now to verse 26 of chapter 43. He says there, "Put me in remembrance, let us plead together; rehearse thine own cause, that thou mayest be justified". Now you see how gracious God is; there is another side to your position. He says, If there is anything that you have in your mind, and you think I have forgotten, put me in remembrance of it. It is wonderful condescension of God in order to settle matters in a sinner's soul. He says, If there is anything that you have got since you have been born into My creation, make it known. You are in My creation, I have given you My spirit -- because everyone of us gets his spirit from above, we do not get it from our parents, we get it from God, we are responsible to God as having it. Indeed it says, "man's spirit is the lamp of Jehovah" (@Proverbs 20: 27). It is a door by means of which He can illuminate your whole moral being, and now God would say, What have you against Me since you were a baby, since you were a boy, since you were a girl, as the case may be? You may be in business, or married life; what have
{108}
you against Me? Have you anything in your mind that you think I have forgotten, or that I am at fault in? Think of God graciously condescending to deal with you on these lines. It is marvellous to me. He says, "Put me in remembrance". He says in the verse before, "I am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and I will not remember thy sins" (@Isaiah 43: 25). He would say in effect, that is the kind of God I am. You tell Me if there are things that I do not remember about in My dealings with you, if I have been hard with you. Some people have the temerity to say that God is unreasonable. They complain about things in their lives, their lives have been so hard, and others¬ are so easy -- they complain against God. Even a great servant like Jonah was angry with God. Do not our rebellious hearts sometimes rise up in complaint against God? "Who art *thou*" says one, "that answerest again to God? Shall the thing formed say to him that has formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?" (@Romans 9: 20). God says, Even if you do, I am ready to listen to you. And did He not come down in the person of Jesus? Read the gospels and you will find in Jesus the perfect verification of this in all the gracious ways in which He met men, listening patiently to them. He is ready to listen to you tonight on the same principle. He says, Put me in remembrance, if there is anything that you can bring forward I am ready to listen. And then He would go on to say, Let us plead together; rehearse thine own cause, that thou mayest be justified. If there is anything you have, bring it out, go back on your whole life, on your history as before Me; bring out anything you like. Even go back to Adam and trace the whole history of the race down to the present moment, I am ready to listen to you. To my mind it is marvellous that God should take up such an attitude towards His poor creatures, but He does it in Christ, in the incarnation, God manifest in flesh as it says.
{109}
It is a wonderful fact; would that everyone here would ponder it! "And confessedly the mystery of piety is great. God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory" (@1 Timothy 3: 16). Think of God coming into these circumstances; think of God in Christ coming into such circumstances that He was spit upon, and suffered other indignities. It was God, beloved friends, God coming near to man as the beautiful verse says:
<blockquote>Sinner, see thy God beside thee, <br>In a servant's form come near, <br>Sitting, walking, talking with thee! <br>Sinai's mount no longer fear. (`112:3) </blockquote>
That verse conveys touchingly what is embodied in the verses read. God is challenging anyone here tonight who has any complaint against Him, for He is ready to listen to you. He says, Let us go into it together. Will you not accept His proposal for your own soul as you sit there. After this meeting, take it up with God in your own closet. He will go into it in every detail, and you will find, if you are at all honest, that God will triumph in grace, and you will acknowledge it, and will say to Him as David did, "Against thee, thee only, have I sinned" (@Psalm 51: 4). He goes on here to say, in verse 27, "Thy first father hath sinned, and thy mediators have rebelled against me". You see, if God opens up the door for a sinner to draw near and talk with Him, He reserves the right to say something. You may go over the ground as you have often done shamelessly, speaking ill about Him, but now God says, Let *Me* say something. Thy first father hath sinned. Some of you here may have a family tree; people like these family trees, particularly if there is any ancestor who has a little distinction; that is a very common thing. Well then, God says, You look at
{110}
that family tree, you go back as far as you can in your ancestry, go back to Abraham, go back beyond him -- your first father sinned against Me. It has been one history of sin in all your ancestry down to yourself, and are you any better? No, you are not, even your teachers sin against Me; and that brings up a very important question. Young people are damaged in their schools and turned against Christ. The educational systems of the world are detrimental to men's souls, women's souls and children's souls, and God says here that thy teachers have transgressed against Me. You may say, Well, I have been brought up in this school, and I got a good religious education, and so forth, because that is part of the dignity that belongs to people. You may be sure if you graduated from any well-known school or college, you will not forget to say that; that comes into prominence at once. Well now, God says, Have you examined these teachers? They have sinned against Me (there is no doubt that He has in mind the terrible influence of the teachers of modernism) so that you will have very little to say -- every mouth is to be stopped. God does not stop mouths arbitrarily, He stops them logically; every mouth is to he stopped, and all the world be guilty before God. God will let you tell Him all about your ancestry, your schools and your colleges, and He will show you that in every instance the things go against you. It is all in order that you may acknowledge and face the truth, acknowledge the truth as Saul of Tarsus acknowledged the truth. The Lord met him; he was a man of great ancestry, you know, a man of great education; he tells us so. God met him one day, the Lord Jesus came down near to him, God in Christ. He calls him by name: He says, "Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?" (@Acts 9: 4). It is a question here, it is an argument raised, it is similar to what I am speaking of. The Lord says, Why do you persecute Me? Why do you speak against Me?
{111}
Why do you speak against the brethren? Why do you refuse the gospel? These are pertinent questions asked by Him who has a right to ask them -- not to condemn you but to bring out the true facts of the case so that you may judge yourself and be saved. And so Saul says to the Lord, "Who art thou, Lord?" The Lord says, "I am Jesus, whom *thou persecutest*". "*I am* Jesus". It is the same person as said in chapter 41, "I am HE". He is here tonight saying to you, "*I* am Jesus", I died for you, I gave My life for you, I am here tonight to save you. "*I* am Jesus, whom *thou* persecutest", and Saul says, "Lord ..." He has surrendered -- 'O surrender now', as the hymn says; it is the time for it, as you are surrounded by spiritual people who love Jesus; most of us here are saved people, forgiven people, we surround you and the Lord calls upon you to surrender now. Now is the time. So Saul says, "What shall I do, Lord?" (@Acts 22: 10). He had his pockets bulging with mandates from Jerusalem, he had authority from the high priest, he was going to Damascus to persecute the saints. He was a ready instrument; it was his own thought, he secured these letters, he was going to damage, to hale to prison the followers of Jesus. But now all is changed; the Lord says, "Rise up, and go to Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things which it is appointed thee to do" (@Acts 22: 10). The Lord went into Damascus too at that time to tell Ananias about Saul, and Ananias went to Saul and put his hands on him, and said, "Saul, brother, the Lord has sent me, Jesus that appeared to thee in the way in which thou camest" (@Acts 9: 17). Now that is God. He is the first and the last, He changes not, He is the same yesterday, today and for ever. He is here tonight. I am not speaking theoretically; I am speaking practically, I am speaking what I know, that God is here tonight in the power of the Spirit, to deal with any soul like Saul and to settle matters. And here He tells you all about your ancestry and your teachers -- they are
{112}
sinners, you have not a support left, your only hope is to confess, to get down and own that you are a poor sinner with nothing at all to commend you, and the grace of God will take you up.
There is just another word in chapter 50. It is the Lord Jesus speaking here, the Lord as Messiah, speaking in this chapter, and He says among many other things -- "Who is among you that feareth Jehovah, that hearkeneth to the voice of his servant? he that walketh in darkness, and hath no light, -- let him confide in the name of Jehovah, and stay himself upon his God". Now I think this is a challenge to modernists, and to all infidels and sceptics, all triflers, those who would take the Lord's name in vain, the enemies of Christ. He says here, "Who is mine adverse party?" He is ready to answer you, to have to say to you, "let him draw near unto me!" He says. This is found later in the gospels. There was a time when the Lord was about to die, and as He came to Jerusalem and stood in the temple, He looked around and saw everything as it was, and presently they began to ask Him questions in the temple. Jerusalem was the seat of His adversaries, so when the Lord set His face to go to Jerusalem it was well understood by His disciples that He was going into the lion's mouth, where the adversary was. He said Himself, "For it must not be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem" (@Luke 13: 33). He was at the very centre and citadel of opposition and they ask Him questions, one after another, and the Lord was there, and ready to answer them. Woe be to these infidels, these modernists -- these sceptics and evolutionists! The Lord is ready now to talk to you; He will not talk to you later. When He sits on the great white throne and you are consigned to eternal judgment, you will have nothing to say; it will be all settled then. You will be judged by what is recorded in the books, but now He is here in the gospel period, He says, I am ready to listen to you, I am ready to contend with you,
{113}
"Who is mine adverse party? let him draw near to me". He is not quiescent in regard to all these systems; He is exposing them root and branch, and if the thing is exposed it is judged, and so the Lord would challenge anyone here tonight whose proclivity is to be sceptical or critical. It may be in your heart, though you may not express it, but the Lord says, Come near to Me if you are an adversary. It is no question of your salvation at the moment, it is a question of your being an adversary. If He has to say to you and you are at all subject you will get salvation too. God is no respecter of persons, the infidel here tonight is the object of mercy, as well as any other man and the Lord is ready to have a word with you and the Lord's people here are ready to have a word with you, if there is any movement in your soul about these matters. You have been sceptical, you may be relenting a little bit, the Lord would reach you at this point through His people, and He will have a word with you; it may mean your salvation, it may mean your deliverance from all that darkness into which your soul has come.
Well that was all my message; may the Lord bless His word.
{114}
The Living God, Melbourne and Sydney, 1936 (Volume 136).
THE LIVING GOD (1)
@Matthew 16: 13 - 20; @Romans 9: 25, 26
J.T. What I have before me is the "living God" and the features of the truth that stand connected with that appellation of God as seen in the New Testament. As we look into it we shall see that the subject is extensive, running throughout the New Testament from Matthew to Revelation, and found in the Old Testament too. Moses uses the title, also Joshua, David, Hezekiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, and Hosea, which is quoted in @Romans 9, besides the Psalms in which it appears several times. What should be remarked is that it obviously alludes, not to God's eternal relations with men, for the use of the word "living" can have no force when *all* are living, but it is applied to God largely in contrast to the religious conditions here on earth, and particularly to the deadness as seen in the Jewish system. Hence it is significantly referred to in Matthew, Hebrews, and in the Revelation. It has, therefore, a very direct bearing on the present time, when there is so much called religion which has no *spiritual life*. To say nothing of paganism and Mohammedanism, and the Eastern church which is characteristically dead. The great leading religious body in western christendom is marked by death judicially; as the Lord says, "her children will I kill with death" (@Revelation 2: 23). In the Anglican system, the liturgy of which is hundreds of years old with little or no variation, there is no attempt at life. Without attacking any, the fact is that death, in a spiritual sense, characterises religion generally. It characterises what is *called* the christian religion. So that "the living God" is an appellation that has a very direct bearing now. To answer to it requires life in our services Godward,
{115}
and in our relations with one another, in our walk, as Romans says -- "newness of life", "newness of spirit", "the renewing of your mind", and our bodies presented "a living sacrifice".
Another thing which would perhaps help is that the Lord, before this title is introduced in Matthew, inquires as to what men were saying about Him. That is, what was the current judgment or thought as to who He, the Son of man, was. The disciples were conversant with what was current at that time. They themselves had owned that He was the Son of God as the result of certain evidences. Whatever was in their minds, they spoke of Him as the Son of God in chapter 14; they had the right thought. They evidently did not have what we have here in chapter 16, for this was a revelation, but *generally* speaking the Lord was not known at all, although there were those who had certain thoughts about Him. In no case did *men* have a right thought about the Lord. He inquires about this before this great matter of the revelation appears, as if to remind the disciples that inasmuch as men had had abundant evidence of *who* He was, but did not discern it, it would be of no advantage, but rather the contrary, to tell them, merely as a matter of information. So that He enjoins them in verse 20 to say to no one that He was the Christ; that is, when there is abundant evidence of what is on God's behalf, and it is not discerned, there is a state disclosed that is reprobate. There was abundant evidence *who* He was, but it was not discerned, as shown by the answers the disciples gave the Lord. That is how it is now. Today there is abundant evidence as to christianity, but *men* are not discerning it, and they are not to be merely informed. The ministry is to have in mind the work of God, and that nothing else will absorb what is of God.
Ques. Is it the thought of what is inherent -- the *living* God?
{116}
J.T. Quite so. The necessity for it was not to indicate any change in God; the circumstances bring out the truth, and I believe the force of it is a contrast to the state of things in judaism, as demonstrated in the earlier part of the gospel.
Ques. Would it stand in contrast to idolatry also?
J.T. Yes. The Thessalonians "turned to God from idols to serve a living and true God" (@1 Thessalonians 1: 9), but the point in regard to judaism would be the *deadness* of things in the profession of a knowledge of God. I think that is the point now for *us*, the *deadness* that is current. Of course, paganism, and Mohammedanism, and the Eastern church, which is nearly apostate, are admittedly dead. The Western church and all its outgoings from Europe are marked by spiritual death. The Lord is about to introduce in Matthew, in view of His rejection and in view of the state of things in judaism, a new order of things. He has come to this position at Caesarea-Philippi, and He has in mind that a new order of things should be introduced. He has that in mind from chapter 11 -- all the instruction of that and those following to chapter 16 bears on this. Now in this inquiry as to what men were saying, the Lord assumes that the disciples had a right estimate of things. The Lord had been ministering a long time and there was abundant evidence of *who* He was. They knew who He was. His disciples, "those in the ship", evidently referring to others as well, had owned that He was the Son of God according to chapter 14, but men generally did not. They were exposed by their answers, as to what they were saying about Jesus. He was naturally the subject of much conversation, as He is still in christendom, but what are men saying about Him? If we could get a consensus of what men are saying about Jesus we would readily conclude that there is an apostate condition abroad, necessitating a new movement on the part of God.
{117}
G.A.v.S. When you refer to the deadness of judaism, would that deadness be like the conditions prevailing before Elijah brought down fire and the people said, "The Lord, he is the God"?
J.T. Yes, they were in similar conditions. Baal was their God you might say, but as to the people here, note the answers they were giving! The consensus of opinion was not exactly hostile to Christ, but men were not discerning *who* was there. The disciples had discerned Him. Those on the ship called Him the Son of God, but the generality of people did not discern it although they recognised the miracles.
Rem. They thought of Him as one who was subject to death like a prophet.
J.T. Therefore, their thoughts did not rise to His deity at all; the truth of the Person of Christ was not discerned. That is the test today. John's gospel is to meet a condition like that and to bring out the truth of the Person of Christ. Then it is not only the Person of Christ, but the living God! The Christ, the Son of the living God!
J.D.U. Does that verse in @Romans 8:3 apply here? What the law could not do, God reached through sending His Son? The law only demonstrated the deadness of the state of things.
J.T. In truth, what it did in that section is that it *slew*. Paul says, "but the commandment having come, sin revived, but *I* died. And the commandment, which was for life, was found, as to me, itself to be unto death: for sin ... slew me" (@Romans 7: 9 - 11). The use of the law was very good -- "the law is holy ... and just, and good", and the knowledge of sin was effected by it. But through it sin brought death into the soul of the writer. It is not death in a *literal* way, but in a *moral* sense. He had no power to respond to God. The law is seen in @Romans 7 as, in a negative sense, helping faith and the work of God. The point the Spirit of God, through Matthew, is making, is that
{118}
the most perfect testimony is presented, a living testimony in Christ. It is not simply what the law effected, or was able to effect, but that the most perfect testimony was presented to men in the Lord Jesus, and this is all the result that there is (chapter 16: 14). The answers do not bring out that there is hostility to Christ, but that there was inability even where there were the best intentions, to see what was there. The point is not that they are opposed; that they hated Him and His Father, but according to the disciples¬ answers, with the very best intentions, they missed the mark. Men would be favourable to Christ as far as they could, and the English-speaking world is generally favourable to Christ, but the underlying state is against Him. They are unable to maintain their ideals, because they are not morally affected in their own souls as to the Person of Christ. Such a state of things with, in a certain sense, the best intentions, exists today. The people of God who are quickened, are to perceive this, and know how to serve in these circumstances. The point is *life*! Nothing else will do at all. Mere doctrine, mere creeds will not do. These things inform the natural minds of men. There is no creed that does not appeal to the natural mind of men. Anyone can understand it in the sense of a literary production, but over against all that there is a living state of things. Only that will affect anyone toward God.
C.D. As to the Lord's two questions here, on the one hand He exposes the apostate condition of things, and on the other He would bring to light the work of God as evidenced in Peter.
J.T. Yes. He knew the disciples, He knew God was working in them, and undoubtedly assumed that the answer would be forthcoming, and it was, so that the disciples, represented here in Peter, represent a new order of things that the Lord had in His mind. The disciples stand in contrast with what marked men, who were not actively hostile, but as is brought
{119}
out by what they say about Jesus, were unable to take in the truth. It is the policy of man's empire to hold to christianity as far as it can. In spite of that, it is losing it; true christianity is slipping away. Man in the flesh with the very best intentions cannot hold the testimony of God. Man cannot commend it, nor make it effective in this world. With all the paraphernalia that there is, it comes back to this, that if there is to be a testimony, it must be according to what God is. God is not an abstract conception, not a God to be served as if He were quiescent or static in heaven. He is the *living* God, and all those representative of Him are to be living.
G.H-n. Does Caesarea-Philippi indicate the necessity of a move out of the organised state of things as seen in Jerusalem?
J.T. That is the idea; it would suggest the gentile world and that the Lord is going to move in *that* area.
Ques. Is this question of life very largely a matter of affections?
J.T. Well it is, but you will find the term "living God" in connection with the creation as in @Acts 14: 15. The apostle appeals to them at Lystra to "turn from these vanities to the living God, who made the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and all things in them". In the creation life is greatly stressed. We have vegetable life on the third day, animal life on the fifth day, human life on the sixth day, and the very term, "living souls", shows what God had in His mind. What was before Him was that life should work out in the way of the affections, the lower affections especially in animals, but in man, also what is higher -- *man became a living soul*. Animals are living souls, but Adam became a living soul by the breath of God, so that there was to be a reflection in Adam of the living God. It was by the breath of God that he became a living soul. The idea
{120}
of life there is set out in man -- life that God had in His mind. The Lord is inquiring as to the Son of man here -- who is He? The true answer coming by way of revelation is, He is "the Christ, the Son of the living God". Adam was "of God", but here it is more than Adam ever could be because the Person before us is divine Himself, but still He is the Son of the living God. That does not bear on eternity as we speak; it bears on this world, and particularly where death is, religiously.
Rem. What is living must emanate from God. Even scientists admit that life alone can produce life, and in spiritual life God must be the source of it.
J.T. We have the Son here, and this same Person is the Christ. That is, God is going to do things. That is really what the Christ signifies, One anointed to do things for God, but what is to be done has to be done in a living way. The history of christendom for seventeen or eighteen centuries is on the opposite line. The point is not *living* things, but philosophy, ceremonials, external things, which God never intended to be used in His service at all. In view of the assembly He introduces the idea of the Son of the living God, and this Person is the Christ, through whom God is going to do things -- and do them in a living way.
Ques. Is the thought seen in the living creatures that cease not day or night in activity? Is that the reflection of the living God?
J.T. Yes. There are four of them, meaning that it is the universal thought of creation, but as living, as in life, not only mere physical life; they are *praising God*, day and night saying, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is to come" (@Revelation 4: 8).
J.D. Would the confession of Peter suggest that in Christ there was only one Person on earth at that
{121}
time who corresponded with God? He was *living* -- the Son.
J.T. Yes. At the banks of the Jordan heaven had announced its delight in Him: "Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". That had been announced, but not yet the idea of the living God, because that had not yet been set out in testimony. What intervened between that time and this chapter enters into the confession. Not that Peter understood, not that he would have used the term of himself, because it is a revelation; God conveyed the idea to Peter, and it corresponded with what had been demonstrated. It is not exactly what He was in the thirty years of His life here. That is more what He was under *God's* eye. There was *more* than the great thought of life there. What was needed in testimony to dead Israel was life; a living condition, and that is what is disclosed in the Lord's ministry, so that the time had arrived for this, but Israel had failed to see it. The disciples no doubt perceived it in measure, but it required revelation to bring out the full thought. The full thought alluded to what was demonstrated. The living thought was there before their eyes. "In him was life, and the life was the light of men" (@John 1: 4).
G.H-n. Does sonship as connected with Christ indicate that what is official is intended to be living and connected with God?
J.T. That is the thought, I am sure. The idea is that God has found One, according to @Psalm 89: 19, able to effectuate all His thoughts: "I have laid help upon a mighty one", but the revelation implies that the ministry or service of that Person was *living*, and particularly testified against the *deadness* of the Jewish system. The Old Testament abounded in the thought of life, but they had lapsed into a dead state, as christendom has today. Here we have to trace this new living order of things, but through Christ to God.
{122}
"Of him, and through him, and for him are all things" (@Romans 11: 36). The Father Himself is the beginning of this living order of things. Christ is the Son of the living God.
G.A.v.S. Then does the revelation necessarily involve new and living activities on the part of God?
J.T. Yes; that must be. God Himself must operate. Romans enters into this, "the Spirit life on account of righteousness" (@Romans 8: 10). You must have life for the new order of things.
G.H. Is the new order of things referred to in @Matthew 11: 25 -- "revealed them to babes"?
J.T. In a way it is, that is, the revelation was of *things*, as it is said, "thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes", the Lord says. Things that He had been ministering, but not yet the *Person*. The Father had not yet *revealed* to anyone *who* Christ was. He had *announced* His sonship, but announcing is not revealing. Revelation is more inward; God is beginning inwardly. Public testimony is external, but the revelation was in Peter's soul, as you might say, and hence the clear verbal expression of it.
A.B.J. When the Lord says here to Peter, "flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee", would He suggest that we must have circumcised hearts to get revelation?
J.T. Yes, it is on the principle of what we are inwardly, because Peter is able to put into words what came into his soul. That is, there is ability there to take in revelation. Those whose judgment about Christ had been stated by the disciples had no capacity for that. They were unable to take in the objective testimony. The disciples were able, as Peter said elsewhere: "We have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God" (@John 6: 69). In @Matthew 16: 16 we have something more than the objective testimony. We have something revealed by
{123}
the Father to Peter, and he is able himself to put it into words, and the Lord expressly says that it was not by flesh and blood.
E.M. Does the Lord, in saying, "Thou art Peter", imply that the assembly is living?
J.T. Well, He implied that Peter was material for the assembly. Later on Peter applies the thought of life both to Christ and the saints in relation to the building: "To whom coming, a living stone ... yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house" (@1 Peter 2: 4, 5).
Ques. Do we need to have an impression such as Peter had as to Christ before we can understand the assembly?
J.T. Yes. What Peter had has come in, and *remains* here as a treasure in the treasury. Not that everyone gets the revelation as he did. The knowledge, by revelation, of Christ as the Son of the living God, is here already, and *the Spirit makes it effective*. It is not by merely holding a creed, by taking it in as a doctrine which an unconverted man may assent to. It is a heart and soul matter. That is what we ought to see clearly. David built *inward*. It is the inward side. It implies what a true Jew is; he "is so inwardly;" circumcised, "in spirit, not in letter" (@Romans 2: 29).
F.W.W. Would that be involved in what Paul says in @Galatians 1, that God called him "to reveal his Son in me"?
J.T. It is the same thought, only the preposition is a little different there. It is more definitely *inward*. I think the inwardness of the thing here is in the confession; it is the outcome of the light received within. It is not a mere intellectual matter. Peter is evidently affected by it. The Lord says, "Thou art Peter". Peter is changed; he has become something he was not before.
{124}
H.G. Does this stand in contrast to the sign from heaven that the Pharisees desired?
J.T. Quite so. The sign was there before their eyes. The disciples and others in the boat profited by it, and called Him the Son of God, but men generally did not profit. So the Lord when they asked for a sign, left them and went away, as much as to say, It is hopeless to have to do with you. We have come to that in regard to christendom; there are *conditions* that are hopeless in regard to any effect from the testimony of God.
G.A.v.S. Does the revelation of the Lord as Son of God come in in order to displace the condition of things that was not able to receive Christ?
J.T. Yes. The word "Peter" here implies that there was in principle a real change in the man. "Thou art Peter" -- it is not a *name*, but *what* he was; new material, and that is what God is seeking today. It is a question of suitable material for the assembly; hence the Lord says, as it were, Now we can proceed. God had effected this in Peter. Peter's confession shows that it was a matter that went through his being, and he had been ready for it, he was impressionable; the Lord *names* the material that was there. So, as I said, the Lord says in effect, We can now proceed with the new order of things. "On this rock I will build" meaning there was a foundation, and material with which to build on it. That is the inner view, and the kingdom is the outer; the great bulwark of the new system. He says to Peter, "I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest loose on the earth shall be loosed in the heavens". The kingdom is protection, for there is power in it against evil and in favour of good. There is thus not only what is inward as to the assembly, but also external protection
{125}
in a spiritual sense. So that the new order of things is formulated and protected fully; that is what these verses mean. The Lord "enjoined on his disciples that they should say to no man that he was the Christ" (verse 20). Merely passing on such information is harmful, seeing that it is proved that men as such are not capable of absorbing spiritual impressions, and it is spiritual impressions that are needed in this new order of things. Christendom today -- particularly Rome -- is the result of men, as in the flesh, being informed as to Christ and the assembly.
G.A.v.S. Do these spiritual impressions consist in the acceptance of the revelation?
J.T. Yes -- taking in this inward truth. We have in @Ephesians 1: 17, "the spirit of wisdom and revelation", and in @Luke 24: 45, the Lord "opened their understanding to understand the scriptures". Again, @Ephesians 3: 16 speaks of the Father giving strength in the inner man by His Spirit, so that Christ may dwell through faith in our hearts, that we may apprehend with all saints the fulness of divine things. These thoughts enter into the chapter we are considering.
J.M. Where did the rest of the disciples stand in relation to Peter? The revelation was made to Peter only.
J.T. Well, christianity began as a community. @Acts 1 shows that all this was present in the upper room. They are not yet called stones, but the truth as to the kind of material was there. All this is a tentative state of things, awaiting redemption, awaiting also the Lord going into heaven, and the Holy Spirit coming down. Without the Holy Spirit here you cannot have living stones. This is only a pattern. Everything awaited the presence of the Holy Spirit, so that at Pentecost they had the truth of the assembly as seen here in the treasury, as it were, and those in the upper room are regarded as a community. Christianity began as a
{126}
community, and it is always a community, that is, there is joint ownership by all of what anyone has spiritually. Peter leads; he is the first one to stand up in the midst of the brethren to speak. He would be speaking in the power of this in so far as he could at that time; at any rate, he had the idea in his soul. The thought of a treasury has to be understood if we are to understand christianity. Peter had the truth of Christ's sonship in his soul, and never said a word about it formally, as far as the records go, until he was about to put off his tabernacle, and then he referred to the holy mount (@2 Peter 1: 17). He would be impressed with it undoubtedly, although without introducing it in his ministry, he *kept* it. It was in the treasury, and so Paul had the experience of his elevation to the third heaven for fourteen years and said nothing about it. Mary had many things that she did not say anything about hidden in her heart, and they were with her as treasure in the upper room. Now in @Acts 2, after the Spirit comes, we are told formally that those that believed were a community. What one had, they all had, and if this were so in material things, how much more in spiritual things!
G.H-n. Does the building of the assembly depend on the Lord's own words as well as what the Father had said to Peter -- "*I* also"?
J.T. Yes. *He* designated the material, and *He* is the builder. What is to be done, is to be done by Christ, but the origin of the thing is God, "of whom are all things". God is the origin of the new order of things. He is the end in it, too. In the meantime it is set out, and it is going through in a living way.
Ques. Is the enemy not seeking to detach us from what is living and take us back to what is formal and ceremonial?
J.T. Exactly. See what you have today in christendom. There is positive hostility to Christ in the great Romish system, but generally speaking the English-
{127}
speaking communities are outwardly favourable to christianity. The open Bible, the gospel, and the liberty of christians are allowed. In spite of this favourableness, there is the inability to take in spiritual impressions, room not being made for the Spirit of God. What prevails in the so-called service of God is clericalism, ceremonialism, music, choirs, and other such things. Many of our brethren are linked with these conditions, but necessarily hampered and deadened by them.
Ques. Do you think that the things mentioned might even be found in measure in our meetings?
J.T. Well, that is the point. Are things living amongst us?
J.S.B. Why does the Lord say, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona", would He not encourage Simon, and each, on the line of what is spiritual?
J.T. I think so. Simon Bar-jona is, as you might say, Peter's responsible name. We have often talked about @Isaiah 44: 5 in connection with young people coming into the truth. One says, "I am Jehovah's; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob". That means he is accepting responsibility spiritually. Another shall "surname himself by the name of Israel", which would mean that he is going in for spirituality, because Israel signifies that, which is the idea in young people going in for the truth. They are capable of absorbing what is in the community even if they do not get a direct revelation. What is in the community belongs to them; and they appropriate it as it comes out.
Ques. Is the living God a greater thought than Almighty God? It is more than power, is it not?
J.T. In a moral sense it is a greater thought. Almightiness is more properly an attribute, although of course it is essential to God, absolutely essential, or we could not have creation and the overthrow of Satan and death. It is also a relative thought in view of opposition, and things having to be done. By it creation is sustained -- as it is said, "upholding all things by
{128}
the word of his power" (@Hebrews 1: 3). These terms in the divine vocabulary have come out through exigencies. I believe the whole of the divine language is to be regarded in that way. It is for men, making things intelligible for us. I believe every title of God we have has come out through man by the power of the Spirit. It is a question of God operating, conveying an impression and giving power to put it into words.
C.S.S. The apostle says, "in him we live and move and exist" (@Acts 17: 28). Is the highest thought put first?
J.T. Yes. There is no doubt the allusion there is to ordinary physical life, but I am not saying that that does not apply spiritually, too. John would lift us on to a higher plane. "He that abides in love abides in God, and God in him" (@1 John 4: 16).
Ques. When the Lord said, "Hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it", is that because the assembly is a living system emanating from the living God?
J.T. I think so. I think life is the greatest preservative there is. Without it things become corrupt immediately, and Satan really works through corruption. If any man defile the temple of God really means *corrupt* it. Satan's main plan is corruption. We are to love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption. In natural things, in what is animate, if life ceases there is corruption. It is so also in spiritual things. If spiritual life wanes or ceases there is corruption. So in the discernment of sin -- leprosy -- the white hair denotes decay, that the power of life is gone. Things are preserved only in life, and life comes from the living God.
Ques. Would the thought of conscience purged from dead works to serve the living God, have a bearing on this?
J.T. We shall come to that. It illustrates what we are saying -- dead works over against serving the living God. "*We* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God" (@Philippians 3: 3), that is, we worship in life, as Hezekiah said, "The living, the living, he shall praise thee".
{129}
G.H. What is the binding on earth? Does it preserve the assembly from corruption?
J.T. There is ability to value what would guard against satanic influence such as may be found even among christians. The ability to bind and to loose is a great matter. It is a preservative thought. We have it, in chapter 18, in the assembly. The assembly had power to do the same thing after it was formed. Peter only had this commission in an individual sense, and it was not hereditary to anyone. It ceased with him as regards the person, but the assembly has it as seen in chapter 18, and in view of the last days the Lord gives it to the disciples *as disciples*, but not until He had breathed into them (see @John 20). There He puts remission before retention of sins, because, as it seems, He had it in mind to help us in these last days to loose people, to help people to extricate themselves. It is a great point, if it is followed, in carrying on this living state of things.
C.D. In contrast with the gates of hades, there is the power of the kingdom of heaven, is that the thought?
J.T. There is that, but more than that. The constitution of the assembly is against Satan. The preserving power of life is over against this corrupting power, so that the more we are living, the more active love is amongst us, the less possibility there is for Satan to get in. The *gates* of hades would allude to satanic authoritative counsels, but the assembly cannot be overcome by these.
J.M. Would you say a word as to the speaking of Christ? He said, "And *I* also, I say unto thee".
J.T. "*I* also" implies another Speaker. The Father is one Speaker, the Son is another. That is what is meant, but He waited to say this until the Father had acted.
Ques. Is it only as knowing the living God that we are able to walk in newness of life?
{130}
J.T. Well, that is what is conveyed by @Romans 6: 4 following the statement: "Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father". Glory here is the radiation of affection in the taking of Him out of death, and I believe that enters into the newness of life. That is, life of a different kind from anything that had been.
Ques. What is before you in @Romans 9 -- "Sons of the living God"?
J.T. It comes before us as distinct from the sons of God in Galatians and elsewhere. "Sons of the living God", coming in suddenly where they had been "not my people", shows how quickly God can change a state of death into a living state of things. It is not children, it is sons. Hosea says, where they were disowned and under God's judgment, not His people, they are called "Sons of the living God". It is a question not of our bearing eternally towards God, but living *here* as a witness to the *living* God. It is "in the place where it was said to them, *Ye* are not my people, there shall they be called Sons of the living God". I think we ought to say more about that later.
T.R.Y. Why were the disciples told not to tell these things?
J.T. As we were saying, it is useless to pass on spiritual information to people who have proved themselves to be incapable of receiving spiritual impressions, who are proving themselves reprobate. I am not speaking of any particular individuals, but as bearing on the general state of things we have been speaking of. Christianity is professedly accepted by men as they are, by the nations, and in Great Britain there is the national church. That is not the church of God; that is not a living state of things. Bearing that in mind, what is the use of passing on information to that system? What is the gain of it? It does not help at all. That does not, of course, apply to anyone who might be truly exercised, but I refer to passing on information
{131}
to people who are characteristically impervious to the truth as it is presented to them. "Then" (verse 20), -- a change had come about because of the facts presented in the chapter. The state of judaism indicated in the Pharisees and Sadducees (verse 1), obliged the Lord to *leave* it; and what men were saying about Him indicated inability to take in spiritual testimony; and finally the Father had begun to prepare for a new order of things, marked by the knowledge, by revelation, of who Christ was; suitable material for the assembly being simultaneously evident. All this is in mind in the Lord's injunction to the disciples "that they should say to no man that he was the Christ".
{132}
THE LIVING GOD (2)
@2 Corinthians 3: 3 - 6, 17, 18; @Romans 9: 25, 26; @Hebrews 9: 13, 14
J.T. Most of us will be aware that our subject is "The Living God", as seen in the New Testament, and the features of the truth that stand related to this divine appellation. In @Matthew 16: 16, Peter is recorded as saying to the Lord, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". The object in view in these readings is to stress what should correspond in us on earth, with the living God, namely, a *living* state of things. This is in contrast with *dead* conditions that had marked judaism in our Lord's own time, and now marks the profession of christianity. Instead of the energy of the Spirit of God, we have forms and ceremonies. The passage in @Romans 9 speaks of the "Sons of the living God". It is quoted from the prophet Hosea, and shows how quickly the change takes place, from being a cast-off people, to being in the relationship of "Sons of the living God".
In the order of the truth, we should now consider the *Spirit* of the living God, for it is through the Spirit that the answer to the living God is realised. All that is effected subjectively here is by the Spirit, so that @2 Corinthians 3 furnishes a convenient passage to dwell on as to that side of the truth. Linking this with sonship in @Romans 9 -- "Sons of the living God" -- we reach service in @Hebrews 9. The word 'service' there may be translated worship, and refers generally to the official or public service Godward. It is not the idea of serving men, but God, as @Philippians 3: 3.
E.F. Have you in mind that as we are affected by the Spirit of the living God as in @2 Corinthians 3, we are characterised by what is living?
J.T. That is what I think the Lord will help us to see in this chapter. The use of the word 'spirit' is quite
{133}
distinctive here. We have the Spirit of the living God, and then we have the spirit of the covenant; that is, over against the letter in verse 6, "not of letter, but of spirit". Then, the letter kills, but the Spirit quickens. The second reference there is evidently to the Holy Spirit, and is so indicated in the New Translation. In what is marked off as a parenthesis -- verses 7 to 16 -- we have first a reference to the ministry of the Spirit, connecting Him with the new covenant. Then the Spirit of verse 6 is said in verse 17 to be the Lord Himself -- "the Lord is the Spirit;" and it is then transposed: "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". Then, again, we are brought back to the thought of the Lord being the Spirit in the last verse; that we are changed as by the Lord, the Spirit. There is the union in this wonderful ministry of the new covenant, of the Lord and the Spirit; so much so that the Lord, as we have seen, is said *to be* the Spirit, which I think helps us as to the realisation of His visits and manifestations. His manifestations and His visits, His comings to us are of a spiritual nature. They are not in any sense corporeal. He appeared corporeally, of course, during the forty days to His own, and no doubt afterwards, too, particularly to Paul, but in general everything lies now in the Spirit as to what transpires here on earth.
Ques. Would you say a word as to the fleshy tables of the heart?
J.T. Well, I suppose the meaning is that they are *impressionable* as over against the tables of stone. Our hearts naturally are just adamant, so that it would allude to the work of the Spirit, new birth underlying all the further divine operations in us; that is, we are constituted spiritually impressionable. That is what I understand by the contrast -- not on stone tables, but on fleshy tables of the heart. It is not fleshy in a bad sense, but in the sense that they are soft or impressionable.
{134}
Rem. Indicating that our moral beings have been affected by the Spirit.
J.T. That is what I thought -- the basic work of the Spirit.
J.M. Does Peter suggest the *kind* of material that can be written on?
J.T. Well, you have to understand every word in Scripture in its context. Peter means 'stone', not flesh; it means that he corresponds with Christ as the Rock. Christ was the foundation or the Rock, referring to solidity. Peter is of the same kind, stable, only a part, a lesser thought -- also involving that he is material for building. What is in view here in @2 Corinthians 3 is *writing* material, and for that the figure "fleshy" is used, because God can impress us.
G.H. Written not with ink, does that suggest something that is dead and lifeless?
J.T. The meaning is, it is not what is commonly called writing -- thoughts imparted by a certain fluid with a pen. *Ink* is that fluid, and "the Spirit of the living God" is the contrast to it. On the other hand, John uses the word "ink" in an ordinary, practical way, that it is a means of transferring your thoughts on to writing material. Here it is a contrast. It is not ordinary writing, but the Spirit of the living God. Therefore, we are now on the ground of divine operations. The material *on* which the writing is, and the means *by* which it is -- the former, the hearts of the saints, the latter, the Spirit of the living God.
J.S.B. Would it not convey the thought of what is indelible -- what is really lasting?
J.T. Yes, and that which is living, so that it works out in the way the saints are impressed by things presented to them. It is not a mere intellectual matter that we are pleased with at the moment, but it is an impression that is indelible, so that by it we become the epistle of Christ.
{135}
J.M. Did formation begin with Peter and the disciples on the day of Pentecost when the Spirit came?
J.T. No doubt the apostles and others had been impressed by the Lord while here, but what is in mind in what we are speaking of is the presence here of the Spirit and His work in the saints, that is when the writing began.
Ques. What would you say is a circumcised heart?
J.T. It is a heart that is governed, not by the flesh, but by the Spirit. Circumcision means the putting off of the body of the flesh, that is, the flesh is proved useless, not subject to the law of God; hence put off in the circumcision of Christ. Baptism refers to the world *outside* of me, but circumcision refers to what is *within*. Naturally, we would rely on the flesh, that is, our natural ability. A circumcised heart and ear disallow mere human ability in every sense, and make room for the Spirit of God. It is only in the Spirit that we can properly be said to be circumcised; it is not in letter, but in heart and in spirit (@Romans 2: 29).
J.D.U. Is the heart then to be taken as the seat of the affections Godward?
J.T. Just so. Of course, there is intelligence also, for we have the eyes of the heart elsewhere; the heart is the seat of intelligent affections. The soul is rather the seat of the affections by themselves, so that we have the "springing up" which, referring to *water* as a figure of the Spirit, would be from the lower organs, denoting the lower affections. The Spirit in @John 4 is viewed in the christian as water springing up into everlasting life, which would allude to the lower automatic organs. The Spirit also is typified by air, which would allude to the lungs, the upper organs, where you have intelligence, involving the *spirit* of a man.
A.B.J. Resulting in our calling upon all that is within us to bless the Lord (@Psalm 103).
J.T. That includes, I think, all the organs as we have been speaking of them. If you call upon what
{136}
is within you, before new birth and redemption are known, and the Spirit possessed, it would be an impure thing, but Peter speaks about "your pure mind". What is within the christian is purified, the heart is purified by faith, so that you can safely call upon all that is within you to praise God.
J.D.U. Does the verse in @Romans 5: 5, the Spirit shedding abroad in our hearts the love of God, come into this section that you are speaking of now?
J.T. Yes, it does. The Spirit sheds the love of God abroad in the heart, but here there is a thought added: it is "the Lord is the Spirit", implying, I understand, that it is an office of Christ, but through the Spirit. The authority of the Lord is in it, so that He makes effective the covenant in spite of our wills; He subdues us, and makes the covenant effective. What is in mind, I think, is to dress us properly for the assembly, for the presence of God, because the scene on the mount brought into evidence a certain dress in the persons who spoke to the Lord, that is, they appeared "*in glory*".
E.M. Does that take place in the morning meeting?
J.T. It fits in with the Lord's supper. The Lord has His part in it, and He has in mind this great occasion, proper to the assembly; that it is an occasion for full dress, to use an illustration: we are to be "all glorious within" (see @Psalm 45: 13, 14). He has the service of God in mind, and in this chapter stress is laid on the Spirit and culminates in *our* being glorious. Not simply the glory in the face of Jesus, but the saints being transformed, "from glory to glory".
J.D.U. Would that apply to us as together or individually?
J.T. The point here is *together*. "We all" meaning that we are brought into a glorious state under God's hand by the ministry of the covenant. There is a further thought in Ephesians, bringing in what was in the mind of God before the world. "According as he has chosen us in him before the world's foundation,
{137}
that we should be holy and blameless before him in love" (@Ephesians 1: 4). That is *ennoblement*, but this chapter is *dress*. It is the outcome of the covenant being rightly apprehended: we become glorious. The covenant affecting us in a living way, the thought here is in view of the service of God, it is a question of how we appear before Him: that we should appear glorious.
Ques. What is the practical effect of that? How does it work out -- for instance in the morning meeting?
J.T. It works out in our apprehending what we are under the eye of God. We are *suitable*. We sit down together and the Lord's supper passes before us. The Spirit is there from the outset; He does not *come in;* the truth is that *He is with us*. The Lord says, "he abides with you, and shall be in you" (@John 14: 17). Consequent on that, the Lord speaks about Himself *coming* to us in @John 14. The Spirit is there from the outset, and as our minds are spiritually clear, and we are able to sit together "in assembly", not merely as a matter of theory, but together in affection, there is a gradual change. There is a process of change until there is a sense of being acceptable under the eye of God, that He looks on us with pleasure. It is a question of the dress in which we appear. So in Luke it says two men spoke with the Lord, appearing in glory. And according to Luke there were two men in the Lord's sepulchre in "shining raiment".
W.G. Should we be marked by that as coming away and entering into the activities of the week? Should the shining of the glory be on our faces?
J.T. That would be the effect. Of course, it may wane a bit, because having to do with adverse things tends to weaken us in that sense, but what we are dealing with now is our approach to God and the dress in which we approach. The covenant brings in glory in the sense that we are affected by the ministry of the Spirit under the Lord's hand.
{138}
G.H-n. Does not the question of the building of the assembly indicate a formation, whilst what we are considering, the covenant, is transformation?
J.T. Yes; we are made like Christ, of course, but also like one another. We come into likeness to one another through the transforming effect of the Lord's ministration. The Lord is the Spirit; His authority is in it, but the power of the Spirit is also in it. It is a real thing. So that it is not one point reached, then a lapse, but "from glory to glory;" nor is it from an inglorious state to a glorious one. What is in mind is inward movement here because the following chapters lead on to new creation, and reconciliation. It is the inward position and the state suitable to it that the apostle has in mind.
G.A.v.S. What relation would what you have been saying have to the high priest appearing in robes of glory and beauty in the service of God?
J.T. Well, that is Christ Himself, of course. He is there in all His personal glory and dignity, but on our side, He comes in in relation to the Supper, His memorial, and takes His place with us, but we must understand that it is not a corporeal movement. It is wholly spiritual, it is a question of the state of our souls in apprehending Him. As apprehended thus, He brings us forward in suitable dress in keeping with Himself, for the sons of Aaron were also attired relatively in garments of glory, that is, there is correspondence with Christ in us. So the idea of God's pleasure in the saints is extended. It is not only inclusive of Christ, but inclusive of all of us. The position in Exodus sets out what we are speaking of, more than what stands related to Solomon. Each saint in his place and functioning as anointed, and God says, You are pleasing to Me. That is what is meant, I think, in @Exodus 40, by the glory filling the tabernacle, and even Moses shut out, that is, his ministry; for the moment there is no need for it. All is pleasing to God.
{139}
J.D.U. The understanding of the cup in the Supper is of very great importance in helping us to reach that point.
J.T. It is the more positive side of the institution. The bread is positive, too, in the sense that it is Christ's body which we eat for support, as well as for a memorial of Him. We partake of it for support, but the Lord says more about the cup than He does about the bread. He says, "Drink ye all of it" -- that is, all the saints are to drink of it, and they all did -- those that were there. Then He speaks about it to them, meaning that He would have us to thoroughly understand what it means. It is to have an effect upon us. It had an effect upon *them*, because it says, "having sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives" (@Matthew 26: 20). That was *their* movement, and the movement was pleasing to heaven. We may be sure that heaven was looking down with the greatest intent on that scene. "They went out to the mount of Olives". Jesus had often gone out there by Himself; He spent His nights there, and obviously His living associations were there; they are now moving to that place. It does not say *He led* them there. They sang a hymn and *they* went out, showing that they were now coming to the divine thought, they were moving upwards themselves.
C.S.S. The psalm says, "That my glory may sing psalms of thee, and not be silent" (@Psalm 30: 12) -- is that the thought?
J.T. I think that is right -- the place the glory has -- the scene is glorious. Yes, one's glory praises God, instead of enhancing oneself. This is seen in Mary of Bethany.
E.E. Referring to the Supper again, is it right to think that the cup was uppermost in the Spirit's mind because it says, "after having supped" in connection with the cup; it does not say that in relation to the bread?
{140}
J.T. The bread was formally detached from the passover breads. I think the meaning in the passage you quoted is that the passover supper was over when He took the cup. He was beginning a new thing. The word "supped" of course means the passover; they had finished that and now He is going on to something else. More is said about the cup than the bread. He says, "Drink ye all of it", and they all drank out of it. It is one thing that they do. The Lord's heart would be full of what is involved in the cup, and brings it to bear on them. Then it says, "having sung a hymn". It does not say that *He* did it; it is not the fulfilment of @Hebrews 2: 12, "in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises;" it is rather the mutual state of things that is developed. That is the thing to be noted. The ministry of the Spirit brings in that which changes us, and makes us like Christ and like one another. "Transformed" indicates a real change. It is a substantial change, from glory to glory, and I think that is involved in principle in their having sung a hymn and their moving to the mount of Olives. That is, a new thing is set on foot and the direction is upward. The mount of Olives means the link with heaven.
C.S.S. Would the singing of the hymn mark the end of the covenant phase of the meeting?
J.T. I think the passage indicates that we should *dwell* on the covenant side, because we are approaching the greatest thing -- the service of God in heavenly glory -- and it is well to have our hearts imbued with perfect love; to have our hearts together enveloped in perfect love. Then I think the Lord has something that He can truly lead and use.
E.F. Is it as we dwell on the covenant that the transformation takes place?
J.T. Well, it is as our minds are engaged with the glory of the Lord, but then it says, "even as by the Lord the Spirit". That is His active part in it. He is engaged in that service to bring us into a presentable
{141}
state. Joseph made a selection of five of his brethren to present to Pharaoh. The Lord made a selection of three to take up the mountain. The idea is, I think, to present us in suitable attire.
J.M. Does that depend upon what is written on the heart?
J.T. It runs with it, so that we appear *in glory*. It is a glorious scene. "Whom he has justified, these also he has glorified" (@Romans 8: 30). That is not only the gift of the Spirit, but what He effects in us. Then we go on to Ephesians, where you see what was in the mind of God before the world was, and that enters into the great service of the assembly.
J.D.U. Would the singing of the hymn be a preparation of the heart?
J.T. It is more than that as sung to God, but we are brought together in the singing of a hymn. What the Lord had said about the cup (they having drunk it) means that they were now together in affection; and this would be seen in the singing of the hymn. Thus they went to the mount of Olives.
C.S.S. Is the thought of changing "from glory to glory" that He would have the saints in all suitability to the God of glory?
J.T. I think so. The whole scene is glorious, and the saints do not detract from it. In a sense, we are glorious, as we enter and sit down together, for whom He has justified, them He has also glorified, which alludes to the gift of the Spirit. Then there is "from glory to glory". The impression produced by the Lord upon us; the presentation of the covenant is by the Lord, the Spirit. It is an authoritative, but a spiritual operation.
Ques. Is what you are thinking of in relation to the morning meeting?
J.T. It is a great principle of christianity. We are applying it to the assembly in this reading in order to make it practical, but it is a great broad
{142}
principle of christianity for us. When we come together in assembly, opportunity is afforded for a concrete expression of it.
Ques. Do you suggest that the thought of the covenant is one glory, but that there is a further glory that we move on to, and there is glory after glory?
J.T. That is the idea.
H.W. Seventy elders of Israel went up, and they were spoken of as nobles.
J.T. Well, that is one thought; but it is the second giving of the law that is alluded to in @2 Corinthians 3. The covenant is below in @Exodus 24. In principle they were glorious as sprinkled by the blood. I mean in the type they were constituted glorious; all the people are linked up with the blood. There was abundance of it; setting forth the abundance of the love that envelops us, and we go up in that way. We go up as enriched, but as we go up there is the thought of ennoblement and I believe that brings in Ephesians. In Ephesians God, in order to make us suitable, to make us in every way dignified according to the place, says by the apostle, that He has "blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (@Ephesians 1: 3). What a thought that is! The *place* of our blessings, and that they include *all*! Then He says He has predestinated us unto sonship through Jesus Christ to Himself. It is that we might be before Him in love. That is the sort of thing; that is really the fulness of the glory -- that we are before Him in love! It is not exactly what we are saying to Him in our worship, but what we *are*; what He sees there; the persons.
G.H. Does that verse in @Psalm 45: 13, "All glorious is the king's daughter within", bear on that?
J.T. Well, it does. It is "within:" inside the royal apartments, as the note shows, which corresponds
{143}
with what we are saying, for the place itself is glorious.
Ques. Do you think that the Lord might lead us in the morning meeting to a place of spiritual joy and silence? That is, that no one is really saying anything?
J.T. That is one of the greatest thoughts in the assembly -- that the brethren should be together in *spiritual power*, not only able to control ourselves in quietude, but in *conscious* relation to each other in love; laying hold of sonship, the relationship to which we were predestined anterior to the creation of the world. It was in the mind of God that there should be such beings before Him. So we now advance to the heavenly side, and we are there suitably, in dignity and liberty, every blessing being ours, and it is not here but there. It is *where* they are, and all is *before Him*. You are sitting before Him in the sense that God is pleased, and not only pleased, but He takes charge of the whole scene. God intimates, It is all Mine; all suitable to Me; and that is what I had in mind before the world was. How great that is!
J.S.B. So that when reaching that thought, apprehending it in spiritual joy and contemplation, we would not introduce the thought of forgiveness of sins?
J.T. No. It is what we are according to divine counsels now, and that corresponds more with Solomon's temple or house, for the glory filled it as the trumpeters and singers, as one, made one voice to be heard in praising and thanking Jehovah. The glory filled the house as if God would thus express His satisfaction and delight in the whole scene; because the furniture and all that was there largely typifies ourselves, that is, the saints. It is a visitation now, for God is delighted with us; it is a question of what we could say *to Him*. Of course, it is right to speak about the Lord, about Christ, about the Son
{144}
to the Father, but I think the Father expects us to say something about the Father to Himself, what He, the Father, is. The Lord laboured with the apostles before He went up to impress them with what the Father is.
A.B.J. If a word were given in the morning meeting, you would expect it to be on the way to this or in view of it?
J.T. Generally it is to bring in this side of the truth. That is usually what is needed.
Ques. Where does the thought of orphans come in?
J.T. That is the attitude we take up as we come together, that the Lord is *not* here. Our orphanage is modified by the presence of the Spirit. The Spirit is *another* Comforter. Still the parental thought is in the Lord, and He says, after He speaks about the Spirit, -- "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you" (@John 14: 18). I think the orphaned condition attaches to us as we come together in a hostile world. We come together, as it were, loyal to Christ, and He comes to us.
Ques. You spoke of the morning meeting as a scene of change. Is that an evidence of the abundance of life? The character of the living God is impressed upon it?
J.T. What could suggest it more than that? It is a scene of holy change from glory to glory. What a place the assembly is! It is a realm of glory; "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages" (@Ephesians 3: 21). It is seen in @Revelation 21: 10, coming down from God out of heaven, having the glory of God. It *has* it.
J.D.U. There is a consciousness arrived at of belonging to heaven, although bodily we are down here.
J.T. That is right. That point should be before us so that we reach the divine end in the assembly.
T.R.Y. Is worship distinct from praise?
{145}
J.T. I think you may call praise part of it. The word ordinarily used for worship in the New Testament indicates a movement towards a person adoringly -- supreme reverence and affection, not necessarily anything said. The word in @Hebrews 9: 9 is somewhat different. It conveys the idea of the service of God that is carried on in a public way; and that would include, I think, what is said in hymns or in giving of thanks.
W.G. How far does reference to the death of Christ come into that part of the meeting?
J.T. I think reference in assembly to the death of Christ belongs properly to the Lord's supper. That is as here on earth, but Ephesians, as we have seen, takes us to heavenly places. We are blessed with all spiritual blessings in the heavenlies, that is, our place as in the relationship of sons. Then in Ephesians, too, we are said to be raised up together -- that is, with one another -- and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ; so that you have *elevation* as well. You have liberty and glory in the covenant, and then ennoblement in the thoughts of God about us in the place where our blessings are; then ourselves in heaven. We are said to be raised up and set down in the heavenlies. When you come to that setting -- no longer local but universal -- the *whole* assembly comes into view.
G.H.McK. Did you say the furniture of the tabernacle spoke of the saints?
J.T. Yes, it does. Of course, there is what speaks of God too. In the oracle, the holiest, all spoke of God -- God in Christ; indeed the fact that the whole house, inside, was covered with gold speaks of God, "all in all", but this only enhances the fact that the saints are there, owned to be there as delightful to Him. What is outside the inner sanctuary was generally the saints. The different woods that were used refer to the saints, or to the Spirit. There was
{146}
only one wood used in the tabernacle, but there were several used in the temple. They denote dignity rather than durability or strength. The cedar of the house within was carved with colocynths and half-open flowers -- the evidence of fresh life in the saints. There were also palm-trees.
Ques. Would sons of the living God be part of the ennoblement you speak of?
J.T. Yes. That feature comes in next for consideration (@Romans 9: 26), "where it was said to them, *Ye* are not my people, there shall they be called Sons of the living God". It is not mere theory; it is practical. The Spirit of adoption is there. There is liberty and dignity in that way -- all being the *living* God.
J.M. Is the scripture in Corinthians preparatory to the one in Romans?
J.T. Yes. The covenant comes before sonship. The covenant is not with sons. It is with us as here on earth as a people -- between God and us. The relationship of sons does not require a covenant. A covenant is to encourage and assure us, viewed in our responsible life here; for us sonship belongs to heaven.
G.A.v.S. Then are the passages educative, progressing to the worship of the living God?
J.T. These passages lead on in that way. The relationship of "Sons of the living God" underlies the worship or service of the living God. In @Hebrews 9: 14 the writer is speaking of the covenant, but he introduces the word "worship", and therefore we have a link that fits in with our subject now. The worship comes in properly as we touch sonship by the Spirit, the Spirit of adoption.
Ques. So this ennoblement you speak of is the great objective that God has before Him in first approaching us?
J.T. That is what I understand, and Hebrews, whilst it does not give you the full height of our
{147}
relationship in chapter 9, it does in @chapter 2: 10, 11: there we are regarded as sons of God and brethren of Christ. That is the highest point reached in the epistle to the Hebrews. It is put down there as the thought to be reached through the general teaching.
Ques. Is worshipping in spirit and in truth something that is essential to the worship of the living God?
J.T. It is, and what we are saying about the great place the Spirit has in the covenant, helps us as to God being a Spirit. Perhaps we have not noticed that the last Adam is said to be a quickening spirit (@1 Corinthians 15: 45). Ordinarily no man can be said to be a spirit; he *has* a spirit, but Christ, the Son of God, is said *to be* a spirit -- "the last Adam a quickening spirit". Here in @2 Corinthians 3 He is said to be the Spirit. "Now the Lord is the Spirit". We have to accept that, and it helps us as to God being a Spirit, and to see that the worship of God is wholly spiritual.
F.W.W. Would you distinguish for us between the thought of sonship with God and also with the Father?
J.T. The Father is a more limited thought than God because the Father does not judge anyone. It is a term of affection and care, also expressing grace. It is, as it were, nearer to our understanding than "God". "Father" is a term well known among men, involving parental affection; it conveys nearness, promoting confidence and liberty. It is therefore the great family appellation of God. God is the great primary thought, and the great end too. God is to be known. He is to be "all in all". The name Father, of course, goes on eternally. Christ "gives up the kingdom to him who is God and Father" (@1 Corinthians 15: 24).
J.H. Do you make any difference between worshipping in the holiest and in the Father's house?
J.T. The holiest is the immediate presence of God. The rights of His majesty are seen as maintained
{148}
there immutably through and in Christ. It is not God "dwelling in unapproachable light", but in an order of things in which He may be approached by men. The holiest is a term of gradation, implying immediate nearness to God, which for us could be only through Christ. In the divine arrangement there is what is more distant and still owned of God as in relation with Him, but christianity involves immediate nearness -- the very presence of God, which is obviously the holiest. Besides being the holiest, it is the place of understanding. "To inquire of him in his temple" (@Psalm 27: 4), one says; and again, "I went into the sanctuaries of God; then understood I their end" (@Psalm 73: 17). Holiness as characterising a place is over against what is unholy, and hence has to do with present and millennial conditions and will not have force when sin is entirely removed from the universe. The holiest stands in relation to *God;* but entrance into it is essential to our enjoyment of our relationship with the Father. The two features are implied in @Psalm 27: 4 and @1 Peter 1: 17.
Ques. Referring to your remark as to the Father being an eternal thought, would that be limited to what we speak of as one Person of the Godhead? We speak of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, whereas what is eternal, I take it, would embrace all -- God.
J.T. Well, *God* would certainly, but the Father is differentiated from the Son and from the Spirit, and I think the term always alludes to one Person.
Ques. What about @1 Corinthians 8: 6, "there is one God, the Father"?
J.T. We have to distinguish between the absolute or unrelated conditions of the Deity, and the relations into which They have come in the economy of revelation so as to be intelligible to us. They have taken different relations, so to speak, to execute Their counsels of love and in this way to be intelligible to us; in no sense intimating that any One of Them
{149}
is personally inferior to the Others. In this economy One of Them has taken up the relation of Father, and I think the Father has always to be connected with One. We cannot compass the Deity, and are only safe in keeping to the thoughts of the Holy Spirit in the Scriptures.
H.W. There is also the mediatorial side of things eternally?
J.T. Yes, that goes on. Mediatorship will, however, exist only in a very limited way; that is, as compared with the exercise of it now and in the millennium, but our enjoyment of our knowledge and relationship with God always depends on it.
G.A.v.S. What is the bearing of the words, "Everlasting Father", -- "Father of Eternity"?
J.T. That is a term applied to Christ as Man, the Child born, the Son given to Israel. I think it alludes to Him in His place in the millennium. It is a future thought. It does not refer to *past* eternity as far as I understand. It is what Christ will be. To use an illustration -- a man is said to be father of his country. It is that idea rather than direct parental relation with a family. In the latter sense God is Christ's Father, also our Father.
J.M. Is it the thought of origin?
J.T. Well, the word "father" does denote that, but the "Father of Eternity" seems to mean that He has that place mediatorially, exercising the feelings and care and love of a father towards all in the coming age. So you get Him using terms such as "child", "children", "daughter", in the gospels. He exercised that kind of care and affection towards the disciples and others during the days of His service down here.
E.S.W. Does the expression "God ... all in all" involve the Deity?
J.T. Yes. That is the final state of things, that God might be all in all. "All" would be as Object, and "in
{150}
all" as power. The word *father* is used with latitude in Scripture, applying even to the apostles, for instance, and to the prophets. It alludes to moral rights that are established in persons, and I think in the most supreme way on that line Christ is the Father of eternity -- the coming age. It may be translated 'Father of the age' (see note, New Translation). What a great thing it is, not only to have the Lord, as exercising authority, like a king, but He is Father to all, exercising parental care!
H.C. What connection is there between God as absolute, and God in revelation?
J.T. The connection, of course, is in Christ. He knows God in His absoluteness, being Himself in the Deity. It is One who can lay His hand upon both, as Job says. The idea of mediatorship extends wider than what is set up typically in Moses and Aaron. Christ knowing God in the absolute maintains the thought. In Christ, the absolute is maintained, that is, if He speaks to God, He would speak to Him in that way. He would speak to Him in a wider sense than we, as He alone can, but then we are, as it were, alongside of Him, as in @John 17, as He speaks to God. We are not capable of taking that in, but impressions of it are received; the connection is there in Christ; it is never lost sight of. It goes on to the future; God all in all! The Son shall he subject to Him who is God and Father.
J.M. Does the term, "Sons of the living God" in @Romans 9 stand in relation to the sovereignty of God in mercy?
J.T. The quotation from @Hosea 1 is brought in to show what God has in His mind for Israel. These three chapters, @Romans 9, 10, and 11, are parenthetical in the epistle to the Romans, so as to reconcile God's sovereignty in bringing in the nations through the gospel with His relation to Israel as a nation. He has not lost sight of the latter. He brings in this
{151}
great thought from Hosea -- even the thought of sonship applies to them, but sonship applies to us in a greater sense. God is *now* "bringing many sons to glory", and Christ regards them as His brethren (@Hebrews 2: 10, 11).
{152}
THE LIVING GOD (3)
@1 Timothy 3: 14, 15; @Hebrews 12: 22; 1 Thessalonians 1: 9, 10; @Revelation 7: 2, 3
J.T. We have had first @Matthew 16, in which Christ is owned by Peter as "the Son of the living God". Then Romans 9, which speaks of believers being "Sons of the living God", and then @2 Corinthians 3, in which writing by "the Spirit of the living God" is spoken of, and then @Hebrews 9, "to worship the living God".
What is before us now is "the assembly of the living God;" and intimately related with it, "the city of the living God" (@Hebrews 12: 22); and then, in @1 Thessalonians 1, "the living and true God", to whom the gentile believers turned from idols; and further in @Revelation 7, "the seal of the living God".
In each of these passages we have an important feature of the truth, each in its own setting. There are others that we may refer to in the course of our meeting, such as @1 Timothy 4, which speaks of the living God, in whom believers trust, who is the Preserver of all men. And we have in @Hebrews 3: 12 a solemn warning against "turning away from the living God;" and later in that same epistle (chapter 10: 31), a further solemn word as to "falling into the hands of the living God". The most important features of these scriptures are the first two we read, that is, the assembly of the living God, and what stands related to it in the passage read in @1 Timothy 3, a chapter which speaks of eldership and deaconship. It is linked on intimately too with the Lord's own word in @Matthew 16, "on this rock I will build my assembly". He is the Son of the living God, and He builds the assembly. In @I Timothy 3 the assembly is seen in relation to the truth, that is, it is "the pillar
{153}
and base of the truth", the chapter dealing with rule in it. The letter was written that one should know how to behave oneself in "God's house, which is the assembly of the living God".
J.S.B. What does the apostle imply in regard to behaviour in the house of God?
J.T. Well, all that would comport with it. It is assumed that Timothy would understand. He was left at Ephesus to set in order, in the apostle's absence, what remained unordered. The apostle hoped to come quickly, but in case there should be delay, he sought that there should be no irregularity in Timothy's behaviour, and that others, of course, should know how to behave themselves in the house of God. Behaviour in the house of God is a very important matter. The house of God is such a great thought. It is where God resides, and those of us who are in it are to comport ourselves accordingly.
Rem. Ritual would be out of place in that which is of the living God.
J.T. It would; a ritual does not fit with the idea of what is living; not that there are not ordinances which are to be observed in it, but ritual according to the ordinary meaning of the word is a dead form.
C.S.S. Would the thought of the assembly of the living God imply activity, seen in those who *stand by night* (@Psalm 134), instead of sitting, as Eli, or going to sleep?
J.T. You can see from 1 Samuel where the house of God is mentioned, how unbecoming the behaviour was. Of course, in the case of Eli's sons it was abominable, but even Eli himself was wanting in his behaviour. He was sitting by the door-post unable to discern that Hannah was a priestly person, that she was really praying in a priestly way. He thought she was drunk, he was unable to discern. His posture was not in keeping with the
{154}
house of God. Luke, following on Paul's line, stresses the idea of behaviour, comeliness in all things even to the way we sit or place ourselves in the assembly.
G.A.v.S. Would good behaviour spring from life, as derived from the living God?
J.T. Well, it would. The earth, as some of us were saying, bears fruit of itself, that is, there is latent power. This is seen in the christian, and it works out in the house of God above all places, but then there is the idea of regulation in it. What most christians need, especially young ones, is regulation. The garden of Eden was planted by Jehovah. There were all forms of life there, with plenty of fertility we may be sure in the garden, for a river went out of Eden to water the garden. It was kept fertile, but still Adam was required to dress and keep it. That is, he would regulate the life, so that it should be uniform, it should be uniform in its development, and I think that is what is in mind in this epistle, that however spiritual or energetic we may be, we need regulation.
E.F. Has the anointing anything to do with the thought of behaviour?
J.T. No doubt it has. Among other things, the anointing is in order that we might behave rightly, the word would have in mind the dignity which the Spirit puts upon us, including behaviour. We know instinctively somewhat how to behave in the assembly, but there are besides that, the specific injunctions that we get in this epistle. The anointing is the Spirit, of course, but it is the Spirit in the sense of dignifying us so that we know what to do. The house of God is always universal, only it must take form locally, for Timothy was set at Ephesus, which is evidently a locality.
Rem. What is living could not be formed by national features, or made to differ in one place from another.
{155}
J.T. Quite so, there is a sameness. "Thus I ordain in all the assemblies", the apostle said. There should be the same principles, and not only so, but the same methods, and observances. The apostle uses the word custom; "*we* have no such custom". There should not be amongst us mere local custom. There should be, not only uniformity of principle, but uniformity of custom in the house of God, for after all, we are one family. There is only one house of God, and we are exhorted "to walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye have been called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, bearing with one another in love; using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace" (@Ephesians 4: 1 - 3). That really includes all that is external as well as what is internal.
J.D.U. Is the living character of things indicated in what is mentioned in the first chapter of Timothy? The apostle refers to "love out of a pure heart", and contrasts it with endless genealogies.
J.T. Yes, the highest expression of life is love. Love is really the most exalted expression of life, not that there are not other expressions of life. There is, speaking figuratively, vegetable life, and there is ordinary animal life, involving the idea of "soul", and there is life that is conveyed in the breath of God. These are just features of life; although they are seen in the vegetable kingdom and the lower animal kingdom, they really allude to certain spiritual features in us. So that we get such an expression, for instance, as the "fruit" of the Spirit, which is love, joy, peace, and so on, nine different kinds. Fruit is a vegetable suggestion. The highest order of life is in man. Taking @Genesis 1, we have the vegetable life on the third day, the animal life, that is, fowls and fishes, called "living souls", on the fifth day. Then land animals and finally man on the sixth day. His is the most exalted
{156}
idea. All are applicable to us in a spiritual sense, only there are gradations of life, and I think love is the highest expression, love governed by intelligence. The living God is there in @Genesis 1, He is operating and He ordered life on the third day. It was life as out of the earth, that the earth was to cause grass to spring up and herbs and trees. That is, He put the power of life in the earth, as He has put the power of life in ourselves. The chapter outlines the different features of life, man being the highest conception of it, he is a living soul by *the breath of God*.
Ques. Would the highest manifestation of life be in ministry Godward?
J.T. Well, I should think that; you mean what Hezekiah said, "the living, the living, he shall praise thee".
Rem. The thought here I suppose is representation. The assembly of the living God representing Him in this scene.
J.T. That is right. In Corinthians it is the assembly of God -- just in the locality -- the assembly of God meaning that it is His, without enlarging on the qualities. Here it is the assembly of the *living* God and you look for a living state of things, and that life should be regulated in us, working out in our behaviour.
W.A.P. Would knowing how to behave oneself include the active part of brothers in a meeting, giving out a hymn, or engaging in prayer?
J.T. I think it would. Here it goes wider, of course, but the apostle in 1 Corinthians has great regard for external order in the assembly -- how things are to be done. He makes much of that. One is struck with the references to order: he says, "I praise you ... that as I have directed you, ye keep the directions" (@1 Corinthians 11: 2). Of course, the idea of the house extends beyond our convenings or actual assembly meetings, it extends to our own houses and generally; as in this chapter we have that an elder is to have his own house
{157}
in control. I would say the fact that we are in the house of God implies order generally in us.
J.D.U. It embraces sisters too, does it not?
J.T. It does.
H.G. Is the law of the house in Ezekiel introduced to regulate behaviour?
J.T. Quite so. It is: "Upon the top of the mountain all its border round about is most holy" (@Ezekiel 43: 12). It is holiness in elevation. Corinthians is on relatively lower ground as regards these matters. It is initial. This epistle to Timothy treats of things at Ephesus, it had Ephesus in mind, which was the full result of Paul's ministry. It deals largely with the question of behaviour, but the behaviour in the house of God, and in persons who are living, and who know the living God.
N.B.S. In what sense is the assembly the base of the truth?
J.T. It is the support of it. When the truth is opened up, as in Paul's service, the assembly normally would accept it, and support it. It would be seen more at the beginning, in the unfolding of the truth. The idea of the house properly comes in under Paul, and through him there was a great unfolding of things, new things, the unfolding of the mystery, for instance, and it was a great matter that the assembly was ready to come forward, and support what was being unfolded. In @Acts 15, Paul's doctrine was in question, and the assembly at Jerusalem ratified what he taught, not very positively, but it was supported. The way was kept open for the unfolding of the highest truths.
Ques. You would not separate the dissemination of the truth today from the assembly?
J.T. I should not like to do so. One would look for the Lord to give support through the saints for whatever comes out. Whatever feature is presented the saints should rally to it. If they do not,
{158}
there will be declension and the Lord will be obliged to come in judicially; hence the importance of following what is being ministered; proving all things, as they did at Berea. The brethren should follow what the Lord is saying, what the Spirit is unfolding. There is great encouragement in that for those who minister. I believe that is what is meant. Paul counted on it.
J.D.U. Would the fact of it being a living God mean that both conscience and faith are to be in activity?
J.T. Yes. We ought to have ears to hear; there is an appeal to the whole assembly as to this; it implies that we should be on the alert for what is being ministered, whether we listen to it or read it. There should be a following up of things. The apostle says to Timothy, "thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching, conduct ..." (@2 Timothy 3: 10). All of us, the young ones, especially, should be conversant with what is current, and lend their support to it. The Lord looks for that.
F.W.W. Do you connect the mystery of piety with the living God as expressed in the Lord Jesus?
J.T. The last verse of @1 Timothy 3 is to stress the idea of mystery. What comes out in our meetings, whilst we are glad to have anyone hear it, is to be regarded and known in a spiritual way. It should never be in our thoughts to reduce the holy things of God to the level of man's mind. I believe that verse 16 is brought in to check the tendency to bring the things of God down to man's level. There is the idea of mystery, and of course it is seen in the most exalted way in the incarnation. "The mystery of piety is great. God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit" (@1 Timothy 3: 16). That means that what came out in Christ was not simply justified by man's mental assent to it; it was by the Spirit He was justified. The incarnation was justified by the Spirit, and seen of angels, preached amongst the nations,
{159}
believed on in the world, received up in glory. All was in spiritual power, and beyond the range of man's intellect.
G.H-k. Timothy was told to guard the entrusted deposit.
J.T. Quite so. It was to be kept by the Holy Spirit.
G.H. What is the import of the house of God being described as the assembly of the living God?
J.T. The house is, as the word implies, a family residence; God residing here, and it becomes most attractive spiritually to the saints. To young people, there is a sphere of family affections emanating from God, to be found amongst the brethren, so that there is a home for the very youngest; a place of family affections, and hence, as common in all family abodes, behaviour is a great feature. The word assembly would convey another thing, that is *called out*, and also involves, I think, intelligence. "I speak as to intelligent persons". It involves persons who can take counsel together. "My assembly", the Lord says, "I will build my assembly, and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". Hades¬ gates allude to the power of satanic counsel, the universal lords of this darkness. We may be sure that a great deal of counsel is taken against the assembly, whereas in the assembly, in our care meetings, the counsel we take ought to bear on the overthrow of evil, the keeping out of evil, and the maintenance of the truth. The truth is tested and inquired into as it comes out. In @Revelation 2 we read how the Lord commended Ephesus for trying those who said that they were apostles and were not, and found them liars. There was the power to discern and decide on the truth, and the contrary. I believe the word assembly has all that in mind, hence it is said to be the pillar and base of the truth.
{160}
Ques. Do these two terms, the house of God and the assembly of the living God, bring together affection and spiritual intelligence?
J.T. That is how the truth stands. There is included in the thought of the assembly as the pillar and base of the truth, the assembly viewed as the temple of God. There would be care too, as the apostle says, "how shall he take care of the assembly of God?"
G.H. This would be the assembly, then, in a provisional setting?
J.T. Yes. What it is *now*, whilst the truth is being unfolded. It is the time of the unfolding of the truth, and there is that in this world which stands by the truth; it is no question of gift, but spiritual ability to discern the truth and maintain it.
E.M. What is lacking in companies where there are customs that are not universal?
J.T. Well, I think these irregular customs are usually the outcome of what is national or sectional. The saints are drawn into imitation of what is current religiously. I think the law of the house upon the top of the mountain being holy (@Ezekiel 43: 12) is to stress the *exalted* thought; what is above the common level.
J.D.U. I suppose there can be no such thing as orthodoxy in a stereotyped sense, being connected with the living God?
J.T. While orthodoxy may be to a large extent correct, it is the letter rather than the spirit of the truth and is the opposite of what is living. It began generally about the second century, or perhaps a little earlier, immediately after the apostles were taken. The leaders began to formulate the doctrines of christianity, adding *philosophy*. That has gone on ever since, and characterises christendom today, whereas christianity is from the living God, and hence *life* must mark it.
W.G. Is the Spirit speaking continuously in that way, He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies?
{161}
J.T. That is just the truth; if we have an ear to hear, we are waiting for the Spirit to speak, and that keeps us going on in a living way.
C.S.S. Would there be an order suggested in this chapter, of conducting one's own house, conducting oneself in the house of God, and then taking care of the assembly?
J.T. Yes. Behaviour includes not only persons who are specially caring for things, but everyone, brothers and sisters alike. This epistle is very remarkable for the detail we get, for brothers, sisters, and even children.
Ques. There is no suggestion of gift in elders and deacons is there?
J.T. No, it is more experience, and, of course, qualifications in a moral way.
G.H. Would the delay in the apostle coming bring out in Timothy the spiritual development referred to?
J.T. Delay, or the absence of persons on whom we depend, or are expected to depend, usually tests us. There were tests by the apostle being absent, by Moses being absent, and by the Lord being absent. We see how the people departing from Moses in order to provide the needed things for the tabernacle answer to this test (@Exodus 35: 20 - 29). We are always tested in this way, and the test brings out where we are, so that Timothy would be tested by Paul being absent.
J.M. Would trustworthiness as seen in the virtuous woman, come out in that way?
J.T. Quite so. It is the absence of her husband, as you might say. @Proverbs 7 brings out the contrast to that, where the wicked wife knows that her husband is absent and takes advantage of this to sin. That has its counterpart in christendom today. The virtuous woman is concerned about her husband being known in the gates in his absence. That is,
{162}
the assembly takes care of things for Christ in His absence. You get this much in scripture. The Lord takes children in His arms and blesses them, and then He *departed* (@Matthew 19: 15). What is to become of the children? The parents are tested by His absence. So in many instances absence tests us, but the test is to bring out what is latent. If we accept the absence and rely on the provision made for the absence, we shall prove victorious. The Lord is looking with great interest to see how every gathering of His people throughout the world gets on. How they work out their own salvation with fear and trembling, recognising that God works in them both to will and to do of His good pleasure. It is delightful to heaven to see the divine plantings prosper. On the other hand, the Lord says, "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up" (@Matthew 15: 13). God looks constantly to see what is of Himself here working out. @1 Timothy 3: 16 is remarkable as the end of what we have in the chapter. It is a wonderful consummation of the instruction, the greatness of the mystery of piety, what the saints have in the way of mystery, holy things that we cherish and keep from the natural, rude mind of man.
G.H.McK. What is the force of the word piety?
J.T. I think it is bringing God into what is *here*. We are brought into what is *there* "in Christ" and as I apprehend what is *there*, I bring God into my circumstances *here*. That is what marked the Lord throughout in the gospels. It is the mystery of piety, how He was here, manifested in the flesh, not justified in men's minds; they did not justify Him, it was the Spirit that justified Him, nor will He ever be justified save by the Spirit.
G.H.McK. What do you mean by that?
J.T. That the incarnation is justifiable. It was the wisdom of God, and the natural mind of man
{163}
does not grasp that. The incarnation can never be grasped by the natural mind, but it is "justified in the Spirit, seen of angels;" that is, angels are sympathetic. They saw God manifest in flesh: the Lord said of men, "they have both seen and hated both me and my Father" (@John 15: 24). How wonderful was the presence of God here in manhood, accompanied by the justifying power of the Spirit in everything that was done!
D.N.D. Does the mystery correspond to "the hidden things" belonging "to Jehovah our God" in @Deuteronomy 29: 29?
J.T. Well, there, what was hidden was known to God only, whereas the mystery is known to the saints, that is, those who are instructed into it by the Spirit. The thought of it is inclusive, but rigidly exclusive of the natural mind, which has nothing to say to these things. The very opposite of the instruction here is seen throughout christendom, where everything is brought down to man's level, so that christianity has become in men's thoughts just a religion of the world -- that is all it is *publicly*.
W.B.P. There is a danger of our casting our pearls before swine.
J.T. There is indeed.
C.S.S. Who are the "you" -- "to you it is given to know the mysteries"?
J.T. Characteristically all christians. He was speaking to the disciples, of course; He also said, "Blessed are *your* eyes". What eyes they were! How few eyes are really blessed! Verse 16 is to be connected with Christ. The mystery, "God has been manifested in flesh", I believe that is the proper reading. It is disputed, but there is no doubt that that is what is meant. Things are not to be brought in to gratify man's mind, because as soon as a thing becomes of any moment in this world, men would like to have a part in it. When christianity was established in the power of the
{164}
Spirit, men began to see that there was something in it which would do them some good to take part in, and that is what the Lord intended was to be shut out.
Rem. That keeps divine things on their proper level.
Ques. Do we get individual instruction as to the assembly in this chapter?
J.T. Yes; each individual in it: "that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house".
Ques. What is the thought of the pillar?
J.T. It is something to be seen as a testimony, like the pillars named Jachin and Boaz, and the twelve pillars that Moses raised up at the foot of Sinai.
G.H.McK. The same as, "A city situated on the top of a mountain cannot be hid" (@Matthew 5: 14).
J.T. Yes, for testimony. Not for man's gaze, but testimony there in a spiritual way, so that the overcomer in Philadelphia is to be made a pillar, because that is what he really is in the testimony of God now.
As regards the second scripture, @Hebrews 12, we have a cognate thought to what we have been engaged with as to the assembly; it is "the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem". The word city, of course, is a more general thought: the capital is a centre of light and rule, but Jerusalem has its own place too, here "heavenly Jerusalem".
F.W.W. What have you in mind as to that?
J.T. Well, the name has acquired a fame. There is fame in that name, and that has to be kept in mind; it is not to be desecrated; the name must not in our minds lose its place or power. Jerusalem is said to be "the city of the great King". If we have taken it up at all we do not want it to lose its lustre. The idea of Jerusalem is to go through. It is a higher
{165}
thought than Zion in the sense of its distinction as applying to Christ's bride, and is seen as the divine residence in relation to the millennial world. Zion is the first thing. There are eight things mentioned here. Zion is like the constitution, as for instance the constitution of this country, whereas the capital is another thing; then the universal gathering is another thing, the parliament so to speak, the third thing mentioned here. Then the *society* of the system, the assembly of the firstborn ones; persons of distinction in a social sense spiritually. These are great thoughts. We have *come* to them all. They are all viewed as completed here, that is, they are viewed abstractly, but there is to be some answer to them in a concrete way in the assembly now. The idea of the constitution is simple, it is a sense of mercy: "according to his own mercy he saved us" (@Titus 3: 5).
E.E. Viewing it at the present moment, is the throne of God on earth in *character*?
J.T. I think so, it is in the assembly, the assembly has taken the place of all that Jerusalem stood for in the old economy. "Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth" (@Psalm 48: 2).
G.H-k. Does legislation flow out of the constitution of the assembly?
J.T. Yes, the constitution must be the basis of all legislation, as is usual in all countries. The city of the living God is the great thought before us and it is also called *heavenly* Jerusalem; its heavenly character gives lustre to all that is done.
J.S.B. Would you help as to having *come* to these things, rather than regarding them as merely future?
J.T. It is a feature of Hebrews that we have come to finality, and one of the leading words in Hebrews is "we have". It does not mean that the saints addressed were characterised by having these things. Things are sometimes put in the abstract, so that we should take them up. "Ye have come to mount Zion", the allusion
{166}
here is to Israel, having traversed the desert and camped before the mountain. They came to the mountain, and God then began to open up to them His thoughts. Well, *we* have come to mount Zion, that is the first thing. We want to see what it is, that is the principle of Hebrews, that the things are there for us, and we are to work them out, so that the first great thought is as to the constitution. It is sovereign mercy, and that is to work out in our relations with one another.
G.A.v.S. Would mount Zion show the way in which the constitution is worked out according to the truth we have in Timothy?
J.T. I think the city would be like 1 Timothy, that is, rule in the assembly. Titus runs with 1 Timothy and there we have much made of *mercy*. The two epistles go further than the constitution: there are laws worked out according to the constitution.
G.A.v.S. What is meant by "just men made perfect"?
J.T. All is anticipative here; it is, I think, the acquirement of our bodies of glory, making the complete man, spirit, soul, and body. It is *spirits* of just men we come to, but they are made perfect, meaning that they have every means of expressing themselves, they are not lacking in anything. This follows "God, judge of all".
G.A.v.S. Would it have any reference to their display in glory?
J.T. Well, they will not be lacking as men; disembodied spirits are lacking. We are not made perfect, I apprehend, until we have the means of expressing ourselves, in every sense being what God intends us to be, including our bodies.
Ques. Is it men that are perfect, and not the spirits?
J.T. "Perfect" refers to "spirits", I believe.
G.H.McK. Why do you stress the spirits, that we have come to *the spirits* of just men made perfect?
J.T. Because after all, that is what you are. Your spirit is what you are really. You say, What a spirit
{167}
that man has! Well, that is the man himself. Thus if I go to be with Christ, as falling asleep, my spirit goes, but *I* go. Stephen says, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit;" but I am imperfect until I receive my spiritual body.
G.A.v.S. I was wondering whether all this is connected with the apprehension of "the living God". Would such a phrase as "just men made perfect" appertain to what He is as the living God?
J.T. Just so; your point is life, and that is borne out by the Lord's remark in Luke as to @Exodus 3: 6. He said, "the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob; but he is not God of the dead but of the living; for all live for him" (@Luke 20: 37, 38). That is what is in mind here, they are made perfect. God is the God of Abraham according to His own mind as to him, not simply as a disembodied spirit, but Abraham as a just man.
J.D.U. Is it a help to us today to connect this innumerable company of angels with this living system and the living God?
J.T. Yes, the allusion is not the administrative side, but rather the legislative side of the system; the saints, as we saw, come together, as it were, in congress, or parliament, where they take counsel. J.N.D. says the word translated "universal gathering" refers to the States of Greece, but it would include gatherings for festive purposes.
G.H. Does the local assembly provide an inlet into these things as suggested in the gates of the heavenly city?
J.T. I think it does. In a practical way that is the inlet to all this. Entering the local assembly in an orderly way, according to Corinthians, in the recognition of the Spirit, we are let into all this in a practical concrete way, so that the end of the meeting is a universal position, and a heavenly one, too.
Ques. What exactly do you mean by heavenly?
{168}
J.T. Well it is the heavenly Jerusalem; for instance, in Ephesians we have a peculiar word used where it is said that we are blessed "with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies". It is not that our minds are directed to different places, but to the *fulness* of the idea of heaven. Paul says, he was caught up to the third heaven, I think he reached the full elevation belonging to us as creatures. There is that which is beyond that, but the third heaven certainly gives us fulness in height. That is what I think we are to reach *in assembly;* what we are above, where our blessings are, and our relationship with God there, and our correspondence with Christ there, "accepted in the beloved". Then in chapter 2 we are raised up together -- that is, with each other -- and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ.
C.S.S. Is the vista that is spread out before us so wholly marked by life, and of such a distinctive character, that the necessity is to learn how to behave ourselves?
J.T. Yes, and the heavenly Jerusalem would mean, the city thought in its fulness. When we come to @Revelation 21 we see it -- the bride -- as *new* Jerusalem, and it comes down out of heaven from God. This should give lustre to all our proceedings administratively.
H.G. Is the thought of display connected with the city?
J.T. It is in that way seen in Revelation. It is God's *best;* the metals, the figures used all show that it is the best conceivable thing outside of what is divine, that is divine Persons.
J.S.B. Would you say a little as to the scripture in Thessalonians turning to God from idols?
J.T. It brings out the true God. The true God, connected with Him as living: the living and true God; the idea of the true God being added, is to keep us from idolatry. It is a question of deliverance. The
{169}
saints turning away from idols, whatever they were, to a God thus presented and known. The Lord uses the term, the true God. To "know thee, the only true God", and John uses it and applies it to the Lord Himself; "He is the true God", and there again the connection is, "keep yourselves from idols". It is to deliver us from all that disputes the thought of God in our souls. He is the true God.
The living God, I suppose, would save them from judaism, because judaism had a very great place in Thessalonica, but then heathendom had a place there too, and the true God would bear on heathendom. Of course, *we* have to be delivered and preserved from both of these things.
Referring now to the passage in @1 Timothy 4, where we read, "we trust in the living God". He stands related to the whole human race, the "preserver of all men". That is, the Spirit of God connects God with all men, with every single person in the world, that, "he is not far from each one of us", Paul said, and "in him we live, and move and exist" (@Acts 17: 27, 28). He even brings in their own poets to show that they were the offspring of God. An important side of the truth, especially in the gospel, is to have in mind that we are dealing with *creatures of God*, not simply wicked men. The gospel is to be preached to all the *creation*, and in preaching it to men who are unconverted the point is not only in mind that they are wicked men, but also creatures of God, that there is a link between God and them as His creatures.
J.M. Having in view that they should turn to the living God.
J.T. Yes, and it establishes confidence in their hearts. It gives them to understand that there is a link between them and the living God, but they will forfeit it if they remain in unbelief. The world is now held in reconciliation provisionally.
{170}
G.H.McK. Do you think it is happy for the preacher to address men as sinners?
J.T. Well, Peter addresses "Men of Judaea, and all ye inhabitants of Jerusalem;" and Paul said, "Israelites, and ye that fear God, hearken;" and on Mars Hill, he said, "Athenians". You find in the addresses given in the Acts that there is respect for men whether they are Jews or heathen, they are regarded abstractly, and that is the way to establish confidence. Of course, the person's sins must come up, repentance too.
G.H.McK. You think it is important that confidence should be sought?
J.T. That is exactly what Luke's ministry would teach us, following up Paul's. Paul's address on Mars Hill, his address in Lystra, his address in Antioch, Peter's two addresses in @Acts 2 and 3 are models. They are set down as precedents for us to go by. We must have respect for our fellow men. The living God, in @1 Timothy 4, is said to be the "preserver of all men, especially of those that believe".
W.B. Is that preservation moral, or creatorial?
J.T. It is creatorial, that is what is meant. Not that God is not helping men morally, too. "The powers that be are ordained of God". In @Revelation 7 we see that the seal of the living God is upon His people as *numbered*, the number He has in mind in His counsels. It is a question of *His* number, the number sealed. Paul says that he endured all things for the sake of the elect, "that *they* also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory" (@2 Timothy 2: 10). The seal here is on that side of the truth. The second half of the chapter is the other side, namely, that there is an uncountable number, as far as creatures are concerned, of the redeemed, but that does not militate against the first part of the chapter, that God has His number, and what we think is uncountable fits in with God's number, the latter being a question of predestination.
J.D.U. It means that every individual counts?
{171}
J.T. Exactly, and no believer is an accident. It is all in perfect order according to the infinite accuracy of the divine counsel. It happens as God would have it. He makes things fit. It is a great thing to have that in mind, I think, in our ministry, that God has His number, and the seal means that they are secure.
G.A.v.S. The seal of the living God?
J.T. There is in it the evidence of life.
J.D.U. Why is it on the forehead?
J.T. It is the profession, where it can be seen, so that we are known by life, not only by what we say, but what is *seen*. It is a living state of things.
Rem. Known and read of all men, is that the thought?
J.T. Just so.
C.S.S. In view of all this, is there a danger of our turning *away* from the living God (@Hebrews 3: 12), in contrast to turning to Him, as in Thessalonica?
J.T. That is very solemn indeed, a striking contrast, and shows the importance of the brethren in these last days maintaining the thought of life, because it is in the saints that the living God is now expressed and the thought of life maintained. It makes it all the more serious for persons who turn away, and alas, how many have turned away from the presence of life, the presence of God in a living way among His people! The next thing is "falling into the hands of the living God", that is, ultimate retribution at the hands of the God they turn away from.
{172}
THIS CITY
@Acts 4: 27, 28; @Acts 18: 9 - 11; @Hebrews 12: 22
The object in view in reading these scriptures is to speak about the idea of a city, in relation to both evil and good, particularly "the city of the living God". The thought of a city is well known to us as set out in the Scriptures, and as having been prevalent throughout the history of mankind from the outset, but I desire to confine myself to these two thoughts, what it is in relation to evil, and in relation to good, the good that may be in the cities of the world; and then the city of the living God in which there is nothing else but good, which is the positive presentation of the idea.
The inclusion of the words "in this city", in @Acts 4: 27 is according to the best authorities, "for in truth ... in this city;" and spiritually the words "in this city" have a place in this setting, for the history of Jerusalem is in mind. It was the city of the great King, but it had become the residence of evil, the most consummate evil; so much so that the Lord intimated that it was scarcely possible that a prophet should suffer outside of it, as if murderous opposition to God and His mind had found a residence in this once-favoured city. The Lord Himself, too, in view of the gospel, said "remain in the city". He was then in it, although risen from the dead. He suffered in it according to @Revelation 11: 8, although according to @Hebrews 13: 12, He suffered without the gate. His sufferings were in it, morally, and it was, therefore, the one spot on earth least deserving of grace. In spite of that they were to stay there until clothed with power from on high, and the preaching of the gospel was to begin there. So to continue that thought we read in Acts 4, "in this city", the one they were in at that time. So
{173}
in @Acts 18: 10, it is *this city;* it was one the Lord was in again -- a gentile city. He was in it, not only as risen, as in Jerusalem, but as having ascended into heaven, He appeared to Paul in a vision in regard to that city; a very significant fact, for He had *much people* there.
The bearing of what is to be said at this time is "this city", the one *we* are in now. The Scriptures always bear immediately upon the person, or persons, who are reading them or dealing with them. So in this passage in @Acts 4, it is "this city", the one they were in. They had remained there according to the Lord's directions, not only until they were "clothed with power from on high", but had continued on there in that city exercising the service of grace in most marvellous power. Indeed, the testimony of the apostles in it was one of the greatest of its privileges -- such marvellous power being demonstrated in that testimony. The glory had never been in it as it was at Pentecost, and it was loth to leave it. The same power was seen elsewhere later, but now it was there in relation to the city. God regarded it abstractly for the moment, as according to what it was in His mind, and presented a most marvellous testimony there, not only in words in living power, but in the *effect* of the words; so that notice had to he taken of the effect of the testimony rendered. It was forced under their notice. They would have it that it was the effect of new wine; the enemy was working immediately to counteract what God was doing, to discredit it, as ever, but Peter's address makes plain what it was. It was a wonderful intervention of divine power, the blessed Spirit of God Himself, having come down, found suitable vessels in Peter and the other apostles, and thus the testimony was effectively rendered. Thus for a considerable time afterwards, the Lord having in mind His word that they were to tarry there, this great service went on, and there was not only actual power by the Spirit, but moral power in the
{174}
vessels, that is the ability to bear patiently the terrible sufferings that were forced upon them.
So Peter and John being let go, came to their own company; that is what love values. It is said of the Lord, "having loved his own ... loved them to the end:" now the thought is connected with the apostles. What can be more priceless on earth, dear brethren, than "our own", in this sense in the particular city in which we are? We are to clothe all that are in "this city" in this way. "Being let go, they went to their own company" and unbosomed all their exercises and their triumphs; and what a heart-felt sympathy there was in their sufferings and their services! Then the prayer was most suitable. I would call attention to what they said to God. They took account in their prayer of @Psalm 2, and spoke about it very suitably; it applied exactly. Nothing in a way is more instructive than the use of the Old Testament scriptures in the New; the exactness spiritually, not only verbally but the spiritual exactness. Verbal exactness is not always necessary for conveying the sense of a passage, but spiritual exactness is what strikes you in the use of the Old Testament scriptures in the New. Here @Psalm 2 is quoted, which is one of the outstanding psalms, governing the whole Book. The first Psalm is the moral side, as no doubt you have often heard; the second Psalm is the *official*. It is against the official, that is, Jesus *anointed*, that Satan specially raises opposition. @Psalm 2 is brought forward here with spiritual exactness to the very moment in which they were speaking. It is always important to keep in mind the exact moment, the exact time and place in which the scripture is spoken or read. In quoting the psalm the apostles and those with them bring it down to their own circumstances. They say "both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the nations, and peoples of Israel, have been gathered together in this city". Historically, of course, it was so. We know in the endings of the gospels, how this murderous
{175}
combination conferred whilst the Lord was opening His heart to His own. Outside, there was this wicked combination against Him. No one knew it better than He.
This opposition continued, for Peter and John were themselves the suffering witnesses to it. There was no change, for Jerusalem had not repented. There are conditions like this abroad today. The Lord says of Jezebel, "she will not repent", and thus there is retribution: there are fixed conditions, governmentally, in christendom -- God has acted, imposing conditions, and fixing them, inasmuch as men have gone on in persistent opposition, in spite of remonstrance and gracious appeals. This is a very solemn matter. It may be so with individuals, persons who have gone on in a self-willed way against the truth. God fixes that state upon them; a very solemn thing for those who will not repent. The Lord says, "I will kill her children with death". That is a condition that exists today throughout christendom; it was developed in Jerusalem -- a hardened condition. The Lord had prayed for their forgiveness, but there was no weakening of the opposition. Indeed the word in the message sent after Him said: "We will not have this man to reign over us". The prayer in @Acts 4 makes no allusion whatever to any weakening of this attitude, and so they say, "now, Lord, look upon their threatenings". The murderous attitude toward Christ and His people was unchanged in Jerusalem. The high priest was suitable, as linked with the Sadducees, for the purpose of the enemy; the leading testimony now being the resurrection of Christ, and the Sadducees denied the resurrection.
Dear brethren, these are the conditions with which we have to do in *this* city -- the one we are in now. Whatever the outward appearances are, these are the underlying conditions; let there be no mistake about that. Some cities may be worse than others in this sense, but let there be no mistake, in a greater or lesser degree the cities of the nations are all permeated by
{176}
this, and in time it will appear in "the great city, which is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified" (@Revelation 11: 8). The immediate witnesses of Christ were allowed to lie unburied in its streets after their faithful testimony. It is well that we should be apprised of this, not that we should say anything at all against authority, but we should recognise that when the test comes, the underlying conditions in all the cities of the world will be marked by these things. They are gradually and surely drifting in that direction and God would have us to utter our prayers accordingly. Not that we should pry into the evil; but accept our function of holding out against it at least in principle and *in testimony*, for it is in this way, among other things, that evil is held in check.
The prayer is the point here; as they prayed, the place was shaken; not yet the city; presently the city will be shaken with the shake of judgment. The place is shaken, and the power that is in it is of the same power that is working in us. That power will be used presently against evil retributively, and is being used now, more or less against evil in a moral way by every christian. The same power by which we draw near to God, is the power by which we can stand up against evil and testify against it.
In chapter 18, the Lord expressly says, as to Corinth, "I have much people in this city". That brings in another matter, that in praying for the authorities of a city or a country, we have in mind what the Lord has in them. There can be no doubt that He has holdings in every city, especially in christendom, and as visiting these cities, as He does, in a sense He would always say, *in this city*. That is really a great feature of local responsibility. It is that the Lord comes into the city, town, or village in which the saints may be, and then He says, This city, or, This village. That is, He stands alongside of us, and in truth, we never get a right view of things until we stand alongside of the
{177}
Lord, or He alongside of us, and utters His thoughts, and we see things from His point of view. There is much more of His activity than we are prone to think. Indeed Revelation says that He *walks* in the midst of the seven golden lamps. He stands in relation to all the assemblies, and in His visitations, He will say, This city. There can be no doubt that many of the dear brethren in this city have experienced this in prayer or otherwise; how the Lord has given them to understand as to their particular exercises and sorrows that *He knows*. He says, "I know". What a comforting word! He says, "I know" to every assembly that He addresses in Revelation.
Now the apostle Paul had been in this city, Corinth, for some time, and in this chapter certain things are said to have happened. The Lord might have appeared in a vision to Paul earlier, but he did not, according to the record -- not that the apostle had not been much in exercise and prayer, because chapters 17 and 18 show that he had the profoundest consideration for that part of Greece. He had been to Athens, but with very little result, his spirit was stirred, but there was no vision there. He had been in Corinth a considerable time, waiting for Silas and Timotheus to come, and as soon as they were come, he was pressed in respect of the word, as if he felt it was the word that was needed there; not exactly the terms of the gospel, but the mind of God was needed there. It was a place of learning and profligacy, too. The word of God was needed to search out the actual state of things. The Lord waited for the right moment, as He always does, and He appeared in a vision in the night. I suppose the allusion would be to quietude, when one is free from the burdens of the day. It is always well to make room for the Lord in the quiet hours of the night. It was a vision, but so vivid that the Lord speaks of Himself as actually in *this city*. He says, "no one shall set
{178}
upon thee to injure thee; because I have much people in this city".
Now we have to view the cities in which we are from these angles. First, what they are in relation to evil. The peculiar kind of power there is in the concentration of humanity in a regularised community. All that is capable of attracting the human heart and gripping it, is found, from the standpoint of evil, in the cities. We do well to bear this in mind. It ought to enter into our prayers. The cities of the world seem to be the special places for the development of evil; as we see in @Luke 8, the man came *out of the city* having the legion of demons. Decapolis means the place of ten cities. It is the concentration of evil in an organised way. On the other hand, in spite of that, it is wonderful to see, as one moves about the world, how the young people, and old, too, are being delivered and kept, an exhibition in these latter days of the intervention of God, His power for salvation, as Paul said, "that *they* also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory" (@2 Timothy 2: 10). It is the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, giving the saints another status, and attached to it is the wonderful thought of glory. I believe we can see it; the idea of salvation in the young and the old, and the glory, in a moral sense, shining. That is a great thing; to have the glory shining in our salvation. That is a principle with God from the outset, as to His people viewed collectively, that the glory comes in and shines. Both in regard to the tabernacle and the temple, God comes in and takes charge of it all, God being pleased with His people as in their places in the assembly.
So, as I said, the Lord would instruct His servant in regard to the people in Corinth. Not that Paul was ignorant of the evil in that city; he was not, and hence his ministry took character accordingly. He gauged what was in the place from the standpoint of evil. So according to the vision, despite the terrible conditions
{179}
of this city, his ministry was to go on. The Lord says, "No one shall set upon thee to injure thee; because I have much people in this city". What a great thought that is, as to these large cities. One rejoices in what there is now *here:* indeed what is present in this meeting. "I have much people in this city". If the Lord were to speak tonight, He would remind us of it. His own are here, but the *much people* are viewed abstractly; they are *to be secured*. We must never let this out of our mind -- what the Lord thinks of in this city; what He actually has, and what He has yet to be obtained through the gospel. The apostle stayed eighteen months in Corinth, which was a long time for him -- a long period of his service, in order to carry out the Lord's wish that those *much people* should be secured. His ministry and epistles show unmistakably that he gauged things rightly in the presence of the Lord, so as to secure them from the peculiar kind of evil that was in that city.
Now the final thing is the city, not only *of God*, but "the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem". It is a full title of what God has in His mind in regard of a city. We have much of it throughout the Old Testament, but this description is very beautiful and stirring. This is one of the eight items given in this list to which we, as christians, have come. One could say a good deal about each of them, but I am just speaking about this one item, coming in after Zion; "the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem". We have *come* to that. The epistle to the Hebrews does not go into the things it speaks of in the concrete working out of them, as is seen in other scriptures. The state of the saints was very low, and what was in mind was to interest them in the greatness of what they had come to. It was for them to work out the significance of each of these eight items. They had very largely lost the power of them, and they are reminded of what they had come to, and my thought
{180}
is, not to speak of it in the objective sense only, in which it is spoken of here, but as having part in it, because in truth the saints to whom the epistle was addressed were part of the city. Every true christian is part of this. The book of Revelation opens it up to us in a striking manner, but this is the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and I refer to it on the side of our having part in it. Not only that we have come to it -- the feeblest christian may have come to it; but how blessed to have part in it! It is a matter of spiritual experience. Most of us have an idea of it, and it is being worked out, I believe, throughout the world, and it is a testimony; that is the idea of administration carried on in a heavenly way, and not only in a heavenly way, but in a living way.
There is available to us what is represented in this idea of what we have come to as christians, and of what is workable in the way of carrying out the mind of God in government and order. It has to be taken up now, in an abstract way, but inasmuch as there are two or three or more who understand it, it is workable. I believe if there is one thing more than another that the Lord is stressing, it is that the dispensation should be carried on to the finish, to end up in some sense as it began, that is, in a living way, and in a heavenly way, and especially in regard to our administrative matters. We are so prone to borrow from our own thoughts or from the world's way in these things. Government is greatly stressed amongst the nations. I am speaking now of ordinary government as it is today. Never was so much money spent on government in the history of the world as is done today; the extraordinary expense of government is noticeable everywhere, but then God would meet that in *His* way, in a heavenly way. So in regard of administration, one of the first things you get in reference to the assembly convened in its public bearing is that the brethren were saying, "The Lord is indeed risen and has
{181}
appeared to Simon" (@Luke 24: 34). That is to say, the great principle of *grace* in dealing with an erring one is stressed; and then the second thing is that He was made known to certain ones in the *breaking of bread*.
These are two great public factors, the principle of grace and the Lord's supper. How can we go on together, how can we carry on the idea of the heavenly city aside from the supply of grace; grace reigning through righteousness; and, on the other hand, the constant recalling of Jesus, of our Head in heaven; constantly being reminded of Him in the memorial that He has left us? These two things run together publicly, and every one of us should see to them; should see that grace reigns through righteousness, and that there is a place for the Lord to come in and out, bringing in heavenly freshness and power constantly, so that every bit of administrative activity is governed by these things. If it were a question of choosing an apostle, it must be one that "assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up" (@Acts 1: 21, 22). It is in that way you get the thought of the living God carried on practically, the city of the living God. Life is expressed in the Lord coming in and out amongst us. Of course, it is expressed by the Spirit. The Spirit is life, but things are never to be on the principle of judaism -- that is, on the principle of demand without supply. It is a living and heavenly state of things. It is the idea of the reflex of what is in heaven in the way of government that has to be carried out here on earth.
Now in view of all that, the other side is, that if I am in this city, my responsibility is to observe that the Lord has placed me here under these conditions. He has placed His authority here and so He says to Saul, who was subsequently to work it out more than anyone, "go into the city, and it shall be told thee what
{182}
thou must do". That is what every person who is amenable to discipline has to bear in mind. Not one of us is immune from discipline. I have to respect the idea of the city, and move in that way. I have my individual liberty with God, and I stand or fall to my own Master. Nevertheless, I have to observe what the Lord said to His great servant, "go into the city, and it shall be told thee". The Lord saw to it that things were right in that city. Otherwise, Saul would have had a poor handling, even with a man like Ananias. How easily we may misrepresent the Lord in the way we handle matters, but the Lord prepared Ananias and he handled it most beautifully. Why? Because the Lord went before, and fitted him to do this. So that Saul was cared for according to the Lord's mind. The Lord had in His mind that Saul should be impressed from the outset of his christian life with the thought that the Lord had authority here. Saul was to get the idea into his mind as a christian, that the Lord had authority here vested in certain ones. He did not say, the assembly, or the saints, it is in "the city". Saul was to be impressed with that, but then he was led in in blindness. Saul's eyes were opened in the city, not like the man in @Mark 8, who was taken *out* of the city. Saul was to see, not the wicked things, but what the Lord had set there. That is a great matter.
To illustrate this before I close, I would remind you of Boaz, the progenitor of David, the great city man, who took Jerusalem. The thought was beautifully set out, as I am just coming to it now. When a contract is to be entered into, when an alliance is to be formed, let us not forget the city, let us not forget, when entering into alliances, the place of the city where the Lord has placed His authority. If we do, we shall rue it. The selection of our companionships, in marriage, or in business, and the like, and the entrance into these matters cannot be made with disregard to the authority that the Lord has set amongst His people; any disregard
{183}
will only bring confusion. Boaz, we are told, having settled things in his mind about Ruth, went into the city. (She was the one he had carefully watched; he had settled as to her in his mind, and had measured the barley into her cloak, which she had held.) The Authorised Version says, "she" went into the city, but the correct translation as the context shows to be right, reads that "he" went into the city. He, having selected his prospective wife, went into the city. This is a matter of great importance, and it must be settled in relation to the city. It must not be done clandestinely, in any sense. It must be done openly and transparently, and it was. He went into the city, and Ruth went to her mother-in-law, who said to her, "the man will not rest until he have completed the matter this day" (@Ruth 3: 18). She understood the moral greatness of her kinsman, as we ought to, and "he went into the city". As soon as he entered into the city, the whole circumstances enabled him to do what he had in his mind, that is, to work openly in an appropriate and honest way. The man who had the first claim over Ruth and the property came into his way. He said, "Thou, such a one, turn aside, sit down here". He would not transgress the rights of another. He put it to him, that he had prior rights to himself. Then he called ten men of the elders of the city and says to them also, "Sit down here". This is a deliberative matter; it is not to be executed hastily. You are all acquainted with the facts; I need not go into them. The whole matter was settled to the glory of God and with the most important results. The line of royalty and sovereignty runs through it, and the worship of God. I am speaking of this not as a mere historical matter, but as a matter that bears on us, as scripture always does; the word of God bears upon those that read it and hear it. It is a question of brethren moving in earnestness, transparency, and honesty, in the recognition of the rights of one another, as the apostle says to the Thessalonians.
{184}
What I would specially wish that we should keep in mind is the thought of the city of the living God, of the heavenly Jerusalem, that as we draw near towards the end, when that great city, having the glory of God, will burst on the universe, that there should be some little reflection of it now; not only things done rightly, but in love, done in a living way, in a heavenly way, for that surely is the opposite to what is now done on earth.
May God bless these thoughts to us!
{185}
"MY FATHER AND YOUR FATHER ... MY GOD AND YOUR GOD"
@John 17: 1; @John 20: 17, 18; @Revelation 3: 12
J.T. What is in mind is to speak of what enters into the Lord's use of the term *My God*, and how, as appearing at the beginning of His ministry in our dispensation while He was still on earth, in John 20, it appears also at the end of our dispensation in the address to the assembly at Philadelphia. He -- according to Matthew and Mark -- used @Psalm 22: 1 on the cross, saying, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" and He adds, "thou art holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel".
In John's gospel, which, I believe is, among many other things, intended to instruct us as to this, we have the Lord presented incarnate, and so in sonship in chapter 1: 14 "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father);" that is, He is presented immediately as with the Father. In chapter 11, He speaks in the audience of others to the Father, and says, "Father" -- He speaks thus because of those that heard, those that stood by, indicating that His audible speaking to His Father had in mind the instruction of others. Again in chapter 12, He speaks to His Father, and there is the answer from heaven. Then in chapter 17, He addresses the Father formally, lifting up His eyes to heaven. This was evidently in the audience of His disciples, because He says, "they are not of the world;" that is to say, they were nearby. The thought, I believe, is to draw us to the side of the Lord in a spiritual sense, especially as *in assembly*. He would draw us to His side so that we may apprehend the current of His feelings and His affections, and what His God was to Him.
{186}
This would lead us to have part in what was before Him, especially in our service Godward. So that the instruction peculiar to John in these chapters, is not only as to the Lord going to the Father, but it says also that He came from God and went to God. That would be God in the sense in which He knew Him. In view of all this instruction in these chapters in John, His message to the disciples is the more significant, because He sent the message before He came in amongst them. In John's account they are not said to have been saying anything as He came in amongst them. In Luke's account they are said to have been saying certain things, but not in John's. The thought is that the wonderful message they had received had affected them, and they would think of the Lord in that way. He had sent a message that He was ascending to His Father, and theirs, His God and theirs, and that would be in their minds. It was intended to be in their minds, and it is revived in His word to the overcomer in Philadelphia. That assembly, the last but one addressed in Revelation, is especially before the Lord as having remnant features, and the overcomer would have intelligence as to the reward promised. Those who loved Him would value what He brought before them. So He brings in this term four times in the verse we read: "the temple of my God ... the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven, from my God". It is manifest that He has in mind that this thought which He sought to impress upon the disciples at the beginning has been revived. The purpose of our meeting now, is that we might have it in our minds as the supreme thought in the service of God -- our service in the assembly.
Ques. Does the thought of Father convey more affection than the thought of God?
J.T. It is a term of family relationship which God has taken up, all that God is in that way enters into
{187}
it. Other things do not enter into it, such as judgment. All that God is in affection necessarily enters into it, and the term is intended to assure us of the fullest affection and interest. It is in itself more limited than the thought of God, judgment not attaching to it. It conveys unqualified affection for its objects, that is to say, for those in the family relation. God is a primary thought; God *is*. It is the name or title that is final. The title Father does not cease, but God is the beginning and the end; "that God may be all in all". This means that all His counsels and operations end in Himself. God will be the infinite Object of all, and He will fill all. So that the service of God in the assembly should have that in mind now.
Ques. Do you think that we have allowed the thought that the Father was the terminus?
J.T. I think that is so. Father is a name taken in the economy into which God has come. It appears definitely as Christ is owned from heaven as Man at the Jordan; indeed the three divine Persons are seen there. @Romans 11: 36, @1 Corinthians 15: 28, and similar passages show that God as *God* is the source and end of all His counsels and works.
F.W.W. Would you distinguish for us between God known in the covenant and God known as you are now speaking of Him?
J.T. The idea of the covenant, as I understand, is that God enters into such a relation to assure us of His love, in view of our weakness, and to establish confidence in us as to Himself. We read in @Hebrews 6: 18 "That by two unchangeable things, in which it was impossible that God should lie, we might have a strong encouragement". This passage indicates what is in mind. It is to assure our hearts as to Him, but as we progress in the knowledge of God, we come to apprehend Him as in family relationship with us; in measure as Christ knows Him. There is no covenant relationship between God and Christ in that sense. The Lord did not need
{188}
any assurance, so that His relations with God would be on the ground of the absoluteness of God as He knew Him, as He alone could know Him. The covenant helps *us* in our weakness; assures us and sets us free; "perfect love casts out fear". We can understand that God is God, and the Lord Jesus having come out as the Mediator, knows Him; He can lay His hand on God and on us, and would lead us to the full thought of God. He says to the woman at the well, "God is a spirit". The intent in our reaching this thought of God is to fit us for eternity now. The thought of the covenant will not be needed there, but God, as He is known to Christ, will be the thought.
G.H. Does sonship as applying to us enter into it?
J.T. It does. That is what I thought we might come to. It is God and man finally, but man *in the relation of son*. The thought of man does not cease in sonship. Man is the thought that God had in His mind from the outset. "Let us make man in our image". Sonship is the relation in which there is liberty and dignity, but it carries with it the thought of manhood. Hence the Lord says in the chapter before us, "the men whom thou gavest me".
J.D.U. Does the thought of God convey what He has always been, and will be eternally?
J.T. Quite so. The suggestion of it came out in @Exodus 3: "I am". The first use of the word God in Scripture is in the plural, evidently alluding to His absoluteness. Of course, the title itself is relative, for He is not God to Himself but to others; but it conveys the full thought -- He who is "all in all". That is what we are to end with; all that comes in between is to bring us to that. God comes out on a lower plane, so as to raise us; to bring us to Himself as He is.
A.G.D. Would Psalm 90: 2 come in: "from eternity to eternity thou art God"?
J.T. Yes. It is Moses linking God as He was with him, with what He will be -- indeed what He *is*!
{189}
There is no change with Him. "From eternity to eternity thou art God". It is not that the title *God* denotes His essence and form; it is relative; used by the creature; Christ as Man also using it, but Moses here uses it to denote that time has made no change in the Deity.
W.G. Is the Lord using the term, *My God*, an indication to us of His perfect humanity?
J.T. Clearly so; *His* God comes thus into evidence. Using the term in this way, in our hearing, is to bring us to His side so that we might grasp the current of His mind, grasp what He means by the title *my God*. That is, the God with whom He as Man is in relationship The very fact that He says "My God" implies that He is Man. God comes down to our aide as it were to establish confidence in our hearts, but then He would draw us to His side to see who He is. "God is a spirit" is involved. We have to dismiss material thoughts from our minds. "God is a spirit", the Lord says. We do not get that in relation to the covenant, which is on the down line, so to speak. "God is a spirit", in @John 4, is on the up line.
Ques. What about @John 17: 3, to "know thee the only true God"?
J.T. That is in relation to eternal life; God meeting conditions here. The up line is God meeting conditions, so to speak, in His own heart; that man should know Him or apprehend Him as He is. "True God" in @John 17: 3 is over against idolatry.
G.A.v.S. What bearing would God dwelling in unapproachable light have upon His absoluteness?
J.T. It refers to it. In relativeness He dwelt in Christ here and He dwells in the assembly. The bearing of a statement like that would be to show how limited *we* are. Think of God in His absoluteness There is no possibility of us ever compassing Him. It is only as we get into the current of Christ's mind, as I understand it, that we can get some little thought of what
{190}
He is. If I grasp the current of Christ's mind, I get some thought of God in His absoluteness. Christ alone can compass that. The wonderful thing is that *He* can, and I am alongside of the One who can! I am brought *thus* to infiniteness in the measure in which I am able to take it in. We shall be all filled to the fulness of God, according to our measure. There will be nothing left to fill. "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages".
C.D. Is it that Christ would lead us to know His God as He as Man knows Him?
J.T. Yes, but *the measure* in which He knows Him is beyond us. We can be with Him, and get into His current of thought. Peter says, "this voice *we* heard ... being with him on the holy mountain" (@2 Peter 1: 18).
J.D.U. Does what is before us take us back, beyond, and above all question of good and evil, and the solution of it?
J.T. Yes; it is final. The Lord is leading on to finality in the wonderful communications in @John 14 - 17. The message through Mary, I think, is to affect the minds of the disciples, so that the Lord coming in amongst them, there might be some little ability to stand by Him and grasp what was before Him.
E.J.F. Is the man in @Ezekiel 43 standing by the prophet on the line of what you are speaking of?
J.T. "The man stood by me". I suppose there it would be to give support in the presence of the glory. How could man know God at all except through One who Himself has part in the Deity, becoming incarnate? Incarnation is the down line, but as it is stated in John we get immediately the thought of "an only-begotten with a father", and that the disciples contemplated Christ in that glory. The Lord in the chapters alluded to enlarged on it, and the message through Mary was that they might have some thought in their minds of their association with Him before God so that when He came in they might be ready. The
{191}
position looks towards finality -- to eternity; they are with Him in the light of the message: "I ascend to my Father and your Father; and to my God and your God". That sets us up beside Him, looking on to the final state of things.
Rem Ascension would be vital to the understanding of this.
J.T. Yes. It involves our heavenly place, the ground on which we are. The words, "I ascend", not 'I will ascend', give us the character of the thing, to prepare the minds of the saints for His incoming and our taking up this attitude of being *beside Him*.
Ques. Do you think, like Mary, we would often detain Him in resurrection?
J.T. I think that is the truth. It is not many years back since the doctrine was asserted that *resurrection* was the platform of the assembly, and that Christ comes to us on that ground. That is not the full truth relative to the assembly. In @John 12, He goes to Bethany on that ground; on the ground of Lazarus having been raised, but coming in to the assembly is on a higher platform. It is on the ground that we are heavenly, and He has gone into heaven.
J.D.U. Is there any difference then between the relation of "an only-begotten with a father", and what He is as ascended?
J.T. Well, the verse in @John 1 is no doubt an illustration. It is to present the idea; it is not *the* father, but *a* father. It is an illustration of what they saw, to bring out the peculiar radiation of affection between the Father and the Son. It is a relation known among men, of course; what an only-begotten is to any father normally, and that Jesus was apprehended in that relation with God. It is to bring out the beautiful radiation of affection between God and a Man, as Father and only-begotten. The Son ascending involves more than that; it implies His title to take a place with His Father above, and that the saints have a place there, too. It
{192}
makes His position distinct, but His brethren are to be with Him in view of the counsels of God being opened up. It is looking towards eternity, the ground taken is heavenly. Not that heaven is beyond creation, it is part of it. We do not go beyond creation but *He* does; He goes beyond all heavens. Here it is not, I ascend to the heavens, but "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God".
Ques. Does this thought of God belong to the assembly only?
J.T. No others will have it in the same measure, because of the status given and the formation that corresponds in the assembly. Each family will have its own status and formation, and it is manifest from the way the scripture presents it, that those forming the assembly have a place and intelligence beyond all others. It is only a matter of gradation. It is the same thing in principle, but the assembly has a relationship and formation peculiar to itself.
G.A.v.S. What does the scripture in @Exodus 4 imply, "Let my son go?" What does the word "son" cover?
J.T. I think it is what we are speaking of in a figurative way. Israel had that place, and Jehovah sends a message to Pharaoh that Pharaoh would understand. It is a relationship that would be intelligible to men, that Pharaoh would well understand. Jehovah says, "I will slay thy son". It is carried through from Hosea, into @Matthew 2, and applied to Jesus as having been in Egypt, and called out of Egypt, so it runs on to what we are saying. It is a question of the service of God. "Let my son go, that he may serve me". What is said in @Exodus 4 awaited the incarnation; all awaited that, and sonship therefore develops from it. What we are speaking of today is sonship, not as applied to Israel, because they will have it on earth. It has to be understood as applying to the members of the assembly, which, in view of the fact that we have the Spirit of
{193}
adoption, makes it greater than applied to any other family.
G.A.v.S. Was it anticipative of the covenant in the case of Israel?
J.T. Yes. The covenant was necessary because of what they were; and it is necessary for us also, so that we should be set free to enter into sonship, which is beyond the covenant. Sons, as such, do not need the covenant. The relationship of sons implies that our position is fixed. There is no uncertainty about it.
G.H. Would the Lord's word in @John 14: 9, "He that has seen me has seen the Father", refer to preparedness to receive this thought of God?
J.T. That is greater than the thought of Mediator of the covenant. Christ is the Mediator of the new covenant, but when He says, "he that has seen me has seen the Father", it is not simply a question of attributes or service of mediatorship, but of personality. The Father was there in Him, and perfectly expressed.
Ques. What is the difference of thought between the Father seeking worshippers, and God is a Spirit and those who worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth?
J.T. The Father there would refer to the longings of God known in that relation; it should move our hearts. "God is a spirit" refers to what He *is*. It is a primary thought. The object of the statement, I believe, is to liberate us from material thoughts in regard of God and His service. The new birth implies that we are to be constitutionally spiritual: "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit".
G.A.v.S. Is there any significance in the Lord speaking about "my Father and your Father", before He says "my God and your God"?
J.T. The latter, *My God*, is the final thought. It is really the greatest thought, not in any sense detracting from the precious name of Father, but the relation of Father is taken up in time. As the Word is said to
{194}
have become flesh in John, we have the Father immediately, but the idea of God is from eternity to eternity, as we have seen. Of course, the relation of Father remains, involving family relationship.
J.D.U. Do you get in the thought of God, One from whom every movement of good to man has emanated?
J.T. That is how the truth is stated -- "For of him, and through him, and for him are all things" (@Romans 11: 36). In this and other statements it is God Himself as the Source of all, and the End of all.
W.J. There is an expression in @John 14: 20, "In that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you".
J.T. That refers to the day of the Spirit, of course. The Spirit here enables us to apprehend His place in the Father's affections. The idea is that He is in the Father's affections, and that we are in His affections, and He is in our affections.
Ques. Do the rewards to the overcomer in Philadelphia carry us on to an eternal condition?
J.T. I think they do and that it is very remarkable. It only occurred to me today, that it is striking that the Lord should bring this thought so prominently before the overcomer in Philadelphia. I think that He has in mind the full thought of God. Brethren have been helped as to this in these last days. There has been the recovery of the truth, not only of what we may call mediatorial truth, delivering truth, but truth that involves eternity and the saints¬ place there, and what God is to have there, and how God is to be supreme. The Lord in @Revelation 3 is honouring what is in Philadelphia in speaking thus, in putting things on such a level; first that the overcomer should be made a pillar in *the temple of My God*. What an honour! The Lord would not use such terms were it not that the persons addressed have some apprehension of them and value them. It would allude to a person who is standing upright in regard to these great things in
{195}
these last days. It is what he is characteristically here in this world, and the Lord is intimating to him that he understands the great thoughts He presents to him. He is to be "a pillar in the temple of my God". Then He says, "he shall go no more at all out". This I suppose is an allusion to our eternal portion. There is much going out now, much burden-bearing, and all that; but "he shall go no more at all out" would mean restfulness and enjoyment. Then, "I will write upon him the name of my God" -- a new name. No doubt many would read this and think nothing of *My* God; the name of God would be enough, they would think. The name of God is not enough for the Lord; He is evidently alluding to the intelligence of the people addressed; that they have some little thought of that great final thought in the gospel of John. That is in *His* heart, as He conveyed it to the hearts of the disciples in the message: "my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". It is assumed that the overcomer would understand.
In the addresses to the assemblies, He speaks according to the ability of the persons addressed, according to what they value. He does not go beyond their understanding, and I believe He implies that here; that John's gospel is understood and the bearing of the last days is understood. *His* God is understood. So that He alludes to new Jerusalem; "the name of the city of my God". It is not the city of the living God now, but the city of *My* God, the new Jerusalem. He is assuming that the overcomer would understand, and, of course, we ought to put ourselves in that position. If we are worth anything at all, we should be overcomers, and the promise is to us. It should be an incentive to us, as understanding the words *My God* in that gospel.
McC. Is it personal knowledge? Paul speaks of "my God;" David also speaks of "my God".
{196}
J.T. Paul knew the covenant God; he knew the Creator God, but in using the words, "my God", one can understand he would be on the lines of the Lord's usage of them.
Ques. Would "our God" be more the language he would use as intimating what is collective?
J.T. If you speak collectively you would have to say that, but it does not set aside that one can say, *My God*.
W.G. In @Philippians 4: 19, we read, "my God shall abundantly supply all your need ..." and later, "But to our God and Father be glory to the ages of ages" (verse 20).
J.T. Yes. In no one can you get more fully set out what we are speaking of now than in the apostle Paul. In his writings, you get expressions of worship constantly, and all in this trend, all toward God in the full sense.
Ques. Is it largely the covenant God in Hebrews?
J.T. I do not know that it is. The verse that has already been quoted is really the acme of the epistle, the highest level. "It became him ... in bringing many sons to glory" (@Hebrews 2: 10). That is God as we have been speaking of Him. Then the quotation from @Psalm 22 follows immediately, for it goes on to say, "I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" (verse 12). I think you have there the thought to be reached in the epistle. It is God, "for whom are all things". God bringing many sons to glory, and He has made the Leader of their salvation perfect through sufferings. That is, Christ has reached that point to the end that we might be brought in. "For both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren" (verse 11). We are brought on to the high level of being *His brethren*, so that He might have us in the assembly, that He might praise God through us. I think we are on eternal ground there.
{197}
G.A.v.S. You were referring to the eternal condition of things. Is the new Jerusalem in Philadelphia identical with the new Jerusalem in @Revelation 21?
J.T. Yes. That is found in the beginning of chapter 21. It says, "I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem", that is in relation to the eternal scene. In verse 10 it says, "the holy city, new Jerusalem;" that is millennial. It is the eternal thought, I think, that is in mind in @Revelation 3. It is "the city of my God, the new Jerusalem". The name of the new Jerusalem is written on the overcomer in Philadelphia.
Ques. Are all the rewards limited to the millennium?
J.T. I think these in their fulness go beyond that. I mean, *My* God and *new* Jerusalem. That all appear in the millennium does not affect what we are speaking of; eternity is in view. It is a question of Christ's God. Overcomers go in for all that there is. An overcomer is one that holds to all that there is for us, all that God has been pleased to recover to us. He values it and is in accord with it. I believe that is what is in the Lord's mind in alluding to things in this way. Four times He uses the words, *My God*.
J.D.U. Do you think @Revelation 3: 10 indicates the pleasure the Lord would have in securing for God, in a day like this, what will ultimately be secured for God in the eternal day?
J.T. That is what is in mind in this reading, that the Lord is leading us beyond millennial conditions, great as they are. It is this very instruction that gives lustre to this day. It is not a mere provisional thing. It is an eternal thing, functioning in the millennium provisionally; it is eternally for the divine pleasure. God is helping us forward to eternal relations, I think. I believe the Lord has that in view in these promises to the overcomers in this assembly, because it is a question of our own times. That makes it so important for us to understand it. The millennium is really for testimony, and is more spoken of in Scripture than
{198}
eternity, but it is not final, it is a provisional thing to show what God can do with creation as it is. New creation goes beyond that. What belongs to new creation may come into it to adorn it and to serve God in it, but the millennial state of things is provisional and in relation to the present creation and is not final. When you get something new, new heavens, new earth, new Jerusalem, you have what goes beyond the millennium.
Ques. What bearing would these things have on administration eternally?
J.T. I do not think that you have much thought of administration in eternity. It is the millennium that requires that thought. In @Revelation 21: 2 you have the new Jerusalem, but it is "as a bride adorned for her husband", and what is said of it is, "Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men". The idea of tabernacle is not administration, but *duelling*. The great thought eternally will be dwelling.
G.H. It is "the holy city, new Jerusalem", in @Revelation 21: 2.
J.T. Yes. It is the link with the administrative side, but the term is changed to tabernacle. I do not think it is rule. Of course, there will be some idea of rule, but what will need it? There will he no variation or rebellious thought at all. There will be some idea of rule; the Son Himself will be subject. It is very significant that it is immediately called the tabernacle, which means God dwelling, not at a distance, but near; the assembly will be the tabernacle. The loud voice that John heard does not say, Behold the city, but "Behold, the tabernacle of God".
G.H. What is the import of the change-over in thought from temple to tabernacle?
J.T. The thought of temple would hardly go beyond the millennial state of things, because it is largely a question of light, although the word "temple" also conveys the thought of dwelling. In @2 Corinthians 6: 16, for instance, "*ye* are the living God's temple; according
{199}
as God has said, I will dwell among them, and walk among them". Of course, what is the temple now and in the millennium will remain eternally, as we have seen, the assembly as the tabernacle of God.
Ques. Peter speaks of waiting for the new heavens and the new earth -- that would refer to what is eternal?
J.T. It refers to the eternal state of things. In the heavenly city, there is no temple, which I suppose means that there is great nearness. The Lord God Almighty is the temple and the Lamb. There is always, I suppose, the thought of something that may be made known.
G.A.v.S. What are Isaiah's new heavens and new earth?
J.T. Isaiah does not go beyond the millennium, beyond Jerusalem as in the millennium, but there is that which is new. We have to carry it forward to the full thought. The full thought is an absolutely new creation, where old things have passed away and all things have become new. Peter carries it forward.
J.H. What is "my new name", @Revelation 3: 12?
J.T. The use of the word "new" in this book is most instructive. The bearing of it in a practical way would be that current religion using the name of Christ is no different from what has been in the world all the time. There is nothing new about it. It is merely of man's thought and way. The force of things here is that God has brought us into what is wholly new. "My new name" is the way Christ is apprehended. He is not apprehended rightly in christendom. The word "new" throughout the book has that bearing.
G.H. Would the new name being written on the overcomer make him descriptive of this at the end of the dispensation?
J.T. That is the idea. All this marks him now in principle and he will appear in it. The things that are alluded to will remain.
{200}
W.G. So that there is that which comes out from God Himself, different altogether from the original creation?
J.T. The Lord came in in connection with this creation. He has now taken up another setting altogether, where all is new and of God. What is current religiously in the world in regard to God and Christ is not new. We have to understand what *is* new.
E.T. Where would new creation in @2 Corinthians 5 come in?
J.T. It already exists. It does not exactly say there that the believer is a new creation, but that there is a new creation. But other scriptures, such as @Ephesians 2: 10, say so, and hence we already have part in it.
{201}
MAINTENANCE
@1 Kings 17: 8, 9; @2 Samuel 19: 31 - 38; @1 Chronicles 26: 26 - 28
All these scriptures contain the word "maintain" -- and the word stands related in these scriptures to three important features of Christ in testimony in this world. The first, @1 Kings 17, referring to Him known in prophetic ministry; the second, @2 Samuel 19, referring to Christ as rejected, a feature of the testimony which has to be maintained. Thirdly, in @1 Chronicles 26, that which He has built in testimony here, the house of God, that also has to be maintained. The thought is found in other settings in the Scriptures, particularly as used by the Lord Himself, in spirit, in @Psalm 16: 5. He says to God in piety, "thou maintainest my lot". That is an *individual* matter; that each can reckon upon God maintaining his lot. Joseph also sent word to his father that he would maintain him during the five critical years that remained yet of the famine. A word that may be extended to refer to the way the Israel of God, and its hopes, are maintained among the gentiles, for Joseph's proposal was that his father should be maintained in *Egypt*. So that each of us can reckon on divine maintenance in crises and thus be saved from having recourse to human methods, whether in regard to material or spiritual things. We shall be maintained as believers in Christ, as in dependence upon Him.
These scriptures have to do more with the collective position of the saints, and the prophetic word is of the very first importance. It implies what God is having to say in our own time as to His people, and there has been a certain revival of this. The revival of the truth in the early days of the last hundred years, was marked by diligent inquiry into prophecy, not so much as to the ministry of prophecy, though that was there,
{202}
but to the prophetic *instruction* in the Scriptures. It was of the Lord, so as to unfold, or re-unfold, the great prophetic map, so to speak. In order that the people of God should know the mind of God as to the future, that they should rightly divide the word of truth, and not misapply the Scriptures as was current in that time, and for centuries before. The misapplication of Scripture means the spoiling of it as to its real meaning, and we cannot afford to have any part of it spoilt or made to mislead. So at that time, the diligent dependent study of prophecy in the Scriptures yielded much. We are all the gainers at the present moment from it.
In addition to this there is the prophetic ministry which belongs to the present time, as there was that suited to Old Testament times. The foundation of the assembly, as we learn, was on the testimony of the apostles and prophets; indeed the second great gift, according to @Ephesians 4, is said to be that of prophecy, although this included the foretelling of events. That character of prophetic ministry appeared in the Lord pre-eminently. It appeared in the apostles, particularly in Paul and John, and we do well to keep an eye on it; always keeping it in our minds, that we may not become set, or crystallised in any interpretation, but that we may have it in freshness. The Spirit would always make the prophetic word *surer* to us, as Peter says. Indeed, the prophet John was told in @Revelation 19: 10 that "the spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Jesus". We do well, as I say, to keep all this before us, but then there is in addition, what is spoken of as the *gift* of prophecy to be coveted at any time. "Desire earnestly the greater gifts ... but rather that ye may prophesy" (@1 Corinthians 12: 31 and 14: 1). The apostle adds that one who prophesies, edifies, and that is the great thing, dear brethren, in ministry, to *edify*. Not only so, but such a ministry establishes incontestably where God is at the present time. God can only be, in the sense in which I am speaking of Him, where conditions are morally suitable,
{203}
and while persons may claim His presence, assuming the conditions, yet the ministry of prophecy is a positive evidence of the presence of God. It brings God Himself in, and so much so that a simple person, or even an unbeliever, coming in where such a ministry is current, is affected. He falls down, we are told, and acknowledges that "God is amongst you of a truth". Others may claim it; but what is "of a truth" is incontestable. True prophecy brings God there in such a way as to affect a person in that sense. It does not inflate. It brings us down, and if we are to be built-up, we must be brought down; as Simeon said, for the fall and rising again of many in Israel.
Such ministry is to be *maintained*. Elijah represents it. His ministry was not to foretell events; he wrote no book; he brought God in at the moment, and in bringing God in, he achieved one of the most striking victories in the history of the testimony. Hence, we see the importance of the maintenance of prophecy. God had provided for him, for his sustenance, at the brook Cherith near the Jordan -- very significant! -- and the ravens fed him. He was cared for there, but in a way that did not suggest affection, which a servant needs, he needs an affectionate environment. The brook dried up, and Jehovah says, "Arise, go to Zarephath ... I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee". That word has reference to every one of us here. The command is to maintain the prophetic ministry; it is a command from God; it is not optional. A divine command is never optional. It is imperative! The woman is scarcely equal to it, and what that brings out is the apparent unreasonableness of the demands made upon us. The more unspiritual we are, the more we shall regard the demands made upon us as unreasonable.
The woman was gathering sticks. She was apparently the first one Elijah met as he reached the place. That is what she was doing. Evidently she had not the slightest
{204}
thought in her mind of any such service as Jehovah had said she would perform; how precious it is when the thought comes to us that we are the subject of conversation in heaven! Certainly this woman was the subject of conversation between Jehovah and His great servant many miles away across the land of Palestine, before she, as far as we know, knew anything of it. That God was silently working in her heart there can be no doubt. One can understand that the waves of interest from heaven extend far into the field of testimony, and much comes to us that is not at the outset intelligible to us; yet we *feel* the divine movings. Feelings are often precursory to direct impressions and direct messages. It is well, therefore, to have ourselves well set for impressions, for the waves of interest that are current.
As Elijah drew near, he found this woman gathering sticks. It was under God that she was doing that. She had in her mind just two sticks, but he said to her, "Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel". How particular he was! you might say; and it is often so, that divine urgency is particular, and it is to test us. Why should he mention a vessel? She could not have brought the water without it, but reasoning does not help us in these things at all, for words that do not seem intelligible to us are meant to test us. Many words and phrases in Scripture are quite unintelligible to the natural mind, but they are meant to test us. Why are they there? Not for nothing, certainly. In a way this word "vessel" might tend to irritate her naturally in that time of famine. She might say, If he wants a drink of water, let him leave that to me, but no! "in a vessel", he says. He is the representative of God; he is considering for God, and the word "vessel" has a great deal to do with the service of God. No one can understand the service of God unless he understands the word "vessel", and that it applies to oneself. The very constitution of a christian qualifies him to be a vessel,
{205}
as we see in the woman of Samaria in @John 4. She may he regarded as corresponding to what we have here, because she *arrived* at the thought of the *vessel*. She left her water pot, implying that she knew what the Lord meant; that *she* was the vessel now.
So the woman of Zarephath *went* to get the water. She did not complain. I am speaking of the test that is in it, so that the prophetic ministry should be maintained. We are to be tested, for christianity is not an arm-chair affair; it was never intended to be that; it implies *sacrifice*, and that I should be asked for something apparently beyond me is a real test. As answering to the test, I shall find that the voice that is testing me in asking me to support it, will turn round and *support me*. As I begin to support the testimony, I shall realise that the testimony supports me, that God will not in result be anyone's debtor, and this appears in this very passage. She goes for the water without complaint, and now Elijah says, "Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand". "I have not a cake", she says, "but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse". She further told him that she was gathering two sticks to cook what she had for herself and her son, so that they might eat it and die, that is, she thought of eating and then dying. That is not the right idea; she is confused in her mind; eating is to *live*. The prophet says, "Fear not; go, do as thou hast said; but make me thereof a little cake first; and bring it to me". That is very unreasonable, you say, that man is selfish. He may appear selfish, and he is feeling it. He is, we may be sure, *suffering* because of having thus to ask, but he is representative of God, and surely *God* must come first. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart" -- that is the first great claim put in at Sinai, and surely He deserves to have the first whatever it is; the first-born; the first of the harvest; the first of cattle, the first of the dough; the first cake, and so on. The first obviously belongs to God, for of
{206}
Him and through Him and for Him are all things. The prophet here is asking for a *cake;* that is, he has a *whole* idea in mind; and, dear brethren, if we are to have prophetic ministry, we must have the *whole* idea in our minds. The *whole assembly* is spoken of as coming together in one place for this service, not part of the assembly. It is the whole (@1 Corinthians 14: 23). In order to have prophetic ministry maintained, we must observe this; it has to do with the whole assembly in a city. I am speaking now of the general principles. The prophet would inject the thought into the woman's mind that he wanted "a little cake first".
You will see, dear brethren, how all this fits into these ministry meetings; how they are not merely occasions of pleasure, of meeting one another -- right as these things are. It is a question of sacrifice, and that the whole thought of God enters into it, and that *He* expects to have the first place. We are considering for God. We are told, as to this widow, that the oil in the cruse did not fail nor the meal in the barrel waste. The whole household, with the prophet, was maintained for a *long period* -- indeed for a whole year! So that we may well afford, as we see these things, to think of God; to have the whole thought in our minds at all times. It is pre-eminent in heaven. I do not think there is a thought in heaven, save as to divine Persons, that has a greater place than the assembly. It is there continually, and in the assembly there should be a reflection of what is in heaven. As we sit down together, it is a question of what is in heaven being reflected here. What is in heaven cost Jesus much. I am speaking very carefully. Heaven is a creation, but the entrance of Jesus into heaven involved history in heaven, and that history goes on. Every day makes history there. We are to have our minds on things above, and what is to be done down here by the Spirit is necessarily a counterpart of what is up there. The sheet in @Acts 10 came down from heaven and went up again. Peter says, "It came even to me;"
{207}
and what was the intent, but to fill his soul with what was in heaven? That was one idea; it was knit at the four corners, and contained great things spiritually, what God had cleansed. So here at Zarephath, history was being made, and so it is wherever God is working, whether in this city, or in other cities; thank God for so many of them. In the towns, villages, hamlets of the world, where God is working, spiritual history is being made. I am speaking now of "the whole assembly". The apostle says, "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place" (@1 Corinthians 14: 23). In chapter 11: 18 we have, "when ye come together in assembly" -- not "the whole", but "ye". That is the *character* of the thing, but in chapter 14 it is a whole thought, and that whole thought stands in relation to the prophetic ministry.
Now I pass on to @2 Samuel 19. I think you will see that the prophetic ministry enters into what you get in this chapter; it was needed, and it was there. David's position is clarified; he is now returning after his exile, but the Spirit of God reverts in this passage to the time of the exile. We are now in the time of Christ's exile, and it is a testing time. It is another view of our position locally or generally. The Lord's supper contemplates the time of the Lord's rejection and the refusal of His rights here; His rights to His inheritance, and to His throne; the throne of David. Our loyalty is tested by this. So Barzillai, the Gileadite, is a rich man, and among others he "maintained the king" in the time of his rejection. That was a great privilege, never to be forgotten. It is the maintenance of Christ as here in testimony in the time of His rejection. There is a certain exposure, a certain danger attached to the position, and it taxes us. We are taxed according to our measure. This was a great man, a rich man. He not only contributed, but he is accredited with *maintaining* David. What that means today is maintaining conditions for Christ and what represents Christ here, in spite of the opposition, in spite of His rejection; that I have
{208}
part in maintaining with Him this position. We are to see to it that there are conditions here suitable for the particular testimony at the moment, which involves the rejection and crucifixion of our Lord. The voice that is constantly heard is, "We will not have this man to reign over us". Yet we are called upon by the example of this great man to maintain the position, the Lord's supper being the testimony to it, until He come. We are to be identified with the Christ put to death here, but who is coming back. It is not a mere theory; it calls for maintenance in a practical way. Barzillai was equal to this, and he was ready to go a certain length with the king after having done it.
Now I wish to point out that we may to a point have served in the Lord's supper, in the assembly, and the care meetings, and thus serving well. Yet in a crisis, when the time comes in any given state of things, we may not be prepared to go the whole way, and that is the lesson to be learnt here. Full credit is to be accorded for all that has been done, and yet there is inability to take up the full spiritual thought that is involved. Every crisis, every conflict amongst us is intended to lead us on further in the truth. It is intended to make us more spiritual. My ability, my knowledge, my affection, my goods devoted to the Lord's interests; all that goes a long way. It is highly valued in heaven, but what is still more highly valued is my spirituality and a consequent relish and desire for heavenly things; that I give up earthly things for the things above. The territory of Gilead, of course, always involved this very defect, and it is a challenge to us as to whether we live spiritually on the other, the western, side of the Jordan, which is the spiritual side. David was maintained there, on the eastern side, in Gilead, but he did not propose to *live* there; he returned to Jerusalem as soon as the way was opened. In returning after the conflict, the Lord would seek to bring us with Him. Barzillai had served David well, but now the test was Jerusalem.
{209}
Who is ready for that? "A little way", he says. He was ready to go only a little way with David. After serving so well, and being so honoured, that one should miss the main point in the end, is so lamentable. Barzillai says, "that I may die in mine own city". What a poor speech! He makes the most of his failing years. To link on with one's great age the imminence of death, and that that death may take place in one's own city -- what a poor thing that is! He wanted to die in his own city. I suppose he had established a name there. It is pretty certain, if I live on the eastern side of the Jordan, that that will have a great place with me. I may love the Lord and serve the brethren well, and yet I have in my mind the place I have in this particular city. I may have some little renown because of my service, and want to die there. He says. "that I may die in mine own city, by the grave of my father and of my mother". They must have been a good while dead too, but his mind was in the realm of the dead, great man that he was, and honoured by God too. Barzillai intimates he has no taste for David's food. See the questions he asks here. He had no taste for David's food; no power to hear the voice of singing men and singing women.
How different all would be were he to go (I am speaking now spiritually), and enter into the heavenly side of things, to leave behind all those thoughts of death and of one's own city, and one's father and mother who are long in their graves. The Lord says, God "is not the God of the dead, but of the living". He would have our minds in the realm of the living, in the heavenly side of our calling. This is the great burden for the moment; the great divine thoughts concerning us, to lay hold of that for which we are apprehended; the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus. If it is a question of the city, let it be the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem. Barzillai missed it, and there is a spiritual warning in the fact that some of his descendants, being unable to find their
{210}
genealogical register, were, as polluted, removed from the priesthood (@Nehemiah 7: 63 - 65).
Chimham, who represents a younger generation, goes to Jerusalem; Barzillai nominated him to go, and he is ready. We may thank God for the young men. On them the continuance of the testimony, under God, depends. Normally they are strong and the word of God abides in them (@1 John 2: 14). Besides, the young men of today are the old men of tomorrow. Thus they are to be enjoined to take up these things. If we do not see the elder brethren going in for them heartily, it is all the more urgent that the young should go in for them. Chimham goes up to Jerusalem with David. He comes in for what David said to Barzillai, "I will maintain thee with me in Jerusalem".
My final thought is in @1 Chronicles 26, the maintenance of the *house of God*. We have here the evidence of great regard for persons who have gone, who have dedicated things, brethren who died. This Levite, "This Shelomith and his brethren" are occupied in the dedicated treasures. First there are treasures dedicated by "king David, and the chief fathers, the captains;" living persons who were there; they had the first place. If we speak about the old brethren that are gone, to speak about them first is not wise. Better to speak of the living ones first, because we are so prone to think the former times were better than these. We do not speak wisely if we say that, because, as the scripture which has often been quoted says, "a living dog is better than a dead lion" (@Ecclesiastes 9: 4). This Shelomith is occupied with the dedicated things of David; he is still living. In a certain sense, he was never more living than in these chapters. Captains of thousands, too, men of distinction militarily; captains of hundreds, of less distinction; captains of the host -- whatever their titles, they were captains. It is all a question of distinguished persons. There is nothing more foreign to christianity than communism or socialism. Christianity implies great
{211}
distinctions. It is a question of moral worth; and moral worth comes in for distinction; it is bound to; its value is recognised in heaven. The Spirit of God sustains that valuation here whatever it be. So this Levite Shelomith, who is a descendant of Moses, is looking after those dedicated things. Whatever may happen to me, I get credit for all that is past; not a thing will be omitted, but the Spirit of God is telling us first about the *present* treasures, what the living had dedicated, and he is looking after these. We are then told that these things were treasured in order "to maintain the house of Jehovah;" showing that what is in this sense current amongst us is to this end. Whatever is dedicated, taken as spoils of conflict, is all carefully treasured. It is for the maintenance of the house of God. Nothing is to be omitted. Very comforting!
Then the passage tells us of the dedicated things of Samuel the seer, whose dedicated things would be specially valued. Then Saul the son of Kish; one whom we might think would be ruled out, he had dedicated; and Abner the son of Ner, who stood out against David even after the death of Saul; and Joab, the general of David's armies, whom even David referred to as a hard man -- and he was that -- he came in for the severest judgment under the hand of Solomon, yet his dedicated things have a place in the house of God! In this record we have a striking evidence of God's fairness as to the services and gifts of His people. I am speaking of all this, dear brethren, because the house of God is in mind, and that it is wonderfully furnished and maintained with "things new and old". We may not be equal to using them, but still they are treasures to be used in maintaining the house of God. Ancient things are necessary, but he mentions, as I said before, treasures of *present* servants. These are first; these are the most prominent. It is what the Spirit is saying today to the assemblies that has the first place. Then take up the '*Collected Writings*' and all other writings that are of
{212}
the Spirit of God, however ancient. They are all profitable and all intended to maintain the house of God, so that we may be fully furnished in our places in the house of God. One could say much more about the house of God, and of what David had himself furnished for it. Indeed he uses that remarkable word in this section, "my affection for the house of my God" (@1 Chronicles 29: 3). Beautiful phrase! When I look upon the brethren in that light, as composing the house of God (@Hebrews 3: 6), they draw out one's affections. So David, in his "affection for the house of my God", gives three thousand talents of the finest gold and seven thousand talents of refined silver. This gift was *special*, as expressing *affection*. As we learn elsewhere, he had given much more for use in the building of the house of God, which is the great point in this section of Scripture and the early chapters of the next book.
Solomon is the great builder, and these dedicated things, as I said at the beginning, are for the maintenance of the house of God. Although the outward form christianity has taken is called "a great house" in which there are vessels to dishonour, yet the true house of God, composed of all those who have His Spirit, exists. It is to be maintained by what is ministered currently in the power of the Spirit of God, and also by what was dedicated earlier, but used now in a living way.
{213}
HEAT
@Psalm 19: 4 - 6; @Ecclesiastes 4: 11; @2 Kings 4: 32 - 35; @Acts 28: 2 - 5
What I have in mind is to speak about *heat*. It is referred to in Scripture as beneficial, sometimes as adverse, but generally as advantageous to men and to the earth.
It is mentioned first in @Genesis 8: 22, "Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". The allusion is to a fixed state of things, consequent not alone on creatorial grounds, but on mediatorial sacrificial grounds. The physical state of things, or environment in which we are, is not only on the ground of creation but also of redemption. @Genesis 1 is entirely on creatorial grounds: we are not to forget the Creator, we are to remember Him, and that He is faithful.
In chapter 8 we have offerings, mediatorial, as I said, in figure at least; burnt offerings, and we are told, that Jehovah smelled a sweet savour. Noah having offered of every clean animal, and every clean fowl, God said He would not again curse the ground; He would be favourable to it. Indeed in the next chapter He enters into a covenant with Noah, his sons, the fowl, cattle, and the earth, and so He says that all the days of the earth there shall be "seed time and harvest ... day and night". Other things have modified this covenant, but God never forgets the ground on which He is with men, and with the cattle, and with the earth. The mention of heat is benign, beneficial: cold and heat, Jehovah says, shall not cease. As these are experienced, we name them. A very important thing in spiritual history is to name things as we experience them. We have cold and heat, and then we have the names of
{214}
these two seasons -- summer and winter, summer coming first. It is first as of more value; in the naming we give priority to what is specially desirable.
Heat, is marking a season, has a name; it is alluded to here for the first time, and it has its own distinction ever afterwards. Sometimes, as I have intimated, it is adverse, that is, used of God in His governmental ways, so that it scorches. We read of that, but what I have in mind, dear brethren, is the benefit implied spiritually. So it is formally connected with the sun in @Psalm 19. In the verses preceding it is made clear that it is Christ, typically. Earlier the sun as set in the heavens on the fourth day of creation would also typify the Lord. There it is to rule the day, and in conjunction with the moon it was to be for signs and seasons, but here the thought of heat stands in relation to it. Significantly too, for it is a question of experience. Whatever we get in the book of Psalms may be rightly regarded as a matter of experience. God allowing His people to put their experiences into words, poetry; helping them to do it; His mind thus coming out through the experiences of His people, and stamping all with His own approval. This is a very great honour. We get, for instance, Sarah, who said she would not have Ishmael brought up with her son, and God honours her remarks, as *Scripture*. He says, "What says the scripture?" (@Galatians 4: 30). A very touching matter that God so honours the experience of His people with Himself. In Galatians we read, "But what says the scripture? Cast out the maid servant and her son", but they are Sarah's words in @Genesis 21. So throughout the book of Psalms it is a question of experience with God; and God qualified one man to write a great many of them, that is David; "the sweet psalmist of Israel" gives a touch that no one else could give. These beautiful productions, made in the power of the Spirit of God, are set down in beautiful order, and God graciously uses them as His own communication. Sometimes they rise to the direct words of our Lord
{215}
Jesus in the most touching and beautiful manner. The most profound feelings we get of our Lord Jesus are voiced in the book of Psalms, and so here we have one who knew something about the heavens, for it is, as you will observe, a psalm of David. I suppose he had weighed over the accounts Scripture gives of the heavens, for the relation between the book of Psalms and the heavens is very strong. It is said in the scripture that God by His Spirit garnished the heavens, and that God in a vision took out Abraham and caused him to look up to the heavens, and asked him if he could count the stars. They are all called by name. David is really more concerned about the heavens than about the earth, whereas with Solomon it is more the earth.
David here attributes heat to the sun, and speaks of it in terms that can only have reference to Christ. He says, "In them hath he set a tent for the sun". Had Peter thought of this, he would not have proposed a tabernacle for Moses alongside of Jesus. That there should be a tabernacle for Moses in the heavens is utterly contrary to any spiritual mind, but that there should be one for Jesus is perfectly intelligible. He comes forth, the psalm says, "as a bridegroom". Who can fail to think of the warmth that enters into that thought? And then: "rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race". We have surely, wrapped up in these wonderful words, an allusion to the Lord Jesus in His affections, in the warmth of His affections for us in this cold world. He knows how chilly it is, how frigid indeed it may be, as the devil, who is the god of it, turns his winds against us, but this psalm says as to the sun that, "there is nothing hid from the heat thereof". I suppose those of us who live in the temperate zones value heat more than others. I have no doubt that christianity flourishes best in those zones, for even physical conditions are used of God to help us. I doubt if there is anything in our environment, as God has
{216}
set it, that is not intended to help us; the whole environment is educational.
So in the recurring heat and cold, we all the more value both. The higher the temperature, certainly when it goes above blood heat, the more we value the cold, and the lower the temperature, certainly as it goes below zero, the more we value the heat. Besides, there is benefit from the changes, to our bodies as well as to the earth. It cannot be doubted that God in His creatorial wisdom, has set us in these temperate zones. Spiritually it is necessary, for the apostle Paul refers to winter, speaking of spending it with certain saints. He evidently spent a whole winter in the island of Melita; he felt the rain and the cold, but the people were "very friendly" to him. How he would value that! Those who move around in the Lord's service, as he did, greatly value friendliness amongst the brethren. For the word, friend, is really of more value in certain circumstances than the word brother. Brother is apt to be very hackneyed, and to lose its power. There is a Friend, we are told, that "sticketh closer than a brother", and friendliness is greatly to be cherished among the brethren.
In Melita, as I said, the winter is taken account of. It was cold and they made a fire, and Paul added to it, a significant thought spiritually, but I wish to dwell on this thought of heat, that nothing is hid from the sun depicted in such beautiful language in @Psalm 19. I am speaking now of Jesus as Man, up there. No one else has such distinction, for in everything He has the pre-eminence, but He comes out, and "rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race;" and what a race that is, to make the circuit of heaven and to affect all. The benign heat that issues forth from Him, the winds may modify, but there is also the altering of the winds, and how great the change when the south wind blows! By it "thy garments become warm", as Elihu says (@Job 37: 17), but the heat is from the sun. There are modifying
{217}
things, and we thank God for them, but the heat is there, and we know from whence it comes. "There is nothing hid", says David, "from the heat thereof".
Now, to follow that up, I want to speak to you from the book of Ecclesiastes, which is from Solomon. He speaks of heat in persons, and obviously it links on very instructively with the psalm; what comes down from Christ is radiated. There is the idea of radiation, not at a distance, but in two lying together; "how can one alone be warm?" is the inquiry. There may be those here who have left the place of spiritual heat, but the wise man says, "how can one alone be warm?" It is for you to answer. Were you to tell the truth, you would own that since you left you have hardly had any warmth at all. The Lord has a word for you here. The passage also says, "if two lie together, then they have warmth". Such is our constitution. The whole passage bears on brethren seeking one another, as if to say, We cannot get along without the brethren. You say, The Lord Jesus is enough for me. Well, He would say to you, Do not forget the brethren. I never intended you to be in isolation; I have made provision for you; I have provided the brethren for you. They are available for you and with them you shall have heat. Have you not found that you do not get warm spiritually in your isolation? Yet among the saints you get warm. The Lord would have us honour one another. We may be in the same meeting, and breaking bread as we say, and yet not really lying together, for our fellowship, dear brethren, becomes with many just theory, whereas the terms are divinely intended to be carried out in accordance with their meaning, and not only the idea of "lying together", but that we belong to *an organism*, for a body is the figure used. Such is the inter-dependency of the saints on one another, that the striking figure of the human body itself is employed to show our relations with one another.
{218}
The obvious point in Solomon's remark here is that isolated brethren should not remain so. The Lord has provided the brethren in whom there is spiritual heat, and it is for you to get as close to them as possible. To make clear what this means, I read in 2 Kings, which affords us a figure of a young person who has become spiritually dead. The coldness of death was there, but happily there is a mother who feels the calamity, which would by extension suggest the mother feelings of the saints for one who is thus affected. It is a question of his *head*. The chapter is full of instruction, but the mother laid him where he was most likely to get help. She laid him on the prophet's bed, the man through whom God had promised her the child. The Lord had given, and the Lord had taken away, and she turned to the man of God. She took a long journey to reach him, but found him. She would have no one else, no one but Elisha, not even his staff. She would have the prophet, and he returned with her, and went up to the room where the child lay. This is the moment, dear brethren, of recovery for these cases, and there are many like it. Elisha completely identified himself with the boy -- his eyes, his mouth, and his hands. It is a question now not only of his head, but of his whole body, because the whole body has to be of divine use, not only the head. Some of us would assume that it is only the head, but it is every member. Our members are to be instruments of righteousness to God, and Elisha had the divine thought in mind for this boy. He is to be restored, but restored in all his members, not only in his intellect, but his hands, his eyes, and his mouth, and then the prophet *bent* over him, that is, deep exercise. If there are persons to be recovered from spiritual death, the Lord looks for this. He has gone all the way Himself, entering into death, so that we might live, and so Elisha, in this performance, remarkable as it is, and full of instruction, brought
{219}
warmth into the child. He was not to he warm alone. Left alone he would be in the cold hand of death, but he begins to get warm. Applying it today: he will now come to the meeting, and seek out the brethren; a sure sign of life, and of heat. You will find in all the cures in the gospels, every one is "made whole". Every one is a finished matter, the Lord leaves each person whole; and there should be no less thought in our minds as to anyone who has strayed. Then Elisha walks in the house to and fro; there is evidently something wrong with the house. If there are some novels on the table, he will see them, or other things like that, with which even christian houses are often strewn. He walked to and fro in the house. The eyes of the Lord look all round. Why is this sorrow? What is the secret of it? Is it that those in charge have been loose or worldly? It may be the state of the meeting; it may be that something there is to blame for all this, but still, warmth has come in, and there is hope, and if the eye of the Lord sees what damage is in the meeting, you may be sure He will not fail to speak about it.
Elisha walked to and fro in the house -- a most searching thing. I have seen in some houses the words, 'Jesus is the silent guest in this house', but He will never be silent if there is anything to correct. Where is the house that does not require some reproof? A silent Christ is not the thought at all, it is a Christ that sees things, that walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, and He speaks with the voice of a trumpet. There will be no mistake. If He enters into a house and there is anything wrong; He will not fail to tell those responsible, and to tell us too that any spiritual death in the family is largely due to it. Elisha again bent over the boy, and he sneezed seven times. His lungs are operative, and he opened his eyes; and Elisha called his mother and said to her, Take up thy son. He is
{220}
restored, using the mother as a figure of the assembly, and indeed it is so used: "Jerusalem above ... which is our mother". The Lord, as it were, delivers back a young brother, who had been spiritually dead, not only warm now, but with the breath of life in him, and with his eyes open.
To finish, we see in the passage in the Acts to which I have already alluded, how *friendliness* in a meeting is most desirable. The word meeting has acquired a meaning amongst us of its own, I mean among christians who have light from God. It refers to a number of saints who are accustomed to meet in a certain place, under certain principles, but there may be such, and yet a lack of friendliness. One may say, I have a letter of commendation, and I will be allowed to break bread, but more than that is required; that in itself is not christianity. It is just, as I might say, an initial thought.
Here in @Acts 28 is a suffering saint; wrecked in the Mediterranean; suffering physically, and with others he has landed on these shores. What will he find? So in regard of any saint who goes through a town where there is a meeting, what would he find? He would find those called *brothers* and *sisters*. These are largely technical words used by us, and hence do not always convey what is needed by the wayfaring man. The people on this island are not called brethren at all. Publius, the most prominent, is "the chief man of the island", and his father is sick. "But the barbarians", it is said, "shewed us no common kindness". And of Publius it is said: "who received us and gave us hospitality three days in a very friendly way". All this was in the winter time. The first mention of this particular season is in @Genesis 8, and it had come all the way down and now it is being experienced in the island of Melita by this honoured servant of God and his companions, and these barbarians show them great kindness. There is not a
{221}
word about brethren or the assembly, but what should mark the assembly is stressed, namely, *friendliness*. That can only be truly found today amongst those who have the Spirit of God. It is to them that God looks for these graces as a testimony in this world. Where else could God look for it? "The barbarians shewed us no common kindness", it is said, and the first thing is, they built a fire, "because of the rain that was falling and because of the cold". It is also said, "they took us all in".
What I would say here, dear brethren, is that in these circumstances, visitors must not expect everything. Certainly Paul did not, yet if there was any man righteous it was he. Every christian trait, I believe, was found in that man, the most simple of men, he always had a sense of obligation to others. "These hands", he says, "have ministered to my wants, and to those who were with me". He never failed in a sense of obligation to others, even in the smallest of things, nor did he fail here on the island. He did not let the barbarians provide all the fuel, he provided some too. Indeed the passage says, "a certain quantity of sticks together in a bundle". He gathered them himself, and placed them where they should be placed, that is on the fire, to maintain what was needed in the place. I am here, not to put the fire on, the fire is on, but to *add to what is of God here*. That is what every visitor should have in his mind in coming to a place. I am trying to bring out the thought, that if I am going to travel, I must travel with a sense of obligation; if I visit the brethren, it is not to tax them, but to add to what is there, to make it greater. I do not believe in christians who travel except with that in their minds. To add to what they find, and that is exactly what the apostle did. It is not that he *brought* the sticks, he gathered them in the place. The idea in christianity is not only what I bring, for if I come where the Spirit of God is I will find
{222}
something that I can use to further what there is in the locality. You may have an outline of the word to give, but the freshness and applicability of what you give is obtained at the moment. These sticks were in the island of Melita. The point is that the fire *was* on, it was kindled in love and friendliness towards him and those with him, and he says, I will add to that, I am under an obligation as to it, and so he did. The devil said, You will not do that again. The devil hates such thoughtful service, any effort to maintain the balance of obligation.
One of the finest words there is whilst we are down here is *obligation*, and so the devil intended that that hand would never gather a stick again. The viper was not in the sticks, but when he put the sticks on, it says, the viper came out of the heat, and fastened on his hand, but he shakes it off into the fire. See the power of God in the man! What can Satan do to a man like that; a man engaged in the fulfilment of righteous obligation? He was answering to the work of the Lord Jesus on the cross, who took our sins upon Him and discharged to the glory of God the terrible obligation He took on. The viper was thrown off and did no harm. I need not proceed further, for the facts are well known to us, I am only speaking of heat, and that even a viper may come out of it, but as met by the power of God it only brings defeat to the wicked one. It exposed him, and it brought to the servant greater prominence perhaps than he would have otherwise had in that island. The apostle remained there three months, evidently winter months. However, they had a good time; spiritually there was no cold after that, for it is said of those healed that they "honoured us with many honours, and on our leaving they made presents to us of what should minister to our wants". The friendliness was maintained throughout. It was not just a novelty, people from a ship-wreck are always interesting, but
{223}
they maintained the hospitality for three months. It is a great test, as to how we treat the brethren that come to us; and on the other hand that those who are treated well by the brethren should add to what there may be of God in the localities they visit. As we add our quota we maintain the level of heat as in a bee-hive.
{224}
CHRIST'S DISPOSITION OF HIS DISCIPLES
@Luke 8: 35 - 39; @Mark 6: 45 - 52; @Luke 24: 49
My object in reading these three scriptures is to speak of the Lord's disposition of us. I may say it is arbitrary; His disposition of us is in view of His service, but although arbitrary, the authority being that of the Son, to be subject is not irksome; the rule is not irksome. The more we accept it, the more we shall prove how acceptable, how benign and delightful it is, in a supreme way, the perfect law of liberty.
The Lord, as Ruler in the kingdom, being the Son of the Father's love, has a state of things in which to work out His great thoughts; otherwise, much time has to be spent in subjugation. Of course subjugation is very much better than extermination, infinitely better. Joshua's military service had extermination in mind, and the Lord will have resort to that in time, but in the meantime it is more on the line of the administration of David and Solomon, which is subjugation.
David spent much of his time in subjugating those over whom he was to rule. Solomon entered on that and had a free hand, and so developed a wonderful system of empire. There was no "adversary nor evil occurrent;" and so it is that as subjugation is effected, the work of God proceeds in a positive, well-defined way.
Now I take this first scripture as having to say to us individually; for the Lord, in order to use us structurally, must have us first severally; we each must come under His adjusting hand, so that He may fit us for what is in His mind. This man in @Luke 8 serves to illustrate how the Lord takes us up and tests us out in an individual position, so that we learn how
{225}
to get on with the Lord *alone*. Many do not experience this very much, but Luke more than any other of the evangelists enlarges on the effect of the healing on the man himself. Luke and Mark both make much of the effect on the man; this trophy of Christ's service. Matthew mentions two men, and makes more of the overthrow of the evil, making nothing of the effect on the men. It is a great matter, of course, that when an evil arises, and interferes with what God is doing, that it should be overthrown. Matthew, being concerned about the assembly, and the Lord's word as to it, that "hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it", makes much of the overthrow of the evil.
It is a great matter that God acts, not yet for the overthrow of evil universally, but for the overthrow of it in the measure in which it impedes the progress of His work; so Matthew enlarges on the evil. As remarked, it was in two persons, not in one, as Mark and Luke give it; for two would suggest organisation, and organised evil is the more powerful and effective. Matthew tells us that the two were possessed of demons, and they were so fierce that no one could pass *that way*. That is a particular point noted. The rights of heaven were challenged, for all power is given to Christ in heaven and on earth, and any position occupied by evil that interferes with what is in His mind must be dealt with. What He has in mind must go on; in Matthew He has the assembly in mind, and the development of it, so that any condition arising in a locality that hinders right principles, that prevents them being operative, must be dealt with. The Lord has to do with that constantly. Alas, that conditions locally in many gatherings should interfere with the operation of divine principles.
It says, that no one could pass that way, that is, other principles are adopted, and what God has in mind cannot proceed. Matthew would make much of that, while Luke and Mark stress the effect on the
{226}
man. There is not the slightest evidence that the evangelists copied each other in any way. The Spirit of God used them all, and each wrote according to what He wished to present. The divine thought is not only that the evil must he overthrown, but that the human agents are to be rescued from it, and henceforth employed as agents of good.
God set out that principle in commissioning Moses. He said, "What is that in thy hand?" (@Exodus 4: 2). God would have us to work with Him, to be intelligent in what He is doing. It was obvious that he had a staff in his hand, but still God would have Moses name it. In this he would be reminded of what the staff had been to him, and hence would grasp what God would convey to him in view of his service. Moses says, "A staff". God says, "Cast it on the ground". Moses had it in his hand; it was a useful thing; something to be *leaned* upon; having to do with *experience with God*, of which he had much. As the hand of authority released it, it became a serpent, illustrative of what man becomes as God releases His hand, and Moses fled from it. If you asked him what it is now, he would say, a serpent. A terrible transformation, but illustrative of what we are capable of; and Jehovah says, "Stretch out thy hand and take it by the tail", and he did so, and it became a staff in his hand. It returned to normal, to what was in the mind of God about it, what it really was in this sense. In other words, man has returned, God taking him up in Christ, man has returned to normalcy, to what is in the mind of God as to him.
The manhood that God had always in mind was Christ, and Adam was a figure of Christ. It is in Him that the true divine thought of man is, and so here in Luke, as you would expect, we have the man, as delivered from the power of Satan, answering to the thoughts of God. Matthew is dealing with the assembly as an organisation itself, so to speak, that
{227}
in which God's power is, and against which "hades¬ gates shall not prevail". The gates of hades shall not prevail against it; the thought involves that there is power to deal with the gates of hades, and so, as I said, Matthew stresses the overthrow of the evil in these two men, and leaves the rest. What he has in mind is that the work of God will go on. People can *now* pass that way. Divine principles have a right of way, and we shall never have the assembly, according to God, until divine principles have a right of way. They *must* prevail.
We have to consider if there has been anything different from that, and if divine principles have not been operative; whether what has been hindering them has been dealt with in us severally. This is going on constantly in the Lord's gracious government of the assembly, for Luke would bring in the Priest, he does not leave us simply as Matthew does with the overthrow of the evil, great indeed as that is. What about the man? Luke and Mark would say. Any servant that Mark would approve would be concerned to reach the full desired end, and see that the divine thought in the object of the service is reached. Luke alone says, "they ... found the man". Now that is really what the Lord is looking for in all matters of this kind, however modified they may be, that manhood shall be reached through conflict; so they see the man. How different from what he was! They see him, Luke says, "sitting, clothed and sensible, at the feet of Jesus". In other words, as delivered from the power of Satan, I take the place of learning. I am going to learn everything from the Lord. Sitting, clothed and sensible. Sensible persons are very important, but they are rare in a spiritual sense. God uses here the word "sensible", having in mind persons who exercise their senses, the five of them, according to His mind. Where you have a sensible man spiritually, he discerns good and evil, as the writer of Hebrews puts it, "full-grown
{228}
men, who ... have their senses exercised for distinguishing both good and evil" (@Hebrews 5: 14); and so evil has no inlet.
This man, being sensible, is amenable to all that would be right and fair; he would not be unreasonable or exacting. You could talk to him. He is ready for what is true and spiritual. Present it to him, and he will listen. He is material for the assembly. In truth, this chapter in Luke brings out assembly material. This man of whom we have been speaking, and the woman with the issue of blood, and the girl are what you might call the component parts of the public assembly; and how important it is that you have a sensible man, clothed; all that is unseemly covered. This man had been naked, and now is found clothed, sitting at the feet of Jesus. Now, the Lord will take him up, and see what he will do, left, as it were, to himself. He besought the Lord that he might be with Him. How pleasing this must have been to Him! But the Lord says, "Return to thine house and relate how great things God has done for thee". What a commission that was! He himself is the witness of what he is to speak of, and that is the great principle in the testimony of God, that one *is* what one speaks of. He went through the whole city, publishing how great things Jesus had done for him. Cities are hard territory, where worldly principles prevail and the spirit of so-called refinement; all that will be against him.
The man is to witness where *Christ is rejected* for He had been asked to depart (verse 37). What kind of a welcome will he get? Well, he is going to be tested, and then there is the idea of what one man can do. The Lord had left and there were no brethren as far as the Scriptures tell us. The whole place would thus be against him. He tells them what Jesus did for him. The Lord had told him to tell them what *God* had done for him, and it was no question of disobedience to the Lord's word, that he said *Jesus* had done it. He
{229}
understood that God was there; in truth "God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself" (@2 Corinthians 5: 19).
What nights he would have, what days! There is not a word said of him having the Scriptures, or books of any kind. How did he get on as a believer? Was the Lord unmindful of the great disadvantages of this man's environment? Not at all. The Lord had them all in mind, you may be sure, for *He had placed him there*. He would have recourse to God. It is well for each of us to begin this way. We should work out the idea of individual relations with God. It develops such confidence in service as can accrue only from *experience*. Nehemiah says, "I took counsel with myself". You might say that appears to be independence of God, but far otherwise; it is really independence of man, as such. The Lord Jesus Himself says in @Psalm 16: 7, "even in the nights my reins also instruct me", but He had counsel with God in a most wonderful way. In the same verse He says, "I will bless Jehovah, who giveth me counsel". Thus He is a model for us, and of God's work in the believer accordingly.
The Lord said, the Spirit should be in the believer as a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life. What possibilities there are in one thus set up in relation to God! The recipient of the gospel, and of the Spirit! What possibilities in one person! He is not to remain in isolation, though it is a great thing to be tested out in isolation; there it is known what we are capable of, and how we get on, and so we shall be concerned not to come under the influence of others unduly. There is, of course, influence that is good. In Matthew the Lord makes much of it, for He says, "make disciples of all the nations". It is a great thing to have spiritual influence, but at the same time those that are so influenced have to learn how to get on with God; learn how to be by oneself, to speak by himself, and take counsel by himself. If my
{230}
senses are in action, I can weigh things and balance things, and thus learn to stand on my own feet; in this way I become practically a board in the tabernacle. As we have noted, the boards were made "standing up" (@Exodus 36: 20). It can only be so spiritually. This man was made to stand up, and evidently he held his ground, not only negatively, but positively, for he told "how great things Jesus had done for him".
Well now, the second scripture speaks of the collective side. Mark gives it as no other does. I refer to him because, although the Lord teaches us to be together, and that is one principle of our position, yet in a gracious way He *compels* us to be together, without asking our leave as to this one or that one He puts into the company. It says after He had fed the multitude that "he compelled his disciples to go on board ship, and ... he departed into the mountain to pray". And they were "labouring in rowing, for the wind was contrary to them". Note the words "comes to them". How heaven looks at us with compassion, knowing full well how the enemy takes account of us as in any city. At times the wind blows contrary. The education of the disciples was the object of this; the wind was contrary to them, and the Lord knew it. So "he comes to them walking on the sea".
There is a great lesson to be learned from this walking on the water, but there is not so much made of it here, as Matthew makes of it; this again is characteristic. Mark contents himself with Christ walking on the water, and says nothing about Peter. Matthew establishes the principle of men being superior to the *worst* circumstances. The Spirit of God in Mark has something else in mind; to show us how the Lord intervenes for His people as in distress; also how we are to be affected by the work of God. The feeding of the multitude was a great evidence of divine resources; every person with any right sensibility would rejoice in seeing so many fed, it was a great miracle.
{231}
The account given here shows the effect it had on the persons who saw it; those for whose good educationally it was intended. What did they gain by it? They certainly could tell you about it as a matter of history, as Gehazi told the king of Israel about the great works of Elisha, but what was the effect on their hearts? What is presented is that the Lord compels us to be where we are, we would not choose each other possibly, but the Lord has compelled us to be together, and normally the more we are together the better we like one another, I mean spiritually. One can say the saints are becoming increasingly a delight, as one sees them in all circumstances, but the Lord puts us together, it is a sovereign act now; here the disciples were closely together. It was in a boat, evidently not large, rubbing each other's shoulders, and the wind contrary to them; conditions that bring out any irritability, impatience, or readiness to complain that there may be in us. The Lord had this in mind. The whole position is before Him. He was on high praying for them, and now He is on the water, and they think they see an apparition; their vision was bad. Mark makes much of seeing everything clearly. The Lord was no apparition, He was a real Man walking with human steps on the water, and He would have passed them by. That is a very solemn thing, for there is the suggestion that He can get on without us; His love would take account of and desire to have us, but still, as regards the testimony, we must never limit Him to ourselves. He knows Himself what He will do, but let us never assume that He cannot get along without us. Not that He fails to love us according to eternal counsels, but I am speaking about the public position, and if things are not suitable, the Lord will indicate to us that He is not just satisfied.
I am not speaking of any particular company; what I am saying applies to the assembly in its subdivisions at the present time, and the Lord gives us to understand
{232}
that He is not just satisfied. If things are not suitable He will have it otherwise, and He would go further; here "he ... would have passed them by". *We* cannot afford to ignore that; we cannot get on without Him. We *must* have Him, and that enters into His position, I believe; so that it is a searching matter. He compelled them into the position, but went up to pray for them, but would pass them by. He could do that perfectly, and convey to their minds exactly what He wanted to convey. What the composition of the company in that boat was, the Lord knew well; He would bring it out and expose it. Mark shows us that the real difficulty was that *their hearts were hardened*. They did not take right notice of the miracle of the loaves (verse 52). The intervention that had just occurred was not affecting them spiritually. No doubt they spoke among themselves about it; how many people were fed; it may have been a subject of conversation on the boat, but the moral effect was not there; their heart was not touched; it was "hardened". Mark would, no doubt, consider well, that if he used the word hardened, it applied to himself. He would say, I was once hard; I was with Paul and Barnabas, and I failed and went back from the work. He was speaking of what he knew, and one would take this home, for the natural heart is deceptive. He says, "their heart was hardened", and the Lord knew it.
Now, I return to Luke; to the verse I read in chapter 24. The Lord had been speaking about the terms of the gospel; repentance and remission of sins were to be preached, beginning at Jerusalem. He makes a great deal of Jerusalem. He says to the disciples, "I send the promise of my Father upon you", that promise characterises the dispensation. The great fact of the Holy Spirit being here is a dispensational thought, but it enters into the whole experience of a christian. It is a practical thought, and so the Lord says, "Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon
{233}
you; but do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high". The clothing with power from on high is the coming down of the Spirit. It is not *heaven* here, it implies moral *elevation* accorded to us in the service of God. That is the idea, I think, of *on high*. Our preaching and teaching, and our relations with one another, are not what is current in religious circles at all. What is current in these circles is not from on high; it is according to the principles of this world; it is what is common. What has existed in man's religions from the beginning, although more or less dignified in the eyes of men by the name of Christ, is not from on high. The clothing from on high is by the Spirit. So that the third thing I had in mind is spiritual power in ministry. Individual experience with God, collective experience with one another in close quarters, and clothing with power from on high -- all are required for the testimony of God. What God has in mind for us in this sense is the gospel. Thus the Lord says, "*Ye* are witnesses" -- not *my* witnesses here, but the thought of having seen what is to be testified to, but in serving there must be the Spirit, whose presence here is essential to public testimony. What is to go on to the end, is to be in the dignity of the anointing from *on high;* as if the Lord would say, In spite of the fact that you have so much knowledge, through being with Me from the beginning, do not present that in testimony until you are clothed with power from on high. The Lord is concerned about what is representative of Him, and that must be in the dignity of the anointing.
Then He leads them out as far as Bethany, and He lifted up His hands, and blessed them, and as He did so He is carried up to heaven, and they return to Jerusalem; true to His commission; true to His word, they were in the temple daily, with great joy. They had worshipped Jesus before they came back, which is beautiful, and are now in the temple praising
{234}
and blessing God. They are where He wanted them to be, and the next narrative of Luke, that is Acts, shows that the Holy Spirit came down like tongues of fire and sat upon each of them. Then Peter stood up and preached the gospel, explaining the whole position. It is one of the most striking addresses available. In the first chapter he stood up in the midst of the brethren; in the second, he stands up in relation to the eleven, indicating that the gospel testimony is a matter of *gift*. He is perfectly accurate spiritually in what he does, and standing up with the eleven, he announces Christ as glorified, and that the Holy Spirit is here.
{235}
GO, SHEW THYSELF TO THE PRIEST
@Mark 1: 40 - 44; @2 Kings 11: 1 - 16; @1 Samuel 14: 6 - 16
I trust the Lord will help, dear brethren, in dwelling on the thought of *testimony* as seen in persons. The testimony of God includes not only what is said, but also the *persons* who speak on His behalf, and even if there be no speaking, there will be testimony in persons normally in whom God works. Lazarus of Bethany, for instance, is not said to have spoken; speaking by him in words is not recorded, and yet we are told that many believed on Jesus because of him; because of him as raised by Jesus from among the dead. So in many instances that could be cited, the same thing can be seen.
Speaking, of course, is a great feature of the testimony of God, but the persons who speak are always in mind. The Lord Himself in Nazareth spoke, so as to draw out the admiration even of those who were not genuinely affected by what He said. It is said, they "wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth" (@Luke 4: 22); and "the eyes of all ... were fixed upon him". The Spirit of God stresses His attitude and movements at that time. He stood up to read, we are told; also that He found the place of a certain scripture; and that He delivered the book to the attendant, having rolled it up.
So that the testimony, as I said, includes not only what is said, but the persons who say it. I refer to these three scriptures because it is a question of the persons being *shown*, or appearing under certain eyes. Firstly, the cleansed leper is to *show himself* to the priest; and secondly, the king's son, that is, the seed royal at that time, is *shown* by the priest to the military -- those who would contend for the truth in the house of Jehovah; and thirdly, Jonathan and his
{236}
armour bearer *showed themselves* to the enemy, the Philistines. Thus, we have in these passages what will enable us, by the Lord's help, to dwell on a considerable area of the field of truth.
First, the cleansed leper. No doubt we are all included amongst cleansed lepers. Every true christian rejoices in the fact of his cleansing, but it may be that we have not thought much of showing ourselves to the priest for a testimony. The priest has a great deal to do with this form of disease, symbolic of sin. Leprosy symbolises sin more as a *state* in men and women, than as active in detail in the sense of transgressions. You will all remember how large a place it has in the types; two very long chapters in the book of Leviticus are occupied with it, and throughout these chapters the priest is in evidence. It is not a military matter; it is the priest's service throughout to deal with it; meaning a spiritual person, pre-eminently Christ, who is our great High Priest. In character it involves every true christian; those called spiritual; those having the Holy Spirit; and particularly those who accept obligation to minister as priests.
The chief function of a priest is to minister unto the Lord. That is what Jehovah says of Aaron and his sons -- that "they may serve me as priests" (@Exodus 28: 41). This office also involves teaching, for the "priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they seek the law" (@Malachi 2: 7). They were, in a way, the custodians of it, but they also had to attend to this loathsome disease called leprosy, referring to sin more as a *state*. The state is much more difficult to deal with than the actual transgressions. Transgressions are usually easily discerned and named, but the root whence they come is not so easy to deal with, hence the need of the priest. Throughout those two chapters in Leviticus the priest officiates. He is the attendant and everything is under his direction. Pronouncement as to leprosy belongs to him, and so in
{237}
this particular scripture and in those that correspond in the other gospels, the cleansed leper is to go to the priest and show himself to him for a testimony to *them;* the word being plural, it is general, not only the priest. The idea is that the testimony is to be wide in its bearing.
In @Luke 17, we have the well-known incident of the ten lepers that were cleansed, and it is not said of them that the Lord touched them. He touched this man freely, as the original word indicates; meaning that He fully identified Himself with the leper. Morally He could not touch him at all save in view of His own death, which is a very affecting matter. In dealing with us, as lepers, it is as having dealt with our state as well as our sins in His own body on the tree! That is very affecting. In @Luke 17, He simply directs them to go and show themselves to the priests, and says nothing about testimony, for He had in mind that there should be a returning to Himself, for in Luke's thought, the priest is Jesus Himself. So it was that one of the lepers returned to give glory to God; but "as they were going they were cleansed;" they were all cleansed. That is to say it was not a question of the Lord's touch there, but of obedience to His direction, an important matter under this head; obedience to the Lord's word. We miss much because we fail to follow His direction in these matters. They went to the priests as He directed, and, as they went, they were cleansed; and one of them returned, and falling down on his face at His feet, gave thanks and glorified God. That is surely the end in view in His service -- to secure *glory to God*. The Lord took account of him, and inquired as to where the nine were. One only of the ten returned.
In this instance, in @Mark 1, we have one leper, and the Lord *touches* him, and says to him, "I will, be thou cleansed", and whilst He spoke, the leprosy left him. The Lord's speaking entered into it, and He
{238}
enjoined him straitly not to speak of it to anyone, but to go to the priest and show himself to *him*. Now, this is important, because the Lord surely had in mind that saying much under these circumstances is damaging. He straitly charged him to say nothing to anyone. Saying much under these circumstances arouses mere natural interest, which can but hinder, rather than promote, the work of God, and would indicate that the leprosy was hardly fully dealt with -- I mean in a spiritual sense. The Lord says, "See thou say nothing to any one". It is early in the Lord's ministry, and the force of it is not just what it was later when He enjoins the people to tell no one that He was the Christ. His rejection had taken place then, but here He forbids what would call forth natural interest, which, as indeed happened, should hinder His work. The Lord tells him to say nothing to any one. It is a question of *how you appear*, not *what you say*.
In such a case now there are those who are thinking of you, and some of them at least will seek to act in a priestly way, representing the Lord, for scripture says, "if even a man be taken in some fault, ye who are spiritual restore such a one" (@Galatians 6: 1). The allusion is directly to priestly *ability* in the saints, not only to persons who have the Spirit. The Corinthians had the Spirit, but were not spiritual. The direction in Galatians is to those who are *spiritual*. Thank God, there are those who are spiritual today. There can be no true assembly conditions, or administration, or service of any kind, according to the mind of God, unless there are those who are spiritual. The apostle does not say *if* there are any. He says, "ye who are spiritual restore". Even among the Galatians there were those who were spiritual; in spite of the efforts of the enemy to destroy the liberty of the saints, there were certain there that were spiritual. So the cleansed leper is to think of that. You have to do with them. The Lord has directed you that you will have to do with them; and it is not a
{239}
question of what you are saying. If indeed you are saying much, it will be a detriment and will hinder perhaps their discernment of your state. It is "shew thyself to the priest". That is a very testing matter, for one has to go humbly and show himself to the priest, carrying with him all that the law required as Moses commanded. There are to be no terms other than what the law required; there were no terms at all proposed by the cleansed leper. This is a very important thing as to testimony, that we are law-abiding under these circumstances; meek and lowly in heart and humble, as to our previous condition, and appreciative in humility of what the Lord has done for us. So in that attitude of mind and heart we present ourselves to the priest. That is what is required and I believe the testimony that God has raised up in these last days can only be continued on this line.
It is a question of what each person who is identified professedly with what is of God, is showing in himself. Is he showing the cleansing effect of the death of Jesus? Not only the forgiveness of his sins, but what he is himself; not his activities, but the person himself. Show *thyself*, it says. What I am in my business affairs, in my household affairs, what I am amongst men generally; it is what the person is. "Shew thyself to the priest". It is for a testimony, not only to him, but to *them*. It is a general thought. You may make *them* as large as you like -- it depends upon how far, how extensive, your radius is; the persons who know you. We have to show ourselves. We have, for instance, the case of John the baptist; he was in the deserts, we are told; not only the desert, but in the deserts, until the time of his showing to Israel. The allusion is that he was where the flesh would not be ministered to. He had recourse to that position, a variety of circumstances in which the flesh is negatived instead of being ministered to and supported -- until the time of his showing to Israel. What a man he was when the
{240}
time came! We are told what he wore and what he ate. Well this matter of the cleansed leper includes every one here, old and young; every boy and girl; every one that professes to believe in the Lord Jesus, and have thus come in for the benefits of His death and resurrection and of the Spirit here. It is for each of us to have this in mind, to show himself for a testimony. So that every christian in the world is in the sight of heaven a testimony to them. I mean every christian characteristically.
I go on to the passage in @2 Kings to show how the king, the royal seed is shown. Athaliah's aim was to destroy the seed royal; that was what was in her mind and she thought she had succeeded, but she had not. God was watchful, as He ever is, over the testimony, and had, in the king's sister, Jehosheba, a servant to protect the seed royal. The position is very apparent; these circumstances spiritually are apparent at the present time. That is to say, a woman ruling without any sense of obligation to a man. Her aim was to destroy every one who might have any right to challenge her position of rule. We know who says, "I sit a queen, and I am not a widow; and I shall in no wise see grief" (@Revelation 18: 7). She asserts her own rights, demanding to be heard, claiming to be a queen, and her aim is to destroy all the seed royal, that is, all who in any sense could represent the divine thought in rule. Earlier, this same thing that I am speaking of, as existing today, is typified in another woman, that is, Jezebel. Her thought was to destroy the *prophets*, that is to say, to cut off the prophetic ministry of the Spirit. These are the two great efforts of the false system which these women represent, and it has succeeded to an enormous extent, but not entirely. In these last days particularly, God has intervened and has asserted the rights of the seed royal. We see how the seed royal is developed in the gospel of Matthew, and we do well, as having come into the light of the assembly and the rule that is
{241}
vested in it, to see how the assembly rules in relation to Christ. She is not independent in her rule; she rules in relation to Christ; she maintains the seed royal. One of the most important features of the testimony at the present time is the truth as to the seed royal. The other great feature of the Person of Christ is His deity. The greatest feature of course always is the truth of the Deity. John has that in mind specially, and so in the book of Revelation when the Lord announces Himself to the assemblies, He says, "*I* am the root and offspring of David" (@Revelation 22: 16); He says, "*I* am the root!" That is John's testimony; John's gospel. The offspring of David is the seed royal, that is Matthew's line. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". There is a full understanding of these two great features of Christ, and it surely behoves us to pay attention to the ministry of the Spirit at the present time both in regard to John's presentation of Christ -- His deity; and that of Matthew which is the *seed royal*. He is the Root of David in John; He is the Offspring, that is the seed royal, in Matthew.
Now Athaliah thought she had succeeded in destroying all the seed royal, but Joash is preserved. Much has been said on this chapter, but what I wish to point out is the *showing*, and how this child, the king's son, as he is called, is guarded by Jehosheba and kept in the house of the Lord for six years. Again what I wish to make clear is that the application of this now is not, of course, Christ in a personal or corporeal sense here, for He never will appear in that sense as a Child or a Boy again. When we get diminutive thoughts, like these, it is a question of Christ characteristically here in the saints. We see how He has been preserved, during all these terrible doings, in the house of the Lord in loving care by priestly hands, by that which regards what is of God though in great weakness. It is a very great matter that there is this, however diminutive it may be, for the child was just a year old when
{242}
he was hidden in the house by Jehosheba, but *quality* was there; it was the seed royal. It was the king's son, representing rule according to God. Historically, of course, it is an item, but spiritual brethren never deal with these matters merely as history; it is a question of their present or general spiritual application.
What a service Jehosheba rendered! Who knew that she was rendering such a service? Perhaps only a few; certainly not every one, but the priestly element was there in Jehoiada. We may be sure that it was *that* which supported this hiding in the house of the Lord; the priestly element, but in a very distinctive official way, Jehoiada the priest.
As the time drew nigh Joash is shown -- for circumstances warranted this movement, and we always have to be alive, to have our eyes open to discern any movement of God to relieve a position; to relieve an objectionable position, or whatever it may be, for God will surely come in. He came in one hundred years ago, in a wonderful way to relieve a most objectionable position. This spirit of Athaliah was abroad, and the spirit of Jezebel too, cutting off the prophets and cutting off the seed royal. She called herself a prophetess, taking everything into her own hand, and ruling as she would, setting up dignitaries, giving them titles, and giving garments at her will. She is doing this yet, but God came in in a wonderful way and brought the seed royal to light, and in conjunction with that the house of God. These are the two great thoughts that came to light about one hundred years ago; there were others, but these are the great principles governing the kingdom and the house of God! So that here Jehoiada the priest, with spiritual skill and discernment, seizes the right moment, and he calls the military, bringing to him captains of hundreds of the bodyguard and the couriers, and he "*shewed* them the king's son". In this respect, *we* are to know our military service, and be good soldiers of Jesus Christ; we are to know
{243}
what we are contending for. There is an incentive in it. He showed them the king's son. The intelligent priestly element says, This is he. It may be in a small way that Christ is seen, but circumstance after circumstance arises and those who are spiritual discern Him and take their stand to defend Him. In the military sense all here were ready, and it is wonderful to see that when God intervenes, things go well. There is the overshadowing of the Almighty. God protects those who are with Him in the conflict, so that things reach fruition according to His mind. Jehoiada showed them the king's son at the opportune moment.
So it is now as the saints discern what is of God in the government of the house of God, in the realm of the kingdom, they will see what they are contending for. Contention often arises upon party lines. One of the first things to be noted in the letter to the Corinthians is that some one in the house of a priestly sister apprised the apostle of "divisions among you". One has to deplore contention on party lines in many places, but here is one to be heartily contended for; it is not this brother is on my side, or that one, it is the king's Son. The king is brought forth in due course, and is crowned. What a fine day it is after difficulties have been settled. God comes in and the king is crowned. Not only shown, but *crowned*. As soon as the crown goes on, the party is over. It is for us, as seeing the divine idea in the government of the kingdom, in the government of the house, to crown it, or crown Him, for it is Christ in *character*. What else is there to fight for? He is the great subject of testimony, the great occasion of the enemy's attack, whatever form it may take. So, as I said, the king is crowned, and he is acclaimed. "God save the king". It is no question of supporting a person or persons, on partisan lines, but it is a question of Christ and the crown upon Christ. It is most interesting and instructive to think of the twenty-four elders who are
{244}
crowned, to see that they cast their crowns before Him who sat on the throne. Whatever one may have in the way of a crown, it is to be used in that way. It does not sully it at all; it only enhances it, as I cast it before Him who sits upon the throne. Athaliah the wicked ruler, and it may come down to us in a little way, pretends conspiracy; a well-known way with that wicked system I am speaking of, to assume by her words that she represents God, but she does not. The king was on the dais, an exalted place, crowned. He was elevated, and this wicked system has to retire and come under the dire judgment of God which she is about to suffer; indeed has already suffered, for the Lord says, "her children will I kill with death" (@Revelation 2: 23), and *He has done it*.
To finish, I would come to the third point, that is what is shown to the actual enemies. The king's son was not shown to Athaliah, although she saw him; she saw him crowned and exalted, and that was her ruin, thank God! We have in the last scripture the soldiers of Christ, typically, showing themselves to the enemy as soldiers. The time arrives when that is the point to lay hold of; it is cold steel, so to speak; no longer a priestly showing in grace, for we have to deal with Philistine opposition; grace often is mistaken by them for weakness. Jonathan and his armour bearer were in great weakness; he went off stealthily, not even telling his father. It was a secret matter with him. For the moment he represents the right spirit and sentiment. He knows what to do, and is ready to sacrifice to do it. There stood out against him visibly two crags. They would be *forbidding*, but he went on; he is the leader in this movement. Leadership is a great principle with God and a great matter with us. It is the opposite of the democratic spirit; we must have leadership, but a leader is one that goes before, however threatening the difficulties. There are these two crags, one on either side, but he went on as a leader, and his armour bearer
{245}
was ready to go with him. There is unity of spirit with the leader and the one led; they go on. They confer together, not on partisan lines, but as persons jeopardising their lives for the cause of God; exposing themselves to the greatest dangers. They understand each other, that is, there is the leader and the one led, and they are in perfect unison. The armour bearer is not being led by any undue pressure; he is thoroughly with the leader.
The understanding now is, if the Philistines say, So and so, we shall know what to do; there is to be a sign that God was in this matter. We must always look for that, dear brethren. God will never fail to signify His presence if we have eyes to see it. They pursued their way and they discovered themselves to the enemy, and he was dismayed. They progressed in a humble way; they went on their hands and feet. There is no pretence to be great military leaders, but under the most trying and dangerous circumstances they pursued their way humbly against the enemy, and God was in it. A great victory is the result, but the point I am making is this, that in those circumstances, they *show* themselves. They are under opprobrium, but they are military men, acting with courage and skill in a self-sacrificing way, acting in the recognition of leading and being led, in perfect unison, and they show themselves. The sign is there that God gave them, and the victory was overwhelming, as the passage shows.
Well, that is what I had to put before you, and I believe there is much in it for us all, both as to the general state of things in christendom, and as to many localities in which those seeking to walk in the truth are at the present time. The instruction is for us, to bring out what we are personally, whether as cleansed lepers, or whether the seed royal, for the government is in our hands in that sense, as of the assembly, as representative of Christ in a feminine way, or whether as the military, as the good soldiers of Jesus Christ.
{246}
it is a question in all cases of showing ourselves as evidencing the work of God, and that is where the victory lies, that is where the testimony lies, as the Lord says, "for a testimony to them".
{247}
THE NUMERAL THREE IN TESTIMONY (1)
@Genesis 18: 1 - 10, 16 - 21
J.T. What is to be observed in the divine operations is that God operates sovereignly, *irrespective* of conditions; indeed, in spite of them, as in @Genesis 1. He also operates *because* of conditions; because of favourable conditions. This is what appears in this section of Genesis, and what is in mind is that we may see how, as conditions are favourable, we have increase of intimacy, God making Himself known more fully and familiarly, for it is His thought that He should be with men in holy familiarity, and that they should be with Him also in holy reverential familiarity.
It is thought that this passage helps us to see the revelation made in the New Testament of that into which we are baptised. It is said that the nations were to be baptised "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" (@Matthew 28: 19). The events recorded in the gospels are not always in the order in which they happened in the Lord's life here. They were written later, by chosen vessels, evidently in relation to conditions then existent, such conditions as would enable saints to understand what was written. What the gospels present is largely confirmation of the apostolic testimony. Testimony had been rendered orally, and the gospels, although going further, are the confirmation of it. The testimony being rendered, and having been effective, conditions existed enabling the Spirit of God to present what He intended to present in the several gospel narratives. So in Matthew the Trinity is formally presented after the baptism of Christ, both the Father and the Spirit coming into view. Secondly, in His resurrection, He directs His apostles to make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. The great
{248}
thought of the Deity is thus set before us in an ordered economy into which the nations were to be baptised, and into which we are all baptised. Obviously the gospel was written because the conditions effected through the testimony of the apostles warranted it. It would be understood. The things alluded to would he intelligible, and hence, in the sense of moral instruction, the Lord would help us to see to conditions. The more they are according to the mind of God, the more spiritual advantages and privileges we shall have, the more divine overtures and incomings. So we might pursue the inquiry, beginning with this chapter as particularly representative of favourable conditions; having the numeral *three* in mind, as representative of complete testimony from God, here evidently, in regard to Himself. That is, He comes in; there is an appearing; not the first one, but it is a unique one; it is an appearing of three Persons to Abraham. What is seen shows that he was ready for it and was quite equal to it; that is what God delights in. It is a scene that affords great instruction for us in these days; instruction in regard to suitable conditions for God. The number three, applied here to Persons including Jehovah Himself, points to the fullest revelation, at least in figure, that God has made, and suggests that we are to be in familiar relations in that wonderful economy; in holy, respectful, reverential relations. We have in this book -- just to make the outline clear -- several instances of the use of three as complete testimony in various relations, such as the human race, developed, as we have it today, from three heads -- Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Then we have the patriarchs, three of them in Genesis. Then, in the four ministerial books, that is to say, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, we have three ministers, Moses, Aaron and Miriam, formally representative of God in the ministerial sense. So, throughout the later books, particularly the historical books, the same thing will be seen, the full testimony
{249}
presented on this principle in relation to the various subjects of the books. That is what is in mind.
W.J.H. Had you in mind that each appearing to Abraham was consequent upon conditions, except the first one, which was wholly sovereign?
J.T. That is right. He dwelt in Mesopotamia when Jehovah appeared to him, and Joshua tells us that he served idols at that time, so that it was a wholly sovereign movement. It was in spite of conditions.
Rem. Abraham obeyed the call of God, and as obeying the call of God, suitable conditions were there for further disclosures.
J.T. That is exactly what came out in @Genesis 12. It says that God had directed Abraham to go into the land of Canaan and he came into it -- "into the land of Canaan they came" -- that is, he obeyed. It took some time, for his father took the initiative at the outset, and Stephen says that it was after his father was dead. That is to say, the natural hindrance was removed; he came to the land of Canaan, and as there, Jehovah appeared to him again, and that would be on account of conditions. He was moving in obedience.
E.E.S.L. Are these favourable conditions difficult for us to provide for God?
J.T. Well I think we may see in the history of Abraham up to this chapter how difficult they are, and no doubt everyone present will recognise that the difficulties that Abraham had are just his. The first appearing was in Mesopotamia, according to Stephen, and it was the appearing of the God of glory. He had another appearing according to chapter 12, and built an altar, and called upon the name of Jehovah. But then he went into Egypt, and that did not afford favourable conditions -- he lost ground. Abraham may be taken as representative of a man of faith in the history of his soul, showing what difficulties arise, and how they are overcome. So that he has to come back from Egypt; learning a lesson in that, and much that followed in
{250}
his controversy with his brother Lot, and the conflict that he entered into to rescue his brother; all that was educational. I suppose every one of us has had to go through it more or less, and each one knows how extreme the difficulties of the path of faith are. So that after the conflict with the kings that fought against the king of Sodom he comes in for divine help, in Melchisedec. Then in chapter 15 we have for the first time the "word of Jehovah", something perhaps, that has not been observed by us as studying the history of Abraham. There are appearings before, but the "word of Jehovah" is what tries us. It is said of Joseph that "Until the time when what he said came about: the word of Jehovah tried him" (@Psalm 105: 19). The word of God enters the inwards. It is "sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do" (@Hebrews 4: 12, 13). That is chapter 15; a chapter we should take notice of. It is a searching, a crucial chapter; it is the word of God. As you will notice it says, "After these things the word of Jehovah came to Abram".
G.C.H. Is the "trying" process seen in the horror of great darkness that came upon Abraham?
J.T. That is, I think, what involves the greatest crisis in our lives, that horror of great darkness. It is the outcome of the word. The epistle to the Romans opens it up to us. The word is the mind of God expressed. He earlier opens up great thoughts for us; a great perspective. Then what we are inwardly; what we are in ourselves, and the difference between God and us comes into evidence. The word opens up God's mind; and we have to compare ourselves with the mind of God.
{251}
E.S.W. Is that fully answered to by the Lord Himself in Gethsemane in His words, "My Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me" (@Matthew 26: 39)?
J.T. There you see that the Lord understood well what the Father's mind was, and what He had to go through in consequence. There was nothing in Him at all to be disclosed contrary to that, but in the case of each of us there is. It is what is contrary in us that brings in the crisis; can I stand it?
Ques. Is that why such stress is laid on the prophetic word in our day?
J.T. I think so. God is helping us on that line. It is a question of the mind of God at any given time, but particularly *His* mind as compared with *mine*. Abraham was complaining, and then he says to Jehovah, "How shall I know?" It says in chapter 15: 6, "And he believed Jehovah; and he reckoned it to him as righteousness;" and in verse 8 he says, "Lord Jehovah, how shall I know that I shall possess it?" "How shall I know?" The *way* to knowledge; the way to reach the promises that are for us; the way to the purpose of God; all these enter into the answer to this question.
Ques. Is the way to the knowledge of the mind of God by first seeing that there is obedience to the word of God?
J.T. What you get in @John 14: 15 - 23 is tabernacle conditions. The Spirit was to come on the ground of the disciples keeping the Lord's commandments, according to God's great principles. "*He* spoke, and it was done; *he* commanded, and it stood fast" (@Psalm 33: 9). Then in view of remnant times, the Lord says, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me" (@John 14: 21). And when inquiry is made as to how it is that the Lord would manifest Himself to the saints and not to the world, He says, "If any one love me, he will keep my word" (verse 23). The *word* deals with what I am. It deals with my inward motives. If I am to provide
{252}
conditions suitable to God I have to deal with myself; my inward motives and so on.
E.S.W. Is the link between love and knowledge seen in @1 Corinthians 8: 3, where the apostle says, "If any one love God, *he* is known of him"?
J.T. Quite so. The word here in @Genesis 15, the word of Jehovah, leads to this inquiry on the part of Abraham. "How shall I know?" Then God directs him what to do; He says to him, "Take me a heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtle-dove and a young pigeon". Jehovah did not add more, but Abraham proceeded to carry out the divine word: "he took all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid the half of each opposite its fellow; but the birds he did not divide. And the birds of prey came down on the carcases; and Abram scared them away. And as the sun was just going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and behold, a horror, a great darkness, fell upon him". That is what the word brings out. I am referring to the remarks as to the humble and contrite heart -- that it is the effect of a process, it is a point reached, God looks towards that man. @John 14 would show that He comes to that man, and this passage in @Genesis 18 shows that He comes in a familiar way, in company, to such a man.
H.M. On the side of spiritual development, does the tree mentioned in chapter 18 suggest the matured growth of what had been originally planted in Abraham's soul?
J.T. That is good. Abraham said to them, "Let now a little water be fetched, that ye may wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree". There is something there that God, using reverential words, may shelter under. It all brings out the familiarity that enters into the occasion and points to a state in Abraham, the man of faith, that answered to the mind of God. There was nothing in Abraham to repel; on the contrary,
{253}
conditions were such as afforded convenience, comfort, and restfulness to God Himself, and those with whom He came.
H.M. Was not that tree Christ characteristically? It had developed in spite of adverse circumstances.
J.T. Just so. I was endeavouring, in passing on from chapter 15, to show how the state is reached that God can approve and rest in. Chapter 15 is, I think, the internal process, and that is the most difficult with us, for our minds take in subjective truth much more slowly than what is objective.
G.A.v.S. Are you indicating that the horror of great darkness was a necessary exercise for Abraham to pass through if he was to provide these restful conditions under which God would be able to make His communications?
J.T. That is the truth, and moreover what Abraham passed through was anticipative of what his seed were to pass through. It was included, I think, in the four hundred years. The period that is spoken of as four hundred years includes this extraordinary experience of Abraham and points to the fact that God had in His mind that all His people must come into this. We have to go through this process in order to reach the promises. The very experience is confirmatory. It is said, "behold, a horror, a great darkness fell upon him. And he said to Abram, Know assuredly that thy seed will be a sojourner in a land that is not theirs, and they shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years. But also that nation which they shall serve I will judge; and afterwards they shall come out with great property. And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age. And in the fourth generation they shall come hither again; for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. And it came to pass when the sun had gone down, and it was dark, that behold, there was a smoking furnace, and a flame of fire which passed between those pieces". That is
{254}
the great truth that comes before the soul here. How the whole matter of God's purpose and of the believer's condition is solved in the death of Christ, but Abraham had to go through the thing in the horror of great darkness. You have a period here of four hundred years, which does not apply properly to the actual sojourn in Egypt. It is obviously spiritual and includes what Abraham was going through; for four hundred years would be more than, as it says here, four generations. The four generations allude to the actual stay of the people in Egypt, but the four hundred years must include what faith goes through in order to know and embrace the promises, and thus you come out with great property. The "property" is to make conditions for God so that He may be with us (see @Exodus 25: 1 - 8).
Ques. Would you say that the psalmist gives expression to it in a personal way -- "Search me, O God, and know my heart; prove me, and know my thoughts. And see if there be any grievous way in me; and lead me in the way everlasting" (@Psalm 139: 23, 24)? Is not that the searching of God and the conditions reached that God finds favourable?
J.T. I think so. You are enabled thus to call upon all that is within you. The great wealth that we have, refers to what we are spiritually. They came out with great property, the passage says, and if I call on all that is within me, that means I have something to bring forth for God -- to afford conditions for God. Chapter 16 is another difficulty, that is to say, the believer seeking to bring about right things but on natural lines, which is very often seen amongst us -- efforts to provide things to meet the divine mind on natural lines, natural ability, but in chapter 17 Abraham is prepared for the great truth of circumcision. "We are the circumcision", Paul says, "who worship by the Spirit of God". That is a great point reached.
Ques. Does the teaching of Romans and Colossians enter into that?
{255}
J.T. Quite so. The teaching of Romans is in @Genesis 15, but chapter 17 is the teaching of Colossians, and of Ephesians up to a point, though particularly Colossians. "Circumcised with circumcision not done by hand, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ" (@Colossians 2: 11). So that you find in chapter 17, that God enters into covenant with him, and He says to him, "It is I". In verse 3 we read, "and God talked with him, saying, It is I". Then God proceeds to speak to him of the covenant. You will see that God, speaking reverently, is the one party and Abraham is the other. He is coming on to familiar lines with the believer. God gives us to understand that He is dealing with us on personal, familiar lines; and He enters into covenant with Abraham, and changes his name. He changes Sarah's name also, and says in effect, I will bring you into the nobility and status that is proper to the believer in relation to heavenly things. He finished speaking to Abraham, as you will observe in verse 22; "he left off talking with him; and God went up from Abraham". Think of that, the Creator of the universe speaking to a man, speaking to him, as it were, on equal terms. He says, "It is I", and when He finishes the conversation he goes up *from Abraham*. Think of the dignity of the believer -- "from Abraham". What does Abraham do? He is left to himself. He orders circumcision in his house, and that brings out the state of things seen in this chapter. The divine word is carried out to the letter, and God honours that.
J.D.U. Speaking of honouring it, is there any connection with what is said by the Lord when He was baptised of John -- "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness"? I was thinking of John, as conveying God's word to Israel at the time.
J.T. There is a correspondence there -- a very good one, because it brings out the divine approval. As Jesus came up out of the waters, the heavens were
{256}
opened to Him. That is really the fulness of what we have in chapter 18; the full recognition by heaven of that Person; that Man fulfilling all righteousness. The heavens were opened to Him, and the word to Him was, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight;" and the Holy Spirit came down in the character of a dove, meaning that there was infinite complacency there.
H.M. Speaking of circumcision, is it not most touching that the basis of it for us is the circumcision of Christ?
J.T. Yes. We are told what it means, that is, putting off the *body* of the flesh -- not a part of it. Philippians brings out the full thought: "we are the circumcision;" that corresponds to @Genesis 18. Abraham was not taking it on partially, he took it on *wholly* as God gave it, and so in principle he is of the circumcision who worship by the Spirit of God. So that the circumcision of Christ deals with the flesh totally, and that is what God is aiming at, that we should reach the full end of the flesh, and thus have conditions such as He desires. We can scarcely limit what God would do for us, if we afford Him these conditions.
Ques. Are not such restful conditions suggested at the beginning of chapter 18, and as they are there, we shall be ready for further developments.
J.T. Well, that is what happened. The first verse is a statement of the fact of the appearing; then we get details of it, as if the Spirit of God would open it up, and it is a beautiful scene. "And he sat at the tent-door in the heat of the day. And he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, three men standing near him". The familiarity of the occurrence is most striking. God himself is present; in a figurative sense, the Trinity is foreshadowed. Three are there, and they are standing near him; they have nothing to rebuke.
{257}
W.R.W. Does the fourth verse suggest that we should provide refreshment for divine Persons?
J.T. That is the next thing. What is so beautiful is that he has the liberty to do this. "When he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent-door". That is the position; he was at the tent-door in restfulness, and he "bowed himself to the earth, and said, Lord". You see the intelligence. He is not at all darkened in his mind, or flustered by the extraordinary appearance. He knows whom to address. He says "Lord;" he discerns Jehovah. John says to Peter, "It is the Lord". It is a question of spiritual discernment.
E.S.W. Why does he change from the singular to the plural in addressing these three? He says, "Lord, if now. I have found favour in thine eyes, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant. Let now a little water be fetched, that ye may wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree".
J.T. It is as if he sees that these other men were on the divine side. It is a suggestion, I think, of the Trinity, coming in where conditions warrant it, and Abraham discerns God in one of them and addresses Him as Lord. "To us there is one God, the Father", and Abraham recognised God, but he recognised the other two, and speaks to them all in a collective sense.
G.A.v.S. Is such spiritual perception the fruit of what Abraham had gone through, and an indication of how spiritual perception grows with us?
J.T. Well, that is what is going on constantly. One observes in moving about, how God is working to lead His people on to assembly lines, enabling us to take our place *in assembly*, and to discern the Persons, and the relative positions of the Persons in the assembly. We are brought into an economy. It is not God as in light unapproachable, it is *God as He has been pleased to come out to us*, and how He is to be understood in the assembly; how the Persons are to be understood in the assembly.
{258}
G.C.M. Would you say why it is that Abraham did not invite Him into the house, but to sit under the tree?
J.T. I think that what was suggested is right. The tree denotes the growth; it was a tree of Jehovah's planting. The Lord said, "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up" (@Matthew 15: 13). The psalmist shows what the divine planting is, and that the believer, as planted there is like a green olive tree in the house of God, and as a green olive tree he is recognised; God has respect to him. That is to say, God has respect for the spiritual development that is in the assembly.
W.J.H. The oaks of Mamre would confirm the position.
J.T. That is another thought; another evidence of growth, showing what Abraham had reached in the point of *stability* as knowing God.
W.J.H. I wondered whether the three preceding chapters really bring us to the thought of the oaks.
J.T. I think they do. The book of Genesis has the idea of stability, permanence; a point that the believer reaches through the divine process. The apostle says, in @2 Corinthians 1: 21, 22, "he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". That is to say, the second letter to the Corinthians is stabilising. It is a great point in our history when we become stable; not tossed about, but able to stand up against all winds, and afford shelter to others too. The oaks of Mamre allude, I think, to the progress Abraham had made in his soul, and God recognised that.
G.A.v.S. Does that explain how it is that, as the scene develops, Abraham indicates that he has at his disposal valuable agencies such as his wife and his servants, which all combine to produce conditions for the refreshment of the three visitors?
{259}
J.T. That is good. There is a system of things; a proper household condition. It is a "household of faith", which whilst it may apply to the believer's house, is properly seen in the assembly, as it is said "that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth. And confessedly the mystery of piety is great. God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory" (@1 Timothy 3: 15, 16). The mystery of piety enters into all this, involving how God could be here in such lowliness; manifested in flesh, but justified in the Spirit. All that was done was in the power of the Spirit. There was justification of the incarnation in what the Spirit did. We have here suggestively that state of things in the house, how all is under the direction of Abraham, and the divine Persons, you may say, are entertained; they sat graciously under the tree, as invited, until the patriarch brings forth what he has prepared.
G.A.v.S. Does all this spring from stability, or does it contribute to the stability that is set forth in the oak?
J.T. Both are true. This visit would be stabilising to Abraham and his house. Every divine visitation tends to stabilise us, and prepare us for further great occasions. It is from glory to glory. God is working to help us to get on more and more. The more the conditions are suitable, the more the overtures from God; the more visitations and privileges. Each visitation prepares us for another.
C.S.S. Would you say that this delightful scene is reached only by obeying God's word, "walk before me, and be thou perfect"? The apostle speaks of going on to perfection.
J.T. Well, I think that is the way the truth stands in this book. Enoch had walked *with* God, but God is
{260}
looking for more than that from Abraham. He says, "walk before me". He would see the gait, the proportions of the believer in his spiritual movements, and Abraham answers to it. God honours it here, in that He says in effect, I am going to make him My friend: "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" He is viewed as God's friend here; God had come to him in the familiarity of a friend, saying, "It is I", and held a conversation with him; now He comes back with two others. It is the idea of divine revelation, the three Persons, and all because of conditions.
C.D. In speaking of the oaks of Mamre at the end of chapter 13, it says they are in Hebron. Does that not emphasise the thought of divine stability?
J.T. Yes. It is a question of the purpose of God. As we have often seen, Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt. It refers to the purpose of God; what He is to have, and Abraham is now in the light of that, as it is said in @1 Corinthians 2: 7, "wisdom which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory" -- hidden wisdom. In verse 19, God says, "I know him". The apostle says, "if any man love God, the same is known of him". Abraham is a typical lover of God, and God says, "I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice, in order that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he hath spoken of him". We see how God is taking account of the patriarch, who is considering for Him. He commands his children after him. That is, conditions provided by faith are to go on; God says "in order that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he hath spoken of him". We reach a definite end on the ground of the provision of suitable conditions here, and that is what marked Abraham. In commanding his children after him he is thinking of the future, until the end is reached of the purpose of God.
{261}
M.H. Would you say Abraham was in the enjoyment of perfect love when he ran to meet God -- "perfect love casts out fear"?
J.T. Just so. What one often observes in the assembly meetings is the want of it. If divine Persons come, They are to be understood. That is the point one would seek to have before us. Divine Persons are known in Their respective relations in the assembly, and, as discerned, there is movement. "He ran to meet them". When he saw them he ran to meet them from the tent-door. That is, the position is right and he has liberty in it. The scene illustrates how "perfect love casts out fear".
W.J.H. The conditions are so right in his tent, that it is evident that the very best that Abraham had there was devoted to God.
J.T. Then see the beautiful interchange of thought. He changes, as was noted, from the singular to the plural, and says to them, "Let now a little water he fetched, that ye may wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree. And I will fetch a morsel of bread; and refresh yourselves; after that ye shall pass on; for therefore have ye passed on towards your servant. And they said, So do as thou hast said". It is not, Jehovah said.
E.S.W. Is this intimacy with divine Persons learned first in our household settings, and then transferred to the assembly?
J.T. I think that is right. God has greatly helped us on the line of the household -- what Paul in Galatians calls "the household of faith". He has greatly helped us in regard to baptism, and bringing up the children, and He is giving great results. It is a constant theme of thanksgiving amongst the brethren; the great results God is graciously giving to His people in their children. I believe it is that He is honouring the "For I know him that he will command his children and his household after him".
{262}
Parents are thinking of that, and God is thinking of them and honouring them, and showing them that He will continue the testimony, according to His pleasure. He means to carry on, and is honouring His people on that account.
G.A.v.S. What Abraham proposes to do here is much exceeded in what he actually does, and I am wondering whether that gives us an indication of why the Lord assented to his suggestion.
J.T. He values our bounty and particularly the *increase* of it. What you find here, too, is that as Abraham ministers to his great visitors, they say to him, "Where is Sarah thy wife?" as if the question of the assembly is now raised. They said this, and then we have the bringing in of Isaac, that is, of Christ as Man, typically, and then the next thing is the removal of the world, as typified in the destruction of Sodom. God is going to have a world of His own. He is working out all this. The promise of Isaac is renewed; there is no doubt about it, and God regards Abraham as His friend; instructing him in regard to what He is going to do with the world. It is to be judged, and for what purpose? To fill it with Christ, and all the purposes of God in relation to Christ. In the patriarch there is no exulting over this, that Sodom was to be judged, though he knew how wicked it was, but rather he is anxious that the divine patience should continue. So Abraham becomes an intercessor. We have the great principle of intercession brought out in this setting. How patiently God allowed Abraham to go down as far as he wished in regard to the number of righteous persons that might be in Sodom, and then it says in the last verse: "Jehovah went away when he had ended speaking to Abraham; and Abraham returned to his place". Jehovah does not go up to heaven now, as in chapter 17. The position is that God in going to judge the world at any moment; the judgment is imminent. Jehovah "went away". He does not go up here, but
{263}
carries out His will on earth. Abraham is His confidant. We have established here a great principle of friendship with God. What it is to be the divine confidant, to know what is to be done in regard to the world!
{264}
THE NUMERAL THREE IN TESTIMONY (2)
@Genesis 24: 1 - 9; @Genesis 28: 1 - 5; @Genesis 48: 8 - 20
J.T. At the previous reading we dwelt on @Genesis 18, having, as then said, the numeral three in mind, as indicating *complete* testimony on any given subject. There it was, in type, a full testimony to the Deity as entering into the economy in which God is known. The thought now is to look into the patriarchal testimony as set out in the three fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. I believe that they set out the full testimony on the patriarchal side, the side of the *Father*, following on the declaration of God as seen in John's and Matthew's gospels. Indeed, generally the Father takes supremacy and prominence in the economy, and so, in the present dispensation, it is the Father. The other two divine Persons are seen moving subserviently in relation to the Father. Thus it says in @Ephesians 4: 4 - 6, "There is one body and one Spirit", then "one Lord", then "one God and Father". That is how the scripture in the New Testament presents it; denoting the grace in regard of the testimony towards man, and the accomplishment of eternal purpose in regard of the saints. With these thoughts in mind, I think the brethren will see there is a good deal to be gathered up for our souls in these scriptures as to fatherhood, as to God known in that way. It is thought that the closing records of the lives of these three patriarchs are the most suitable to bring out the result in each. The passage in chapter 24 brings out Abraham as stressing the heavenly side of the truth, and occupied with Christ and the assembly in type. Isaac, following upon that, also has Christ and the assembly in type in mind, only, in a sense, on lower ground, for it is in relation to the testimony rendered here. Then Jacob in his closing moments is occupied with the tribes, and the passage brings out the principle of selection, of lifting certain ones, that
{265}
is, Ephraim and Manasseh, on to a higher level, in taking these grandchildren and giving them the full status of sons, like Reuben and Simeon. The thought applies to ourselves, God giving us that full status. It would help us to grasp the thought of the Father. These fathers are necessarily on the divine side and representative, carrying with them the power to bless.
Ques. Is there a certain sequence in them, in which we discern the unfolding of what God has in mind for us?
J.T. That is what is in mind, first, the heavenly side of our position, but the heavenly side is not stressed at first in the *history* of the testimony in the Acts. God held that in abeyance in order to manifest His patience toward Israel. Abraham includes the ministry of Paul, that is the heavenly side of the truth, that Christ is not presented as *standing* in heaven waiting to come back to Israel, as we see in @Acts 7, but rather as *sitting* with a view to the calling out of the assembly, the formation of the assembly as His heavenly bride. So that you get here the thought of the heavens, and the earth; the thought of heaven particularly in Abraham's command that Isaac must not be taken back to the country from whence Abraham came. For in no sense must he leave Canaan; figuratively, Christ must not be brought down to a lower level than the heavenly testimony. He must remain on that level.
W.J.H. Is that what the Lord meant when speaking to Mary, when He forbade her to touch Him?
J.T. That is what I understand. She would link Him with the garden. First she thought He was the gardener, but evidently, even after knowing Him, she linked Him with the earth. He enjoins her not to touch Him, because, as He said, "I have not yet ascended to my Father". That is, the link between us and Christ is on *heavenly ground*.
Ques. Does that emphasise the fact that the assembly is completely detached from earth and what is of earth?
{266}
J.T. That is what Paul's doctrine brings out. We belong to heaven, "as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones". The sheet that appeared to Peter came down from heaven, and went back into heaven. He says in @Acts 11: 5, "it came even to me", as if Peter needed to have the thought brought near to him, so that it should lay hold of him, and that he should be elevated to the heavenly side of the truth. In @Genesis 22, Isaac is offered up by Abraham and received back from the dead in figure, but he is not said to have come back with Abraham to Beer-sheba. The inference is that Christ *has gone up*, as He intimated to Mary, "go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend". Then at the end of @Genesis 22 Rebecca appears, for that is the divine thought now, to bring out Christ and the assembly. Figuratively, it is the christian dispensation seen from the highest point of view; not in its historical development as related the Acts, but the full thought of God, brought out in Paul's ministry.
F.W.W. Would what you have been saying help us to distinguish between the thought of father and children, and father and sons?
J.T. Well, it is not that the children are on any lower level, the idea of children is that we are here on earth in testimony, but the same persons. Sonship as applied to us, refers to heaven, and I hope by what will develop in this inquiry, we shall see that the types begin at the very top and come down in Isaac, and again in Jacob, but they *begin* at the very top.
E.S.W. Is that heavenly relationship seen in the early part of chapter 22; the father and the son moving together?
J.T. Quite so. You might say it is typically the Father and the Son, that is God and Christ in that relation, and then Christ received back in figure from the dead, and Isaac not seen as coming *down* with Abraham to Beer-sheba, the place of promise, but remaining
{267}
*above*, and Rebecca coming into view at the end of chapter 22. Then the death of Sarah is referred to; that is Israel entirely disappeared in the grave, her tent is vacant, so that Rebecca is led into it. It is the Lord taking the assembly into a position, not her own heavenly one, but a provisional one for testimony.
J.D.U. You refer to the patriarchs being blessers. Does that connect with what is said in Ephesians in regard to blessings in heavenly places?
J.T. It is the Father who has blessed us -- "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (@Ephesians 1: 3).
Ques. Is it the function of the Spirit to bring the assembly to where Christ is; is that not an important beginning?
J.T. It is, and the strict requirement is that Isaac must not be brought out of Canaan. In no sense is he to be brought out of Canaan, that is to say, Christ retains His place in heaven. We must keep that in mind; that is the basis of the dispensation, not simply resurrection, but Christ in heaven, and that the assembly is brought to Him *there*, and then she is led into *another position*. The leading is another thing, Isaac led her into his mother's tent.
G.C.H. Does that twofold position indicate the place the assembly has, both in relation to the God of the heavens and the God of the earth?
J.T. I think so, but the first thought is the heavens, and when we come to Isaac, only the heavenly scene is in mind, though Abraham speaks of God being God not only of the heavens but also of the earth. I believe that the thought is that the assembly is brought to Christ in heavenly places by the Spirit, in affection and intelligence, and presented. We are taken on by Him. It is not finality, it is in view of the provisional testimony that God would render to Israel first. Rebecca is led into Sarah's tent. In the New Testament we read
{268}
in Luke what corresponds to what we are saying. The Lord, after instructing the saints, opening their understandings, led them out as far as to Bethany. He led them to that point, and then was carried up to heaven, but they returned to Jerusalem. That would mean that they are *left* in connection with the place of love -- but still on Jewish ground.
W.J.H. Would the Lord breathing into His disciples (@John 20), following upon the message through Mary, fit us to take up that heavenly position?
J.T. I think that is the thought in it. The last Adam is a quickening Spirit; a very remarkable fact that enters into what we are speaking of; not simply a quickening *Person*, but a quickening Spirit (@1 Corinthians 15: 45). Another passage says that "the Lord is the Spirit". There is a remarkable combination of divine Persons so as to make the service, in view of all this, efficacious; first in regard of the covenant, and then in regard of the heavenly position.
Ques. Does ascending to the Father apply to the completion of the forty days?
J.T. The message sent through Mary speaks of what is characteristic rather than historical. It is "I ascend", not shall ascend. The forty days do not enter into the heavenly position; properly they are educational, particularly in regard of spirituality.
E.S.W. Is that what you had in mind in regard to "He led them out"? We have to be led and taught during the forty days.
J.T. Yes, they were educated by the extraordinary things that occurred, especially the Lord's appearances to them. The forty days is an educational period *preparatory to the heavenly position*. We must become spiritual; the point in the forty days is spiritual education, what spirituality means. The Lord is a quickening Spirit, yet He is a real Man; He stresses that point in Jerusalem according to Luke 24, but He is a quickening Spirit.
{269}
S.S. At Pentecost the numeral three is in evidence.
J.T. You mean that "having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear". The three Persons are there; it is remarkable how many illustrations you get of the Trinity in co-operation.
Ques. Seeing that knowing the Father is a blessing that belongs to christianity particularly, shall we be helped to grow in that by seeing Him in the Son?
J.T. We apprehend Him by the Son, it is the Son who reveals Him. "No one knows the Son but the Father, nor does any one know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son may be pleased to reveal him" (@Matthew 11: 27). It is the Son that makes the Father known; the Father is made known by and in relation to the Son. The Father, according to what He is, is seen in the Son in testimony; as the Lord said, "he that has seen me has seen the Father" (@John 14: 9). That is God in Christ, which is largely the testimony in John's gospel, but the Father has to be apprehended as that Person of the Deity, so that He speaks from heaven, to and of the Son as here on earth.
E.S.W. So that @Genesis 22 is fundamental to the subject of which you are speaking, divine relationships seen in operation.
J.T. Yes; it really is the basis of what we are speaking of, and to see how Abraham is concerned typically as to the heavenly side; that Christ typically should not be taken out of it, but that the assembly should be brought to Him there. Then, subject to His leading, to be available in whatever capacity He may want to use her. What the Lord is labouring for, particularly lately, is to help the brethren to lay hold of the *heavenly* position; that we belong to *heaven*, but if the Lord wishes to use us in any capacity on earth we are amenable to His directions, His leadership. Isaac led Rebecca into his mother Sarah's tent, as the Lord led His disciples to Bethany. He had a
{270}
reason for that, the function of the assembly is subservient to the Lord's leading, He refers to it as "my assembly", and He is free therefore to use it as needed. It is a great vessel, and yet amenable and subservient to Christ, so that He may render particular testimonies in a particular way. The dignity and greatness generally of the vessel qualifies it for the most exalted services.
G.C.H. You remarked that the assembly provides the place for divine Persons to move relatively. Would Rebecca as brought to Isaac on the one hand, and led into the tent on the other indicate this?
J.T. I think that is the thought. He led her there, and connecting that with the New Testament you can see how the assembly was used in service in the Acts. How, in it, God set out His great patience in waiting on Israel, and it will be used by and by in a greater way as the heavenly city. But throughout the dispensation now it is used as the house of God, and it is the body of Christ. It is the pillar and base of the truth, and so on; also a vessel of service Godward. So that it must be regarded as the greatest vessel for divine purposes, always remembering that it is *heavenly* and united to a *heavenly* Christ.
E.E.S.L. Would those two sides be connected with the epistles to the Ephesians and the Philippians respectively?
J.T. Yes. That to the Ephesians is the full divine thought, so that we are there immediately introduced to our own sphere; "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (@Ephesians 1: 3). Then in chapter 2 we are said to be raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ, in order that God might display in the coming ages the surpassing riches of His grace in kindness towards us in Christ Jesus. Now, however, He expects of us that we might walk in the good works that He has ordained for us (verse 10). At the end of this chapter
{271}
it runs on to the thought of the assembly being the residence of God down here, and the gentiles brought in as a habitation of God by the Spirit, which runs on to the end of the dispensation. The truth is presented as though the Jews had dropped out and the gentiles *by themselves* are regarded as the habitation of God by the Spirit, and that is a function of the assembly to the end. In Philippians, it is here for the display of Christ in a practical way. The truth of it is seen there; Philippians is a counterpart of Ephesians in that sense.
Rem. I was thinking that this is seen in connection with the younger son in @Luke 15, who is spoken of as having been dead, but alive again, referring to the gentile as material for the house of God.
J.T. I think that is right, because the elder brother represents the Jew as now reprobate. It would correspond, I think, with Stephen's testimony, "he ... would not go in", but then the house is there, and the music and dancing go on notwithstanding.
E.E. Would you say what answers, in the scriptures we are now considering, to the position of the assembly as raised and seated in the heavenlies in Christ as in @Ephesians 2?
J.T. The position of Rebecca led into Sarah's tent does *not* indicate the present position in the heavenlies, it indicates the present position she is *led into on earth*, but as already heavenly as to dignity. The heavenly position is hers, it belongs to her as heavenly, but in view of testimony she is *here* and available to Christ for any purpose He may see it necessary to use her. Being such a vessel as He calls "my assembly", she is available to Him and continues to the end of the dispensation in that availability.
W.J.H. So that the apostle Paul calls the assembly in the epistle to the Galatians, the Israel of God; is that what is in mind?
{272}
J.T. Yes, she takes that place; she takes Israel's place; she is in Sarah's tent. @Romans 9, 10 and 11 develop that truth in regard to the gospel, to reconcile God's promises to His earthly people with the "no difference" gospel that Paul was preaching. Israel is yet to be restored to its own place, but in the meanwhile the position of testimony is occupied by the assembly.
S.S. "The king hath brought me into his chambers" (@Song of Songs 1: 4). Is that after her following and then running? "Draw me, we will run after thee".
J.T. Yes, Christ is her object. Paul's ministry places the assembly in heavenly places, but she is also amenable for service toward Israel and generally, as still here upon earth in a provisional way. Then later she becomes, as the heavenly city, the great luminary of the universe. In every case she is subservient to the will of Christ.
Ques. How would you distinguish between the servant leading Rebecca, and Isaac leading her into the tent?
J.T. The servant is simply the ministry of the Spirit, bringing us in mind and affection to Christ in heaven, but the other part of the question is that it is only as she apprehends her place, her formation, as derived from Christ in heaven, and as heavenly, that she is properly fit to be used here in testimony. She is not earthly, she is heavenly, but capable of being used here provisionally in any testimony that is to be presented.
E.S.W. That is an important point, that we do well to lay hold of, for only as the heavenly position is understood and entered into, can we take up service intelligently here.
J.T. It is a very important matter, because the heavenly vessel has been lost sight of in testimony; whereas the great thought that characterises the dispensation is that God has the assembly here; itself heavenly and united to Christ *up there:* so that she is available and usable for the various purposes He has in
{273}
mind, and in this way she is great enough for that. Unless we see that, our testimony must be correspondingly desultory or on lower ground than is proper.
H.W. Does that help as to the understanding of @Revelation 21, the order in which things are presented as in the holy city?
J.T. She comes down. She is seen as coming down out of heaven, meaning that that is her place, she *belongs* to heaven; she comes down in liberty, she is not sent down; she *comes* down, having the glory of God, invested with it.
H.W. I was thinking of the fact that she is first seen in relation to eternity, before she is seen in relation to the world to come, in @Revelation 21.
J.T. That is a very good point. We see her in the greatest relations before she is seen coming down into the sphere of testimony.
J.S.D. Does the oath in this chapter refer to the urgency of the thing in the mind of God?
J.T. Yes. Abraham is so urgent about it, that under no circumstances will he have it otherwise, and that is for us; that we should hold to a heavenly Christ and a heavenly assembly. Those two points are essential if our testimony is to be such as divinely desired. The bride must be of the same family or lineage as the bridegroom, as Isaac; she is equal to him in that sense; she is great enough to be his bride. All this is to bring out what the assembly is in the divine counsels and as the subject of divine workmanship, and as raised up and made to sit down in the heavenlies in Christ.
H.W. May we have a little more as to the distinction between the bride and the wife?
J.T. The wife is brought in in @Revelation 19. The bride is brought in in @Revelation 21. It is a very remarkable thing that you have the wife before the bride. Usually the idea of the bride precedes the wife, though they are simultaneous. We talk about the bride and then the wife, but the wife is introduced first in
{274}
Revelation; she is the Lamb's wife; His confidant, and she is competent to fill the place in this time of testimony; He can trust her, as we get in @Proverbs 31: 11.
G.A.v.S. Does the wife in that way indicate the transitional position of the assembly here upon the earth during the period of being in Sarah's tent, as trusted and maintaining the interests of Christ, as the wife according to what you refer to in @Proverbs 31?
J.T. Yes, she is His confidant, as already remarked; she can be trusted, and that is another thought for us, for that is the position today; we are to be trusted with something.
E.E.S.L. Is it significant that Rebecca comes into view first as the subject of Abraham's purpose and later as the subject of Isaac's love?
J.T. It is after she is led into the tent you get the thought of His love for her, and I think that must mean that the idea of trustworthiness enters into her lovableness; what she is here in the position of testimony and as true in it. It is after she is led into the tent that it is said that Isaac loved her. I think the Lord must have been greatly pleased with what He had in the early days of the testimony; how the assembly behaved itself; what a testimony she was. It says in @Acts 2, He added such as should be saved, she could be trusted with them; she is quite in keeping with His mind; there is nothing in her contrary to His mind.
Ques. Can the full testimony be illustrated in the injunction that Rebecca gave to Jacob that he might bring two good kids out of the flock that she might make savoury venison which his father loved?
J.T. Chapter 27 brings out what Rebecca was in quality as *facing problems*. She had a great problem to solve. We have also the subterfuge and all that, which we must leave for the moment, but she faced the problem in a heroic way; she corresponds to Christ; ready to accept the curse upon herself, so that the mind of
{275}
God should go through. What quality was there! "On me by thy curse, my son!" she says. She knew the mind of God because He had told her before the children were born that the elder should serve the younger, and she is prepared to suffer that this might go through; a very great point in the testimony. She is conversant with matters like the woman in @Proverbs 31; how capable she was!
Ques. Is the position partially recovered in Philadelphia, where the Lord says, "I have loved thee"?
J.T. Yes; I think the moral element enters into that; not only what the assembly is to Him in counsel, but what He has *found* her to be. Love may begin marital relations, but what is developed after the marriage tie is the test, and the Lord finds in the assembly as typified by Rebecca led into the tent (that is into the position of testimony among the Jews) what He can love, and so in Philadelphia today in a similar position. The Jewish element is one of the most testing things we have to face today; it is an element marked by feeling (usually personal) instead of being governed by right principles. The Lord refers to those who "say they are Jews, and are not". It is what christendom has become -- the revival of judaism and He says, "I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee" (@Revelation 3: 9).
G.A.v.S. I was wondering whether the Father's love is indicated in the love of Abraham for his son in seeing that a wife was secured for Isaac. Is that the source of what comes out in Rebecca and Isaac in relation to Jacob?
J.T. Quite so. Christ's love for the assembly is seen as originating in Himself. It is that He has His ideal, and I believe that as the disciples came into view in His service here in the flesh, the thought of the assembly came into mind. He was looking for it, He was seeking "beautiful pearls". He was a connoisseur of the finest things, and "found one pearl of great value".
{276}
He is viewed in the parable as capable of discerning what is most excellent, and finding this one pearl of great price He sold all He had and bought it. The love of Christ for the assembly is seen as originating in Himself. Yet, because of what He has found her to be in the sphere of testimony, His affections became enhanced.
J.D.U. Does that come out in the clothing of the Lamb's wife?
J.T. I think that is the thought; what He has found her to be as wife, she is His companion in suffering. That is what is meant: "the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready" (@Revelation 19: 7). Then what she is granted to wear, as if it is due to her on moral lines; and hence "the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints". That is the moral side and shows the importance of what we are speaking about; what it is to be in testimony as conforming to Christ.
E.S.W. So that it is while she is housekeeping in Sarah's tent that her lovable qualities come into view.
J.T. That is the idea. Lovableness marked her from the outset, but its presence in the definite sphere of testimony is of particular importance.
Ques. Are bridal affections produced by faithfulness and trustworthiness?
J.T. Yes, I think the real affection in the marital tie is *after* it is made, all before that is preliminary. It is in the relation of wife that the moral qualities are fully seen; that is where the test comes. The Lord has had to deal severely with the assembly in public, but in Philadelphia He comes back to the real thought, and He does not hesitate to say that they "shall know that I have loved thee".
We have two other patriarchs to dwell upon, but there is hardly time now. We should take up the thought of the Father coming out in Deity and then the idea of the Father in full testimony. It is of great importance that we should give time to that.
{277}
W.J.H. I was wondering in regard to your reference to Philadelphia, where the Lord says, "I will cause that they ... shall know that *I* have loved thee", and then He speaks of writing on the overcomer there "the name of my God" and "my new name". Does this suggest the heavenly side permanently established in the saints?
J.T. We spoke of that in Melbourne and I think we got help. The Lord in speaking to the overcomer in Philadelphia uses the phrase *My God* four times. He is suggesting the final thought that God has in mind, that is to bring us to Himself; not simply the covenant God, but *Christ's God;* that He is to be apprehended as Christ's God, and what is said to Philadelphia implies an understanding of that. I think that is the thought the Lord is helping us on at present; it brings out what God is *in relation to Christ*. Christ alone knows Him in His *absoluteness*, and we are to be brought to Him who is Christ's God.
Rem. That gives us a little sense of the greatness of what is heavenly.
J.T. What is eternal also; what is final. I think the final thought is not so much the heavenly, although of course it is that, but it is *God;* it is finality; "the end".
Rem. So that Christ not only secures something for His own heart, but something for God that will endure eternally.
J.T. Yes, it is secured by One who knows Him as "My God", not simply as we know Him in the economy into which He has come, but in His absoluteness. Obviously absoluteness is included in the knowledge that Christ as Man has of God.
Ques. Are we to be brought to that as a present thing?
J.T. I think so, "My God and your God". It can only be entered into in any sense as we are, as it were, alongside of Christ, but being creatures we cannot
{278}
grasp it. There is a link between the relative and the absolute in Christ, He has to do with both.
Rem. "From eternity to eternity thou art God" (@Psalm 90: 2).
J.T. I am speaking of Christ as Man. The other side of the truth is the great fact that He is God.
{279}
THE NUMERAL THREE IN TESTIMONY (3)
@Genesis 27: 27 - 29, 39, 40; @Genesis 28: 1 - 5; @Genesis 48: 8 - 20
J.T. That what is in mind in the present inquiry may be clear to all, it may be remarked that our first reading was on @Genesis 18, attention being drawn to the bearing of the numeral three in testimony, as suggestive of the *whole* testimony in regard to any given subject. God has given full testimony so that there should be no doubt in our minds as to the meaning of what He is presenting. In that chapter we have three men, as it is said, "standing near" to Abraham as he was at his tent door. In that incident there is the indication of the Deity, the Trinity; God coming in in that way in an economy. One of the three is recognised by Abraham as the Lord, but subsequently he speaks to the three together, he addresses them collectively, and they answered in the same way.
Then yesterday we dwelt on chapter 24 as presenting the leading patriarchal thought in Abraham. He is occupied as a father with Isaac, and with a view to the bride for Isaac. What was mainly in mind was to show that in the economy into which God has come, the Father takes prominence, as it is said, "to us there is one God, the Father". The Son and the Spirit also have part in the Deity, but take a subservient place in order to carry out the divine thoughts and make them effectual. It was remarked that Abraham represents the Father's activities in relation to Christ and the assembly. It was urgent, but the idea of the "oath" is added, requiring that his servant must not take his son Isaac out of Canaan, but that the bride must be sought and brought to Isaac into Canaan. What was stressed was that Canaan represents the hidden side of the position; Abraham being seen as presenting figuratively the God of the heavens and of the earth, but that Christ, from
{280}
the point of view of the truth presented there, is to be regarded as in heaven, as indigenous to heaven and, as there expressive of the divine counsels for Man. Then the saints as the assembly are brought to Him in the power of the Spirit, in mind and affection answering to the position He is in. Then, as Isaac led Rebecca into his mother's tent, and loved her, he is to be taken account of thus as representing a testimony, namely, of the One who has a wife here, who is subservient to Him in whatever is needed on earth; that is, of course, Christ and the assembly. That is the substance of what we had yesterday.
Now we have to consider the patriarchal teaching as seen in Isaac. It will be observed that in the last scripture read, the idea is cumulative. Jacob says in blessing Ephraim and Manasseh (verse 16), "and let my name be named upon them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac". So that the patriarchal instruction from Abraham to Jacob is cumulative, and all comes down in the blessing of Ephraim and Manasseh. The suggestion now is to consider Isaac, as to what feature of the fatherhood of God is typically set out in this patriarch. In this connection what has been stated in the New Testament is that "Isaac blessed". "By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come" (@Hebrews 11: 20). I thought @Genesis 27 should be considered a little, before we proceed with the other passages, as indicating certain features of fatherly activities, not, as in chapter 24, to procure a bride for a heavenly Christ, but to convey blessing. For blessing is imparted to the two brothers, although the element of love between them was absent. The suggestion is what God is in grace in our dispensation, seen in blessing, notwithstanding the incongruity, in the absence of love, as if the blessing might induce what was lacking; that the influence of the Father might work thus, for the Father's name stands only in connection with grace and love, not with judgment (@John 5: 22).
{281}
Another thing that comes out in chapter 27 is the energy seen in the object of counsel; for it is in this connection that we have that remarkable statement in @Romans 9: 11, 12, that the principle of election must stand, that all must make way for the establishment of the principle of election. So we have the energy of faith, although the circumstances were not in keeping, yet the energy of faith secured the blessing. Another great point to consider is the presence of hatred, a brother's hatred; suggesting, as we might say, the difficulties of natural relationship, for very great difficulties indeed, in the things of God, arise from natural relationships, which often hinder us. We have in this chapter the energy that secures the blessing in spite of that hindrance.
W.J.H. You mean the energy of Rebecca, that would at all cost put what is spiritual first instead of what is natural?
J.T. That is what is seen here, because natural relationships, in which connection there is almost sure to be a worldly element, are a very great hindrance amongst the people of God, to our laying hold of our proper spiritual heritage.
H.M. Is the fact that all these things took place generally in the last days of the patriarchs¬ lives, a suggestion of the precious things that the Father is bringing to light in the last days?
J.T. That is a good suggestion. Connecting all the ministry of Christ, as He takes account of the days in which we are, with what we get in these patriarchs is very encouraging, and shows how God reaches His thoughts at the end. This is especially seen in Jacob, whose faith really exceeds all that preceded, in that he "worshipped on the top of his staff" (@Hebrews 11: 21).
Ques. Does Isaac's blessing of Jacob, referring to God giving him of the dew of heaven, suggest that if we reach the heavenly position we are under constant heavenly influences?
{282}
J.T. That is the thought in Isaac; he is typically in the heavenly position. In him we do not see the energy of responsibility exactly he represents the *position* rather; the heavenly side is stressed, and Isaac says, "God give thee of the dew of heaven". It is the first thing he mentions, and we know from @Psalm 133 that unity among brethren is good and pleasant and is like the dew of Hermon. It descends upon the mountains of Zion, it is an allusion to the Spirit coming down and freshness coming into view, tending to promote brotherly unity. So that with the energy of faith amongst us laying hold of the thoughts of God, these conditions would promote brotherly unity.
N.B.S. Does the reference to the smell of his clothes suggest that there are conditions that can be blessed?
J.T. Manifestly it is the field already said to be blessed, but the blessing is great potentially; that is, there are great possibilities to be worked out.
E.E.S.L. Is the faith of Isaac, spoken of in @Hebrews 11, evidenced by his placing the dew of heaven before the fatness of the earth? One would hardly have thought that the blessing in a general way was of faith, inasmuch as he was under a misapprehension. I thought perhaps the priority he gives to heaven over earth was the evidence of the state of faith.
J.T. No doubt the allusion to heaven is in keeping with what he represents; he is the heavenly man. Abraham has precedence of Isaac and Rebecca, meaning that God the Father has precedence of Christ and the assembly in heavenly relationships, which we had yesterday. It comes out in the ministry of the apostle Paul. Isaac is the heavenly man, but in relation to the present dispensation, so that it is said he blessed both Jacob and Esau; grace reigning, notwithstanding the incongruity in the want of love; that is the thought. God would make the best of the position; the knowledge of God as Father implies the very best that can be made out of the position.
{283}
F.W.W. Would that in any way suggest the advantage in testimony that the presence of the assembly is as upon earth now, towards the world?
J.T. It would; it reflects the mind of heaven. The want of love between brethren is overridden by the greatness of grace as revealed in the name of the Father. John enlarges on it in his gospel, it is constantly "the Father", or "my Father". It is not our relationship to Him, but the question of the Deity in the exercise of grace, and so the Lord at the end says to His disciples, "as the Father sent me forth, I also send you. And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit: whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained" (@John 20: 21 - 23). The commission is very broad, and the Lord's confidence in the disciples is expressed in it; the Lord undertaking to support them in the exercise of their forgiving ministry; adding, of course, "whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". But the prevalent thought is the spirit of grace; and that is what continues throughout the dispensation.
J.D.U. Are you meaning Jacob and Esau in the natural relationship, or as representing them as brethren, in the spiritual relationship?
J.T. Typically they represent the *public* position in christendom. Blessing marks the divine attitude towards all.
S.C.D. Jacob gets the kiss and Esau does not, does that go with what has been said?
J.T. It points to the place Jacob had, according to the passage alluded to in @Romans 9: 10 - 13, which would definitely help us. It says there, "And not only that, but Rebecca having conceived by one, Isaac our father, the children indeed being not yet born, or having done anything good or worthless (that the purpose of God according to election might abide, not of works, but of him that calls), it was said to her, The greater shall serve the less:
{284}
according as it is written, I have loved Jacob, and I have hated Esau". The kiss of Isaac, now that he is on the line of faith, according to @Hebrews 11, undoubtedly contemplates the place that Jacob had in the mind of God; evidently he was loved. It is said later, in @Malachi 1, that God loved him, but already it says that Rebecca loved Jacob, she understood his place in the mind of God. The terms of the blessing are: "God give thee of the dew of heaven, And of the fatness of the earth, And plenty of corn and new wine. Let peoples serve thee, And races bow down to thee. Be lord over thy brethren, And let thy mother's sons bow down to thee. Cursed be they that curse thee, And blessed be they that bless thee". That is what is in mind in christianity, the blessing of God as Father. That is real christianity; which subsists and will go through.
E.S.W. Is your thought that as we take up and enjoy the spiritual blessings of christianity, what is natural will be overcome in our meetings?
J.T. That is the thought, the one really blessed is furnished with the means of overcoming.
W.J.H. So that even an enemy of Jacob gets blessing according to @Hebrews 11.
J.T. What can be more conducive to love and unity amongst us than the knowledge that the blessing is common to the dispensation? It helps greatly in the deliverance of those in the religious organisations around us.
W.J.H. So that one of the lovable features of Jacob is that he set a great value on divine blessing.
J.T. That is what this chapter brings out; it is the energy that *would have* the blessing, and then the great principle governing the position, that the brother who is hated is blessed too. So that that brother may have at least the idea of blessing, and it ought to induce in him love, instead of hatred; thus there is nothing more important than to maintain the thought
{285}
of God as Father, not exactly in relation to ourselves as Father, but that that Person of the Deity stands in the economy in that relation; and of Him, the Father, it is stated expressly that He does not judge; we are thus impressed with the thought of grace. Grace reigns through righteousness, but in the Father you are impressed with the thought of the dimensions of grace, even to the brother who does not love and who ultimately is hated. If he continues in the absence of love and in his hatred, then he is hated of God, for it is said in @Malachi 1: 3, "hated Esau".
H.M. Isaac invited Jacob to come near and kiss him. Does that suggest that the supreme blessing comes to those who are in nearness, and who are responsive?
J.T. Quite so. Then the smell is another thing. The kiss is one thing, and the smell is another; bringing out what is there in Jacob. There is nothing of that in Isaac's remarks to Esau; the smell is not there, the brother who hates has no smell that can be valued. We often see that kind of thing; the root of the matter is in a person, and you can rely upon him; but if there is no root then nothing can be expected for God.
E.S.W. While blessing characterises the dispensation, it has to be taken up.
J.T. Exactly. That is what comes out in regard to Esau, he neglected the blessing; he sold his birthright. He sought it afterwards, but found no place for repentance.
E.E. Would you say a further word about the smell? It seems to have a distinct place here in connection with the blessing coming forth; the smell of his clothes, the smell of his son, and the smell of the field.
J.T. "He smelt the smell of his clothes, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which Jehovah hath blessed". The field is mentioned as a metaphor to show that there are
{286}
great potentialities, and this would be very intelligible to Jacob; suggestive of great things to be developed on the principle of life. Of course, the whole scheme of Scripture has this in view, looking on to Christ. That is where the fruitfulness lies.
Ques. Is that why it speaks of Him buying a field because of the treasure that is hid in it?
J.T. Well, that is another view; here it is peculiarly the agricultural thought, the great possibilities indicated by the smell of Jacob, who was blessed of God.
Ques. Does the smell of the field suggest the bringing in of the world in reconciliation through the death of Christ (@Romans 11: 15)?
J.T. Well, there it is merely a provisional thought; it does not mean that the world is essentially reconciled, but that God is now regarding it in that light in view of the preaching of the gospel, though it will not be always so regarded. In @Genesis 27 Jacob himself is the field; he is the field as essentially blessed of God; it is not a provisional field, it is the field in which are worked out the great thoughts of God in love.
W.J.H. Do you think the smell of Jacob arises out of the discipline and pressure that he goes through. Is it not that which produces the smell in the saints?
J.T. Yes, all this will be worked out; it is really a potential position here, because he is just a lone man, but wonderful things are to be worked out in him in a living way, and that is really what is in mind. Isaac is the father, that is, he represents God in this sense, having power to bless, and having power to "smell" spiritually. For it is not the natural here; he is now acting in faith, and discerns the divine smell, and it is prophetic, showing what will be worked out in life in this man, hence later it is said, "I loved Jacob". God had really been loving him all the time and working out His thoughts in him.
G.A.v.S. What would be suggested by Isaac saying to Jacob "Come near, now, and kiss me, my son"?
{287}
J.T. It is the divine thought; God calls us near to Him, and addresses us as sons. It indicates what we are called into, the nearness of sonship; and the kiss as we know expresses the affections of the Father. In @Luke 15 the Father covered the returning son with kisses, which is just to suggest the same thing.
C.S.S. Is the smell filling the house at Bethany indicative of those who have crossed over from that which is first -- the natural -- to that which is spiritual?
J.T. Yes, it must be so; that is one great principle running through all this matter; that which is first is not spiritual but natural, afterwards that which is spiritual. Jacob represents the spiritual, Esau the natural, which is superseded.
L.J.T. Would the reversal in the blessing indicate that the dew of heaven is put first in relation to Jacob and second in regard to Esau?
J.T. Yes, what shows how the truth was taking hold of Jacob spiritually, is that he crossed his hands knowingly in regard to Ephraim and Manasseh; he puts the second before the first.
E.S.W. Is your thought that in order to arrive at the assembly in a living way in these last days, we must appropriate the blessing proper to it?
J.T. Yes, and to see that the principle of blessing applies to those who may be opposed to us, though still in the relation of brethren; the blessing applies to them. What they do is another thing, and that is what the second blessing implies. The principle of blessing is there in regard to Esau, for the Spirit of God says that Isaac blessed both Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. Now what is said of Esau first, is as to his dwelling, that it will be a rich place on the earth. That is, he will be in the realm of the Spirit; although he is such a man as he is, and the dew of heaven too is there for him. Yet he would live by his sword, and would serve his brother. Then
{288}
"when thou rovest about ... thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck", that is, he would prove himself lawless. That is the way it seems to me, according to the record of the historical facts concerning Esau; that the character of the brother who does not love works out. The blessing is there, but then the facts also are there, and they bring out what he is, that he is not a subject man: he breaks off the yoke that God imposed upon him.
As regards the next chapter, we have the patriarchal thought; the Father's thought, in regard to Jacob's marriage; that his wife also must be of his own kindred, so that the fatherly thought is again expressed in considering for those in the place of blessing.
W.J.H. Could we have a word as to the meaning of Abraham's wife, and Isaac's wife, and Jacob's wife, all having a common lineage with their husbands? It is remarkable that in the Song of Songs the spouse is said to be the sister, and Abraham says of Sarah, "She is my sister", and so with Isaac and Rebecca. There is the lineage there before the marriage tie exists. I think it would help us to see what that really means.
J.T. From a practical point of view, it means as regards literal marriage, that the sister must come before the wife, or marriage cannot be "in the Lord". On a higher plane, as we had it yesterday, the allusion is to the assembly viewed as the spouse of Christ, that she is of His own family or lineage, meaning that she is the fruit of the work of God, and thus of divine worth. It is on a higher plane, of course, but there is instruction in it in a practical way in regard to marriage which ought to be observed. Because the enemy gets great advantage in a brother or sister forming an alliance with one who may not be born of God, or whose birth is cloudy. Such marriages are mixed and the fellowship is compromised.
{289}
C.D. Is not Rebecca's concern in regard to the daughters of Herb, as expressed in the last verse of chapter 27, significant?
J.T. Yes, she says to Isaac, "I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these, of the daughters of the land, what good should my life do me?" It is the experience that the saints have really, for Rebecca may be taken to represent the mother side; the assembly viewed in that way. What sorrows we have to endure because of brothers and sisters forming marital alliances with persons whose divine origin is questionable, or even non-existent. Even if they have the experience of being born of God, if they are not in fellowship they have not committed themselves to separation from worldly associations. Thus they cause the assembly great grief of mind.
G.A.v.S. Would the idea of brother and sister mean something more than merely being in fellowship outwardly, but carry with it the apprehension of a divine link formed primarily, so that sister comes before the bride?
J.T. Quite so. There are two lines running through, the first is the birth; the family link conveyed in the sister, but then there is the fellowship as well. Otherwise if there be not the fellowship, if they are not in the fellowship truly, then the marriage cannot be "in the Lord".
F.W.W. Does Jacob's doing of this support what you are saying in that way? In chapter 24 it is Abraham's servant who is instructed to take a wife for Isaac, but in chapter 28 it is what Jacob does himself.
J.T. I think that is right, the comment is that he "fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served for a wife" (@Hosea 12: 12). I think it is the practical side; it is the brother *finding*, as it says, He that finds a
{290}
wife finds a good thing. On the spiritual side, he represents, I think, Christ, not as remaining in heaven, but representatively coming out into the gentile world to seek His bride. That is especially seen in the energy of the ministry of the apostle Paul, who says that "I, from Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum, have fully preached the glad tidings" (@Romans 15: 19). He also tells us of his sufferings. Jacob, too, had experienced his.
Rem. Isaac's concern as to this link is an evidence that it is the generation of faith that inherits the blessing.
J.T. Well, you can see that. Isaac says, "Arise, go to Padan-Aram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father" -- not Laban, but "thy mother's father", the patriarchal side is in mind, "and take a wife thence of the daughters of Laban thy mother's brother. And the Almighty God bless thee, and make thee fruitful and multiply thee".
Rem. So that the position is clearly set out; on the one hand the Father's thoughts go through, and on the other, the object of the blessing is obedient.
W.A.J. Is the groundwork of the lineage and of the marriages of Isaac and Rebecca, and Jacob and his wife, based on the change of names of Abraham and Sarah?
J.T. I think so; the root is really there. The change of the name to Abraham being an extension of Abram. Abram was *high father*, meaning moral elevation, which is proper to a father, the head of a family. Abraham is *the father of a multitude*. Sarah too is *the princess*. It is just the extension of what there is in the root, but established in chapter 17, and circumcision maintaining it. Circumcision was given as a covenant with the change of name, and shows how what the name signified was to be maintained; so that the posterity can say, "*we* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God ... and do not trust in flesh" (@Philippians 3: 3).
{291}
Now, as to the last chapter we read. As we have already remarked, @Genesis 48: 16 shows that all we have had before us is cumulative and culminates in Jacob. He brings down the name, "my name ... and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac". There seems to be a remarkable connection there with this verse and @Matthew 28: 19, "baptising ... to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". Viewing all these patriarchs typically in connection with these activities, we can see *the full testimony to the idea of the Father* in the names of the three.
E.S.W. Do you mean that the Father's activities in blessing are exercised today by the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Yes, and they are made effective by the Son as over the house.
Rem. So that in the thought of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the full blessing of the position is before us.
J.T. Yes. Then the sovereign way of divine action and the intelligence with which Jacob puts Ephraim before Manasseh, and lifts both to a status they had not previously had. I think we ought to observe that, as entering into this part of the subject, the coming into a status that had not been enjoyed before.
W.J.H. Do you suggest that the Father is known in such activities as lifting us out of one level and putting us on to another?
J.T. Well, I think that in a practical way is what is going on. God is helping the brethren into the thought of sonship; of course it has been known, but it is now stressed. Then the full, divine number is retained, the number twelve, which is administrative order and fulness (See chapter 49).
J.D.U. What is the thought then of the multitude, also the fulness of nations? Is that productiveness for God?
J.T. Yes, and of His quality. Such a family, such a multitude of men to be treated in this way, lifted
{292}
sovereignly according to all the affections of a Father. It says, "Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who are these? And Joseph said to his father, They are my sons, whom God has given me here". Now Jacob had said of them in verse 5, "thy two sons, who were born to thee in the land of Egypt ... shall be mine: Ephraim and Manasseh shall be mine, as Reuben and Simeon". I think that is very beautiful, it is typically full of blessedness; the Father's love enters into it. Jacob says: "they shall be mine", and in this elevated place of sonship, "as Reuben and Simeon".
G.A.v.S. Is it that they are transferred from Egypt to heaven?
J.T. In that typical sense, that they have the full status of the family, of sonship.
E.S.W. Is this being worked out by the Holy Spirit in these closing days?
J.T. I think so. One of the greatest features of the revival of our days is sonship, involving the Spirit of it now. God has brought it before us more fully lately, that the brethren may lay hold of it. What could be more precious to the heart than the Father's voice saying, "they shall be mine"? What an elevated status!
G.C.H. Does predestinated to sonship express the thought?
J.T. Exactly. That is being worked out in a practical way, that persons who have not *enjoyed* this favour are being brought into it.
F.W.W. "The wind blows where it will" (@John 3: 8). Is that the idea?
J.T. That is the principle of sovereignty, only the Father's voice is so much more delightful than the sound of the wind. The wind blowing is of course the power that works in us, but now you have the voice of the Father saying, "they shall be mine".
{293}
W.J.H. Sonship was Joseph's, was it not, in an absolute and peculiar way? These affections were Joseph's, because Jacob loved Joseph, and now he elevates these two on to the same platform as Joseph.
J.T. Quite so, and then an immense multitude in prospect, as it is said later, "let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the land!" Then in verse 20: "he blessed them that day, saying, In thee will Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and Manasseh!"
F.W.W. Does this come in as the fruit of the sufferings of Christ typically, these two having been begotten in Egypt at the time of Joseph's sorrow and rejection? Jacob now claims them and says, "they shall be mine". Is that the truth of sonship coming out as the fruit of suffering?
J.T. That brings in a collateral line of thought in these chapters, that is, that typically Christ came into Jacob's family when Joseph was born. It was then that Jacob proposed to leave Padan-Aram and to go back into Canaan; suggesting the thought of Christ coming in, and the place that is proper to Christ, that is, Canaan, His own country. Then in chapter 37 we have Christ seen in Joseph as peculiarly *loved* by his father. "Israel loved Joseph", and "These are the generations of Jacob, Joseph". No other generation is mentioned until Joseph is owned, indeed owned by his brethren, and after that we have the others. Then this chapter 48 presents the elevating of the sons of this loved one, that is, those he had begotten in his affliction. God gave them to him, as he says, "here" in the land of his affliction; these are now elevated to the position of sons.
W.J.H. "As Reuben and Simeon", not exactly as Joseph. Do you think that suggests the peculiar place of sonship that Christ has, but we have sonship as Reuben and Simeon?
{294}
J.T. Quite so, members of the family. The first thought of God is that of the family, because Reuben means "see, a son", that is to say the thought of sonship *in the family* is set forth in him. Joseph accentuated the thought, as coming in, especially as lovable and loved of the father.
J.D.U. The Lord says in @John 14: 23, "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him". Is that connected in any way with what you are saying?
J.T. One proves oneself lovable in that way. John's gospel does not really present sonship to us, but it presents that which is morally in keeping with sonship, that we keep the commandments, and the word. Sons are marked off in that way. Sonship is more properly presented in Joseph. It was seen first in Isaac the heavenly man, then of course Jacob was a son. But Joseph as the son of love, suggests Christ in a personal way. He was loved of his father, and invested with a coat of many colours, and that is why his brethren hated him. Joseph presents that side of the truth. Then there were his sufferings, and his begetting sons in the land of his strangership, suggesting heirship, and then their elevation to the full position of the family, that they did not enjoy before.
G.C.McK. Joseph brings them out from between his knees, would that suggest that they have been under the formative influence of Joseph?
J.T. A very good touch, how well cared for they were, and now are embraced by him who typifies the Father, and elevated to the status of *his* family.
W.J.H. Would you outline the three distinct patriarchal features?
J.T. Well, the first is the Father seen in Abraham. In connection with him there is illustrated in Abraham's servant, in @Genesis 24, the thought of the Spirit coming out from the Father; Christ being in heaven. That is to say the land, and the assembly is brought
{295}
to Him *there*, as seen in Rebecca being brought to Isaac in the land. Thus the highest thought of the dispensation is introduced first. Then Isaac, the heavenly man, conveying the thought of the whole dispensation in *blessing*, both towards them that love -- Jacob -- and them that do not love -- Esau. It is the whole dispensation that is in view, the blessing tending to promote love and unity. Then in Jacob, the continuation of the blessing carried down from Abraham and Isaac, growing into a multitude in the midst of the land. Finally culminating in spirituality at the end, the great spiritual thought of the displacement of the first and the establishing of the second (@chapter 48: 14). The great spiritual family of God, the great result of the testimony -- the thousands of Ephraim and Manasseh -- come in on that platform. I think this is what is in view in the last days, a great triumph morally, God bringing us to this platform, and to the spirit of worship as suggested in Jacob worshipping God at the end.
{296}
THE NUMERAL THREE IN TESTIMONY (4)
@Exodus 3: 1 - 6; @Exodus 4: 1 - 17, 27 - 31
J.T. So that our subject may be more clear, a verse from @Micah 6: 4 will help. It says, "I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam". The proposal is to consider the thought of full testimony, as seen in the numeral three, as regards the *ministry*. We have considered the question of the Deity, taking up @Genesis 18, and then the patriarchs in Genesis, as representing, under the same numeral, the fatherhood of God. Now we have before us the ministry; what God has appointed, so that all we have before us in the types as to God, the Trinity, and then the Father, may be made effective through officially qualified instrumentalities. The official feature of the truth is not much in view in Genesis, indeed scarcely at all, whereas in these books -- Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy -- it is the leading feature. They show what Christ is officially, and what ministers appointed by Him are; what their function is. The proposal is to view this subject under the head of Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, as put together by the Spirit of God in Micah, and as seen in detail in these books. The inquiry, of course, is not only that we may be instructed in this great subject, but that it may have a moral bearing upon us, since the obligation to serve attaches to each of us, although there are those who are specially qualified.
W.J.H. Would you say a little more as to what you mean by what is official?
J.T. We see it here in the way in which Moses and Aaron are appointed by God to lead His people out of Egypt, and as out, to lead them through the wilderness and regulate them, and hold them in a moral way in relation to the service of God. In the New Testament the Lord Himself is the antitype,
{297}
the One who, as we are told, was here in flesh, and anointed by the Holy Spirit, and now as risen from the dead, and ascended into heaven, is made both Lord and Christ. Then the twelve apostles are formally constituted to represent Him here, to represent the Lord; and especially Paul. The Lord addresses him as one called to be a minister and a witness; "a called apostle". I suppose that would indicate what is meant in the official feature of the truth.
W.J.H. With Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, everything was personal, in a family setting. Moses, Aaron, and Miriam are distinct from that.
J.T. Yes; although Moses and Aaron are brothers, and Miriam their sister, they are mentioned as appointed leaders, and hence do not represent the family of God, but what is official.
F.W.W. Would the official be more connected with the anointing?
J.T. Well, it is formally stated to be that. Jesus is said to have been anointed by God. He says in the synagogue: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach ..." In Genesis the patriarchs represent the fatherhood of God, and that would be what constituted the economy in Genesis from the family point of view under the head of three -- three men -- and then three patriarchs, or fathers, presenting the full testimony connected with the idea of *father*, which, of course, applies to God, and which we see more fully brought out in the New Testament. Then there is the official anointing, which is to make all this effective in an authoritative way, and a skilled way too, for one idea in ministry is *skill*.
E.S.W. What is it that is ministered?
J.T. Well, typically, the full revelation of God. The Spirit of God is sent down; the great result of redemption, and represents that side, what is administered. "He has poured out this", Peter said of Christ
{298}
as established in heaven as Lord and Christ. What was there was what Christ had "received of the Father". That is the principle, for "the Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand" (@John 3: 35). So that He is constituted an official under the title of Lord and Christ, and being thus constituted, He received of the Father, it says, "the promise of the Holy Spirit", and poured it out. That is the great general act of administration, and nothing can exceed it in extent. What follows is the testimony of it applied in its wonderful bearing towards man in the gospel, and in the formation of the assembly.
N.B.S. What is the bearing of two of these being brothers, and one a sister?
J.T. The first is authority, Moses, and ability to open up the mind of God; and in Aaron brotherly sympathy and affection, which is allied with authority and the general opening up of the mind of God. So that the ministry in Moses is made sympathetic as to men, and attractive, in that way; as illustrated, for instance, in the gospel of Luke. Matthew and Mark convey the idea of authority, and great general principles mark those gospels, whereas Luke enlarges on personalities, sympathy in persons. John also enlarges on personalities and brings out dignity. Luke enlarges on personalities to bring out sympathy, but particularly as allied with Matthew, and presents the thought of Aaron, so that the testimony is presented in an attractive, sympathetic way to men. It is a very important matter in the ministry, that we do not prejudice it, "that the ministry be not blamed", as Paul says (@2 Corinthians 6: 3).
E.T. Is the thought of divine selection seen in the appointing of these ministers, but underlying that the moral qualities, each having their moral history?
J.T. That is an instructive way to put the position. In *Moses* we have a life-size picture. Aaron is first presented to us at the age of eighty-three, that is, he is an old man before he is presented, while Miriam is
{299}
not presented, *by name*, until she is probably much older than that. No doubt she is alluded to in chapter 2, under the name of Moses¬ sister, but not *by name*. So Moses is to be taken to be representative personally of this great subject, because we have him from his infancy, and in his infancy he suggests the idea of divine selection; from that time he is being prepared to take up his ministry. His beauty as a child is alluded to twice in the New Testament; as if God foreshadowed what he was to be. There was to be a certain attractiveness in his ministry, which was there potentially in the babe; and he was under divine care peculiarly, until he was eighty years of age; then he receives his appointment. This shows how, as taken up young, an extended course of instruction is necessary for the ministry. We cannot enter into it immediately we are converted. We may do things, but ere God commits Himself to us, we require careful training; that is what Moses represents. He represents the ministry actually, while Aaron and Miriam are adjuncts to make it attractive, first in the way of sympathy, and then affection and instinct, on the feminine side.
J.D.U. Is the patriarchal side more connected with purpose, and the official side with extrication from the scene of opposition, of what is to be for God?
J.T. That is right. The first is the family side, what God has in mind in approaching men. He has in mind to secure not only a people down here for Himself, but a family of sons, and that, I think, is what is represented in the fathers. The ministerial service runs alongside of that, but only as an instrumentality to secure it. The official side will drop out as the family is secured according to divine counsel. First of all Moses is presented to us as a beautiful child, but there is more in that verse than mere physical beauty. He is *fair to God* (@Acts 7: 20), it is evidently what God saw in him; and then the education extending over a period of eighty years, forty years of which were
{300}
spent in the court of Pharaoh. All that is to bring out the educational side, and in the course of that education we have divine selection evidenced in Moses. It was seen in God taking him up, but the moral fitness shows itself in that, when he came to years, he "refused to be called son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction along with the people of God than to have the temporary pleasure of sin; esteeming the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt" (@Hebrews 11: 24 - 26). A very important side in a minister, as developed in his educational period, is the principle of selection: *choosing and refusing*. Choosing the good, choosing the suffering and the affliction, and refusing the evil. Then as coming under the wrath of Pharaoh, he flees, and in Midian sits by a well. We see there what God was doing in the man. This everyone who aspires to serve, or is serving, must have in mind. What God is doing in him educationally, and how the work of God in him shows itself, in his ability, and holy qualities generally. So Moses sat by a well, we are told, in Midian. He had had recourse to physical energy, and doing things in his own ability in Egypt, but now he is trusting to a power outside of himself, he is resting by the well; alluding, doubtless, to the Spirit of God. These things are all very important for us, whether we are in the service or aspire to it; indicating how we have to pay attention to the educational side, and how the work of God runs along with it, showing its spiritual instincts.
G.C.H. Is there teaching in the way in which the names of God and Jehovah are interchanged? Does the official thought come to light in connection with the name of Jehovah, and the service you have referred to?
J.T. In the chapter read, God enters into relation with His people under the name of Jehovah, which is the covenant name; that is the name of relationship with His people. The idea of the Father, as we have had in
{301}
the patriarchs, is largely to set out grace. What runs through them is the thought of blessing; blessing is a great feature of the Father; it marks this dispensation. Then there is the idea of the covenant, and thus the name Jehovah would represent that which would set us free from ourselves; that the people of God should be liberated. God says "Let my people go", that is, from under the authority of Pharaoh. But, also, as in the wilderness, to be liberated from themselves -- ourselves -- through the knowledge of God in the covenant; and for the covenant we need a Mediator, another thought that enters into the ministerial side of our position: the Mediator of the covenant, which Moses represents, to effectuate these things in us. God would have us entirely free from ourselves; the truth of the epistle to the Romans opens this up to us.
J.D.U. Is the thought of selection on God's side, or on both sides?
J.T. It is on both. It is on God's side in choosing Moses, Aaron, and Miriam; on our side as seen in Moses making his selection, in due course, when he came to years; when he became great, he *refused and chose*. God will be known through the Mediator, hence you have the thought of the appearing in @Exodus 3, reminding us that in the service of God we are to be impressed by Him. God will seize every opportunity to impress us, to keep us occupied with Himself. It is a very important thing for those who serve to receive impressions, it requires abstraction; that is really seen in chapter 2, where Moses was occupied with keeping sheep. He was given great opportunity of solitary relations with God, and we are told that he led the flock behind the wilderness, and came to the mount of God -- to Horeb. That is how his history is presented before the divine appearing to him; he was in the way of it. No minister can be effective unless he studies all this; as to how to be in the way of divine impressions, so that he has something
{302}
that comes directly from God. What he has from God, God furnishes him with the means to convey; and so here he led the flock behind the wilderness, and came to the mount of God, Horeb. The mount had already acquired a place in the vocabulary of the people of God. It began in @Genesis 22, and Moses had understood. It comes in here, "the mountain of God". The minister understands that he must needs put himself in the way of divine impressions, divine resources, and that as getting such, there is also resource to enable him to carry it to God's people in an effective way. What comes out is that "the Angel of Jehovah appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a thorn-bush". Moses looked and the thorn-bush was not being consumed. That is a matter of appearing. The Lord may help us just to dwell a little on this, especially in view of ministry, of being in the way of divine impressions, and to lead in the direction of divine resources. Divine impressions and divine resources are bound up together.
E.T. So that, at the outset, the servant would be impressed and say, What a God! One who can come into such conditions.
J.T. That is the next thing in the course of ministerial education, how to see the manner of the divine incoming, how God came in here in Christ, the mystery of godliness.
W.J.H. The apostle Paul speaks of God making him competent as a minister of the new covenant, and he was the subject of divine appearings.
J.T. That is exactly what is stated about him; the Lord says to him, "what thou hast seen, and of what I shall appear to thee in" (@Acts 26: 16). As he proceeded with his ministry there would be appearings from time to time. We may not look for what Paul had, but we should look for it in principle. If we put ourselves in the way of it we shall get divine impressions, and at the same time divine resources.
{303}
J.J.J. What is the thought of turning aside? Was it from something?
J.T. Moses said, "Let me now turn aside and see this great sight, why the thorn-bush is not burnt". What we notice is that it is a deliberate act of Moses. "Let me now turn aside and see this great sight". It is not simply that he did it, but he *resolved* to do it. Something came into his vision, came before him, and he resolved to find out what it was. A very great matter not to miss what God would manifest to us. We want to see it, and understand it, and there is a definite resolve on the part of the prospective minister to see what is presented to him.
E.S.W. Does he turn aside from his service to gather fresh impressions from this thorn-bush?
J.T. That is the idea. He is turning aside from keeping sheep. He is still in his ordinary employment; this has come to his vision and he is deliberate about it. "Let me now turn aside and see this great sight". It is an extraordinary thing that he wants to understand it, he is not careless about it.
J.J.J. Is it not also significant that it says that Jehovah saw that?
J.T. Yes; Jehovah takes notice of a movement like that, that you are sufficiently interested to turn aside to see what He presents. It is the uninterested persons that God dislikes. When He puts privileges in our way and we are neglectful of them, God resents such an attitude. But when He saw that Moses turned aside, God called to him out of the midst of the thorn-bush, and said, "Moses, Moses!" as much as to say, You are the man, you will do. God hates lack of interest in Himself.
C.S.S. Would it be something more than mere desire? David said, "One thing have I asked of Jehovah, desired that will I seek after" (@Psalm 27: 4).
J.T. Quite so. This is brought to Moses and he is going in for it. That is what God delights in. He
{304}
calls his name twice. He is mentioned thus, and distinguished.
N.B.S. Should we be impressed with the urgency of it? It says, "Let me *now* turn aside".
J.T. Yes, he did not put it off. Many of the young brothers and sisters put off their opportunities. They make up their minds that they will not commit themselves to the Lord, or to His people, until some other thing happens; taking matters into their own hands, and thus slighting what God is proposing to them. Here it is "Let me *now* turn aside".
W.J.H. Do you not think that the lack of contentment with the place in which God has put us often causes us to lose these opportunities?
J.T. Very good. Certainly if I take up the service of ministry, because I do not like my ordinary calling, that is not commendable. "Moses consented to remain with the man" (@Exodus 2: 21). It was a great change of circumstances for him, having been a prince, to become a mere servant of the Midianite, looking after sheep, but he was content. If God calls us into the ministry, it is not because we are dissatisfied with our ordinary calling.
J.D.U. Would you recommend then that if an impression is received in a meeting like this it should he immediately followed up?
J.T. That is right. The gospel of Mark is characterised by the word "immediately". Let there be no delay as soon as the way is made clear to us by God.
Ques. Does this double call indicate that God has taken account of the prior history?
J.T. I suppose so. His name, Moses, refers back to his infancy, meaning *drawn out*. He has been taken out of the water; he is a thoroughly baptised person. God has pleasure in the names of those in whom His work is seen distinctly. He delights in His own work.
Ques. Does this question of divine appearings enter into what we call gift?
{305}
J.T. That appears here. I should take this incident as the occasion of Moses receiving his gift. It involves what is seen here; an indelible impression of God in Christ.
E.S.W. Would that impression give character to subsequent service, in one who receives gift?
J.T. I think so. The good will of Him that dwelt in the bush is what runs through these books; that is to say, the service is in identification with God as having come into these lowly circumstances. The circumstances are lowly, not exalted according to man, nor has heaven intended that the ministry should be clothed with any human dignity. It is outwardly identified with what is very small, and that is what is spoken of here, a thorn-bush, not a cedar or an oak; it is, in itself, very insignificant.
Ques. Does that refer to the people, or is the incarnation suggested in it?
J.T. I think the incarnation is in the bush.
W.J.H. Does the likeness of sinful flesh suggest something like that?
J.T. Yes. Thus, "the good will of him that dwelt in the bush" refers to God having come into those lowly circumstances. It is a "great sight". The whole ministry is in view; God would occupy us with the thought of a power outside of ourselves. Flesh profits nothing, and the Lord said, "without me ye can do nothing". We need a power outside of ourselves and this is suggested in the well. Of course it is in us in the sense of the Spirit springing up, and the anointing which makes one superior to human ability, then the contentment in whatever calling we may be, however irksome, and the instinctive movement to Horeb, the mount of God. So that, instead of human resources, seminaries and the like, and salaries from the world, all that which marks christendom, the true servant reaches the mountain of God and is blessed with *divine* resources. Then God honours the servant in appearing to him, so that he
{306}
has impressions to present to men, and means by which to present them.
The next thing is the moral teaching as to sin that Moses has to understand before he can enter into the ministry. God says to him, "What is that in thy hand?" This suggests to us that what you have of Himself, God can use. A man has something, but in this gift he has to learn what sin is, what the flesh is, and so these signs. The first is, that Jehovah directs him to cast his rod on the ground, and it became a serpent; as much as to say, Moses, that is just what you will become if you are released from My authority. Your staff represents yourself, release it and it comes under satanic power. That is what you are exposed to if you get out of the hand of God; you come under Satan's power. You must keep in your place in the divine hand, and so Jehovah says, "Stretch out thy hand and take it by the tail", and he did so, "and it became a staff in his hand". That is to say, it is the second man, not the first. The first is fallen under the power of Satan, but man taken up under divine authority, in God's hand, becomes a staff again, becomes man as answering to His mind. That is what I understand by this remarkable sign. It is sorrowful that if I get away from the divine hand, I come under the power of Satan.
W.J.H. So that it becomes the rod of God ultimately as held in relation to God, God calls it *His* rod.
E.S.W. When Moses saw it like a serpent he fled from it. Would it have the same effect upon us, if we could see ourselves as released from divine authority like that?
J.T. I am sure it would. It was the staff he was accustomed to use; it represented his experience, but in spite of that, released, it became a serpent. I may have experience with God and yet get away from His authority, hence I come under the power of Satan.
F.W.W. Do we see manhood in its perfection in the Lord when He was tempted of Satan?
{307}
J.T. Exactly, and what is there seen in Him clarifies this whole subject. The Lord stood His ground. Satan proposed to Him to take other ground than that of dependence, saying to Him in effect, You are the Son of God, You are independent, You can command stones to become bread. But the Lord, as Man, was here in dependence on God, so that He says, "Man shall not live by bread alone". Satan does not say it as to man, but as to the Son of God. The Lord answers as Man; sonship is in manhood, and what is proper to manhood is dependence upon God. He lived "by every word which goes out through God's mouth" (@Matthew 4: 4). Thus He did not come under the power of Satan.
W.J.H. He ordered Satan to get behind Him, instead of fleeing from him.
Ques. Have not all the sorrowful divisions in the assembly been brought to pass by unregulated gift?
J.T. A very solemn suggestion. We ought to feel it a challenge to those of us who are serving, whatever gift we may have. We are liable, if we take ourselves out of the divine hand, to come under the power of Satan, and be the more destructive.
Ques. Why does he take it by the tail?
J.T. Well; I suppose it would be due to the fact that the tail would, in a serpent, be weakness: his power is in his head. God in taking up man in this way does not take him up in his dignity. To take him up by his head would be regarding him in his natural power and dignity. Taking a serpent by the tail would ordinarily be dangerous, for it could strike in its usual way, and hence the result stated denotes the power of God. Then the next thing is the *state* of man -- leprous. Jehovah said: "Put now thy hand into thy bosom". His hand became leprous. Then he put his hand into his bosom again and "it was turned again as his flesh". This would typify the *state* of man, but changed by the power of God. The one
{308}
is what man is naturally, and the other is what God has made him in Christ.
W.A.P. Would that be new birth?
J.T. Yes, but more. The epistle to the Romans opens up the process, the purpose of God and the love of God come into it.
J.D. Would you say that Moses had to learn what Satan brought in through the fall by putting his hand into his bosom?
J.T. Yes, but all is changed in the believer through redemption. The serpent would denote the violence that has come in through sin, and the leprosy would denote corruption. Ministers have to carry with them the understanding of the overthrow of satanic power in these features. The hand is the symbol of man's intelligent activity; as restored, he uses it according to what God has made him in Christ.
Rem. A deep lesson for the minister to learn, that anything attaching to himself according to nature would only bring in corruption.
J.T. One of the most important lessons to be learned by those serving in any way, but necessary for all of us.
E.S.W. I suppose Moses would never forget after this, what was in his own bosom according to nature?
J.T. Quite so. That is the point, to see what *we* are capable of, the meanness of our own hearts. It comes up so that you hate the thought of it, and God humbles us by that fact, and by the meanness you discover in your own heart.
R.S. Does God use these things to cast us more upon Himself?
J.T. The bringing in of these signs reminds us what we are capable of, and the need of dependence on God; in the second instance the need of dependence on the Spirit of God. It is only by the Spirit I am free of this corrupt state.
W.W.W. David was deeply conscious of this, as seen in @Psalm 51.
{309}
J.T. Yes. He never realised how bad he was until he reached the experience contemplated in that psalm.
H.S.H. So that the voice of these two signs should never be lost to us?
J.T. No; they were to be used in testimony. The passage says, "if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign ... they will believe the voice of the other sign". That is, first of all, that a man is able to preach and present the testimony in power so that souls are subdued; the second sign is more what he is in himself, he is free from sin in himself; practically, that he is a fully delivered man. "If they will not believe also those two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it on the dry land; and the water that thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land". That is the *final* thing. No shelter there at all, that is judgment. In other words, if the power of the testimony and the gift is not believed, and if the power of God in changing a man completely from a corrupt man to a righteous man is not believed, there is nothing left but judgment. If people are not affected by these two signs, there is nothing but judgment.
The next thing is the question of speaking, and this brings out what had been thought of earlier, as far as the narrative goes. It brings out Aaron and what comes to light in him, so that, to complete our subject in these chapters, God says, I know him. That is a very suggestive statement, although he is eighty-three years of age according to the record, and we have not had his name before. God says, I know him. We might say, God knows Moses, for He has portrayed his history. But He has not done it in regard to Aaron, but we have this unquestionable testimony that God knew him. He intimates here that He would not propose him if He did not know him: as though God said, I am not taking anyone up that I do not know; he is a
{310}
man that I know. The weakness of Moses leaves room for Aaron, and that is, in a sense, how the ministry goes on. God says in effect, I would have used you more extensively, only you were too backward, hence I had to bring in another. The point is, is there another? Vacancies are coming up continuously, so the thing is to be ready. What does God know about *you*? Young men should have that in mind. The brethren have not noticed me yet, but the point is, has God taken notice of me? Whatever disregard there is in the brethren, God will never disregard whatever ability He has given me. So that vacancies are constantly occurring and it is for young men and women to be in dependence, and God will bring them into His service in His own time.
E.S.W. Two things evidently marked his previous history, he was not only a Levite, but a brother.
J.T. Not only *a* Levite, but *the* Levite. That is, God honours this man as knowing his qualities. He is listed in the divine books, as it were. God says to Moses: "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?" That is how he is reckoned in heaven. With God he is actually listed under the proper designation of the ministry, that is "the Levite". That is the point for us to see, because the ministry must go on and vacancies are constantly occurring. The urgent matter then is, Am I available?
G.H.W. Does the fact that he is coming to meet him show his availability?
J.T. Quite so. God says to him, "also behold, he goeth out to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart". How well God knew him! How good to have a brother like that!
E.E.S.L. You spoke of the opportunities for young men, would you not suggest a little help for the older ones also?
J.T. Aaron was a good age, you know. God must have had good times with him! We leave God out
{311}
too much in thinking of times of enjoyment. I believe He has enjoyment every day with those who are faithful, and no doubt He had enjoyment in Aaron. He knew everything about him. We know not how far it went, but God says: I know him, and he is going out to meet *you*. That is the great thing in the service that at least there is one brother who is thinking of you in this sense.
J.J.J. It says God knew he could speak well, I suppose Aaron was used to speaking to God in secret.
J.T. We may assume that. That is how God knew that he could speak well. He used to speak to him in prayer. He met Moses on the mountain of God and kissed him. It is the appropriate meeting-place. We all need to be at the place of divine resource.
E.E.S.L. Does the description of Aaron as the Levite suggest that Aaron would be prepared to take a subordinate place? Levite means joined.
J.T. That is a good suggestion. A minister is to understand that he may have to take a second place. In principle, the levite must do this, because he is subservient to the priest. That is what develops afterwards. Here Aaron is not the priest, but when he became high priest the tribe of Levi was united to him to minister unto him (@Numbers 18: 2). That is the principle, but we shall have to touch a little on Exodus again, so as to bring out the position of Miriam, and then to proceed to Joshua, and perhaps Judges, to bring out how the suggestion of three enters into the inheritance.
{312}
THE NUMERAL THREE IN TESTIMONY (5)
@Numbers 27: 15 - 23; @Joshua 14: 6 - 15; @Joshua 22: 10 - 14, 30 - 34
J.T. Our last reading was in regard to the ministry. In the book of Exodus we read from chapters 3 and 4, and had in mind a verse in chapter 15 which speaks of Miriam's service. It might be well to touch on Exodus again for a moment in view of Miriam being one of the three raised up, according to @Micah 6: 4, and, according to the facts in Exodus and Numbers, to lead Israel out of Egypt and to establish the service of God. We dwelt on Moses and Aaron considerably, but failed to reach the end of chapter 4, which records that as Moses and Aaron began their ministry together, the people worshipped Jehovah, reminding us that all ministry according to God will lead in that direction, it will make everything of God. Ministry is for this purpose, not to exalt the persons who minister, but to exalt God, to instruct His people so that they may worship God; that is the end of @Exodus 4.
Another important item in the subject of ministry is that in chapter 12, where Jehovah gives at length the instruction relative to the passover, Moses *epitomises* it in telling the message to the people; suggestive of brevity in ministry, that in serving we should be regulated by wisdom, by what people are able to take in, and present what is sufficient. In this instance the minister secures that the people worship God. In chapter 15 we have the song of Moses and the children of Israel, the first song indeed that we have in Scripture, and Miriam rendering her peculiar service, appears at the end, for "Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took the tambour in her hand, and all the women went out after her with tambours and with dances". Miriam, added to Moses and Aaron, comes
{313}
in as filling out the full testimony of God in regard of ministry.
W.J.H. What is the thought of the feminine side being connected with leadership, in the way you have presented it?
J.T. I thought it was to bring out the *depth* of the work at that time. A ministry may be very effective on account of its power, but we have to measure the results of it, what it effects, and it seems as if Miriam's service here affected the women in Israel, bringing them into the current of praise.
W.J.H. Would that be in keeping with the important place the women had in the Lord's ministry when on earth?
J.T. Yes. Unless the sisters are brought into the ministry, you doubt whether it is effective, whether the result desired has been reached. Because they represent the subjective side, the side of affection and response, and therefore unless the sisters generally are brought into the truth in an active way, the effect of the ministry is questionable. The testimony may be right and in power, but then there may be a hindrance to it. Miriam is presented here for the first time by name; no doubt she is alluded to earlier as Moses¬ sister, in chapter 2, but not by name. She is not mentioned by name until this chapter 15, and she was then quite an old person, probably over ninety, and she is presented as a prophetess and sister of Aaron, so that she is linked up with God, and she is linked up with Aaron. It is said, she "took the tambour in her hand, and all the women went out after her;" that is a lead given from God.
H.W. How would we see the effects of this working out today?
J.T. Well, I think it is in the generality of the saints coming forward and expressing their appreciation of what there is, what is given of God, and that in a way indicates they are linked up with Him in it. It
{314}
is not a passing thing, nor a superficial evidence of approval as in the days of Ezekiel; what he said was to some as a pleasant song (@Ezekiel 33: 32), but there was no permanent effect produced. What is needed is that the generality of the saints should come forward and show that they are with God in the matter. In Miriam there is the lead given, so that the women come out after her -- a definite evidence of response.
E.E.S.L. She had greater staying power than Barzillai the Gileadite, who when aged could not hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women.
J.T. Quite so. She joined in heartily, not merely as a passing interest, but as with God; she is called a prophetess.
E.S.W. Would you expect to see the results of it working out in a high spiritual level in the meetings for worship?
J.T. Well, that is the thing. What she says is in keeping with what Moses and the children of Israel sang, but it shows that she and the women were heartily in the thing, and with God about it.
G.C.H. Would the filling out of this song be seen in the wise-hearted women in the part they took relative to the tabernacle?
J.T. That is confirmatory. @Exodus 35 shows how heartily the women joined in to provide the material for the tabernacle, spinning certain things that were needed.
G.C.McK. Would Phoebe in the New Testament be an example of the filling out of the thing and the results of it?
J.T. Yes. I think that Luke shows us the feminine result in a striking way in his gospel, particularly in Anna. What is proper to the man is seen in Simeon in the way he is spoken of -- Christ received in his arms. Then Anna coming in at that moment rejoicing, joined in heartily; so throughout his gospel, and throughout the Acts, Luke's second treatise, women
{315}
have a great place in his thoughts. Those that were affected generally by the testimony showed that it was a real movement of God; it took root, and what takes root downwards and bears fruit upwards, stands.
F.W.W. Does that mean that in all ministry there is not only to be presentation, but also response?
J.T. If there is not response, you feel there is nothing; for God's testimony is intended to be effective. What has been said touches on that side of our subject as to ministry, I think a most important side of it, that there should be results, and that the generality of the saints should come into that which is coming out in a spiritual way, showing that they are linked up with God in their souls in what they are doing; able to take part in what is presented, then spread it abroad in their own way. The women of Israel followed Miriam, there was influence with her to lead them.
W.J.H. The result of the Lord's ministry is seen not only in the twelve in the upper room; with them were the women also and Mary the mother of Jesus, thus securing the responsive side.
J.T. Yes. What you get there in the upper room in @Acts 1 suggests the result of ministry in *quality*. No doubt there were many more affected by the Lord's ministry than were there, but these would express the result of it, in quality. Thus there are now means to go on with, to open up the dispensation, to go on with the ministry.
J.H.F. In @Revelation 15 there is the song of Moses and the Lamb; would you tell us why the one is mentioned before the other?
J.T. It is to link up the two corresponding lines of thought. The song of Moses alluded to in that chapter is undoubtedly the one in @Exodus 15. It would celebrate the deliverance out of Egypt; the song of the Lamb would imply what the Lamb effected. The Lamb
{316}
is a leading title of Christ in Revelation, specially calling attention to His character as the Sufferer. It is a diminutive word there, rather conveying the idea of one that is passive in suffering, one who suffers and does not defend himself outwardly, but who secures great results in his service.
Now the subject before us for the time left is the inheritance, which comes in in order after the ministry, for the ministry has in mind that the saints should take up their inheritance. That means that we have not only left Egypt, but have another world opened up to us; so that what is needed now is leadership into that world, and Joshua represents that. He is the leader into the inheritance, so that he is introduced to us, in view of this service, as "a man in whom is the Spirit". That is what is to be noted in @Numbers 27: 16, 17. Moses says to Jehovah, "Let Jehovah, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the assembly, who may go out before them, and who may come in before them, and who may lead them out, and who may bring them in, that the assembly of Jehovah be not as sheep that have no shepherd". Moses alludes to the spiritual side, he addresses Jehovah as the God of the *spirits* of all flesh. Our entrance into the inheritance now is not an external, but a spiritual matter.
G.C.H. Would this refer to the assembly as in Ephesians, the heavenly position.
J.T. That is what is in mind. Joshua is introduced to us first in @Exodus 17 where the issue was the Spirit; the Spirit typified in the water from the smitten rock. Amalek attacked Israel, and Joshua is introduced first there, because the conflict was typically a spiritual matter, its object being to make room for the Spirit.
E.S.W. Is it significant that in @Numbers 27 this is preceded by exercises amongst certain women, the daughters of Zelophehad, that they should not lose their portion of the inheritance?
{317}
J.T. It is very significant, especially as the claim of these five women to their part of the inheritance follows immediately on the numbering of the people for the inheritance in chapter 26. God numbers those that are qualified for it, and these women claim their portion and the section that we have read comes in immediately after that.
G.C.McK. Does it imply that although we are taken account of for this, it requires spiritual power to enter upon it?
J.T. That is important, because the taking possession of the inheritance is not the mere objective understanding of the truth of the inheritance, it requires spiritual power, hence Joshua is said to be a man in whom is the Spirit.
Ques. Is that distinct from gift?
J.T. Yes; gift is for the work of the ministry, as @Ephesians 4: 12, 13 states: "for the perfecting of the saints ... until we all arrive". Gifts are to help us to arrive at the mind of God, but having light as to the inheritance, we need the Spirit to enter into it.
J.D.U. Does the ministry of the Spirit in connection with the new covenant help us in the taking up of the inheritance?
J.T. Well, it does; it has the effect of liberating us. The ministry of the covenant is properly in the types in Exodus; it belongs to the glory that filled the tabernacle, and is in view of the saints entering into the service of God in the wilderness. It attaches to the Lord's supper, so that we might be liberated to enter on the divine service, but the effect of it of course goes on, as applied to ourselves, in assembly. It properly belongs to the Lord's supper, and it has the effect of liberating us. Leadership into the inheritance is by Christ and is a further thing, but the effect of the covenant upon our spirits sets us free for Him to lead us.
{318}
Ques. Does the apostle's prayer in @Ephesians 3, that the saints might be strengthened by the Father's spirit in the inner man, bear upon the matter?
J.T. It does. What is needed to take up the inheritance is not only that we have the Spirit, but that we use the Spirit; indeed He leads us. "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God" (@Romans 8: 14).
G.A.v.S. What are we to understand by the inheritance?
J.T. It is to be taken account of as to how it is entered on *now*, for that is how it is largely presented in Scripture. It is to be entered on now, but of course it alludes to our portion in and with Christ eternally in the heavenlies. When the Lord comes He will take us into the place of it, but how it is entered on now is what the book of Joshua teaches. It is a question of apprehending Christ as He is in heaven, not simply risen, but in heaven, and our being conformed to Him, and the Spirit enables us to take up that ground. Viewed in its fulness, the Spirit is the earnest of it.
W.J.H. Previously, in the book of Exodus we have the Spirit under the figure of water and of oil, but in Joshua it is the Spirit personally.
J.T. That is right. From @Numbers 21 the Spirit is formally recognised, "Sing unto it". Numbers 21 is celebrating the Spirit, who is a divine Person, as Jehovah is celebrated in @Exodus 15. The Lord stresses in @John 14 that, "he will give you another Comforter", that is a divine Person here to lead us in.
E.S.W. Is the thought of the inheritance summed up in the prayer already referred to: "the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge" (@Ephesians 3: 18, 19)?
J.T. Yes; Abraham was called to view the land in its length and breadth (@Genesis 13), only that *we* have additional measurements, depth and height -- we have the
{319}
fourth dimension in the verses in Ephesians, which can only be apprehended spiritually.
G.C.H. Does the thought of "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory" convey the thought of the inheritance?
J.T. That is in @Ephesians 1. What is in mind there is to bring out *His* inheritance. The first prayer in Ephesians is to bring out God's inheritance -- what it is, "the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints". But in the second prayer it is that we may be great enough to enter on the inheritance of God for us in all its extent. It is that "ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints". It is to be apprehended collectively, for there is more power in "all the saints" than there is in one saint. The measurement alludes to the extent of the inheritance, but it is not merely surface measure, but also depth and height.
F.W.W. What is the thought of the going out and the coming in, in connection with which Joshua's leadership was so prominent?
J.T. Well, I think to accustom the saints to him. It says in @Acts 1: 21, "all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us". Here the idea is that Joshua should lead them out and in, as David did later. I think it is to accustom them to his leadership. The actual leading into the land is not stated here.
N.B.S. Would you say more as to the position of Joshua as leader? Is he typical of Christ or of spiritual elements in the saints?
J.T. Joshua typifies Christ as the hidden Leader, Moses the public leader in relation to the tabernacle, but Joshua is Christ in a hidden way, leading us in. Here he is set before the assembly, it says, that they "may obey him;" the principle of obedience must be in the people. Entrance into the inheritance requires this and also hinges on the Spirit; not only on our having the Spirit, but being *led* by the Spirit.
{320}
E.S.W. Does coming in and going out imply spiritual liberty? In @John 10: 9 it says, "shall go in and shall go out and shall find pasture".
J.T. It is a very delightful state of things, it involves liberty, but also that we are amenable to the leading of Christ, amenable to spiritual leadership. I think spiritual leadership implies influence; it is not only what is said; it is the influence that is exerted and particularly in assembly; the influence that the Lord exerts over our spirits, because it is a question of the "spirits of all flesh". Paul says, "I will sing with the spirit" (@1 Corinthians 14: 15), meaning his own spirit. We may be ready to sing and yet not be controlled by intelligence, so he says, "I will sing also with the understanding". That is the line on which we come into what we are speaking of.
J.D.U. Do we experience that as together?
J.T. I think the leading into the inheritance is a collective thought, it is *all* the saints. We are raised up *together* and made to sit down *together*, and as we love one another we would not have it otherwise; and God would not have it otherwise, it is a question of leading all in that direction.
A.C. Why is Caleb brought in in such an outstanding way, as one who wholly followed the Lord?
J.T. He is introduced here as the second personage in this part of the testimony; he valued the inheritance, he *would* have it. We apprehend Christ as our Leader, and this is a spiritual matter entirely. Then the next thing is, do we value what God has for us? Caleb is brought in as testimony for us to that side of the position; he is the second witness as to the inheritance, he valued the inheritance. So in the verses read in @Joshua 14, "Caleb the son of Jephunneh" relates what happened, and said, "Moses swore on that day, saying, The land whereon thy feet have trodden shall assuredly be thine inheritance, and thy children's for ever! for thou hast wholly followed Jehovah my God".
{321}
He is brought in in Numbers as one of the spies, and his loyalty and integrity were manifest. He traversed the land and valued it, and stood for it against all the opposition; stood for it with Joshua, and he recalls this fact here forty-five years later asserting that his strength is equal now to what it was. He valued the inheritance, and he is maintained in spiritual freshness: that is the idea.
G.A.v.S. Was that valuation of the land connected with his affection? He had tasted, so to speak, of the grapes of Eshcol.
J.T. Manifestly, he valued what God had apportioned for His people, it was a good land. It was not mere words, for he had traversed the land, and knew it was a good land flowing with milk and honey, and he would have it; it was guaranteed to him and now he claims it. The word to each of us is, Do I value it today? If I do I claim it, and this needs spiritual power. Caleb maintained his spiritual power throughout all the journey in the wilderness. He proved the land, he had been into it.
W.J.H. Joshua and Caleb say, "The land ... is a very, very good land" (@Numbers 14:7).
F.W.W. Although Caleb claims this inheritance as it had been promised him, he refers to the conflict that will be involved. Will you say a word about that in its collective application?
J.T. Well, that will he understood if we understand Ephesians, that the enemy is now in our place, the enemy is now where we ought to be, a place designed for the assembly in the counsels of God; so that at the present time it involves conflict.
E.S.W. If Joshua represents spiritual leadership, does Caleb represent spiritual desire in all of us, that we may take up the inheritance in spite of the conflict?
J.T. It is the question whether I value what God has given me; the Spirit is the earnest of it, but in our laying hold of it we encounter opposition, hence
{322}
conflict, and this is not with blood and flesh, but with principalities and powers in the heavenlies. It is very real conflict, but we are furnished for it, and should be equal to it. According to what Caleb says here, there should be no fear as to it. Caleb's title to this territory is guaranteed, a fixed thing, and hence the strength of his claim. It says, "Moses swore on that day, saying, The land whereon thy feet have trodden shall assuredly be thine inheritance, and thy children's for ever!" He valued that oath, for by it the inheritance is assured to him, and so it is with us, the promise is assured; there is the promise and the oath, that we might have a strong consolation. Caleb had a strong consolation up to this time, and now he wishes to get *possession* of what was sworn to him.
G.A.v.S. Is that a necessary element in spiritual energy and vigour?
J.T. It is -- to know that the thing is assured to you by God. You claim it; God is pleased as you claim what He has apportioned for you. The Lord says, "The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage" (@Psalm 16: 6). Caleb understood the inheritance, the actual part where "the lines" had fallen. Joseph and Judah get their portion before the general allotment in @Joshua 18.
J.D.U. Why did he choose Hebron?
J.T. Spiritually, Hebron means that which was before the world. As the apostle says, "which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory" (@1 Corinthians 2: 7).
C.S.S. Does the refusal to face the warfare mean the loss of the enjoyment of the inheritance?
J.T. Quite so, we have to dislodge the enemy, and that is what comes out in Caleb; he immediately dislodges the enemy. He took Kirjath-Arba, and then he would have Kirjath-Sepher, as we get in the next chapter, and that brings in Othniel and Achsah, both of his house, who show that they valued the inheritance
{323}
and secured what sustained them in it. Achsah would have springs of water, a feature of great intelligence marking Caleb and his house.
G.A.v.S. Does Hebron bring us to the collective side?
J.T. Well, I suppose that is right, not that it goes to the full length of the divine mind, it is properly Colossian truth. We need Jerusalem for the full divine thought, but that awaited David; it required great spiritual prowess. I think the full truth of Colossians and Ephesians involves what is collective in its *spiritual* sense, not exactly the collective truth of @1 and 2 Corinthians, which is local and visible, but what we are to each other spiritually.
R.B. Do we get the Hebron position in "having marked us out beforehand for adoption" (@Ephesians 1: 5)?
J.T. Yes, it was "built seven years before Zoan in Egypt", that is, it was before the world. "That wisdom ... which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory".
E.S.W. What is suggested by the change of name which is specifically recorded twice in the Scriptures, Kirjath-Arba and Hebron?
J.T. It is just to bring out the importance of Hebron. Hebron is mentioned in Genesis, and then in connection with the spying out of the land, it is stated that it was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt (@Numbers 13: 22). It is the Spirit of God bringing that great thought to us in Numbers as in Corinthians. God had His own thoughts before the world came into view; wisdom ordained for His people, that is the thought of it. Paul says, "we speak wisdom among the perfect" (@1 Corinthians 2: 6); he could not speak it at Corinth. Spiritual growth is in mind, so that the idea of Hebron should be opened up to us, that is, what God had in mind before the world for our glory.
G.C.H. Is it a change over from Kirjath-Arba? The New Translation says: "the great man among the Anakim" (@Joshua 14: 15).
{324}
J.T. Yes, it is the power of the world, it is the city of Arba, the city of the great man of the world. You might say, a city where the sort of power is that the people of Corinth were aiming at, and therefore the reference to what God had ordained for us before the world. That is why I think the *head* of Goliath is cut off, it is a question of the wisdom of the world being judged.
E.S.W. Is our right to the inheritance contested by spiritual wickedness?
J.T. That is exactly the position; the inheritance that God designs for His people is being laid hold of by men's minds, and satanic powers have got into it, and these have to be dislodged.
R.M. Is the conflict referred to collectively?
J.T. It is collective, the saints are all brought into it. That is the saints viewed, not in their external position, but in their spiritual relations, a very important thing to get hold of. Perhaps few of us have got hold of it, but we have to learn to take account of each other spiritually. It is a question of the spiritual, and whether we are being led on in the collective sense. Even although we have not all the brethren with us, it is for us at least to include them in our affections; it is "with all saints". God would not have it otherwise, so that when they were about to enter, the two-and-a-half tribes must be represented: the twelve tribes are there in principle. We must have all the saints, God will have it that way, and if we love the saints we want them with us. Joshua and Caleb appreciated the inheritance when others despised it, but even in our ordinary assembly meetings we are to "wait for one another;" we must have all the saints, we do not want to go on in independency in any way. God has "raised us up *together*, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus" (@Ephesians 2: 6).
W.J.H. So that a lead in the right direction is of great value.
{325}
J.T. That is right, and to see the thing exemplified in one human heart; one man that values what is divinely promised to him. He says in effect, I am equal to it, I am as able now, I am as strong as I was forty years ago. He retains his spiritual energy, he does not grow old spiritually, for none of us should grow old spiritually, although we grow old physically.
H.S.H. Caleb's desire was delightful to Joshua, for it says that Joshua blessed Caleb.
J.T. Quite so, for Joshua has an exalted place here, representative of God.
Finally, the position of Phinehas brings us to a very practical side of our subject, that is the man that is in the inheritance. The saints in the inheritance would have it in peace, would keep it free from war, for we shall lose the sense of it practically unless we are maintained in unity. So that I think Phinehas becomes a remarkable witness to what is needed in the inheritance, that is ability to keep the peace, but not at the expense of righteousness. Phinehas has a great place in the Scriptures, and represents an element that we cannot get on without, a man that stands in a crisis and knows what to do.
L.F. In your reference to Phinehas, have you in mind the incident of Baal-Peor, in @Numbers 25?
J.T. Yes, that is where he shines first of all, he shines in a crisis with his javelin. Phinehas properly belongs to the ministerial side of the truth, he was properly a priest. In the genealogy of Israel in @Exodus 6, the Spirit of God takes Reuben, Simeon, and Levi. He comes to Levi and his sons till He comes to Phinehas. He was bringing out the lineage of Moses and Aaron, and stops at Phinehas, because Phinehas was to have an everlasting priesthood. He represents the priesthood, serving in an emergency, so that the saints should enter on the inheritance (@Numbers 26). He is also seen in @Joshua 22 as saving the people for the inheritance, as in it, but in danger of being disrupted
{326}
by war; he saves them from that, at least he is presented in that way.
G.A.v.S. Was this a more complicated situation than Baal-Peor?
J.T. Well, it was. It was a reasonable sort of thing, as the two-and-a-half tribes would make out. But I think there was an element of pride in building the altar of grand appearance; it was a conspicuous sort of thing. It is to be noted that they were conscious of their poverty spiritually, as over against those that were in the land, the nine-and-a-half tribes, and hence they have to resort to a material testimony to their claim. Why should I want such a testimony to my claim if I am in the land, enjoying it? If I am in the possession and enjoyment of my heavenly portion I do not need an artificial testimony to my right there.
G.A.v.S. Does the altar indicate that the positive enjoyment of the inheritance was lacking?
J.T. That is what I thought. Constant troubles are arising amongst us, little things sometimes that are of no importance, but they cause a cleavage. Why do we not go on with the positive things and thus not have any disturbance amongst us?
J.J.J. Why are the ten princes brought in?
J.T. "With him ten princes, of each father's house a prince, out of all the tribes of Israel". You have in your mind then, why not twelve princes? @Numbers 31: 4 - 6 says, "of all the tribes of Israel, shall ye send to the war. And there were levied out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand by tribe, twelve thousand armed for war. And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand by the tribe, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war". Now it is interesting to compare these two incidents. Phinehas is in both cases, that is, he is a man for a crisis, and all Israel in their twelve tribes must be brought into the conflict with Midian, following up the great act of Phinehas against the Midianites. Here in Canaan it is the ten
{327}
tribes (or rather nine-and-a-half) that are in the land. The other two-and-a-half had built the altar, and what is to be done has to be faced, but this can only be by those that are spiritual, for it is a priestly matter. If the heavenly inheritance is to be maintained in any practical way we must have the priestly element; here it is to keep the peace, and that is the point. The meaning of the action of the two-and-a-half tribes is not so serious as was thought. The lesson being that we must consider each other, what is in a brother's mind. You may have a difficulty with what is said, but let us find out what is really in his mind. It may seem wrong, but what is in his mind? Then can we not modify what is in our minds, and generally there is really no cause for difficulty at all if we understood each other's minds. That is, I think, the idea, and that is what Phinehas represents; a man who is spiritual enough to be able to get the minds of others and there may not be need for war at all. The two-and-a-half tribes were spiritually poor, and we may be sure that spiritually poor people will do something to cause anxiety, something to disturb will be constantly springing up where people are not in the current of the Spirit, but usually when you look into it there is no cause for cleavage. If there is no will at work, we ought to be ready for modifications. Often a thing is not so serious as we thought.
J.J.J. We may have to move on sometimes although we cannot carry all with us.
J.T. That is true also, we cannot wait for unanimity; as regards discipline. The matter should be done, it is a question of "the many", the rebuke inflicted by "the many" (@2 Corinthians 2: 6). In the inheritance we want all the brethren, our outlook is that not one is left out.
Ques. Is that why the apostle introduces such qualities as lowliness, meekness and longsuffering in connection with the keeping of the unity of the Spirit?
J.T. Quite so, "bearing with one another in love".
{328}
TOGETHER
@Acts 2: 44; @Acts 220: 7; @1 Corinthians 11: 18 - 20; @1 Corinthians 14: 23 - 25
The word "together" being in these scriptures is initially why I read them. It is a word that characterises christianity, characterises the saints as here in the absence of Christ, and will characterise them eternally, for it is said that we are raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus. Underlying it is love, and it is this that gives lustre to it as seen in christians, as over against the application of this word to men in the world. In the gospels we have instances of men being together in hatred of Christ, murder in their hearts. Such assemblies set out the power of the world, for organised opposition is the most potent and virulent. We read of the assembly of the wicked surrounding our Lord Jesus in His closing moments here in flesh. Evil took this form as if to shut out every possible way of escape so that their design should be accomplished. In no part of human history was evil so concentrated and virulent as at that time. It was a combined effort of the devil, his agencies being arrayed militarily so as to shut off all possible escape, as they thought. It appears as though, as they reached their end, that the outlet from them was unexpected, and in it their end was judicially complete, not yet outwardly, but nevertheless in truth. The resurrection of Christ, for He is heard from the horns of the unicorn, was the answer to that combination of evil.
Satan is still carrying on, dear brethren, aware, as perhaps others are not, that he is defeated. The prince of this world *is judged*. It is a matter for faith; those who have faith understand, and Satan understands. We thus take on the principle of the assembly, of gathering together. The Lord had indeed inaugurated it Himself in His own way, and then Peter alluding
{329}
to their assembling during the Lord's lifetime here, speaks of the men who have "assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us" (@Acts 1: 21). The Lord inaugurated that great thought of assembling, or gathering together; that is, not only that we come together actually, but that we are together as being led together. There is also the idea of being assembled, as being convened by One who has authority to do so, so that the matter has a great place in the Scriptures and in the testimony of God. It involves great privileges and enjoyment spiritually during the period of the absence of Christ from this world, affording to Him opportunity of coming in and going out amongst us in a spiritual way, so that we might know Him and how He assembles with us as our Head.
Now I begin with these remarks and allude for a moment to the well-known @Psalm 133: 1, which speaks of "how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!" The idea is very strongly expressed in the early chapters of the Acts from which we have read. I read chapter 2: 44, not because it presents the thought first, but because it gives the idea of being together as to the attitude of our minds towards one another and the longing of our hearts to one another, even though we may not be actually together. We are told there that "all that believed were together, and had all things common". It does not say here that they were together in one place. The allusion is to the attitude of their hearts and minds in regard to one another, that as the opportunity offered, and it was physically convenient for them, they were together whether in small or large numbers.
That is the first point I would dwell upon, and without the understanding of it, the coming together by appointment and for a purpose is not likely to be what it should be. So in chapter 1 we have the idea of the brethren staying in a certain place -- the upper
{330}
room. The suggestion is that they were *morally* elevated that they were abiding in quarters free from ordinary religious influences. That is how the matter stands in chapter 1. Those who had seen the Lord Jesus ascend into heaven returned to Jerusalem and went to the *upper room*. His disciples were loyal and instinctively free from what was current religiously, and we are told the names of the persons in the upper room. Then the Spirit of God proceeds to tell us about Peter standing up in the midst of the brethren, and that the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty. The word *crowd* is used, that is, they did not come together for a specific purpose, nor were they led into a position, but they were in it and each with a distinction; a point that is of great importance in christianity. For in truth every one has his distinction, and his distinction saves him from rivalry and envy. Hence christians are marked off in this informal way in the divine narrative in the book of Acts, so that each one should understand that he stands on his own feet in relation to God and before his brethren, and he is no more and no less than God has made him. That idea will run through eternally, we shall certainly not be any more nor any less than God has made us, and that will be the distinctiveness of each and every one who will then shine, each in his own glory.
Then we find in @Acts 2:1 that the saints "were all together in one place". The point is not that the one hundred and twenty were there, but they were *all* there, and heaven took account of that. It is characteristic, the formation of the assembly being in view, and heaven pleased with the scene. It is the divine way to take account of what *is*. I mean there is no thought up there of adding to or subtracting from what is. However large or small the number, heaven takes account of it as it is.
The Spirit would draw attention to what heaven has to say; heaven retains the thought of intervening
{331}
here upon earth. There are those who would shut out heaven, and indeed the general trend today in religion, politics, society, and science is to shut it out, but heaven will not be shut out; it is at all times ready, and will seize opportunities. In speaking of heaven, I am of course speaking of divine Persons, of God, of Christ, and of the Spirit of God. Heaven is always ready to take advantage of opportunities, the more opportunities we give to it, the more we shall find it intervenes, and what could be more blessed, more gracious, than heaven intervening in complacency? Heaven may intervene otherwise, and will presently, and does too amongst the brethren, but if it intervenes in complacency the privilege is great, and so it is here. It was Pentecost, and the Spirit of God understood what Pentecost meant from the earliest days of its introduction. It is the feast that in the type signifies eternal relations, and what could be greater in the mind of heaven, at that time when such conditions existed on earth, than to make good what the type meant, to introduce eternal relations? And these relations are running on, and will run on, for there is no time limit to this great feast. I am speaking of the greatness of it, the greatness of heavenly intervention, the "sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house where they were sitting". Never such a sound had reached the ears of men as that, and it filled the house. It would not be forgotten; we may be sure that these early occasions in the introduction of christianity were carried down. The early traditions -- not such as were carried down in the so-called fathers, but the traditions carried down in love and in intelligence -- were conveyed in accuracy from one lover of Christ to another, from one generation to another. Certainly the Holy Spirit has never lost sight of this great sound that He caused when the saints were thus seen together in one place.
{332}
Well now, I want to go on to 1 Corinthians to show how the christians began to come together for a specific purpose. I wish to go over the ground with you in these chapters; this section of the first epistle and also @Acts 20, bring out how, under the Spirit of God, the apostle Paul peculiarly sets out this great thought of coming together. In Corinthians he is concerned about the order of it, and in the Acts the Spirit of God is concerned that in the coming together to break bread, the whole range of divine thoughts in the ministry of the apostle Paul should be in view. What a vista opens up to us therefore as we understand what @Acts 20:7 implies!
I speak first of all about @1 Corinthians 11, and what you find is that added to the word *together* is the word *assembly* -- "when ye come together in assembly". Now we have an added thought and one which I hope by the Lord's help to make clear, but at any rate it is well to have it before us; it is an added thought to what I have been speaking of already. We have the word *assembly* in Acts, alluding to persons called out, and it is added to the thought of gathering together in this epistle in order to set out the proper position, environment, and order for the Lord's supper. It is not only that saints are together, even though we are together in love -- that is really the only way to be together -- but not only are we together in love according to this chapter, but "*together in assembly*". The thought of the assembly is added to it, and that gives a lustre to the position that we have not had as yet in the divine narrative. It is true that it has had to be brought in by the apostle in a corrective way. The conditions he is dealing with are distressing in the extreme, that brethren were coming together ostensibly in assembly and carrying in their hearts party feelings, personal bias -- a most distressing situation, but the apostle nevertheless uses this word. He says in effect, at least inferentially, that it *should*
{333}
be to partake of the Lord's supper. He does not say, When you are *all together* in assembly, and when he speaks in verse 20 of one place, he does not say the *whole* assembly. Scripture is wonderfully accurate, and foresees difficulties that would arise; and undoubtedly the carefulness with which the words are chosen in this particular scripture has in mind our present circumstances. In these last days cities have grown to enormous proportions; sometimes the boundaries are almost indefinable, taxing the wisdom of the brethren, taxing their patience, taxing their love. Yet this scripture is so carefully worded that though we may have any given number of subdivisions in the assembly in a city, the truth is workable. For the words are chosen in such wise as to convey what is characteristic, not what is specific. That is to say, "when ye come together *in assembly*", may mean a dozen or twice that number, or fifty or a hundred; it is not the number but the *character* of the thing. It does not necessarily include all the saints in the city, but the character of the thing is in view; and even if it be in one place, the same thing holds, it is the character of the thing, not the totality of the saints in a city -- the Spirit of God reserves that word for chapter 14.
We must never forget the unity of the assembly in the city; it is not a matter of a confederation of meetings, it is one assembly in the city; and that idea of oneness should appear as often as possible. I come to that in a moment. I want to dwell now on this characteristic idea of coming together *in assembly*, and how it brings into mind not only that we love one another, but that we understand the position. The idea of being together in love underlies it; unless we have that we shall never understand the idea of coming together in assembly. For the coming together in assembly may tax our patience, and unless we have love, our patience will give way, and we shall lose the power of sitting together. "Love never fails", and certainly that word
{334}
applies when we are together in assembly, and have the precious emblems of the Lord's death before us, and all that enters into such a service. We certainly require love, love amongst ourselves, that which never fails, if the divine thought in the position is to be realised.
So you have the word *assembly*, and in the introduction to this subject you have the word *intelligent*, "I speak as to intelligent persons", that we may he able to sit together in the exercise of affection, not simply sit, but in the exercise of affection, so that I am able to clothe the brethren inwardly with affectionate thoughts, and every moment of the time is a matter of enjoyment; it is preparatory to our eternal relations, to our eternal portion. There shall be nothing else, dear brethren, but continual enjoyment, enjoyment of divine love, enjoyment of the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, and the enjoyment of the brethren. Let us not think otherwise than that the presence of the brethren in heaven will add to our enjoyment; and not only does it add to the enjoyment, but it adds to the divine enjoyment. That is the great thought in divine purpose, that God is to have enjoyment in His people, and we are being educated for that now; hence the necessity of love, the bond of perfectness.
The introduction of the covenant in the Supper, which the Spirit never fails to stress, is to carry into our hearts the bond of perfectness, and when is perfectness more necessary than when the idea of an organism is present? It is a question of love in the power of the Spirit; so that you have the idea of faith in the verse in @Acts 2 -- "all that believed". Believing is a fundamental idea, but love *draws* the saints together, "all that believed were together;" it is faith working by love, and what joy when the Spirit of God brings the new covenant home to us as we are sitting together in assembly!
Now, I want to show that @Acts 20: 7 is the statement of how things proceeded in these early days. The
{335}
writer says, "we being assembled to break bread". The word is not the same, but it is significant that the saints were together with a view to breaking bread. That is, they were together for a specific purpose, and whilst love is always present and enables us to be together for pleasure at any time normally, yet christianity carries with it this specific thought. In a sense nothing is so important as the idea of being specific in coming together, so that we proceed as we come together according to the purpose in mind, and that is what we get in this chapter. As I intimated a moment ago, the Spirit of God presents to us here a remarkable incident that we have often dwelt upon. I mention it now, not to go over what we have often heard, but to suggest to you that the purpose in mind involves, not only public order as in Corinthians, not only public smallness, not only the idea of the anointing, the dignity that is proper to us as coming together, but the whole range, the whole environment implied in the divine counsels. That is what I would like to make clear, so that we might see that the Lord's supper is introductory to that. It is not something simply to be partaken of and the saints to return to their homes, as for instance with the priests of old -- they went to their tents after partaking of the passover. The Lord's supper, according to this passage, has in mind what is introductory to the whole range of divine purpose.
How great is this! -- and one would seek to rest on it for a moment -- and how great is this matter that here are saints, intelligent men amongst them, besides the apostle -- some names given which indicate great spiritual wealth and intelligence, and yet they do not proceed with what they came to do. One may inquire, Is that an example for us? We are to understand every passage in its own setting. Whilst we may have considerable intelligence, considerable spiritual wealth, and love among ourselves, while we
{336}
have all that, we may miss much. We may miss the great range of things, a great vista of glory as to environment that is opened up to us; and that is clearly why it is said that the apostle discoursed and prolonged the discourse till midnight. What I have in mind is that we may think of this a little, and look into the Scriptures and see what detail enters into the position we are in as coming together in assembly. What is meant by it? There is not a word said here as to what Paul actually said in his discourse. One would like to have heard it, but the Spirit of God has not preserved it. We may find the words substantially elsewhere; that is, they are essentially bound up with the ministry which the apostle had. He makes much of it; he said in @Ephesians 3, I would have you to know my intelligence in the mystery, and is it not for us to search and, by the Spirit, acquire an apprehension of the mystery, and see how the Lord's supper leads us into that which it presents?
Now the setting here is marked by love; the chapter is full of affection. *Paul*, you may say, is written over it from beginning to end. Not that the Spirit of God would occupy us with any person rather than Christ, but He would occupy us with the ministry -- the ministry of this great servant, lest it should be overlooked or ignored; lest we should be proceeding with the Lord's supper without the fulness of the setting proper to it. That is what I had in mind as to this chapter.
So that the coming together in assembly should take on what is divinely intended, not only for ourselves but for God. As the Lord said in @John 15: 26, "the Comforter ... whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who goes forth from with the Father;" a remarkable expression, who "goes forth from with the Father; *he* shall bear witness concerning me". The Lord had in His mind that the Spirit, coming out, as it were, with first-hand knowledge of all
{337}
that was there, from being with the Father, would bring out the Father's thoughts about the Son; testify of them, testify of Christ. The twelve were to testify of Him, as the Lord said, "because ye are with me from the beginning;" that is Christ in the gospels, but the Holy Spirit has come out to testify of Christ as He is in heaven today. Paul presents Him as He is, He is the glorified Christ, as to whom the Holy Spirit would witness to us; that is in Paul's ministry.
Unquestionably Paul is the minister taken up to open out the great range of the Father's thoughts about the Son and about the assembly. Can we afford to be without all this? I do not think so. The Lord is seeking to lead us into it, and it lies in a practical sense, in this word "together", with the word "assembly" added. Then, so as to have the mind of God maintained in a city -- in all cities, of course, but in a given city, in @1 Corinthians 14: 23 we have "if therefore the whole assembly come together in one place". This scripture has in mind the working out of the temple, another great thought in this epistle. There is not only the incoming of Christ to His people as in assembly in the way of interest and affection, but as affording light particularly to meet current emergencies. If there be freshness in the assembly spiritually, if God be working, we may be sure that the enemy will be working too, to offset what God is doing. The meeting that is contemplated has in view to bring in the mind of God for every emergency; *prophetic* ministry is especially contemplated. The Lord is calling attention to it, with the thought of the mind of God coming in. In this connection we have the unity of the assembly in a city, this must not be lost sight of. Sub-divisions must not rob us of the great thought of God of the assembly in a city. Surely it must take form at some time, it must not be a theory; and so here "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place".
{338}
There are prophets; we are told in Ephesians, "*he* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers". Prophets are the second in the list. It may be there are none today in the *full* sense in which the word is used in that scripture. But in the sense in which it is used in this chapter, that is to say, power to minister the mind of God, the idea remains, and we may look for prophetic ministry. It is particularly stressed here; it is not the Ephesian point of view; it is presented here as something to be aspired to, something to be coveted. "Be emulous of spiritual manifestations, but rather that ye may prophesy". This enters into the continuance of the assembly in power, that the gates of hades may not prevail against it.
So the Lord would have us keep in mind the unity of the assembly in a city, *all* coming together as directed in this chapter that we may have the special advantage of it in the prophetic ministry. As we lay hold of the divine thought and make room for it you may be sure that the Lord will seize every opportunity and come in for us. It is a question of conditions, of the brethren taking up the divine thought and moving in it, and heaven will not fail to come in and meet current needs.
These are the thoughts I had, and I commit them to the Lord, and to all, for our profit.
{339}
KEEPING DIVINE THINGS
@2 Timothy 1: 14; @John 17: 12; @John 12: 7; @2 Kings 4: 42
The message which I believe I have from the Lord bears on the idea of *keeping* what is of divine importance. I hope to show the importance of preserving in integrity whatever may be entrusted, or whatever may be of one's own spiritually, intended to be for God in service, or intended for His people. I would urge upon all the acceptance of the sense of responsibility to God and to men, that is to the saints. Irresponsibility is rather what marks us, alas! It may seem unfair to make such remarks in the presence of so many who, I am well assured, are lovers of God. The fact that we are here indicates interest in divine things, but large numbers are often misleading in this respect. Whilst general interest may exist, yet a test, especially one ordered of God, if applied, might bring a certain disillusionment and a corresponding disappointment. Gideon had, you know, an army of thirty-two thousand to fight the Midianites, a fair army, although the opposing one was exceptionally numerous, but numbers may prove a hindrance rather than a help, and that is exactly what we have presented in @Judges 7. We have nothing recorded as to Gideon's feeling of disillusionment, or disappointment, that his army should be reduced, and may well assume that he accepted the divinely proposed test with humble obedience. But it disclosed that, however apparently willing these thirty-two thousand men of war were, personal considerations outweighed divine considerations, and some thirty-one thousand seven hundred of them had to be sent, as we may hope, shamefacedly, back to their homes, leaving the conflict to be waged by three hundred. The two tests were divine, but they brought to light the sad spectacle of the army of thirty-two
{340}
thousand returning to their homes, save for three hundred men.
I mention all this because I would call attention to the irresponsibility that one observes, whilst not in the least degree minimising the great work of God that is seen at this moment in this hall, part of the great result of God's work by His Spirit. It is a spectacle for the eyes of heaven; I have no doubt about that. My remarks are not in any way disparaging, but rather to further stimulate us to a sense of responsibility to God and to men, so that anything, small or great, that may be entrusted to us may be kept and may be available as needed.
The first scripture appears in a letter to a young man upon whom responsibility was laid. In view of the days in which he was to bear it, this burden was peculiarly great. The great servant Paul was about to lay down his commission and to depart, as he says himself, to be with Christ, and the epistle to Timothy is particularly intended to help this young servant in the discharge of the great obligations that were put upon him. The apostle could speak of the good deposit which had been entrusted (@2 Timothy 1: 14). To analyse this deposit is not the purpose of this meeting. Timothy would understand that it was of great value, such value as could not be appraised really by man. It is called by the apostle "the good deposit entrusted". If one might venture a word or two on an analysis of it, one might say in general what is alluded to is the great truth particularly entrusted to the apostle Paul. He urged Timothy to have an outline of sound words which he had received from the apostle. These words are said to be held "in faith and love which are in Christ Jesus;" a very important word for those who are serving in any way in the truth. This injunction as to the good deposit would suggest the truth as a whole, which had come in through the great servant, who is the writer of the letter.
{341}
So that we are in the presence here, dear brethren, of the truth, and especially what God in these last days has opened up as recovered for us and put into doctrinal form such as is intelligible to us. The burden implied, as bearing upon ourselves, is that this is to be *kept*, not simply in our bookcases. Great as the value of books is, and great as the importance of brothers and sisters having books calculated to aid them in their spiritual education, yet the deposit is not what is in books. I mean the allusion is to what is in *ourselves*, and what is to be kept thus by the power of the Spirit of God. For that is what it says: "Keep, by the Holy Spirit which dwells in us" -- a very beautiful statement, a very significant statement, a statement that implies a condition of soul in which the Spirit of God is not characteristically disturbed. The ground of divine dwelling is that there are suitable conditions, and the Holy Spirit is here alluded to, as *dwelling* in us. Where this is so we may avail ourselves of Him, in every sense in which we need Him. I am speaking now of keeping what we have by divine teaching, by understanding given by the Lord; what we have as a good deposit in the knowledge of the revealed mind of God, both as to truth and principles. Now this obligation is put upon us. What Timothy had received he was to pass on to faithful men, who should teach others also; for passing on divine things implies teaching. It is the divine way of inaugurating depositories here for heaven's thoughts. Teaching is the divine way, so that there should be treasuries for God in this world, that is to say, persons who keep things, and who do this not by mental effort or memory, but by the Holy Spirit. Of course our minds come into it, for the renewed mind of a christian is employed by the Spirit to keep in order in his own soul that in which he is instructed, in which he is taught. At the same time the affections also are engaged, so that the believer is a treasury of God. Nowhere
{342}
is this thought so significantly set out as in this verse, "Keep, by the Holy Spirit which dwells in us, the good deposit entrusted".
I pass on to @John 17 to speak of another trust; that is, persons. In the typical teaching of the book of Numbers relative to the Levites, we are taught what the Gershonites were to carry -- for the word carry is the key. It is burdensome work. Levitical service is burdensome. The Gershonites in the main had to look after the curtains, which curtains had to do with concealment and demarcation. In other words they point to divine principles by which the people of God, that is the assembly, is to be controlled and governed. I allude to these as entering into the good deposit, but I speak of it now, dear brethren, as over against the charge of the Merarites. These latter had to do with the boards and other subordinate things which symbolised persons. For to have an order of things reflecting heaven, a figurative representation of things in the heavens, we need both heavenly principles and heavenly persons, for the tabernacle represented a heavenly order of things. So we find in the service allotted to the Merarites, the items were given by *name*. The word is significant, for obviously the items I allude to refer typically to persons. I mention all this so that you may understand what I have in mind, that we have to keep persons, and of course, the first person to be kept is oneself. That is quite obvious; for how can I undertake to keep another, save as I have learnt to keep myself? We are told that better is "he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city" (@Proverbs 16: 32).
You can see therefore how great one is, even initially, as coming into the truth of christianity, as he learns to rule his own spirit. For one can never be of use in the divine system of things save as he begins thus to keep himself, to rule his own spirit and correspondingly to keep himself pure. Many other things could
{343}
be said in that connection as to the individual. What is in mind is to show that we are to keep persons, and that no christian, however young, should say like Cain, that he is not his brother's keeper. The saints of God are precious beyond words. The more we see in the Scripture heaven's appraisement of the saints, the more we shall see the truth of what I have remarked. The more one looks into and applies the thought of keeping, the more one gets the divine viewpoint and applies the impressions received in his relations with the brethren, the more attractive the brethren become, the more lovely they are. I may say here in a very simple way, that unless we begin to see them thus and respect them and then love them, we shall really never serve according to God. We may serve in a careless official way, but I can assure you, if you do not respect the saints, you will never love them, and if you do not love the saints you will never serve them according to God. But the more you look at them from the divine point of view, and the more you search for the virtues in them, search for the Spirit in them, the more lovely they become and the more worthy of your service. Not only so, but like Abraham our father, the great believer, you will risk everything to rescue a brother. The Lord speaks of this subject to His Father -- in, as I may say, a conversation -- from His side at least. That the Father was responsive to every word that the Lord said in this wonderful chapter is unquestionable. We cannot conceive anything but the most intense interest in heaven as these words were uttered by our Lord Jesus Christ as He lifted up His eyes to heaven, saying, "Father". The theme of His remarks, after verse 5, is almost entirely the saints, and in verse 12 we come to the question of keeping. He is entrusting them to His Father to be kept; in dependence, putting His own, as He is about to be taken from them, into the hands of the Father; and then He says, "When I was
{344}
with them I kept them in thy name; those that thou hast given me I have guarded". What a record! What an example for us, dear brethren, in the keeping of the saints -- in as far as one is competent, and as I said the responsibility rests upon every brother and sister. We talk about care meetings, and, of course, they apply to what we are speaking of but let us not forget that every saint is to have care of the brethren, that no saint, no sister, no brother, can say he is not his brother's keeper.
If I can set the brethren in movement by what I have been saying, with the sense of this responsibility, I believe that I shall do much under God, to the end that all should begin to move in care. That word *in care* must not be officialised, nor must it be attributed to certain, or all the brothers. It belongs to every saint. This is seen with Andrew, for instance. John the baptist looks on Jesus as He walks and says, "Behold the Lamb of God!" (@John 1: 36). Andrew follows. He abides with Jesus that day, according to the Lord's invitation, and then he finds his brother Simon. That is the spirit of care, the spirit of interest by which the saints have to be kept, and this works out particularly in the way we regard those that are already in a position of safety, at least ostensibly. The Lord Jehovah says, "Yet will I gather others to him, with those that are gathered" (@Isaiah 56: 8); that is a promise. But then those that *are* gathered have the first claim upon us; they have to be kept. That is the principle that, according to the mind of God, pervades the fellowship. The saints have to be kept, whether by example, or by word or by influence. The responsibility attaches to each of us to keep the brethren. The Lord says, "not one of them has perished", and remarks significantly, "When I was with them". It is while He was here, where the influence to snatch them from His hand was present all the time. It is through the world that the saints are stumbled. "Woe to the world because
{345}
of offences!" (@Matthew 18: 7). The world is calculated to stumble the saints, that is to cause them to fall, to set snares for them, and hence the Lord here alludes to that position. So that under these two heads you can see I have in mind that the Lord should lay upon us the obligation to keep the good deposit by the power of the Spirit that dwells in us, and then to keep the brethren; for these two thoughts run together. The truth which heaven delights in requires the brethren. We need them and in as far as it lies in us we must keep them, keep them, of course, on divine terms. Any other effort is worse than useless. Keeping persons for the sake of numbers and the like is pernicious. It is keeping the brethren as the Lord kept them, on divine terms.
Now I go on to @2 Kings 4, and I wish to speak of the food that is to be ministered to the Lord's people. The Lord lays great stress on food and says of the servant who ministers a portion of meat to the household, one whom He "on coming shall find doing thus. Verily ... he will set him over all his substance" (@Matthew 24: 46, 47). What a great incentive the Lord gives us in that word to have food for His people and food "in season;" that is the food that is needed this very day. The importance of supplying this food, of keeping it from poisonous influences, from damaging or discrediting things is obvious. This very chapter, indeed the previous paragraph, tells us in a most striking way, how the food provided for the people of God may be poisoned. All will remember the incident of the great pot that the prophet directed to be set on, and how one went out and gathered a lapful of wild gourds of the field and shred them into the pot. Someone uncontrolled by levitical principles, by the need of accuracy, and of testing everything by Scripture, brings something in that is poisonous. I mention that before speaking for a moment of this man from Baal-shalisha. He is over against this incident. Aside
{346}
from the intervention of God through the prophet, there must have been disaster in the wild gourds. He gathered a lapful and shred them into the pot. The man of God was able to meet the danger, directing that meal should be put in the pot, and the food was preserved, the poison was nullified. This is one of the most important lessons for fathers and mothers in regard to their children. The schools and universities are just full of poison. We cannot control the schools, we cannot reform the world, we are here to go through in spite of it. That is the principle, and if our children are in any way obliged to come within the range of these poisons, the obligation rests upon parents to watch and have the meal ready. In the divinely appointed way to bring in what Christ is; the pure holy divine humanity of Christ, presented in testimony to children, nullifying these terrible poisons that are so current. The man from Baal-shalisha is set over against all this and how good it is to have food brought in from that land! The name would indicate a land entirely subservient to a ruler, where there is no disorder or irregularity such as is seen in the gathering of the wild gourds. This man comes in from that land with first-fruits, twenty loaves of barley, barley being first-fruits of the crop, but not sheaves of barley, but bread -- loaves -- meaning that the fire had been applied so that the barley was constituted food. Twenty loaves and then fresh ears of corn, and then "in his sack" is added.
That is what I want you to notice. If you will read in the New Translation (a provision the Lord has made for us in these last days) you will see this man carried the food provided in his sack. He had this food and he brought it from a certain place that indicated order and government, where things were done properly. The assembly is a reflection of heaven and should be marked by things being done properly. The Lord has sway there -- it is a question of the Lord and what He has
{347}
commanded in His word and the Spirit of God is free there, so that we can trace to the source what we get and what we hear. There is no question about this man, he is trustworthy, and he says in effect, I have good food, and he gave it to the man of God so that he could give it to others. Poisonous things must not affect it, so he brought it in his sack. It is of the greatest importance in ministry that what we have to present must be kept from defilement, from poisonous influences, from wrong thoughts. That it is the pure product of heaven ministered and developed in a believer, in a minister's soul, by the Spirit of God. Thus he brings the food in his sack. I can take those loaves and spread them about the table. I do not have to examine them, for they have been kept. I am confident that I can partake of this food and I can invite others to do so, and so Elisha said, "Give the people that they may eat; for thus saith Jehovah: They shall eat, and shall have to spare. And he set it before them, and they ate and left thereof, according to the word of Jehovah".
I wish you would just dwell on this beautiful picture, dear brethren, as regards food. How it inspires confidence! Of one who ministers, the saints should be able to say, We have confidence in that man. This is most important. If you are to serve the saints you must establish confidence in their hearts. What can you do for the saints unless they have confidence! This man inspires confidence. He has the loaves of barley and the fresh ears of corn, but he has them in his sack. He is careful and considers for others. He is a man of integrity; he provides such food as is edible at the moment, and it was greatly enlarged. God will not enlarge what is adulterated. He will enlarge what is the pure product of the Spirit of God and nothing else.
There is one other thought, which is found in @John 12. We never tire, as many dear brethren here would testify, in referring to certain persons in Scripture, and
{348}
Mary of Bethany is one of these. She is one of the outstanding figures in the Scripture and she is mentioned here for the last time. She disappears from Scripture full of glory. How we all would love to disappear in that way! It is said of Jesus that He was "received up in glory" (@1 Timothy 3: 16), and that is in measure what everyone should aspire to, to finish in glory, and Mary, in the way in which I am speaking of her, disappears gloriously. She disappears in worship. She is criticised, and no one who is an outstanding person spiritually escapes criticism. Everyone who makes everything of Christ is persecuted. The greatest test is, what a man makes of Christ. She made everything of Christ, not only in public, but in private, and that is what the Lord alludes to in the verse I read. She was criticised, but the Lord defends her. Indeed He and Judas are the only ones who *speak* in this passage. Lazarus says nothing, Mary says nothing, Martha says nothing, neither does Jesus say anything until we have this criticism. Judas says, "Why was this ointment not sold for three hundred denarii and given to the poor?" He breaks the silence. Some brethren think that an assembly meeting is only good as there is activity, as there are hymns and praises given, but there is not one word said in this wonderful scene at Bethany, as far as the record goes, until Judas speaks. One would not like to be in his company to disturb this holy, this spiritual silence. That is what he did, disturbed it rudely, viciously. He was a thief and had the bag. What a disturbance when a man like that dares to speak and break up a holy season of silence in the presence of Jesus! Then the Lord speaks. Not that He turns on Judas, the time had not come to expose him. The Lord simply says, "Suffer her to have kept this for the day of my preparation for burial". What a jewel that is and how perfectly set! The Lord did not turn on Judas and say to him what he deserved; thus the lustre of this scene is preserved. It brings out the secret history of
{349}
the worshipper, and there is no true worshipper who has not a secret history; I mean a secret history with God, known intelligently. The Lord says of Mary that she has *kept* this for the day of my burial; she *understood*. We do not hear of Mary at the sepulchre saying in unbelief that they had taken the Lord away, that was Mary Magdalene. She disappears from Scripture here; she disappears in glory; she had filled the house with glory and with the spirit of worship, and she disappears with the Lord's commendation. Like Enoch she was not, for God took her, as it were. She had this testimony that she pleased God, she was justified in what she did, and what she did was to keep what she had for the service of Christ, free from all defilement, and use it on Him in the appropriate time. We have no alabaster box here, we have it elsewhere, but not here; attention is thus called to the integrity of the worshipper. She thoroughly considered for the One she adored, and kept the ointment with which to anoint Him free from corruption. She loved our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption, she kept it free from all taint for the day of His burial, and she seized her opportunity. She understood exactly the circumstances, for although it was some days hence that He was going to die, she had kept it for the day of His burial, and she understands when to use it.
May God bless this thought to us as to keeping.
{350}
SUFFERING
@Daniel 3: 13 - 30; @John 9: 26 - 38; @Romans 8: 16, 17
I have in mind, dear brethren, to speak of suffering this evening, and have read these scriptures for this reason, and also because they show that suffering for Christ now, results in His association with us in sufferings, and then our association with Him. Sufferings have a great place in the mind of heaven; sufferings down here. This has been so from the very outset, since the beginning of the occasion of it, that is, the presence of sin among men. The history of suffering is stressed throughout the divine narrative, and the object of this meeting is to encourage us to accept that it has a definite and designed place in relation to God's people at this particular time, as ever. The prophets of old, we are told by Peter, testified of the sufferings of Christ; "testifying before of the sufferings which belonged to Christ, and the glories after these" (@1 Peter 1: 11).
These sufferings are held out to us, particularly in the New Testament, as a consequence of our loyalty to Christ, and hence as a privilege; as indeed what is essential to formation, and to lustre of character, conforming us to Christ. For it is said, "it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings" (@Hebrews 2: 10). And so the great servant who was called out to convey the truth to us gentiles, is introduced to us by the Lord who called him and furnished him in this connection. Ananias is told by the Lord, "*I* will shew to him how much he must suffer for my name" (@Acts 9: 16). What he suffered is partially recorded in Scripture, reluctantly, by himself, but not all his sufferings. What is recorded is sufficient to show the truth of the Lord's prophetic announcement, and these sufferings add great lustre to him as a minister, and commendation to what he ministered; and
{351}
the effect in a formative sense will be seen in its lustre in him throughout eternity. We shall see him and we shall trace the effect of the Lord's announcement as to him, as appointed a leader in the sense of sufferings. As I said, the object of this address is, as under the Lord, to direct us in this great matter, and to induce us to take our share in suffering. No one of us will have the share the great apostle had, but each has his share -- an appointed share -- of sufferings.
Timotheus is enjoined to take his share in sufferings, and I have selected first of all the well-known chapter in the prophet Daniel as illustrative of the sufferings of the saints, and how the Son of God -- for that is what is presented -- becomes identified with us in these sufferings. An honour beyond words to convey, that the Son of God should identify Himself with us in our taking our share of sufferings, "because to you has been given, as regards Christ, not only the believing on him but the suffering for him also" (@Philippians 1: 29). This chapter has peculiar significance in these last days, when the authorities -- those for whom indeed we pray and are enjoined to pray -- impose upon men what deprives them of their liberties, their rights as men, as creatures of God. I am not here to decry the authorities, far otherwise, but only to point out that in these last days men are suffering from unfair decrees, and the saints of God peculiarly so, as unable to conform with what denies divine rights in them. Contrary decrees and laws are formulated and established in certain countries in which the saints of God are; interfering with their consciences in obeying God, and in maintaining right relations with their fellow men, and especially with their brethren.
It is important, therefore, that this principle of suffering should be understood, and how it is, in large measure, the way out of all such difficulties. Difficulties there are, cloudiness in the minds of many of God's dear people as to what to do, whether to obey
{352}
what man enjoins as contrary to what God enjoins. There can be no question that their decision ought to be immediate, that we must obey God rather than men. This may be accepted as a principle and denied in practice, and therefore falsified, rendered null and void in effect, which is what God never intended. What God intends in these matters is to bring out what He has put in His people, to bring out ability to suffer. This passage shows that in the acceptance of this great principle of obeying God rather than men, the authorities are changed in their own minds, as seeing the folly of their way. I know of no other way to meet such conditions save the way of suffering.
Now in the book of Daniel we have the mind of God as to the times of the gentiles. The book holds great significance right up to the present moment as that which particularly affords light to us as to the powers that have been current since that time, the great gentile monarchies, or what other forms they have taken in these latter days. The book is full throughout, I might say radiant throughout, with loyal sufferings of devoted men, men devoted to God, who sacrificed their bodies rather than their consciences; who said in the most definite way, we must obey God rather than men. They said it not only in an undertone, in bated breath, but openly, and without a tremor of fear in the presence of the great monarch of the time. I wish to stress this because of its present bearing, and how God is opening up to His people the privilege of suffering. I mean suffering in this kind of way. Every saint suffers in some way. From the first movement of God in a man or a woman or child, the first effects of the work of God bring out sufferings. We see, for instance, in the babe in Abraham's house, how he that was horn after the flesh persecuted that babe. He was horn after the Spirit, and wherever new birth is, and where men move according to it in any
{353}
sense, sufferings are sure to follow, so that every christian in some sense suffers, but then there is this peculiar kind of suffering that we have little of in our times, and it is a matter of great thanksgiving that it is so.
The prophetic scriptures show, especially the book of Revelation, that the saints who shall take up the position in the testimony after us, that is after the Lord translates the assembly to be with Himself, these saints shall suffer from the powers that be. They will suffer because of principles that are already in existence and that are already causing suffering to some of God's people. Others of God's people evade the point at issue, and miss the sufferings. Now I submit that it is unworthy of us with the light we have, with the calling we have, with the presence of the Holy Spirit here to support us, with the intercession of Christ in heaven, and with all the privileges that belong to us as of the assembly, that we should be behind the saints that are about to take our place in this world in testimony. They shall have much less in the way of privileges, much less light, but the Scriptures show that they suffer. They suffer because they refuse to obey man rather than God. Heaven makes much of them. They are expressly mentioned in @Revelation 20 as sharing the thrones with those who, like ourselves have been translated to heaven before -- those that are beheaded under the reign of the beast. Heaven makes special mention of them as having to suffer through faithfulness.
So the Lord would speak to us as to whether we are at all in keeping with this great matter. He has allowed certain laws to come into effect which will occasion suffering if we apply the principle that we must obey God rather than men; and what is it but to bring out what He has put in us by the effective work of the Spirit, that is, the ability to suffer?
Now this remarkable chapter brings three men before us, confirming what I have been saying as to
{354}
@Revelation 20. The names of these three men are mentioned together *thirteen* times in this chapter. What can it mean but that God is spreading out these precious names before His own eyes and before ours? They are *sufferers;* being three in number, they are intended to present the full idea that is in mind: three men suffering together. The king himself with all the glamour of his royal dignity and glory, his counsellors, his military men, and all the work of the fine arts in music -- all brought to bear upon them. As if Satan would assert all that he had under his power to quell these men and force them into disregard of the great principle that we must serve God rather than men; and they stand firm. They reply most gloriously, as you will observe in verse 16: "Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer thee in this matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O king. But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image that thou hast set up". What an example for us! What dignity, what definiteness, what intelligence as to what is meant! So that they firmly state, "we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image that thou hast set up".
What is to be learned, I believe, at this present moment, is that we are to face things intelligently and see the bearing of what is presented to us, weighing every thing and resolving that God must have first place. What delight to heaven as a brother resolves in the secret of his soul that he will be loyal. Not compromising with the evil secretly and professing to be against it outwardly, but in purpose of heart to be *loyal*, to take a definite stand before God in the secret of his soul, that he must be loyal to God and to Christ. Heaven is with him. Heaven is delighted with such a resolve; all its power is behind him. But then heaven
{355}
has decreed sufferings, and it looks for the ability which it furnishes to come forward and suffer. It may be only in a little way, but the suffering of this saint and that saint for righteousness will certainly make its mark and impression on those about us; and what comes in is that the *Son of God* stands by the sufferers. Can we afford, dear brethren, to miss this wonderful privilege of having the Son of God stand by us in the sufferings? There is the testimony of it. There is the evidence that those in authority might say, These men are not lawless men. That is what a sensible man would say -- and there are such, in a certain sense, among those in authority. These men, they would say, are honest men; they have consciences, and we must regard their consciences. Is it not possible that some will say that? It is; it *has been* said, and that because of someone suffering. There is testimony in the ability to suffer for the rights of God. Will not God honour us? He will. The Son of God, as I said, joins these men in sufferings, and those in authority saw Him and discern Him. Is that not possible now? It is. What can God not do for us if we take sides with Him? The Son of God has power in heaven and upon earth and who can stay His hand? -- who can say what He may do? He may so commend the brethren who are suffering to those about them that relief follows. One knows it in one's own history, it has happened, and it will happen. But what God is looking for is loyalty; He must be served as by these wonderful men here mentioned thirteen times over by the Spirit of God, with their mind fixed as representing the great thought of suffering for the rights of God. See what happens! The authorities turn round in their favour. That is what happened. I will not dwell further upon that, although the chapter demands great consideration.
You will observe that Nebuchadnezzar says in verse 25, "Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt". What a verse that is!
{356}
It is the monarch who said it. It is the man who imposed the decree to disregard the rights of God that is saying this. What can God not do? Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego would say in the secret of their hearts and to one another, "What has God wrought?" What has wrought this change in the monarch? It is the presence of the Son of God alongside the sufferers. We cannot look for this in any openly apparent way. He is not visible today we know; but we certainly can look for the presence of the Son of God, realised spiritually, in the midst of such sufferings. We can look for these things; they belong to the dispensation, and we shall prove them as we accept sufferings.
Now in the gospel of John, in the chapter read, we have a man suffering from the religious leaders. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego suffered from political hands, and that is what I had particularly in mind; and they shine, as I said, gloriously, and are written down as examples for us in suffering. In @John 9 we have a man suffering from the religious world, and what develops is that he also comes in for the society -- as I may say, the companionship -- of the Son of God. It is said that the religious leaders reviled him. Why did they revile him? Because he spoke well of Christ. He spoke sensibly -- he spoke logically, I might say -- and the same thing will happen as in faithfulness we maintain intelligently the rights of Christ over us. This man was taken up by the Lord, as the early part of the chapter tells us, that the works of God should be manifested in him. Notice! The works of God. Now I do not know of anything that ought to appeal to the people of God more than this, that one is taken up that the works of God should be manifested in him. Think of the divine desire that the saints should be here so that the works of God should be manifested in them! Not only that we should speak of new birth and new creation, but that the works of God should be
{357}
manifested in us. That is what comes out. This man shows that God had wrought in his soul -- He had wrought in his eyes indeed, but He had wrought in his soul. How beautifully he speaks as he finishes his testimony. Although reviled by the religious leaders who question him, he says to them -- "But we know that God does not hear sinners; but if any one be God-fearing and do his will, him he hears. Since time was, it has not been heard that any one opened the eyes of one born blind. If this man were not of God he would be able to do nothing. They answered and said to him, Thou hast been wholly born in sins, and thou teachest us? And they cast him out".
What is opened up to us here is the manifesting of the works of God; not only in opened eyes, but in our conversations, in our deductions, in the answers to questions that are presented to us. That is the thought, that every christian is to manifest the works of God, and the result is that they cast him out. Now let us view just for a moment what it is to be an outcast. It is bitter indeed to be ostracised, especially by the religious world. It is bitter, I know it is; but see how it stands here, that it is the outcome of a man who is typically a christian, the subject of the works of God, not only that he sees with his eyes, but he develops an understanding, and answers courageously, logically, and intelligently. What he said is irrefutable; and they cast him out. Let us face the position as to sufferings. In this case it is not the political leaders, but the religious leaders, and they will not have it that there should be such a result here as this, that in such as this man the works of God should be manifested. They cast him out. He is ostracised, and as I was saying, the Lord heard that. The newspaper items would not include it, but the news of heaven would include that.
We little stop to take in what is transpiring in heaven -- what history is being made. Here is a case, we may be sure, that is noted at once in heaven, of a
{358}
man who is manifesting the works of God. He is manifesting them in the way he sees things, in the way he speaks, in the ability he has to stand for God and for Christ. They cast him out, and Jesus heard it. Are His ears deaf as He is in heaven? No, He hears matters. These are items of supreme interest to heaven. He heard that. Millions of things pass in the history of the world each day. Jesus takes no interest in them, in a sense; but here is a man, or a woman, in a position in the office or among their acquaintances in business, and they stand true to the Lord. They speak intelligently of what they hold. They are able to give a reason for the hope that is in them. Heaven is noting all that, be it on the corner of the street, or wherever it may be, heaven is delighted with such persons. It was so here. They cast this witness out and heaven knows it. The next thing is that he is found by Jesus. How great is the scene presented here -- a believer cast out because of his faithfulness and Jesus finding him! He draws near and gives him to understand that He is thinking of him, and that He would have him to get on in his soul through the exercise. He says to him, "dost thou believe on the Son of God?" for that is what an ostracised christian needs to come to. There is always the danger of looking back and being unable to stand alone, but the Son of God opens up *another world*. I do urge this on you in these circumstances. Let the Son of God have a word with you. He will fill your soul with the light of another world, where all things are of God. You are ostracised here, you are *cast out here;* but you are *honoured there*. Your place is there, you belong to the eternal counsels of God. It is only a moment and you are there for ever, and what sustains a soul here lies in the Son of God. The christian, ruthlessly cast out because he tells the truth, because he manifests the works of God, is taken on and supported by the Son of God.
{359}
Finally, I just want to touch on the verse in Romans as the climax of all this: "If indeed we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him". This comes out now in relation to *children*, as you will observe. It is said, "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are children of God. And if children, heirs also: heirs of God, and Christ's joint heirs; if indeed we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him". I desire to say a word very briefly as to this; first of all as to the relation of children that attaches to us. We have sufferers in Daniel in relation to the great public rulers in the times of the gentiles. Christ suffered under these same rulers, and so did the apostles, and now it is for us to suffer under them, and God will give deliverance in every case; but what is particularly to be desired is the society of the Son of God in the sufferings. Then we have, as I said, in @John 9, sufferings through religious leaders. Here we are sufferers because we are the children of God, and the apostle tells us that the Spirit of God witnesses with our spirits. He distinguishes, notice, between the Spirit of God and our spirits, saying that the Spirit of God actually has transactions with our spirits, and gives us to understand through our spirits that we are the children of God. Not simply that Scripture says that believers have title to take the place of children, but the Spirit of God witnesses with our spirits -- a sweet function of the Spirit in every christian. Let us make room for it. I mean in this particular point, let our spirits be free. The epistle to the Romans is to liberate our spirits, and nothing could be more precious and comforting than that suggestion that comes to us by the Spirit that we are the children of God. "If children, heirs also: heirs of God, and Christ's joint-heirs; if indeed we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him". What a rich line of thought! It tends to detach us from this world, and to give us to see that it is essentially opposed to the
{360}
children of God, as indeed John says: "For this reason the world knows us not, because it knew him not" (@1 John 3: 1). That is, we bear His traits before it, and so being children we suffer with Him, and as heirs with Him we shall be glorified with Him.
May God help us as to this! It is a most important matter in view of our translation to heaven. What is noted amongst other things is the lustre that sufferings for Christ impart. Heaven is looking for that. They are to appear in their effect there. God would appeal to us to accept our present position intelligently and take our share of sufferings.
{361}
THE CHRISTIAN'S OUTLOOK
@Genesis 42: 1; @2 Corinthians 3: 18; @2 Corinthians 4: 18
What is in my mind at this time is to consider the thought of what christians are to be *looking at*, characteristically. The Lord spoke of the eyes of His disciples, that they were blessed because of what they saw. Things that exceeded what had been seen or heard. What is in view now is that we should not be wanting in blessed eyes, and in the use of them as blessed; that we may be looking at hallowed things, eternal things, not at the passing defiled things of the world.
The verse in Genesis challenges us as to why we look at one another. Jacob challenged his sons as to why they looked at one another; meaning that among other things activity was needed to provide corn for the family of faith, and not idle occupation with one another. So Jacob says, "Why do ye look one upon another?" He spoke as in the light of the supply of corn that existed, and that it should be availed of. Much more enters into the query of the patriarch. More even than he could define at the moment, for as yet he was unaware, at least as far as the record goes, of the foul crime committed by these sons of his. Their looks at one another would carry some thought of that crime -- indeed it is difficult to conceive how they could ever be free of it. We may not be at all guilty of such a crime, and yet it may be there are those here who have not yet come to Christ, nor acknowledged the guilt, attaching particularly to the Jew, but by extension to all men, the guilt of the murder of Christ. There are those who are guilty directly in this world, and it may be there are some here who as yet have not settled that matter, nor any matter of sin between God and their souls. You can only have a defiled
{362}
look; your look can never radiate heavenly light or heavenly love toward another; but the generality of us here, thank God, are otherwise, we are brethren who have come to judge conduct so gross, so inexcusable as the murder of Christ. The Lord says, "They have both seen and hated both me and my Father ... They hated me without a cause" (@John 15: 24, 25).
Most of us through grace have judged this. Instead of hatred to Christ we have come to love Him, knowing His love for us, for it is said, "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us" (@1 John 3: 16), and our looks characteristically are not those unjudged looks of murderers, or liars, or deceivers, such as the ten sons of Jacob bore at this time; but still there may be some trace left of these features of the flesh. The Spirit of God is pleased to give us several lists of sinful features, and it is well to go over them at times, some of them less serious, less wicked than others. It is wholesome to go over them because of the deceitfulness of our hearts, the meanness of them at times. So that in going over the lists given by the Spirit we may discern the secret chambers of our hearts, and see whether there are any of these things lurking there. For the Lord says that out of the heart of man all these terrible things proceed, not as entering into it, but as coming out of the heart of man. So it may be that we are looking at one another, not with the eyes of affection; and it is a challenge to our hearts as to *why* we look at one another. Not that we should *not* look at one another. Jacob did not at all imply that brothers dwelling in love should not look at one another. We certainly should. "Iron is sharpened by iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend" (@Proverbs 27: 17). The countenances of our brethren as energised by the Spirit of God are delightful to look at. We shall be looking at each other eternally, in measure at least. We shall, of course, be looking at Christ. He will be the supreme One, the chiefest among ten thousand,
{363}
the altogether lovely. But still we shall be looking at one another. I certainly hope to see certain ones whom the Spirit of God has delineated in the Scriptures in the testimony of God. It is one of the prospects before those who are exercised in this way:
<blockquote>Nor what is next Thy heart <br>Can we forget; <br>Thy saints, O Lord, with Thee <br>In glory met. (`160:8) </blockquote>
It will be no small part of our enjoyment then, nor should it be any small part of our enjoyment now, looking at each other with eyes of spiritual affection, and clothing each other with the best thoughts of heaven, as the bondmen of the father clothed the prodigal with the best robe. How attractive we become when it is so! The Corinthians were comparing themselves with themselves: looking at one another. There were local men there who headed parties, and if they looked at one another, it was largely to say, 'Such and such a one is not of our group'. How poor it is to look at one another in any sense in that connection! Such and such a one does not think as I do. The house of Chloe was concerned about these things in Corinth. There were other devoted ones. Indeed in all the epistles overcomers are in evidence. The overcomers are with God, and the house of Chloe should be regarded in this way. They were concerned as to these partisan conditions. You can understand as she would go to the meeting, she would look at this leading man and at that leading man, and at their followers, and observe how they looked at one another. A black cloud might come over the countenance as one turned to look at the opposite party leader or party follower, whereas a countenance would brighten as the favoured leader would come in. I am only seeking to portray how brethren may be seen looking at one another in a way that is objectionable.
Then another thing: we need to look at one another rightly so that we may determine the sovereignty of God. It may be that we have not thought of this.
{364}
His sovereignty works out in two ways; firstly, to obtain the number that He desires. We are not privileged to know all the sons of God on earth today. There are many more on earth who belong to Christ than we have any practical knowledge of, but if one were able to know all the saints, he could work out the sovereignty of God from that. Secondly, sovereignty shows that God is not governed by human tastes, or predilections, in His choice. In fact He has in mind, in His calling of men and women, to bring to nothing what is great in their natural estimation. God has poured contempt on all human pride. He is saying, I do not respect persons; for although exalted personages were saved in the earlier days, thank God, though not many noble indeed, but there were *some*. God would say, I have made My own choice and in making My choice I do so entirely according to My eternal counsels. I will have everyone I choose like My Son. There will not be one there but in entire accord with the Son of God; all will be conformed to His image, and it is that He might be the firstborn among many brethren. Whilst that is true, those called are in the main from the lower strata of society. But this fact does not belittle the saints. Far otherwise, for if a king were saved and fully accepted the truth, he would regard himself, like Paul, as less than the least of all the saints. So that there is no thought whatever of lessening the saints. We cannot be lessened. There is no family in the universe to be compared with the saints forming the assembly, whatever the strata of society from whence we are drawn. God has made us according to His own mind; He has clothed us already in His own mind with the most exalted thoughts. James says, Let the rich glory in his humiliation. There is therefore no thought whatever of disparaging anyone. If we are spiritual, the greater we may be in this world, *humiliation* is our glory. Let him glory in his humiliation and the poor in his elevation. Not that the poor
{365}
believer is to be made rich in this world's goods, or exalted in the society of this world, by his christianity. God has no such thought as that christianity should exalt a man socially. If he glories in his elevation, it is the elevation that God gives him *spiritually*, and the greatest elevation is to be conformed to the image of God's Son; to be His companion in heaven, and that belongs to the poorest person in this world who is a true believer in the Lord Jesus Christ. We should look upon one another in that way; we are told to do it. "Consider your calling, brethren". See the kind of people that have been called. The great majority are called from the lower strata of society. It is our glory, so that we should not vie with one another as to our cars, our houses, our dress, our businesses. If we look at one another from this point of view, Jacob's question comes close to us, "Why do ye look one upon another?"
Then we must look at one another as regards the temple of God in Corinthians. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" (@1 Corinthians 3: 16). How changed the appearance of a brother or sister in our eyes when he is clothed as being of the temple of God! Think of what that means. It means that the light of God shines there; it is the oracle. Some of you perhaps have never thought that there is such a thing as the oracle of God. There is. Every saint belongs to it. As at Corinth, so the saints of God in this city are, in principle at least, the temple of God. The mind of God as to any matter may thus be obtained. It is most important to view one another in that light, and not to suffer any unholiness in any of us, that we might be functioning as the temple of God. So that when we come to our Bible readings, for instance, as the brethren proceed on their way recognising the Spirit, one after another speaks, and the mind of God is unveiled, and it will he said, 'I never saw it in that
{366}
light before!' What is the secret of that? The temple. How important that every saint should be there! "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?"
Then again there is the body of Christ. We, being many, are one body, all partakers of the one bread in the Lord's supper. As sitting down in the assembly we are to regard each other in this way. I am speaking of lifting up your eyes and looking upon the brethren. It is a privilege. The saints are clothed with the dignity of the anointing, having the Spirit of God, as they issue forth from their houses and wend their way to sit down *in assembly*, where we are in the apprehension of Christ in heaven and of one another as members of His body. We are privileged to look around on the saints in this sense. Heaven is looking down. I am not speaking of theories, I know that it is so. God looked down from heaven, we are told. He looks down now and He sees groups of saints anointed by His Spirit, as they sit down together in assembly and they are delightful to Him. It is delightful to the spiritual eye too, to look around and see the brothers, sisters, and young people sitting down together in assembly. The world knows nothing about that, they know nothing about the phrase "in assembly". It is beyond them. It is spiritual. As we look at one another with anointed eyes we see the beauty of the saints. The beauty of the Lord our God, we are told, is to be upon us. This precludes mere natural feelings. As I said at the beginning, we must have clearly before us not to look at each other on any partisan lines, or lines of personal preference, or friendship. Personal friendships are very dangerous amongst us. We must cultivate the ability and habit to clothe the saints with divine thoughts. "Bring out", says the father of the prodigal, "the best robe and clothe him in it". He says that to his bondmen.
{367}
Having said so much about Jacob's remark, I go on to speak briefly of the two passages in 2 Corinthians, and the first follows properly after what I have been saying about looking at the saints and clothing them with divine thoughts as the body of Christ. It brings us into unity, into personal touch with each other in a spiritual sense, so that there is a real collective thought present; and the saints move in that thought. The second epistle contemplates ability to look at the glory of the Lord. I would seek to enlist the brethren's sympathy in a few remarks on chapter 3, for it is crucial. It is the link with what is public; that is, the anointing, as I have been speaking of it, of the saints coming together publicly. It is the link between what is public and what is spiritual, what is outside the view of the natural eye. All in the chapter hinges on the Spirit and the remarkable combinations of the Lord with the Spirit. As the apostle touches on the new covenant he says, "Not of letter, but of spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit quickens". That is the keyword -- the Spirit. That is the spirit of the new covenant. Then he proceeds to the thought of the Spirit of God, and he says that the ministry of the Spirit subsists in glory. The Lord would have us to take this in, because it is what is presented to us spiritually and what subsists, as we are told, in the Spirit. It exceeds the glory of the first covenant in the sense that the second subsists in glory; whereas the first was merely a passing external glory on the face of the mediator. In fact, the apostle says it has no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth; by reason of what is brought to us in the new covenant, the Lord being the Spirit of it -- and in His gracious way with us giving effect to it in our hearts. We are thus changed; not externally as Moses was, but actually changed.
{368}
You say, That is by looking at the glory. That is true, but only partially so. "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". You see, therefore, that looking at the thing in itself is not the great formative power. It is only partially so. It is, as it were, material for the great Workman. Our part is the use of our eyes, our spiritual understanding -- to be occupied for the moment exclusively with the glory that is presented to us objectively, thus becoming material for the great Workman, not here the Spirit of the Lord, but "the Lord the Spirit". He is working all the time. He is working according to pattern. So we have at the back of all this the remarkable statement about a Man, that He is a Spirit. The last Adam is a quickening Spirit. No other man is called a spirit save Christ. A man of Adam's race is a tripartite being, with spirit, soul, and body, but of the Lord Jesus Christ it is said, He *is* a Spirit. We must understand what distinction attaches to Him. It is not that His humanity is denied. His humanity is as real as mine, sin apart, but nevertheless the last Adam is a quickening Spirit. He functions as a Spirit, and that does not set aside what He said to His disciples, "A spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having" (@Luke 24: 39). He is a real Man, but functions as a Spirit, "a quickening Spirit". You see what we are brought into: how the Lord is operating in us as occupied unitedly with His glory; for it is "*we* all". The Lord the Spirit would bring us to the idea of oneness in this remarkable way, effecting a transformation in us, for the word signifies, as many of us here know, a real change. We are changed into the *same* image. I believe that carries the idea of sameness to one another, as it does also that we are made like Christ -- from glory to glory. You see how the Lord is gradually, here a little and there a little, bringing the truth of the glory of the covenant home to us, attracting us, and showing us that as
{369}
coming into it, seeing it and looking at it undividedly, the formation goes on. The formation is not merely by our looking; it is by the Lord the Spirit. The authority of Christ is in it, and yet the Spirit of God is in it.
Well now, the third passage is intended to appeal particularly to the spiritual. Of course one does not assume there are those here who are not spiritual, but still we have to admit that there are grades amongst the saints, and the apostle said indeed that he could not speak to the Corinthian saints as spiritual. He said they were babes, not, however, simply babes, but "babes in Christ". One does not criticise anyone here in suggesting that there are grades of spirituality or grades of knowledge in the people of God. What one has in mind is that whilst we constantly appeal to the young amongst us, yet there are the spiritual, they are listed in heaven. Here the apostle presents the truth that marks the spiritual, in the same way as he does in chapter 3. He puts it as if some were occupied looking at the things that are not seen. "While we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen", some are doing that. He had just been speaking of what he calls "an eternal weight of glory". What a word that is! He says, "For our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory". The idea of weight here is not burden. There will be no burden-bearing in eternity at all. That is a levitical thought in the wilderness. The idea of weight here is substantial; it is not evanescent, nor superficial -- it is substantial. Does it not attract your hearts? An eternal weight of glory! Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, is over against this. In chapter 11 of this epistle the apostle gives us a list (it is only a part) of *his* afflictions. As having read the list we may wonder at his estimate of it, but this is how he speaks of it. What is the affliction of any of us? A mere featherweight as compared with Paul's sufferings. But however severe our afflictions may be, they must be
{370}
classified as *light*. I have been speaking here of suffering and of taking our share; not that we seek suffering, but whatever comes, let us not shirk it -- let each take his share. It is a great investment, dear brethren, for the more of it we experience for Christ, the more the eternal weight of glory; for suffering *works* to this end.
Then the apostle connects that with "while we look not at the things that are seen". I know well enough how we look at the things that are seen, and in a certain sense we are bound to, but the older we get, as we walk with God and get glimpses into "that world and the resurrection", the less *seen things* are to us. Every advanced brother should be able to say something about that. For the idea of experience enters into leadership; that is, going before as walking with God, and thus being able to convey to the younger, not only by word at the Bible reading, but by countenance, general demeanour and the lightness with which we touch things here, that we really are occupied with the unseen; that we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen. One would love to be able to lead on a little in this way, that the brethren should see in a practical way that seen things may become less and less, and eternal things become more and more. That is how the apostle brings it in here. He does not go as far as to say that seen things are defiled, wicked, but in saying the best you can about them, they are temporal; they come to an end, and then what is there? What *prospect* is there when a man comes to the last days, having only viewed the seen things? The very thought of it is distressing. He has no brightness in his outlook at all. But think of the christian! The apostle speaks of himself later as "Paul the aged", but what an outlook he had! He began with an outlook, having had visions and revelations of the Lord, and the vista of glory became more and more. He speaks of an eternal weight of glory. It is not weight in the sense of burden, as I said, but
{371}
solidity of glory; as when we speak of a fine metal, we speak of the *weight* of it. It is valuable, it is substantial.
That is what I had to present to you and I leave it with the brethren and take it home to myself. What is one looking at? What is one's outlook? The apostle says, "always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus" (@2 Corinthians 4: 10). As soon as one takes this ground, God says, I will help you. So that this passage says "we who live are always delivered unto death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh".
Then in this closing verse, as I said before, in looking at eternal things, the weight of glory opens out before us. So that if one comes to dissolution, as the apostle contemplates here (not indeed that we should be unclothed, but clothed upon), that is, if this tabernacle has to be dissolved, it is our wisdom to accept it in the government of God. Moses in his well-known prayer (@Psalm 90), calls upon us to number our days that we may acquire a wise heart. So that if dissolution comes, and of course it will, unless the Lord comes first, one is looking at this eternal weight of glory, and death is gain, for to depart to be with Christ is far better.
{372}
Generations in the Book of Genesis, Croydon, 1937
GENERATIONS IN THE BOOK OF GENESIS (1)
@Genesis 2: 4 - 25
J.T. The generations spoken of in the book of Genesis have been in mind. The word is rendered "histories", of things or persons in some cases, and it was thought that a consideration of them would be helpful as to current conditions publicly and in the assembly. The *first* is in chapter 2 -- the histories of the heavens and the earth. The *second* is in chapter 5 -- the book of Adam's generations. The *third* is in chapter 6 -- the history of Noah. The *fourth* is in chapter 10 -- the generations of Noah's sons. The *fifth and sixth* are in chapter 11 -- the generations of Shem and the generations of Terah. The *seventh and eighth* are in chapter 25 -- the generations of Ishmael and the generations of Isaac. The *ninth* is in chapter 36 -- the generations of Esau, and the *tenth* in chapter 37 -- the generations of Jacob. The thought in the word is not, as we say, so many generations, but rather of origin or birth, corresponding with the gospel of Matthew, where we have the "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ".
It may be helpful to direct the minds of the brethren to @Genesis 2 as the counterpart of chapter 1. It bears the character of fulness; God proceeding immediately to show the working out of what is touched on basically in chapter 1. The events recorded are largely already mentioned in chapter 1, but they are presented in chapter 2 as fulness, which is a thought that runs through Scripture. God works basically, whether in the physical creation or in men, and then there is development which may be termed fulness; the assembly coming in typically at the end of our chapter points to the great thought of the fulness of Christ. It is the
{373}
idea of the development of what is already there basically. The creation of Eve is alluded to in chapter 1, but is seen in chapter 2 in the sense of fulness -- taken out of Man.
H.H. Would you say a little more as to the thought of fulness?
J.T. We have in the passages alluded to a word that denotes birth or origin. The word "generation" is much more frequently used as denoting a generation in the sense of a circle, or a certain number or series of descendants, but what is stressed in the word we have under consideration is *origin*, so that we get the root of things. It is translated "history" in the New Translation in this chapter, in the sense of getting an account of the matter, an account of the heavens and the earth as created. It says, "in the day that Jehovah Elohim made earth and heavens". It is not a scientific matter we are dealing with, but simply the divine thought, for God would have His people to understand the environment in which we are, from the outset of it till now, and how as before our eyes there is development. Though development may go on, the basic thought remains. The idea of fulness is seen as God continues to operate by the Spirit, or whatever agencies He may use, but it is all to bring out the fulness of what is there in principle.
H.F.N. Is that why the thought of fulness comes in so prominently in Ephesians?
J.T. That is right. Ephesians contains the idea of fulness more than any other scripture. It is the full result of the work of God that is in mind. You notice here it says, "every shrub of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew; for Jehovah Elohim had not caused it to rain on the earth". We begin here at the very root of things; we begin abstractly.
Eu.R. How would you illustrate the basic thought from the New Testament?
{374}
J.T. Particularly in new birth. The thought is presented to us in what things are; what the flesh is, and what the work of the Spirit is, and what is born of the Spirit. It is really a question of the origin of the thing, not the fulness of it.
J.R.S. Does the result of God's acting in this way spring from what He is in Himself?
J.T. It must be so; all emanates from God. In chapter 1 we see that God created man, but in chapter 2 He breathes into him in view of fulness.
Ques. How does the thought of image and likeness fit into this? Does that come in first, before you get fulness?
J.T. It fits in instructively. Image is God's representation here, the complete representation of God, and that based on man being like Him, taking on His character. It is a part of the fulness. It is due to God that He should be represented in His creation, not only in an official way, but in actual likeness; Adam taking on, in so far as he could, what God is. The appellation "God" in this early part of the Scriptures is the nearest you get to expressed absoluteness. The title is relative, but less relative than any other title of God we have, because the idea is that God is doing something for Himself, and He is to be represented in what He is doing. The word is plural, denoting fulness of the thought of God.
F.G.W. "Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the living and abiding word of God" (@1 Peter 1: 23). Would that suggest the germ of a new moral being, the development of which we have in Colossians and Ephesians, where we are told to put off the old and put on the new?
J.T. Yes. Peter goes further than @John 3, to which we have already alluded as the basic thought. When you have the "word of God" as in Peter, you get His mind, but @John 3: 6, "that which is born of the Spirit", does not involve the mind of God. It is the bare thought of what the effect is; it is "spirit". You can
{375}
tell what it *is* by that condition, but we can understand it by the development of what "spirit" is and what spirituality is. Peter goes further and speaks of the "word of God;" conveying what God is.
W.S.S. Would @Colossians 1 help us? The heavens and the earth are referred to, and then the "fulness of the Godhead" as pleased to dwell in Christ.
J.T. Quite so; it is just the "fulness". The fulness was there, but in @chapter 2: 9 it is brought within our range. It is said that "in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", so that it becomes intelligible to us. Chapter 1 of Genesis is generally the root thought, and without chapter 2 you could hardly be intelligent as to the working out of what is there, but the Spirit of God takes up this history, or generation, and works it out, so that we understand what is before our eyes today. Chapter 1 is God presented very nearly in absoluteness, but not fully so, for He is in relation to His creation. It is God and we are impressed with that. God would impress us with how He began as of Himself, and what He perfected Himself, He brings others into. He began the history by alluding to things abstractly, that is before they existed, as it says, "in the day that Jehovah Elohim made earth and heavens, and every shrub of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew". Thus He is pleased to give us His mind, and then how the thing is worked out; and the first thing He would occupy us with is man, not simply as created, but *formed*.
A.M.H. Do you mean that those things were made before they grew?
J.T. It is the way God can speak of things: "the God ... who ... calls the things which be not as being" (@Romans 4: 17). He would teach us to begin with what He had in mind. The fact that it is a history or a generation, in the sense of what is seen from the origin, should instruct us as to how God is drawing us
{376}
to His own side of things in the beginning, so that we might travel along with Him and see what He does. Afterwards it is a question of things opening up and what pleasure He has in them.
A.M.H. So that there is a full thought in His mind, and He is working out the detail.
J.T. That is the idea, and you are working along with God thus.
Eu.R. What are we to learn from the fact that in chapter 1 man is *created*, but in chapter 2 he is referred to as *formed*?
J.T. There is more interest on the part of God in the formation; He is in it more personally as it were. Immediately you come to this section in chapter 2, you have a personal thought, not simply God, that is Elohim, but Jehovah Elohim. It is very touching and ought to affect us. We have the appellation "Jehovah Elohim" perhaps more in @Genesis 2 and 3 than elsewhere throughout the Scriptures. It is a personal thought. If God takes us into what is in His mind, He does so in a personal way. He enters into compact with us, for Jehovah is a covenant name, but it is more personal here, and what can be more touching than that He takes us into His thoughts in this personal way? Eve was the first person to use the title Jehovah (@Genesis 4: 1). Elohim is the great general thought of God, the Creator, of whom, and through whom, and for whom are all things, but then there is the personal thought, and that finds its full amplification or fulness in Jesus.
H.M.S. Is what you have spoken of regarding the basic work of God connected with the Lord's word about the corn of wheat falling into the ground and dying?
J.T. I think that helps. John gives us these great thoughts. We have in chapter 3 the new birth which in its very name -- born anew or born throughout -- means God is beginning over again. Then in chapter 12, which you cite, it is the work of Christ, but it is
{377}
basic in that the corn of wheat dies. The allusion is to what happens in the earth, and as the apostle says, "God gives to it a body as he has pleased" (@1 Corinthians 15: 38). Of course, in John it is the Lord Jesus falling into the ground and dying.
R.O.S. In the beginning of verse 4 it says, "These are the histories of the heavens and the earth", but in the end of the verse it says, "in the day that Jehovah Elohim made earth and heavens". Where God as the spring of all is in view the heavens would be mentioned first, but thinking of the Lord Jesus coming to fulfil His mind and purpose, the earth has the first place, in view of the revelation of God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
J.T. In the mind of God heaven has the first place, but earth has the first place actually, so much so, that here the actual moisture is in the earth itself. It says, "Jehovah Elohim had not caused it to rain on the earth, and there was no man to till the ground". The earth is seen to be self-contained at the outset, and it is a question of the opening up of what is there, and we know that the Lord Jesus, although in Matthew He made much of the heavens, yet had the earth immediately in mind. God begins there, so that the beginning of the opening up of His thought of fulness is seen in the ground being made suitable by moisture. He formed Adam, beginning with what was in the earth. It did not receive sustenance from heaven, and what is presented is rather what the earth is, and what it is capable of, how it furnishes the means with which God makes man.
H.H. God uses material at hand, forming things out of what was in the earth.
J.T. He is operating now in the sense of fulness in an ordered state of things, and we see how the earth has the elements in itself that qualify it so to be used. So the initial work of God in us by the Spirit corresponds.
{378}
H.H. Adam is formed out of the dust in this chapter; it is not something made out of nothing as at the outset.
J.T. God is dealing in this history with an ordered state of things, and we see how everything develops out of it.
Ques. Would the heavens and the earth be suggestive of the lines of ministry respectively of Paul and John?
J.T. Yes, I would go with that. John operates in relation to what is here and brings God in here; he has heaven in mind, but it is what is here. Paul deals with the heavenly side. We do not get exactly the expression, the fulness of the heavens, but we do get the fulness of the earth (@Psalm 24: 1). We also get the fulness of God, and Christ, and Israel, and the nations, but it is the earth that is in mind here, and what God is working in this sphere.
M.W.B. What is the idea in God giving us these generations? Is it that we might get a more intimate idea of Him and, in that way, a greater sense of fulness?
J.T. The narrative beginning with @Genesis 1 includes verses 1 to 3 of chapter 2. Then we have the history formally, a history or generation; the word denoting the origin of the thing, what things are from the origin. @Genesis 1 speaks of the Creator coming in and acting Himself without us, and for Himself, but now He would enlist our sympathy that we might go along with Him. So we have immediately in @Genesis 2: 4 this personal thought introduced by the addition of the name Jehovah. Of course, Jehovah is a name in itself, but here it is placed before Elohim, as if God would touch us personally. We have to understand this title in all this section from the standpoint of Moses. It is he that gives us the meaning of Jehovah, but what he gives does not imply it was not there before. It *was* there before, and how important it is to have this history and to find Jehovah Elohim brought into it, so
{379}
that we travel along with Him. What can be greater than to have part in what God is doing? It is said that Enoch walked with God.
P.L. Would 1 Chronicles particularly illustrate this? Would that link on with the introduction of the main point of going along with God? It is seen in the haste with which the Spirit of God moves to reach David in the second chapter?
J.T. That is good. 1 Chronicles is a continuation of the history; in fact, it is generally the whole history as we are speaking of it. The word "generation" to which we are referring occurs several times in it. It begins the history over again in relation to Israel, and therefore we get David very quickly, because he is the man God has taken up to do things.
P.L. It says early in that book, in connection with planting, "there they dwelt with the king for his work" (@1 Chronicles 4: 23). Would that link with what we have here?
J.T. Yes. We want to travel along with God and see how He waits over everything and delights in the working out of things. We come on here to the great thought of Adam, and it says, "Jehovah Elohim formed Man" -- that is, that order of being, "dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life". Well, what can be more personal than that? How touching it is, the personal thought at once! "*He* spoke, and it was done; *he* commanded, and it stood fast" (@Psalm 33: 9). That refers to creation, but here it is the personal touch.
M.W.B. Then, noting the development, is there education for us to move sympathetically and intelligently with God?
J.T. That is the idea, so that the next thing is, "Jehovah Elohim planted a garden in Eden eastward, and there put Man whom he had formed". Then it says, "And out of the ground Jehovah Elohim made every tree grow that is pleasant to the sight". He is
{380}
thinking of man; thinking of the opening up and the fulness of things; a scene of blessedness and pleasure. Then follows, "and good for food; and the tree of life, in the midst of the garden". We can see that God is acting in a personal way; it is not the general thought of creation, but planting in relation to Adam. He has Adam with Him, and He sets him over the creation, as it says, "Jehovah Elohim took Man, and put him into the garden of Eden, to till it and to guard it", and so forth. You can see the link established by God in a personal way with Adam.
Ques. Is that link seen in the beginning of John's gospel? The basic thought connected with John the baptist's ministry, then the two disciples hearing Jesus speaking and following Him, the personal touch?
J.T. That is beautiful. We can see how this opens up when we come to the New Testament, for in truth Jesus is Jehovah.
F.C.H. This thought of Jehovah Elohim is left out when the serpent speaks to the woman.
J.T. You can understand that. When any departure from the truth happens amongst us the personal thought is left out; we lose sight of God in Christ and think of ourselves, but the personal link is essential to christianity.
Eu.R. Would this thought of planting link on with @Matthew 15: 13? "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up".
J.T. Just so, and how personally it is seen in Jesus, growing up as a root out of the dry ground!
A.M.P. The psalmist says, "I will praise thee, for I am fearfully, wonderfully made. Marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well" (@Psalm 139: 14). Would that show the creature coming into the thoughts of God as Creator?
J.T. You ought to quote a little more. The psalmist takes account of himself as "curiously wrought in the lower parts of the earth", showing that he understood
{381}
how God operated abstractly, so to speak, and what He had in mind before it came into view.
A.M.P. "My bones were not hidden from thee when I was made in secret, curiously wrought in the lower parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see my unformed substance, and in thy book all my members were written; during many days were they fashioned, when as yet there was none of them" (@Psalm 139: 15, 16).
J.T. That is very instructive as regards each of us, and as regards the assembly; how God would have us travel along with Him from the outset, even in an abstract sense. It corresponds with what we have here; before the shrubs had any concrete existence, they had an abstract existence.
E.T.S. Might we have the next verse of the psalm?
J.T. "But how precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God!" How very beautiful the personal touch is there! I suppose the book of Psalms may be taken as the counterpart of the Pentateuch. It is a question of God and response to Him as known personally.
P.L. So that in @Revelation 4: 11, "Thou art worthy, O our Lord and our God, to receive glory and honour and power; for *thou* hast created all things, and for thy will they were, and they have been created". Is that the personal thought -- "our God"?
J.T. Quite so. Then, so as to show how God is entering into the scene He has created, having man as a companion, you get the river, and the wealth connected with it. You get nothing of this in @Genesis 1. We see the wealth of the scene, and the fructifying power of the river; the river of God, parting from this scene of blessedness into four heads. We have nothing of gold, or bdellium, or onyx stones in chapter 1. But in the personal relations of God with His creatures we have wealth, and all brought to light, not in the general creatorial thought, but in relation to a river, which suggests a powerful and extended influence for good; and then the man set in the garden. God,
{382}
as it were, would say, I love to see the working out of My supreme handiwork, and so He brought the other creatures, the field animals, etc., to him, "to see what he would call them". That is, God is to have pleasure, and He would bring us into it. "And out of the ground Jehovah Elohim had formed every animal of the field and all fowl of the heavens, and brought them to Man, to see what he would call them". How much enters into that!
Rem. The psalm referred to is very interesting. Have not the translators of the Authorised Version rather coined a word, "yet being unperfect" (verse 16)? The word would normally be 'imperfect', but the whole thing is perfect in the eye of God, but really "unformed", as J.N.D. translates it.
J.T. It is a great thing that has not yet fully taken place. The great thought is the fulness, but here we see what pleasure God had in seeing His creature intelligently with Him. He had a personal link with Adam, who is set in a scene of blessedness -- "to see what he would call them". That is to say, it is the opening up of what was in Adam. How will he name what is presented to him objectively? It is a very important matter how we name things.
Rem. The Lord named things in John's gospel particularly. He named Judas, and speaks of him as the son of perdition.
J.T. "Cephas" is an example of this. As applied to Simon it was as yet potential, and in time was characteristic of him; also in John you get the word "devil" applied to Judas. John would deal with things in their root character, so it is important to name things as they are presented to us.
P.L. We are to try the spirits, and we name them.
J.T. As soon as you name a thing that is presented, others get help by it.
C.C.E. Would Adam see some evidence of the Creator in the animals as he named them?
{383}
J.T. I suppose every one would represent some divine trait, and so we have the idea of the living creatures as representing the attributes of God. How important it is to be able to name what emanates from God, and over against that, to name what emanates from the devil. You do not get him until the next chapter, where he is called the serpent, and in the final analysis in Revelation the "ancient serpent" is there. So God would find peculiar pleasure in hearing Adam, and in the names he gave. If we let God into our consideration of these things we shall get a better grasp of what He has, and how He finds pleasure in the opening up of what He has created.
A.M.H. Would the "all-various wisdom of God" have relation to naming things?
J.T. I think that is right. It is developed in the assembly and so the assembly is marked by that superior intelligence. The apostle calls attention to himself in @Ephesians 3: 4 and says, "Ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery of the Christ".
H.M.S. Later on Adam is allowed the great privilege of naming his wife, calling her Woman, and then Eve.
J.T. Yes. It is said "he found no helpmate, his like", and we have the account of his being put to sleep. In every instance here the personal thought is brought in.
H.F.N. Judas is named four times in John's gospel. He is spoken of as a devil, and named as a thief, and then as the betrayer, and finally as the son of perdition. Would these names have a bearing on the condition of things in christendom today?
J.T. I think so. @Genesis 3 begins the history of evil, and it is important at the present time that we should be grounded in these matters, knowing good and evil. Evil does not come into @Genesis 2, but it does in the next chapter, and the naming of Satan there is carried down to the last book of the Bible, where he is called the ancient serpent; that is, he is there developed in the character of serpent: "the ancient serpent, he who is
{384}
called Devil and Satan" (@Revelation 12: 9). So that we must name things rightly. One has noticed the three pairs of evil men in @2 Timothy -- Phygellus and Hermogenes in chapter 1; Hymenaeus and Philetus in chapter 2; and Jannes and Jambres in chapter 3. The first two are just personal, they turn away from Paul; the second two are teaching the worst kind of doctrine, "saying that the resurrection has taken place already;" and the third are connected with the principle of imitation. We are not told the names of these last elsewhere in the Bible, and why should Paul have their names, unless to remind us in these last days of the importance of naming things? Not only referring to them as the magicians of Egypt, but persons who have names, and who are to be known by their names and avoided accordingly.
Ques. Would the overthrow of all that evil be in naming the name of the Lord?
J.T. Yes. "Let every one who names the name of the Lord" -- that is in keeping with what we have been saying -- "withdraw from iniquity" is the corresponding responsibility.
A.J.B. It is significant that the naming is commented on. It says, "and whatever Man called each living soul, that was its name". The naming was acceptable and pleasurable to God.
J.T. They represent the positive side. When we come to chapter 3 we have evil, but here we have what is good, and of course today it would be a question of our naming what is of God, whatever feature we see; and it is salvation to know what is positively of God. It is negatively salvation too from what is not of Him. It is very important in regard of moral things; when a judgment according to God is reached as to anything, it stands as divinely supported. Normally brethren know what is right, and it is a most important thing to know what is right. If we do not know how to name things we shall have
{385}
unnecessary trouble, but if a thing is rightly named the saints generally are greatly helped in recognising it.
Ques. Does it involve spiritual discernment?
J.T. It does. "The spiritual discerns all things" (@1 Corinthians 2: 15).
H.H. Distinctiveness is necessary in connection with naming things in relation to the assembly. "The priest's lips should keep knowledge" (@Malachi 2: 7); priestly discernment is necessary for that.
J.T. I was thinking of things standing; it is said of Samuel that "Jehovah ... let none of his words fall to the ground" (@1 Samuel 3: 19). I am sure God would help us in ministry to be definite. We ought not to be dogmatic, but certainly judgment is necessary, and for brethren to name things as right that are right, and as wrong things that are wrong.
Ques. Is it important for us to discern the Lord's movements, that we discern whether He is in a matter? In the last chapter of John's gospel, John discerning the Lord's movements, says, "It is the Lord", and that becomes the rallying point for those who had gone astray.
A.M.H. In the end of Proverbs we get groups of four things mentioned, and lastly the features of the woman of worth in detail. Would that make room for the development of what is spiritual amongst the saints?
J.T. Quite so. As we learn how to name things we are able to name her.
Ques. Would not our ability to name things depend on the measure of our personal link with God?
J.T. The Lord says again in @John 6: 45, "They shall be all taught of God", and so the disciples serving along with the Lord would see how He spoke of things and looked at things and named them, and thus learn how to do as He did.
H.F.N. After the disciples had travelled some way along with the Lord, He tested them as to whether
{386}
they could name Him. "But ye, who do ye say that I am?" (@Matthew 16: 15).
H.E.S. God names things on the first day, and it is the first formal naming of things recorded.
H.F.N. How would you distinguish between the way the Lord names Peter in @Matthew 16 and the way that the names are given to the apostles in regard to their levitical service?
J.T. In @Matthew 16 it is a question of material for the assembly. That is the outlook, and I suppose it is always well to know what is in mind. The setting of the word "Peter" is the assembly viewed constructively, for the Lord says, "I will build", but in naming the apostles their responsibility enters into it.
Ques. Is it significant that at the end of the chapter in 2 Timothy, where the third set of those who had turned aside is given, the man of God is spoken of as complete?
J.T. Quite so: "that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work".
W.S.S. Is the thought of pleasure emphasised in the chapter? We are considering what is pleasing to God in these personal relationships; and would the apprehension of that help us in naming things according to God?
J.T. You want to be with Him. "Enoch walked with God", we get later. There would be nothing in him to intrude; he would not put anything before God that would be contrary to Him. Of Abraham, great as he was, God says, "Walk before my face, and be perfect" (@Genesis 17: 1); but he said to God, "Oh that Ishmael might live before thee!" (verse 18). Well, that would not be pleasing to God, and so, in walking with God, we have to learn what is in His mind, and that fits in with what was said as to being born of incorruptible seed, "the living and abiding word of God". We get
{387}
the mind of God, and so Adam here evidently gathered up what each creature really was as created, and named it, and God accepted it. There was nothing incongruous in the names; if there had been, God would have noted it, but He does not.
J.J. Why does the break come in at the end of verse 18?
J.T. The main thought in the passage is the helpmate for Adam. The lower creatures come in and God would have them named, but He is leading up to Adam naming the woman. That is in this sense the greatest thing in the chapter, for he had not previously seen her. The animals he may have seen, but here he has been asleep, and so it is a question now of coming up out of death.
J.J. Has it any connection with @Matthew 17, the principles of the kingdom being in support of the assembly? I thought the principles of the kingdom were brought out before Eve was actually brought on the scene.
J.T. The mount of transfiguration, you mean? So the order of the development of the truth in Acts is the kingdom first, the Lord speaking of the things connected with the kingdom of God, which mainly came out in the twelve -- in Paul, too, but the assembly was not fully brought forth in its beauty until Paul's ministry developed it.
G.M. In connection with the naming of Jesus in Matthew it says, "Thou shalt call his name Jesus", but in a later verse it says, "They shall call his name Emmanuel, which is, being interpreted, 'God with us'".
J.T. The meaning of the first is given: "for *he* shall save his people from their sins", and it identifies Him with the generation -- "of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ". But when they call Him Emmanuel, that would be the outcome of experience, a matter of realisation, God proved to be "with us".
{388}
G.M. Is it the thought of fulness?
J.T. Quite so. The final paragraph of @Genesis 2 is most glorious, that is, the working out of the mind of God in what He had formed. Eve comes in in this way, and is named. It is not now a question of divine attributes or the kingdom, but what was in the mind of God from all eternity, Christ and the assembly. Ephesians shows the full working out of this. It is a question of Man here; what is worked out from him as already created.
Eu.R. In @1 Corinthians 2: 16, "*we* have the mind of Christ" in a general way, and then, "I speak as to intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say" (@1 Corinthians 10: 15). Would that be the bringing forward of this great principle of intelligence?
J.T. Yes, and Paul later refers to himself as an example: "by which ... ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery of the Christ" (@Ephesians 3: 4); that is to show what an insight our apostle had into these things. It is what comes out of man here -- Ish and Ishshah, a question of the mind of God as to man, that is, Christ and the assembly -- the full thought.
H.F.N. Would you say more in regard to the thought of fulness that we started with?
J.T. We have the fulness of God, but next to this the assembly is the greatest thought of fulness, the woman emanating from Man.
M.W.B. And in that connection the assembly is spoken of as "the fulness of him who fills all in all" (@Ephesians 1: 23). Then, in @Ephesians 3: 19, "that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God". Would you explain a little the difference?
J.T. The assembly, of course, is what comes out of Christ, but the "fulness of God", I suppose, is not simply what He is in the covenant, but what He is as God, if one can convey the idea of God as seen in
{389}
@Genesis 1 and as running through Scripture, the fullest thought of God that we as creatures can grasp, and we are to be filled into that. It is not the covenant in Ephesians, but what God is in His counsels, and we are to be filled into the fulness of God in that way, indicating the fixed condition in which we are to be eternally.
{390}
GENERATIONS IN THE BOOK OF GENESIS (2)
@Genesis 5: 1 - 32
J.T. The generations mentioned in the book of Genesis have been mentioned, the word translated "generation" having reference to origin, and what develops from the root or basic thought. We read part of chapter 2 this morning and dwelt upon the generation -- or history -- of the heavens and the earth, to see how that chapter is the counterpart of chapter 1, indicating the idea of fulness, an idea that runs through Scripture. We dwelt at length on the idea of intelligence in Man being able to name the lower order of creatures, and then being able to name Eve, or the woman, which led us into a wide field inclusive of the epistle to the Ephesians, where intelligence is stressed, especially in him to whom the mystery of the assembly was committed, and who calls attention to himself as possessed of this great intelligence. Much was said, too, as to naming evil things, which leads us into chapters 3 and 4.
What may be said at the outset about this chapter is that it is "the book of Adam's generations", which is a more complete thought than we have in chapter 2, and enters definitely upon moral grounds rather than creatorial. On the moral line we have the thought of separation, and also of life, as over against chapter 4, which gives us a family also, but which is judged for moral reasons from the outset. Cain and his line as representative of the world are judged from the source, whereas chapter 5 stresses that Adam is retained as created, so that we have the line of life, the family of God in principle, which while taken up on moral grounds, is yet attached to the creatorial source: it is of God, as we get in the New Testament. The apostle says, "Of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus" (@1 Corinthians 1: 30), that is, of God,
{391}
whereas the world is detached from God; they did not like to retain Him in their knowledge.
What will help us to begin with is the similarity of names on both lines, which tends to confusion and calls for discrimination -- whether we meet an Enoch in the world, or an Enoch in the life line. Obviously the name, although the same literally, has a different bearing in each chapter. The same idea, that is, discipline or education, may be attached to Enoch in chapter 4 as in chapter 5, but it is a question of the stamp of the world in chapter 4, whereas in chapter 5 it is of God.
P.L. Is this moral line seen in the genealogy of Jesus in Luke's gospel -- "of Adam, of God"?
J.T. That line is through Seth to Adam. So that in christianity the line is maintained in relation to God, not simply God as revealed as Father, but God seen creatorially as in @Genesis 1 -- "For of him, and through him, and for him are all things" (@Romans 11: 36).
Ques. The writer in @Hebrews 11 selects certain who were men of faith -- is that a principle on which we move?
J.T. In that chapter we begin with God creatorially, so that faith links us with God, God in a creatorial sense -- the Creator. It is a question of His word, so that the christian is set up in intelligence as to everything, and all is traced back to God. We are maintained in relation to God, who also is an absolute Being, and this is never to be lost sight of. The moral side begins in chapter 3, and properly links on with the first history, whereas in chapter 5 we begin another, and it is a book, so we are on more definite and firmer ground.
C.A.C. I suppose the line in chapter 5 would be prominent at all periods of the divine working, and its moral characteristics would go through. I understood by your suggestion this morning that things have
{392}
the divine origin, but they move on by development to a completed issue. Is it your thought that that marks these generations as a whole?
J.T. That helps. In chapter 5 we have a book. No doubt you have that in mind, that things are on record, as it were, and preserved. The principle of a book runs through Scripture, and I believe the continuance to a full issue, involving a book, lies in the thought of life, that is, life as it is found in chapter 3. We have life in the earlier chapters, but more in the creatorial sense. Life in chapter 3 would convey the moral thought, what is living in a moral sense where death prevails, so that it is the great principle running through, and we reach fulness in finality in the book of life.
G.V.S. Enoch is spoken of as the "seventh from Adam", but in chapter 4 there is one who comes in quickly bearing the same name. Would Satan bring in what imitates God's work, but does the "seventh from Adam" suggest patient waiting for what is to be pleasing to God? In the scripture we read this morning there was no man found to till the ground. On the line of fulness are we to wait for that which will please God?
J.T. Yes, and the seventh alludes to a development through exercise. It is the seventh from Adam through Seth. The idea is in Adam, but Adam on moral grounds now, although on creatorial grounds too. That is maintained, but it is an Adam who has gone through things with God and reached the idea of life, because he calls his wife's name Eve, meaning, not simply that she was living, but "the mother of all living", the family idea of something continuing. So that we have in Adam the line maintained on moral grounds, but through life as in chapter 3, not as in chapters 1 and 2; the former in its amplification involves christianity. The Enoch of chapter 4 would be like the education of the world, as among the Greeks
{393}
and early races of mankind, the Egyptians, which had its beginning in Babel; the idea of a development in independency of God, but it is in a family. Cain began with that idea; it is a family he has in mind. The race is seen detached from its source, and under a rival influence, setting itself up with all its ability in learning and arts and sciences, and so forth. The Enoch who is the first-born of that family would mean a person educated or schooled in relation to this world. We know what schooling means in this world, without it the world would not be what it is.
F.S.M. Would the thought of the life line result finally in the Lamb's book of life, and the issue of this development be found in the holy city?
J.T. That is right. Life is the essential thing and runs through and culminates in an issue according to God. Life as seen here involves preservation, presupposing corruption, so that we have death in each case in chapter 5 except Enoch. Notwithstanding the longevity of the persons mentioned, death comes in, and in spite of this, the mind of God is reached -- in spite of death.
L.E.S. "I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of Jah. Jah hath chastened me sore; but he hath not given me over unto death" (@Psalm 118: 17, 18).
H.F.N. We have only two references in Scripture to "the book of the generations", one in connection with Adam, and the other in the beginning of Matthew: "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ". Is there a link between the two?
J.T. I think there is. @Matthew 1 corresponds with what we are speaking of as to the issue of the word "generation". However, it is on the royal line. Luke, taking the reverse way, reaches the source, but Matthew follows the matter down to a conclusion, that is, to One who will take up everything and carry it through -- being a divine Person. Matthew has in mind finality in Christ, and the assembly is the complement of that;
{394}
not that the thought of complement is opened up in Matthew, but it is in Paul's ministry. So the assembly really is the great terminus of what we are speaking of; Matthew bringing in the One who accomplishes everything.
Ques. In @Ephesians 4: 18 the apostle speaks of some who were "estranged from the life of God by reason of the ignorance which is in them". Would you say that the moral characteristics of the life of God are developed in this chapter?
J.T. It is really God's family without naming it as such. When we come to the New Testament we have two families, or lines, that is, the two seeds, as in @1 John 3, which contemplates the children of God and the children of the devil. Now, the children of God take on the characteristics of God here, and I apprehend the "life of God" in Ephesians is not His intrinsic or essential life, but what He is in a moral way, what He is as set out in Christ, so as to come within our range; and there are those who are alienated from it. Cain's line was alienated from it, consciously without it, and so he set himself up and his family: "he called the name of the city after the name of his son Enoch". The world is marked by that, and this explains the destruction of the *firstborn* in Egypt.
Ques. Was the life of God set forth in perfection in Jesus, in those moral qualities that came out in perfection in His life here?
J.T. There would be what has come in in Christ. The things are here, and so the moral element enters into it, and it begins with these chapters. There is the line of the wicked one; the Lord said, "Ye are of the devil, as your father" (@John 8: 44). John's ministry goes to the root of things, even as to the serpent as we have seen. On the other side he would work out the great principle of life.
Eu.R. Is the thought of likeness carried on here? It is referred to in connection with the creation of man, and here it says, "Adam ... begot a son in his likeness,
{395}
after his image, and called his name Seth". Is that the moral line?
J.T. That is right. It is Adam set up in a moral sense that is in mind, so that we are on moral ground here, and life is developed on that ground, as I apprehend it. Seth is Adam's image and likeness, and then Adam's naming of his son accredits him with being on the same line. Eve had said of Cain that she had "acquired a man with Jehovah", and no doubt she thought she had acquired the seed, but she missed the mark. She thought life was there, but it was not; whereas Seth says that Enoch is a dying man; death was upon him. It is the acceptance of that that shows he is formed morally, he accepts what has come in and is affected by it.
Ques. Why is there no mention of death in connection with Cain's line?
J.T. That is significant; it is not that it was not there, but God is not stressing that thought in relation to the world now. He is stressing death in relation to His people; the ministry is marked by pressing death upon us. So when God called out His people from the world into the wilderness, He set them around the tabernacle which was marked by death, for it was there constantly. It is the teaching of death that we are to learn from chapter 5. So that Seth began the thought, he recognised what his son was. Enoch was the seventh from Adam and that thought would enter into his constitution, so that he is translated, whilst fully accepting death. It is as fully accepting death that we enter into the sense of pleasing God.
P.L. Enoch can name things -- the "holy myriads;" what is of God, and then the ungodly and their ungodliness. Does that answer to what you referred to?
J.T. It is as the seventh from Adam that he speaks thus, a person who has gone through things is speaking prophetically now. It is the teaching of death in chapter 5, but ignoring death in the world in chapter 4. The former is just God's way. Death is there, and the
{396}
point is that the saints should get an understanding of what it means. In the line of Shem later we do not have the thought of death; we have the years given, the longevity of the persons, but not that they die. In this chapter it is to stress the idea of the teaching of death, which thought is taken up in Romans, Colossians, and Ephesians.
H.M.S. Mr. Darby remarked that 'Death is the principle of christianity, but its power is resurrection'.
J.T. It is in the light of resurrection that we take it in. David said that the sword of Goliath was the best obtainable, and it alludes to death.
H.F.N. Is any ministry of spiritual or permanent value in the house of God unless it leads us to face the great question of death?
J.T. That is good. Life is in view, but life out of death, and in going through it we have the sense of victory.
A.M.H. It says, "It is better to go to the house of mourning than to go to the house of feasting: in that that is the end of all men, and the living taketh it to heart" (@Ecclesiastes 7: 2).
P.H.H. Are you saying in principle that it is life out of death? Would you say a little more what you mean as to the teaching of death in this chapter?
,J.T. Enoch is the "seventh from Adam", and he represented what is in mind. He is one that does not enter into death literally, but obviously he entered into it in his spirit. That is, his name would signify he has learnt. Those who do not learn the lesson of death, do not learn from God at all, and so I think he represents the thought. We have life out of death in chapter 2; that is, the woman is out of death, but it is not a question of sin there, whereas in this chapter death is imposed as the penalty of sin, and no one is taught of God who does not accept it.
W.S.S. Is the principle suggested in @Genesis 3: 19, "For dust thou art; and unto dust shalt thou return"?
{397}
Then in verse 21 it says, "And Jehovah Elohim made Adam and his wife coats of skin, and clothed them", as if He would clothe that idea.
J.T. That is the principle -- man set up in the light of that; it is life in that sense. Adam arrived at it, but not by what he saw in the living creatures which he had named, although they were all living, nor by what he saw in himself. It is life lived on the principle of teaching or observation, hence the longevity of all these persons, and in each case some quality of God shines out. The life of God is seen, I believe, in the aggregate of these names rightly understood. It is morally the life of God, what Jesus was fully here, and that is what men are estranged from.
Ques. Does Paul touch it in that way in @2 Corinthians 1: 9, where he says, "But we ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not have our trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead"?
J.T. I doubt if he could have met the situation at Corinth effectually without that. Not that I would undertake to judge the great servant, but it is the way things are put, showing the progress of the servant, what he goes through to meet the exigencies of the service.
P.L. "So that death works in us, but life in you" (@2 Corinthians 4: 12).
J.T. Exactly. We see how far-reaching the thought is as we anticipate death in ourselves, but it is the sentence of death: "we ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves".
M.W.B. Is the moral line of the work of God seen in @2 Corinthians 5: 5, where it says, "Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God"?
J.T. That is right. I believe these names, one after another, have to do with the characteristics of the life of God, that is, seen in persons who are themselves dying -- but not all. The fact that one of them does not die
{398}
establishes the principle that life is out of death. Life is entered into through teaching, because Enoch represents the teaching as over against the world's teaching which abhors death; it puts death as far away as it can.
Ques. Is that what Agag meant, in saying, "Surely the bitterness of death is past" (@1 Samuel 15: 32)? Samuel brought the matter home to him in using the sword.
J.T. Quite so; he hewed him in pieces with the sword.
C.A.C. It is very cheering to see God conserving what is of Himself and showing that it is ultimately superior to all the power of death.
J.T. So that what is of Himself -- the life of God -- is seen in these names, that is, these characteristics taken on by persons who are learning. Seth is the exemplar; he is learning in the school of God, and he calls his son by a name that signifies he is a weak, mortal, person, and that calls forth the name of Jehovah: "Then people began to call on the name of Jehovah". God is now coming into the scene among men, in testimony, by way of what man has learnt, and so it goes on to the seventh, when you get the complete thought, and he in whom it is expressed is raptured. It is all secured above, but before Enoch goes up he tells us about the holy myriads.
A.J.G. Then why does the line go on beyond Enoch as far as Noah?
J.T. I think it is to show the result in a man who can do things in meeting conditions here below; there is no other to stem the tide of evil. With these earlier ones it is a question of learning things, but in Noah we have a man that can do things so that he was *called* Noah: "And he called his name Noah". It seems as if the Spirit of God rests on that. He rests on Seth too: Adam "called his name Seth". Eve called his name Seth in chapter 4, but it is Adam in this chapter. Attention is thus called to these, and I think Noah's
{399}
name, meaning rest, is an end reached here below. God has reached one in whom He can rest.
P.L. But the moral line and process is still preserved with him, and so the word, "the days of Noah" (@Genesis 9: 29).
J.T. Quite so; we shall come to that later, please God, and how Noah is regarded in the New Testament. But I hope we are getting the thought of learning, of being established in the great instruction that there is in death, and how God is using it now.
Rem. In @Mark 9: 31, 32, the Lord taught His disciples saying, "The Son of man is delivered into men's hands, and they shall kill him; and having been killed, after three days he shall rise again. But they understood not the saying, and feared to ask him".
J.T. That is right, and it comes into @John 6, the great chapter that presents Christ as food, as dead. He is food as having come down and laid down His life, and it is there that it says, "they shall be all taught of God" (verse 45).
W.S.S. Referring to the end of chapter 4, where it says, "Then people began to call on the name of Jehovah;" it seems to suggest that what is said at the opening of this chapter -- "This is the book of Adam's generations" -- was only possible in the light of that.
J.T. Quite so; it is on moral ground, and the names would indicate that it is progressive and culminates in this heavenly result in Enoch, and then in the result for service, for doing things, in Noah.
Eu.R. Would the water and the blood in the last chapter of the first epistle of John be the teaching side of the death of Christ? Then the witness of the Spirit; "the victory over the world, our faith;" the world lying in the wicked one, and "we are of God" -- would all that imply the two generations side by side?
J.T. Yes. Death is implied in those two elements, water and blood; that is, the Lord came in connection
{400}
with them. Death is subdivided in that sense so as to make it more a means of teaching us. The Spirit is the witness; the Spirit testifies in a teaching way, not merely in statements, but in a teaching way to all these truths. Romans is, of course, the great fundamental book in which we get the teaching of the death of Christ, and then we have it applied in a deeper way in Colossians and Ephesians.
R.O.S. The years of the lives of those mentioned in this chapter seem always to be counted after they had begotten the firstborn son. The firstborn son is "the firstfruits of my vigour", Jacob said of Reuben. Does life count from the time one has brought the firstfruits before God?
J.T. I do not think much is made of the firstborn, save to mark the time, in chapter 5. None of these men makes anything of his firstborn as building up a system. It is a question of marking the time and the experience gone through, life being there; whereas with Cain it is a family matter, making everything of the firstborn and family and building it up with the arts and sciences.
H.F.N. Would you help us in regard of the teaching of death in the three epistles, Romans, Colossians, and Ephesians? On a previous occasion we were considering the actual article of death. The Lord seems now to be calling our attention to the *teaching* of it. Would you help us as to how the teaching is developed?
J.T. It opens up in Romans to us. The teaching of it is based on baptism there, that is, our acceptance of death. It reigned, we are told, "from Adam until Moses" (@Romans 5: 14). It is not the condensation of the thought, but the extendedness of it, as corresponding with the idea of a sea, and baptism is the figure by which we accept it, and in the acceptance of it we "walk in newness of life". We are not said to be risen there, but in spite of wilderness conditions we are able to "walk in newness of life". The acceptance of the
{401}
teaching of Marah enters into this. "Newness of life" is in connection with the shining out of the Father -- "the glory of the Father" -- a very beautiful thought. "Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father" (@Romans 6: 4), not simply by the power of God, but "by the glory of the Father". The thought of the Father is introduced here in Romans to affect us, that is, God in that relation. So that "sin shall not have dominion over *you*, for ye are not under law but under grace" (@Romans 6: 14), and God in the relation of Father is the very expression of grace. You "walk in newness of life" in that light, and, of course, following on that, the Spirit is life (@Romans 8: 10), that is, life in the sense of *power*. Then, in @Colossians 2: 12, we are raised "through faith of the working of God". It is not the Father now, but a question of power. When we come to the Jordan it is a question of power, but it is the ark. Our being raised in Colossians is a matter of *faith*, not actuality; it is faith in the power of God that raised Christ. Then, in @Ephesians 2: 1, it is "being dead in your offences and sins". It is what we were, and God taking us out of it sovereignly and setting us down in heaven. In each case we have the thought of death.
P.L. In connection with this thought of the Father in @Romans 8, would you say that those who can address the Father so intimately are those who in the end of the chapter can say, "For thy sake we are put to death all the day long"? (verse 36).
J.T. It is *the* Father in chapter 6 where Christ is raised; but in chapter 8 we apprehend God as *our* Father by the Spirit of sonship. The first is a matter of grace in the main, the second a matter of family relationship.
G.M. The sentence of death having been pronounced on Adam, how is it that it is the first righteous man, Abel, that dies?
{402}
J.T. There is a man who knows how to die. It is a question of *glorifying God* in death, and normally that is how every christian dies -- whether in baptism or in actual death. What a great thing it is! Death is a penalty, but now it is faced by a man who has faith, and he glorified God in it; he is the first martyr.
G.M. Was it the type of man that God loved?
J.T. Quite so, and that man must be continued. He is continued in Seth, the man "appointed" instead of Abel, whom Cain slew. So we have the thought carried on to chapter 5 -- the moral side, death in the sense of teaching.
Ques. Is there any connection between the death of Abel and that of Stephen, the first martyr of this dispensation, who in dying called upon God?
J.T. Was ever God more glorified in death, outside of the death of Jesus, than in the death of Stephen? What glory shines! What a striking victory over death is seen in that martyr, as he kneeled down and prayed for his enemies! It is God glorified in death by a believer. What a great thing it is here that God has turned death into a means of teaching, a means of glorifying Himself, and the building up of a family with such fibre as this, so that one goes up without dying, the thing evidently verified in him! This great lesson is to be learned, gone through by us all.
L.M. He "begot sons and daughters" -- would that suggest fruitfulness?
J.T. Yes, the thought of the family, involving potential material for God.
Ques. Is the fact that "Enoch walked with God" emphasised, not so much that God walked with him? There was the apprehension on his side, that he could enter into it.
J.T. You have there the suggestion of life; he apprehended by faith what God was going on with and had part in it, this being the outcome of education. Education is a great thing with men in all countries,
{403}
but God had the means of education, from @Genesis 3 onwards, maintaining the creatorial link between Himself and Adam. It is carried on to the moral side, and the great means of education negatively is death, "so that death works in us, but life in you".
P.L. The sentence of divine government upon men in judgment, now becomes in blessing for the generation of faith, the lesson book of divine love.
J.T. I believe it is the greatest element of education in a negative way. It is carried on, of course, in the light of the positive; it is in the light of Christ risen and glorified that we learn through it. So, in the tabernacle in the wilderness, we have the great central thought of God in the ark, but all around the tabernacle was everything to remind us of death. What was it for but the education of the people of God?
J.J. In @2 Corinthians 4: 10 we have the expression "always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus". May that not be connected with @Psalm 116: 15, "Precious in the sight of Jehovah is the death of his saints"? I thought the expression from the psalm would apply morally now.
J.T. Quite so, and to take in those who sleep through Jesus. There is the idea of their going through death; it is through Him -- the idea of instrumentality -- that they fall asleep. We are to learn the lesson of death, and life shines in these men, such as Seth, Enosh, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, and Enoch. I believe their names would indicate that the life of God was shining out through death, and it culminated in one who walked with God for three hundred years. Obviously the lesson was being learnt by him. God would roll in death upon him, so that he learned and was translated; he reaches the divine thought.
Eu.R. Would it result in a person boasting in God? I was thinking of what the apostle says, "So that let no one boast in men; for all things are yours. Whether
{404}
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things coming, all are yours; and *ye* are Christ's, and Christ is God's" (@1 Corinthians 3: 21 - 23).
J.T. It would, showing what triumph there is, that, although we are as sheep appointed for slaughter, we are more than conquerors through Him that loves us. Life is working out there, but death is there, for that chapter contemplates that we are just lined up for death like sheep.
J.H.T. You referred to the tabernacle and death all around -- would that be seen in the education of the people in @Numbers 16: 41? We have the development of Cain's world in the rebellion of Korah and his company, and as they died the whole assembly murmured against Moses and Aaron, and said, "Ye have killed the people of Jehovah". Then, in chapter 17, the life line is seen -- life out of death -- in Aaron's rod that budded. Would that bring the people to this judgment that they had the sentence of death in themselves: "Lo, we expire, we perish, we all perish" (@Numbers 17: 12)? Then Jehovah emphasises the life line in @Numbers 18: 1, "Thou and thy sons and thy father's house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary".
J.T. Of course, the death of Korah's company was retributive, and the murmuring was in unbelief, but the principle was there of death and life, and what comes out is the grace in Moses and Aaron; how Aaron ran in to the congregation and stood between the dead and the living. *He* was not among the dead, but among the living, so it is according to that principle, of one having gone through the thing himself. For he and Moses went through the thing themselves; they felt what happened, and Aaron stood between the dead and the living. Then, in chapter 17, as you say, that principle is established for ever; it is established in the priesthood, and the
{405}
covenant of life is there. So that is what is needed, in that sense, in all these sorrowful things that are coming up, for while God is preserving us in a general way, there are many sorrowful things coming up, what is needed is this principle of life as in Aaron and Aaron's rod. It is in persons who are taught of God, who know the lesson learned through death applied by God, so that we go through the thing ourselves. Then, although we may not have a personal part or responsibility in it, we go through the thing and stand between the dead and the living.
P.L. "Every morning doth he bring his judgment to light" (@Zephaniah 3: 5). Would that be like the living rod taken out in the morning, after being laid up overnight before God?
J.T. In that great crisis in Israel in the wilderness the *next day* is stressed: "Even to-morrow will Jehovah make known". It was so as regards Korah and his company, and as to the rods. We go through the thing; life is in the morning.
J.C.-S. Would you think Enoch sets forth a man who has accepted death in every detail in regard of Cain's world? We are often hampered in relation to the development of life in ourselves because we have not accepted death in connection with some principle of that world.
J.T. I am sure that is right. We can see what a difference there was from his namesake in Cain's world; and even with Lemech -- we have also two Lemechs. There are forceful men in both worlds; men who do things, violent men, as the name is said to imply. How different would be the one in God's world, from the one in man's world!
M.W.B. In regard to Lemech in chapter 4, is there any allusion in verse 23 to moral recovery, or is it a vindication of his own action to preserve himself?
J.T. I think the latter part of chapter 4 includes a reference to the Jews in the last days, that is, the
{406}
world we have to do with today as developed in them later. The world in a moral sense, as spoken of in the New Testament, stood generally in relation to the Jews. "Now is the judgment of this world" (@John 12: 31), but then, the whole history of the public world is going to culminate in the Jew. I think it is God graciously keeping an eye on Cain. We have, of course, to discriminate as to the early part of the chapter which is simply man's world as estranged from God, but then, it is a type of the Jew, as you bring it down to narrow limits. God has His eye on him, and He will not allow anyone to touch him, and I suppose Lemech's remark, "For I have slain a man for my wound, and a youth for my bruise", would allude to a certain confession that the Jew will make in a day to come.
M.W.B. Is there any moral consequence in verse 25 immediately following that? The birth of Seth is referred to.
J.T. "And Adam knew his wife again, and she bore a son, and called his name Seth" -- then there is an ellipsis, according to this version, as if she said more than that. "... For God has appointed me another seed instead of Abel, because Cain has slain him". It would look as if Eve is being brought into the current of the truth, into the instruction; she is not left out. Then, in order to make the position of Seth clear in the life line, in the volume of God, Adam names him in chapter 5. I think chapter 4 brings Eve into the line of instruction; she has judged Cain, and it is happy that God brings in both Adam and Eve, in that way, on the line of learning, so that the whole matter is set out again in chapter 5.
P.H.H. It says of Eve that she bore a son, but of Adam that he begot him. Would you understand by that there is power, as it were, to sustain this life line of which you are speaking? Would Adam in
{407}
some sense represent Christ as the last Adam in this chapter?
J.T. I think that is right. In the latter we get the progenitive thought, and so in Matthew; it is what is begotten, whereas in Luke it is "of;" the source is in mind. So, Eve bore Seth and named him; Adam begot him and named him. The paternal side is the more dignified thought.
Eu.R. Is this calling on the name of Jehovah the great thought of the recovery of man? The soul can take account of what is basic and see all that God is developing for His own pleasure. So we have the name of the Lord in @2 Timothy 2, and parallel with that, the thought of "in Christ Jesus".
J.T. In chapter 5 God takes up things afresh, and so we have the sphere of operations and the life line developed in it.
P.L. Does the great assembly revival coincide with this calling on the name of Jehovah? Has the Lord deigned, in a way, to start afresh?
J.T. Yes. It is on moral ground, not simply that God has ordered the thing. Seth "called his name Enosh. Then people began to call on the name of Jehovah". That is the covenant name, as we might say; the personal link is established in their calling upon it, and that is the basis of chapter 5.
S.J.B.C. So if in Seth we have a new head, in men calling on the name of Jehovah we have a new generation.
J.T. It is the idea of the kingdom, and the life line is developed in that connection.
Ques. What is in mind in Methushelah being brought into this order of things?
J.T. He has a counterpart in Methushael of Cain's world. He is the oldest man and he runs on almost to the year of the flood, the year of judgment, but evidently saved out of it; as if he comes into the line of this chapter. His longevity, and the fact that
{408}
he does not come under the judgment of the deluge, is a testimony to God's *patience* -- a great thought in our dispensation, even as to persons who have no special traits of life.
J.J. Is there any connection between him and the passage in @Ephesians 6: 2, 3, where it says, "Honour thy father and thy mother, which is the first commandment with a promise, that it may well with thee, and that thou mayest be long-lived on the earth"? I thought perhaps he had such a good Ephesian father that he came into the blessing of that.
J.T. He certainly had an Ephesian father, but the sons of Ephesian fathers do not always do credit to their fathers. However, it is a question of God's longsuffering. He is considered for, in that he dies before the deluge; that is, he dies on the principle of the chapter, not by the direct judgment of God in the deluge, which was brought in on the world of the ungodly. It is death in a teaching sense that he came into. So this chapter is wonderful in what there is in it in the way of teaching, and the culmination of it in Enoch and Noah.
P.L. Would there be some analogy to the revival of these last days -- 2 Timothy -- calling upon the name of the Lord, and the separation of the holy seed of God, all culminating in the rapture, in Enoch?
J.T. The Lord would keep our eye on that -- the culmination of all these things. What is the thing going to end with that God has been working at all these centuries? It is going to culminate in something for His pleasure on the life line; life in persons who have been taught through death.
M.W.B. With regard to your remarks earlier about the basic thought, and then the development, and now the issue, would it be right to say that as we learn God in the development of His ways, we are morally tutored for the issue and have the features proper to it?
{409}
J.T. Yes, and Lemech coming in, according to what his name means (overthrower, or wild man), and then so deliberately naming Noah, would show the result in him too, that his character would give fulness to it. It would be that energy that lays hold of what is needed, which is a great thing, that if one cannot meet it oneself, another can.
A.M.H. Do you think the features of Methushelah and Lemech are much required at the end of the dispensation? Methushelah would suggest a people in the consciousness that the end is near, but then the answer is a forceful presentation of the truth.
J.T. That is the idea. Lemech would point to a certain energy or violence for good, culminating in peace or rest, corresponding somewhat to the Lord's statement, "the kingdom of the heavens is taken by violence, and the violent seize on it" (@Matthew 11: 12). He is able to name Noah and is very forceful about it, showing that he is an instructed man; he is saying the thing deliberately.
Ques. Have you a sample of that energy in Phinehas the priest, in the way he moves in the plains of Moab?
J.T. Exactly.
C.A.C. Does this come in with Paul speaking of himself in 2 Timothy as an apostle "according to promise of life"?
J.T. Quite so. There is energy and substance in it. It is what we are saying. He was an apostle according to it, showing that he was a man of energy, using weapons -- "the arms of our warfare are not fleshly" he says (@2 Corinthians 10: 4). He used violence in regard of all that was opposed to the knowledge of God.
C.A.C. The promise suggests divine resource that can be laid hold of in view of the testimony of life at the end.
J.T. Lemech's mention of Noah shows what such a one passes on prophetically. It strikes one forcibly
{410}
that he is a man who has learnt; he is very deliberate in what he is doing. It is not simply that he begat Noah, but he names him and gives a reason: "This one shall comfort us concerning our work and concerning the toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah has cursed". He is a deliberate, thoughtful, instructed man, and he names Noah, and so we have the basis of the next chapters. Noah is a man that does things, but the result of what he does is what Lemech has in mind. Lemech, according to the meaning of his name, was a violent man who would strike through a thing, but it is with a view to this end, to bring in rest and peace among the people of God. Then he has a sense of the judgment of God upon the world, and now there is a man who can go over. How much that is needed!
M.W.B. His very age is suggestive -- seven hundred and seventy-seven.
{411}
GENERATIONS IN THE BOOK OF GENESIS (3)
@Genesis 6: 9 - 22; @Genesis 8: 18 - 22; @Genesis 10: 1
J.T. This section of our subject, for the sake of intelligibility, will need to be divided into two parts. Noah will have to be regarded by himself as the head of a new order of things, according to what he was personally. Then, secondly, in relation to his sons, as blessed with them at the beginning of chapter 9. Then, chapter 10, showing the generations of his sons by themselves, the latter bringing the subject down to the earth as we know it and peopled as it is *now*. The first part of the subject is the more important, because it opens up personal qualities in Noah, and a covenant made with him; God confiding in him, and a covenant made with him on that account.
The references to Noah in the New Testament are significant, particularly as to the number eight, Peter alluding twice to him under that head, also as a "preacher of righteousness", and our Lord alluding to him and his days -- "the days of Noe" (@Matthew 24: 37). Then the writer to the Hebrews brings him before us in relation to his house, and as a builder, also as "heir of the righteousness which is according to faith". The suggestion is that he and his family represent the idea of a number sufficient for any given enterprise, an idea that runs through Scripture. God has his number, in Noah's case a very small number called "few", but sufficient for the undertaking on hand.
So that the deliberate statement of his father, which we noted yesterday, is significant, that is, "he called his name Noah, saying, This one shall comfort us concerning our work and concerning the toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah has cursed". It implies the idea of agricultural toil. The reference to him in our first scripture -- "This is the
{412}
history of Noah" -- is to bring out first of all what he was; "a just man, perfect amongst his generations: Noah walked with God". We have another word introduced here and translated "generations" which would embrace his family connections, so that he was a man of influence. The first word denotes his origin, and what we may expect to be developed out of him, but the second what he was in a practical way. So that, as he represents those whom God uses to do things, he had those moral qualities, what he was amongst his immediate circle.
A.M.H. "Perfect amongst his generations" -- is that a kind of local setting? It makes room for development, for use in a universal way; he brings the whole company through.
J.T. I think so; it is what one is amongst those immediately connected with him and known to him, and one establishes what he is with God in that way -- well reported of, like Timothy. It suggests what is needed in those God would use, commendable, one well reported of among the brethren.
P.L. Does this follow the allusion in @Luke 4: "of Adam, of God", and then would you link up this second reference: "perfect amongst his generations", with the anointed Vessel in the synagogue at Nazareth?
J.T. Quite so, the Lord starting out there; one begins with what one is locally. There could be nothing at all added to the Lord's qualities and manner at Nazareth and yet no result appears, and so with Noah. It is to bring out the perfection of the testimony, though unavailing, to show the conditions under which he had to minister.
H.H. Would it stand in contrast to the corrupt state of things in the earlier part of the chapter -- the sons of God and the daughters of men? Here we have a man "perfect in his generations".
{413}
J.T. That is the thought, and the public testimony is through him, but the soil was so hard, there was no result. It was no less than the Spirit of Christ in him, in which Spirit, it says, "going he preached to the spirits which are in prison, heretofore disobedient, when the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah" (@1 Peter 3: 19, 20).
A.J.G. Does the fact of a perfect testimony without result provide the moral justification for the judgment?
J.T. That is good. There is no question, the state of the earth was corrupt. We are told that God looked down upon it: "And the earth was corrupt before God, and the earth was full of violence. And God looked upon the earth, and behold, it was corrupt". It is to establish the facts without question, and then we have this testimony brought in in such a vessel, one evidently so disciplined and taught in keeping with chapter 5, that he is a vessel for the Spirit of Christ. It is no less than that, and brings out the real point in service, that it is a question of the Spirit of Christ and our being qualified for that, capable of His acting in us.
H.F.N. Reference has been made to 2 Timothy, and the apostle's expression: "according to promise of life;" would what follows in that epistle bear upon this? Paul refers to the thought of a "pure conscience", and then to the generations. Would Noah bring out the great feature of purity in the generation?
J.T. That is very instructive, and shows how the testimony comes down to us. There are four generations -- Paul, Timothy, those he would teach, and others also, the idea of four conveying the universal character of it. I suppose we may humbly come in in the fourth -- "others also". The personal qualities of Noah are outstanding, and deserve particular consideration in view of what was to be done. It is a question of persons who can do things for God and whom God can trust and commit Himself to; so that, from the moral point of view, it is most important to see the generations of
{414}
Noah, and what we are to learn in his history -- from the man personally. As recorded, he finishes his service in blessing. He lived a very long time after the flood, but there is no service recorded of him after chapter 9. The comfort is that he is in the list in @Hebrews 11, and it says, "All these died in faith;" so we may safely keep him before us in this inquiry. God would show him as one He could trust in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. Although the results may be small, yet there is the testimony to which God attaches great importance.
W.W. Is that the reason why in @Luke 4: 24 the Lord says, "No prophet is acceptable in his own country"? That is on account of the soil.
J.T. Yes, because nature is so liable to assert itself in those near to you, those to whom you belong naturally.
Eu.R. Would Romans 14: 18 bear on this a little? "For he that in this serves the Christ is acceptable to God and approved of men". The Spirit of Christ was in Noah, and if we are to be in accord with Him who grew in favour with God and men, we are to be filled with the fruit of the Spirit: "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". There is power available for each one on that line.
J.T. Quite so. One point in service is not to antagonise people. If the testimony antagonises them, of course we cannot avoid it, but all else should be kept out of view, because the testimony is to men. "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation" (@Mark 16: 15). That is to say, the objects of the testimony are those who are abstractly in relation with God, over whom God has rights, and I have no doubt that enters into Noah's character; he was "perfect amongst his generations".
H.M.S. Is it because of Noah's faithful testimony as a preacher of righteousness that he is put together with Daniel and Job in @Ezekiel 14: 14 -- "these three men"?
{415}
J.T. Men who served, as you might say, in an isolated way -- Noah, Daniel, and Job, isolated witnesses, each in his own sphere.
J.T.S. Do we get anything corresponding with this in the passage in @Isaiah 49: 4, 26 -- Jehovah speaking of His servant, and then the hardness of the soil, in the fact that He has to say, "I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought and in vain"? Then, at the end of the chapter: "And all flesh shall know that I, Jehovah, am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer".
J.T. That is a feature of the Lord's testimony, corresponding with Noah, that there was no result. It says "they are like the deaf adder which stoppeth her ear; Which doth not hearken to the voice of enchanters, of one charming ever so wisely" (@Psalm 58: 4, 5). The Lord experienced that; it was His Spirit that was in Noah, and then He Himself experienced the same thing. It is an important matter today, because the soil has become similar, and it is more and more difficult to get any results. Those who are working know that, but we are to take on these qualities, and not be irritated or discouraged; as it is said of the Lord in @Isaiah 42: 4: "He shall not faint nor be in haste".
Ques. Would you think that Noah's testimony was more what he was in himself than what he did in building the ark?
J.T. That a man is more than what he does is a sort of axiom we may accept. It is a question of the man first, and then what he does. So Noah is said to have been moved with fear; that is, he was a pious man. Whilst he was the depository of God's mind, he feared God. He would be immune from the judgment, but still he feared God, and "prepared an ark for the saving of his house" (@Hebrews 11: 7). We have now the household thought brought in.
A.M.H. Would the element of fear help us in preaching? Paul says, "Knowing therefore the terror
{416}
of the Lord we persuade men" (@2 Corinthians 5: 11). Do you think we want that in our hearts?
J.T. You show to men how you regard God. Even although we know Him in Christ, He is to be feared. "Let us serve God acceptably with reverence and fear" (@Hebrews 12: 28). You bear witness to what a man should be in his attitude towards God. So that Joseph, in speaking to his ten brethren, said, "I fear God" (@Genesis 42: 18).
A.N. Do you think that thought is seen in the apostle when he says to the Corinthians, "Thanks be to God, who always leads us in triumph in the Christ, and makes manifest the odour of his knowledge through us in every place. For we are a sweet odour of Christ to God, in the saved and in those that perish: to the one an odour from death unto death, but to the others an odour from life unto life" (@2 Corinthians 2: 14 - 16)? I thought perhaps that would bear out what was seen in Noah -- a sweet savour to God. It was not to be measured by success or non-success; *he* was a sweet savour to God.
J.T. Even in non-success he was a savour, in those that perish as well as those that are saved. That is a great principle begun here -- what was for the nostrils of God in the service..
F.C.H. Do @Psalm 91 and @Psalm 92 help in this matter? The frailty of man, and death, we see in @Psalm 90, and then the man in @Psalm 91 who is preserved against everything that happens around him, satisfied with length of days. Then, @Psalm 92 is 'A Psalm, a Song, for the Sabbath day', speaking of the savour of rest in Noah.
J.T. That is helpful. One develops in that section into "a green olive-tree in the house of God", "still vigorous in old age, they are full of sap and green" (@Psalm 92: 14). @Psalm 90 is the acceptance of the conditions and makes room for God.
F.C.H. It supposes the "work of our hands" (verse 17).
{417}
Ques. Does Noah's service in this way bring before us one of the most onerous kinds of service, standing for the rights of God without outward support? I was wondering whether the word in @Jeremiah 1: 17 would bear upon it. God says, "Thou, therefore, gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I shall command thee: be not dismayed at them, lest I cause thee to be dismayed before them". Is that the kind of service you have in mind that God is raising up for today?
J.T. Noah's service was a great undertaking, and the man qualified for it develops out of the education of chapter 5, the school of God, and chapter 6 gives us his qualities. The number of his sons is given in chapter 5, as if they were essential to what was in the mind of God, showing how much a man's house enters into the service. Then, what he was in his generations, and, in order that we may have a clearer view, the New Testament tells us that he was a preacher of righteousness, and that he was moved with fear, and prepared an ark for the saving of his house.
P.L. In a spiritual way is Paul's ministry also accredited in his sons, such as Timothy, Titus, and Onesimus? Does he bring them forward?
J.T. He does; it is the idea of the generation of a man in the sense in which we are speaking of it, how his sons may be essential, whether naturally or spiritually, because there are the three witnesses. Three is a full testimony that what he is extends out in that way.
J.S.E. Would you say just one word as to the bearing of the covenant in chapter 6?
J.T. The first thing is that God would set out something. It is really the first covenant in Scripture. The prophet Hosea alludes to @Genesis 2 in applying the covenant, but it was a forbidding one which Adam transgressed. The idea of covenant is God entering
{418}
into relation with us, confiding in us as worthy of being in such a relation with Him. The first thing here is that we have a man accredited, and God says to him, "With thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt go into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons¬ wives with thee". It is "*with thee* will I establish my covenant;" but in chapter 9 we have a much more extended idea of the covenant and the sign of it. It is not only with Noah and his sons, but with the animals and the earth itself; but here the man is accredited. One of the most touching things is that God enters into a covenant with any one. It is a secret understanding, and I doubt if any servant is of much value until he knows what that word really means, in the bearing of it. It is a secret understanding with God, so that you know how the matter stands, how you are with God, and one begins with the sense of what he is to God. Noah belongs to chapter 5, to that school and family. It is a chapter really of glory, the persons yielding to God. Noah belongs to all that. Enoch is not entrusted with anything; he does indeed prophesy, but there is no special link with him as to any service. He represents another thing; he represents the teaching, but Noah is a development for a purpose; God having him in mind and his three sons. Now he is on easy terms with God, because if one is not on easy terms with God, in the sense of who God is, and how one is in Christ before Him, one is apt to be legal and exacting, and to fail in rightly presenting God in ministry. I think God would encourage every one of us to be on intimate terms with Him secretly, so that we have liberty in regard of God, and if you want anything, do not give Him rest, as the prophet says (@Isaiah 62: 7), until it is granted. One has to be on very easy terms with God to approach Him in that way, but God loves that aspect; yet in all that, we serve Him with reverence and godly fear. Noah feared Him; he was "moved with
{419}
fear", but particularly with regard to his house, and so he "prepared an ark for the saving of his house".
E.J.McB. Do you not think it would give him great comfort, in the midst of a preaching that seemed to have no effect, to have this covenant relation with God and the promise of its effect on his own household?
J.T. You would speak feelingly -- as all of us fathers would -- that if we are on easy terms with God, our fears very largely refer to our houses, and in a wider sense to the assembly, as to what may happen. So that as his own relations with God are settled, he is in perfect liberty with God; he can go in at any time and does, yet his anxieties remain, for he has to do with a wide sphere, whether his own house or descendants, or particularly the house of God.
H.F.N. Is that why the great levitical chapter -- @2 Corinthians 4 -- is preceded by the opening up of the spirit of the covenant? Is that to put the levite on these easy terms with God?
J.T. In that chapter the apostle says that he had confidence: "I have believed, therefore have I spoken" (@2 Corinthians 4: 13).
H.M.S. And in the next chapter the apostle speaks of the "terror of the Lord". Would that be similar to being moved with fear? Noah prepared an ark for the saving of his house.
J.T. "Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men;" he would convey to men what terror really is, what form it should take in their hearts. One anticipates the thing, and even although his relations with God are settled, he is still here and in danger, and he conveys to others in his service the reverence that is due to God.
Eu.R. In @Deuteronomy 29: 27 - 29 it says in regard of Jehovah, "And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against this land, to bring upon it all the curse that is written in this book; and Jehovah rooted them out of their land in anger, and in fury, and in great
{420}
indignation, and cast them into another land, as it appears this day. The hidden things belong to Jehovah our God; but the revealed ones are ours and our children's for ever, to do all the words of this law". Would that correspond, that in spite of these solemn warnings we are to have hope in relation to our children continuing in the testimony as governed by the covenant?
J.T. So that fear is quite compatible with confidence and assurance as to your house, and as to the testimony.
M.W.B. Is so much said as to Noah's moral condition and exercises, because he had to do with a scene of confusion and carry over what was of God out of it?
J.T. To carry all that is of God through the judgment; what a man is needed for that! So that God prepares those who serve in view of what is needed. He knows what is needed, and the discipline, the learning as in chapter 5, is in view of what is needed. Enoch's education and experience fitted him for translation, but he would not be equal to Noah's service. Yet Noah was fitted in the same school for a great undertaking.
M.W.B. Is the non-success that has been referred to, as a sweet odour in Corinthians, in like manner seen here? God said, "The end of all flesh is come before me". The removal was pleasurable to God, as well as the extrication of those who were to be brought over.
J.T. They were a remnant really, and their number is given -- eight -- but it is a question now of a flood on the world of the ungodly. It is not death as seen in the school (chapter 5), but for destruction. Death is brought into the school as an element of teaching, but when death is brought in on the world of the ungodly it is a different matter; it is not a question of teaching then, but destruction. Well, how is a man to go
{421}
through that? It is as he learns in the school; he is taught to do with death in the school.
Ques. Does he take on the Spirit of Christ, as seen in Hebrews, when it says, "Who in the days of his flesh, having offered up both supplications and entreaties to him who was able to save him out of death, with strong crying and tears; (and having been heard because of his piety;)" (@Hebrews 5: 7)?
J.T. How the Lord graciously links on with us in that! He is classed with the pious; He was heard because of His piety.
Ques. With regard to the covenant with ourselves, does Paul illustrate it for us when he says, "whose I am and whom I serve"?
J.T. Quite so. The ark Noah built enters into the covenant made with him. The covenant is usually that God enters into relations with us -- not for evil but for good; and so the ark was essential to it. First we have the direction as to the ark, and then God said, "But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt go into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons¬ wives with thee. And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee: they shall be male and female. Of fowl after their kind, and of the cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the ground after its kind, two of each shall go in to thee, to keep them alive. And take thou of all food that is eaten, and gather it to thee, that it may he for food for thee and for them". Then we are told in the next chapter that the creatures came unto Noah into the ark. All is directed to *thee* and to *Noah*. God has taken him on for a great matter and would have him in liberty with Himself morally, and now He is calculating for him in every respect: as if God said, 'I am going to make Noah head of a new order of things, a world I have in mind, and so he must be assured of My confidence in him'.
{422}
Rem. "With him" is the characteristic word of chapter 7, as in verse 23, "and what was with him".
J.T. I would like to say a little more about "with him", for servants are apt to be too isolated and think too much of what happens, instead of what they bring to men. In connection with the shipwreck in @Acts 27: 24, it is said, "God has granted to thee all those that sail with thee". That is, God thinks of you and your exercises and desires for the saints, and those exercises and desires usually enter into one's prayers. Our prayers are governed by our desires, and if one is large enough to include the whole area of God's interests on earth, what a man he would be for God! You ask in that relation, and so you find that things are done according to what you desire. It may take time, but it will happen; God will never forget your prayers, however wide they go.
M.W.B. Even if it takes time it is no loss of time to spend it in prayer.
J.T. just so, and time enters into what God is doing. The time may be long or short, and God measures time. He it is that has inaugurated time, and He used time first, too. So we must not be discouraged if things seem long and apparently delayed, because God is in the delay, and something is being formed. It is all in relation to you, if you have been praying about it. Chapter 5 is the great school chapter and death is prominent in it, and who knows what preceded what we are speaking of in Noah?
Eu.R. So those who sail with Paul will reach land.
J.T. "All those that sail with thee:" what agonies must have marked them in that ship!
Ques. Does this come to light in connection with Moses? It says in @Exodus 6: 9 that the people "did not listen to Moses from anguish of spirit", and then in that chapter prominence is given to Moses and Aaron, as it is said, "this is that Moses and Aaron".
{423}
Then later Jehovah says to Moses in the day that He sent him, "I am Jehovah".
J.T. Quite so. What agonies Moses and Aaron must have had in view of the attitude of the children of Israel at first! But in due course they get influence, and God acted with them. So there is a steady expansion in a servant's outlook as he is with God. God works with him, and says, 'All this is in relation to you'. But then he is carrying out the testimony of God all the time, and it all fits perfectly into the divine scheme.
P.L. It is seen in its perfection in the Lord in Mark's gospel; His groans, and the scene in Gethsemane emphasising His agony; then going up to the right hand of God finally, and the word going out to every creature.
J.T. How wide is the prayer in @John 17 immediately before His death! How it extends down to our own time! -- so that the circle ever widens. Christianity is the answer to the Lord's own prayer -- ever widening.
W.J. Does the name of Noah's last son indicate to him the light of what God would do, bringing in enlargement?
J.T. It is in mind to have the names of the sons of Noah under review. Japheth undoubtedly has in view the assembly; that is to say, christianity, particularly in these last days, in the great spreading out of the European countries, and in all of them, thank God, there has generally been an opening for the gospel. I suppose Japheth was the eldest son. J. N. D. regards him so. We shall come to Shem later, not as related to the other two sons, but by himself, for Shem is the line of blessing.
F.S.M. With regard to the character of Noah's service, it says four times that he did as "Jehovah had commanded him". Does obedience enter into this feature of service? I was thinking of the word of Paul in regard to Archippus, "Take heed to the ministry
{424}
which thou hast received in the Lord, to the end that thou fulfil it" (@Colossians 4: 17). Noah seemed to pursue in obedience to the commandment of Jehovah until he had accomplished all that He had commanded him, and that was a very strong feature in the salvation of his house.
J.T. I am glad you have brought that in, because servants are apt to take a great deal of latitude. In connection with the great servants, Paul and Barnabas, when sent out on their first mission, it is said, that they fulfilled it: "the work which they had fulfilled" (@Acts 14: 26). They did not go beyond it and they were not behind. It is a great point as to service that we are governed by the will of God, for after all, the matter is more to Him than to us, and nothing is ever gained by taking licence. Christendom is an evidence of taking licence.
Ques. Do we see that with Philip? At a time when he was very successful in service he heeded the voice of the Spirit, and went down to the desert to one man?
J.T. That is an excellent illustration of it, and I am sure it is a point of the last importance for any seeking to serve the Lord, that we do not take licence, or think that we can do better than what is the will of God.
H.P.W. Is that why the exact measurements of the ark are given?
J.T. Yes. God is a God of measure, and Paul makes a point of that; he was governed by measure in his service. It was a measure that went as far as the Corinthians, whereas there were others without that measure, taking on another man's line of things. So that @Romans 12: 3 is, in this sense, what is to govern the servant: "as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". I should have faith, that is my side, but God deals to each a *measure* of faith.
C.A.C. Is this the working out in a practical way of the power of life?
{425}
J.T. You mean that life is in Noah, but regulated by this principle of measurement and commandment?
C.A.C. Yes, and life in the sense of power to carry out what is the will of God in relation to His testimony.
J.T. So that life is another element that enters into what we are speaking of. The ark is replete with life in great variety. Romans treats of life as potentiality or power: "the Spirit life on account of righteousness" (@Romans 8: 10).
C.A.C. I wondered whether you had in mind that there was progressive spiritual instruction in these different generations.
J.T. I hope we shall see that. There are ten specific generations in the book, and the teaching is undoubtedly constructive. In chapter 2 we have the great general thought of fulness before sin came in, culminating in the assembly in type. Then, sin having come in, we have the moral question taken up, and in "the book of Adam's generations" we have life developed and death used to make room for it. That is, God showing, in the book of life, as it may he called -- for it is that -- how life goes through in the school, and that it is developed as life should be. Whether in plant life, or life in the lower creatures, or in human life, it should be developed under control and tuition. That being established in chapter 5 and God glorified -- for it is there we get the splendour of God and refinement, how it works out in His own -- we see the traits of life in His people effected through discipline. Enoch, the seventh from Adam, takes on the whole thought in the chapter, being seen as made fit for heaven.
A.M.H. Do you refer to Mahalaleel in speaking of the splendour of God?
J.T. Yes. What a thought that is! And what an incentive to us to be in the school of God and let death have its full force upon us as used of God in
{426}
discipline. So His glory shines out in His people, and then a man is developed out of that who is able to do things, able to go through a great crisis successfully and in power.
C.A.C. And to carry all that is for the pleasure of God through the darkest possible time.
J.T. With little encouragement from those whom he would serve. One can understand how patiently Noah would serve his fellow men all that time. He had been trained for it, so that he carried on, I suppose, during all the time he was building the ark. It must have been under great reproach, and he had no outward success, but there was moral success. What growth there must have been there! If he was not attractive to his fellow men, he became the centre of attraction for the lower creation; all the creatures were attracted, for it is mentioned that they came to him; there was a link between him and them.
P.L. Do you get the idea with the Lord in His rejection? "I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me" (@John 12: 32).
J.T. Quite so. When the dove came back to the ark, Scripture says, "he ... brought her to him into the ark;" there was a link between them. It was a feature of life. Then there is the great feature of the house in what Noah built on the principle of the covenant, with the consequent relations with God in the whole matter; the ark was for the saving of his house. What experience there was in all this! and surely it is written for us as in the Lord's service.
G.V.S. "Take thou of all food that is eaten, and gather it to thee, that it may be for food for thee and for them". Would that show that nothing was to be impaired, but everything sustained?
J.T. Yes. The whole realm of life is sustained: "for thee and for them". You have a secret understanding with God and all this is going on in that relation,
{427}
but it is working out the counsels of God, too, His own thoughts.
Ques. In @Matthew 5: 1, 2 it says that the Lord "went up into the mountain, and having sat down, his disciples came to him; and, having opened his mouth, he taught them". Would that be in line with this?
J.T. Matthew has that in mind.
J.J. Would you say something about the number eight?
J.T. It has its place, as already said, being significantly alluded to by Peter, who treats of the government of God and what goes over. Enoch represents the complete exercise of chapter 5, qualifying for heaven. He is the seventh from Adam, that is the complete result of the exercise, and Noah goes over; this would be involved in the numeral eight. I think Peter has in mind what is beyond christianity; his second epistle particularly treats of what is beyond, and that is the idea of eight -- what goes beyond for God.
Eu.R. Would Enoch in that way fit in with 1 Thessalonians, preparing us for the rapture, and Noah with 2 Thessalonians, the "love of the truth", receiving instruction, and then the prayer in the first verse of chapter 3, with a view to the word of the Lord being glorified?
J.T. 2 Thessalonians contemplates the rise of antichrist, and it is a question of our getting the benefit of something we shall not have to go through; we surely ought to get the benefit of the teaching. "For the mystery of lawlessness already works; only there is he who restrains now until he be gone, and then the lawless one shall be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall consume with the breath of his mouth, and shall annul by the appearing of his coming" (@2 Thessalonians 2: 7, 8). Surely it is for us as teaching, and I think Peter's epistles are to teach us, that we may get the benefit of the whole range of the government of God.
P.L. So the expression, "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience", to Philadelphia, would cover
{428}
the instruction, and then, "I also will keep thee out of the hour of trial which is about to come upon the whole habitable world", would be the assurance of our escaping from the actual circumstances.
J.T. We are entitled to believe that promise -- that we are to be kept out of the hour of trial.
G.M. With regard to your remark as to a servant not taking licence, had you any particular thing in mind that we are in danger of in the way of licence today?
J.T. It was a general remark. You know how in earlier days there was a class of men called evangelists as over against teachers, and how it developed into a school, as we might say, and culminated sorrowfully some twenty-nine years ago. That sorrowful history was the outcome of the disregard of the mind of God expressed by His servants from time to time in the ears of those very men; they refused to listen. It is not exactly that there are such dangers now. Whatever dangers there may be, there are levitical principles to meet them which the Lord has made clear. Scripture is precise as to them, and transgression of those principles will bring about disaster. I am certain of that. That is what we get here. We have the God of measure and we have commandments here which Noah did not transgress; he did what he was told to do. So, when he is to go out of the ark, Scripture says, "God spoke to Noah, saying, Go out of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons¬ wives with thee. Bring forth with thee every animal which is with thee, of all flesh, fowl as well as cattle, and all the creeping things which creep on the earth, that they may swarm on the earth, and may be fruitful and multiply on the earth. And Noah went out, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons¬ wives with him. All the animals, all the creeping things, and all the fowl -- everything that moves on the earth, after their kinds, went out of the ark". Things were done exactly under
{429}
the commandment of the Lord. Although he had already determined that the waters had dried up, Noah did not move of himself; it was a question of God and His directions. God would have us move together, and the ark represents the varied features of life housed and carried through. That is the position, but how can we safely undertake going through, without submission to the commandments of the Lord? "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", the Lord said (@John 14: 21).
Ques. In that connection, would there be any significance in the fact that the Lord speaks of Noah by name as many as forty times in these chapters?
J.T. That is interesting; where you have the constant recurrence of a name of this kind in Scripture surely the Spirit of God has pleasure in it. Another thing we ought to notice in Genesis is the idea of blessing -- it begins in chapter 1 and frequently recurs throughout this book. It is a book of covenant, and God's mind is favourable in every connection. Why should the effect of the blessing be nullified? Surely it is the will of God. God's disposition is blessing in full result.
J.J. Do "seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night", come in in that way?
J.T. Yes. Timothy was taken up in relation to prophecy given before, and then the laying on of the hands of the elderhood, and then by the apostle's own hand; so he was wonderfully marked off and well known. Now, is he answering to it? Noah is answering to his name, so it says, "And Noah built an altar to Jehovah; and took of every clean animal, and of all clean fowl, and offered up burnt-offerings on the altar. And Jehovah smelled the sweet odour. And Jehovah said in his heart, I will no more henceforth curse the ground on account of Man, for the thought of Man's heart is evil from his youth; and I will no more smite every living thing, as I have done.
{430}
Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". All is founded on Noah's offerings as answering to his ministry. He was already marked off prophetically by his father, God takes him on, and now the new world is based on what comes out in him.
Ques. Does Peter, in the last chapter of the second epistle, bring in the thought of the eighth day, when he says, "Waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of God, by reason of which the heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements, burning with heat, shall melt? But, according to his promise, we wait for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness" (@2 Peter 3: 12, 13)?
J.T. Yes, showing what his ministry is, and how significantly he brings in the number eight in relation to the days of Noah in both epistles.
P.H.H. Noah had no commandment to build this altar. Does it show a spontaneous answer in the man himself?
J.T. It is the idea of fulness that we began with and which runs through Scripture. There is no commandment for it, but it entirely answers to the mind of God. "Jehovah smelled the sweet odour" -- how glorious that is! It is entirely in keeping with the whole tenor of Noah's ministry.
J.C.-S. You have referred several times to the idea of a secret understanding with the Lord in our service. How do you account for a man who acquires a certain place amongst the saints falling out and becoming antagonistic to the testimony? Has he gone beyond the thought of the God of measure?
J.T. Clearly; and he has got out of hand. In taking up Moses, Jehovah said, "What is that in thy hand?" It was a staff, and God said, "Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent" (@Exodus 4: 2, 3). It was out of hand; it was as
{431}
much as to say, 'If you get out of My hand, you will get into the hand of the devil'. We may begin well, but if we get out of the Lord's hand, if we disregard the commandments and limitations that belong to our service, we shall come under the power of the devil.
Rem. So God shut Noah in, and let him out.
J.T. There was pleasure to God in the new world in connection with the sweet savour of Noah's offering, the establishment of a world fixed on such foundations.
A.S.L. Moses was enjoined to make all the things according to the pattern shown to him on the mount.
J.T. That is an important word; it conveys an elevated thought.
W.S.S. Doing things according to the pattern and the commandment is one side, but the Lord would bring in the preservative principle into our souls. Noah might have taken credit for this result, but he gives glory to God in his altar.
J.T. The altar always implies unselfishness.
H.F.N. Why does this instruction as to the altar end with the bringing in of the seasons?
J.T. I think they imply discipline, that in the new order of things we have discipline. The first great thought is seed time; that has positive blessing in mind in the way of results, the harvest being the counterpart of the seed time. That is, impressions received from God in the soul as seed, have the harvest in mind. The next thing is cold, which would be discipline, I think: "cold and heat". It will be noticed that the terms are reversed when they are named. Summer is the name we give to heat, and winter is the name we give to cold. Both summer and winter have significant places throughout Scripture, and alternating, they imply that discipline enters into the results of seed-sowing. Then we have day and night, that is, experience with God. One's day would be experience, like the days of the years of the lives of Jacob and his fathers (@Genesis 47: 9).
{432}
GENERATIONS IN THE BOOK OF GENESIS (4)
@Genesis 11: 10 - 32
J.T. We were unable to take up the second division of our subject this morning, namely, "the generations of the sons of Noah". The spiritual significance of this section is not so deep and extensive as what was before us this morning, but it has a place in view of the gospel. We noted the number of Noah's family, eight including himself, which the Spirit of God mentions in the New Testament, but the three sons have a place separately as entering on the new world. Amidst the confusion of the race the Spirit of God keeps the three branches in mind throughout, and it is to be noted that in the beginning of chapter 9 Noah and his sons are blessed together. That chapter has to be taken in that light; it is a chapter of blessing. The sons are viewed in conjunction with their father, and the chapter closes with blessing by Noah himself. The covenant is established in that chapter, and a sign attached to it, which sign runs through and has to be taken into account in the proclamation of the glad tidings. For it involves the reconciliation of the world provisionally or, at least, the favourable relations of God in Christ with man in view of the gospel. The family of Japheth particularly, as entering into the section, is more specially in mind in the gospel as we have it, and which the apostle Paul calls "my gospel".
We have first Japheth, and then Ham, and finally Shem in chapter 10. On account of the elimination of God from the mind of man, and the building of the tower of Babel and the city, we have Shem separately in chapter 11, with a view to Abraham and the line of promise. Then we have Terah, filling out the generations of Shem, as having three sons, just as Noah had three. In both lines, that is, in the "book of Adam's generations" and the "generations of Shem",
{433}
we have a culmination in one man begetting three sons. The first three developing into the world as we have it, and the family of Terah representing the line of blessing. Those two lines run together, but the numeral three governs both positions, and indeed has a great place in the book of Genesis. That in general is the line to follow in this reading.
The position in chapter 9 is to be particularly noted. It is a chapter of magisterial government, introduced conjointly with the use of animals to be slain for food, and agricultural industry, in connection with which Noah fails. Notwithstanding his failure, he holds the ground for blessing and is able to bless. All that necessarily is carried down in some sense in the sign of the covenant, and ought to govern us in our public testimony, because it denotes the favour of God whatever has happened.
C.A.C. Is that secured on the line of moral suitability in Noah? "Thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation" (@Genesis 7: 1).
J.T. Quite so. What you suggest links on with the question asked this morning as to why he is called a preacher of righteousness. He is the only man referred to in Scripture as righteous at that time; and being a righteous man, he could preach righteousness, so that the position right down, whilst the earth remains, is to be affected by what is in chapter 9, developed out of what Noah was personally. Preaching righteousness arises from one being righteous; what you preach is a proved thing. Righteousness is always scarce, and there is great need of it now amongst the brethren. It should characterise the man who preaches it. Of course, it emanates from God, but He does not impute righteousness until you come to Abraham. In Noah's case it was what the man was, but the idea of imputed righteousness is a great thought as following upon God's favourable attitude towards the world. What is preached is known -- experienced -- proved.
{434}
G.V.S. The writer of the Hebrews says that Noah "became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith" (@Hebrews 11: 7). What bearing would that have upon it?
J.T. Of course it was there already in Abel. The principle thus preceded Noah, but heirship of it would include also the great thought which came out in Abraham. It is the idea of righteousness *imputed* on the ground of faith, and that is what comes out in Abraham; his faith was reckoned to him as righteousness. It is, as we may say, God's righteousness which "shall look down from the heavens" (@Psalm 85: 11).
M.W.B. Is the position in chapter 9 somewhat akin to the righteous One of John's epistle: "Jesus Christ the righteous"? You spoke of the attitude of God as being favourable towards the world; we have propitiation in John's epistle.
J.T. The bearing of it is for the whole world.
M.W.B. I was wondering if that was the distinction between chapter 9 and what you have spoken of as imputed righteousness on the principle of faith.
J.T. The righteousness of Noah is clearly personal: "thee have I seen righteous before me". It is what he was, but he "became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith". He had faith, of course, and personal righteousness would be the outcome of it, and he preached what he experienced. If Abraham preached, he would preach righteousness imputed on the obedience of faith, which is unfolded in Romans.
Now chapter 9, as based on Noah's sacrifice, is the ground of God's relations with the world publicly. "While the earth remaineth", it says. The sons are seen as related to their father; they are blessed with him, and the covenant is made; it is witnessed in the rainbow, and it continues, and enters into what was said, that the world is in reconciliation. Abraham, of course, would take up that thought because he was
{435}
made "heir of the world", and he would be affected by that in his relations with the nations, so that he prayed for them. God said to Abimelech, "He is a prophet, and will pray for thee" (@Genesis 20: 7). His relations with the nations would be affected by the fact that he was heir of the world. Then, the sons of Noah are taken account of by themselves, and we see that in the great departure they get out of hand and hence we have the world in a moral sense as away from God. They are, however, taken account of under the head of generations, first Japheth, then Ham, and then Shem. I suppose the order is according to their birth. Although Shem *seems* to be the eldest, chapter 10 is the order by which they were known, Shem coming last. That is, he has not the first place in the public world, but he has in the spiritual. He is said to be "the brother of Japheth the elder" (@Genesis 10: 21), as if Japheth had that place, that men were giving it to him on the principle that he that is born after the flesh has the leading place, as we get with Ishmael and Esau. Thus the spiritual line comes in last.
H.F.N. Can we link it up in any way with what comes out in the Acts in regard to the three great representatives of these families?
J.T. I think so. Ham became despised, of course, the curse entering into his family, that is on Canaan, and he is taken up first in the eunuch; and then Saul representing Shem; and the centurion, Cornelius, representing Japheth. That is the order, and we have to follow what God does. When we get Japheth and Shem together it would be the Spirit of God taking account of things as they are publicly regarded. But Shem being taken account of separately and having a generation, or history, of his own, culminating in Abraham, we are on another line. That is the line we really want to get on to, the line that goes through in life and glory. What is regarded publicly is in chapter 10 but what is in chapter 11, the generations of
{436}
Shem and Terah, is the line leading into the purpose of God.
P.L. Do these two thoughts find expression in @Psalm 105: 12 - 15? "When they were a few men in number, of small account, and strangers in it. And they went from nation to nation, from one kingdom to another people". Is that the presentation of the line of blessing publicly in reproach, as in chapter 10? Then does chapter 11, where the generations of Shem are set apart, bring us to the expression in verse 15 of that Psalm: "Touch not mine anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm"?
J.T. Quite so, and the "father of all the sons of Eber" is mentioned in a public setting. They would be the ones under reproach, I apprehend, the ones who would become small outwardly, but cared for by God; as in Psalm 105, those in outward power are notified that God's chosen ones are under His protection, and that they have an intercessory place with Him.
P.L. Then the next Psalm says, "That I may see the prosperity of thy chosen ones" (@Psalm 106: 5). Would that bring in the line of blessing as in chapter 11?
J.T. Just so: "thy chosen ones", that is, Abraham and his family. Terah is important, compared with Noah. Noah at the end of chapter 5 and Terah at the end of chapter 11 branching out into three. Then we have, not only the sons of Terah, but daughters, that is, suitable wives for those who are chosen, the principle of brothers and sisters, a very important advance on anything we have had. So that it is the family of faith, but the family of spiritual relationships, also marital relationships which God can bless; for this, a husband is to be a brother and a wife a sister spiritually.
F.S.M. Has the scripture in @Deuteronomy 32: 8, 9 any bearing on what has been said as to Psalm 105? "When the Most High assigned to the nations their inheritance, When he separated the sons of Adam, He set the bounds of the peoples According to the number of the children
{437}
of Israel. For Jehovah's portion is his people; Jacob the lot of his inheritance". Is that the governing principle on which these developments were taking place?
J.T. That is an important scripture as entering into what we are saying. We have now come to the parting of the ways. The sons of Noah are taken account of by themselves and they get out of hand, and that necessitated God beginning over again on the principle of call, so that there is a separation. The sons of Eber being accredited to Shem in the public position is to bring out how reduction begins. So that they are a few people and of no account, whereas Japheth had the place of the elder. He was of account, and is of account today: so the position is unchanged, for in the name of Peleg, one of the sons of Eber (signifying 'passing over' ), we have reference to *division*.
Ques. Would you say a word on the introduction of magisterial authority, which would seem to be maintained as long as God and His rights are recognised? Is that a principle we should go on?
J.T. That is the ground we should take; it is observed right through Scripture. In the psalm which has been cited, God says, "Touch not mine anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm". That is the position of the saints, on the line of blessing, on the line of Shem. The allusion in the Psalm, of course, is to chapter 20 of this book, where God says to Abimelech in regard of Abraham: "He is a prophet, and will pray for thee". Well, that has to be maintained; we have the mind of God and we pray for the authorities, whoever and whatever they are.
J.S.E. Would you say a little more about the inferiority of this side in connection with what has gone before?
J.T. Though I referred this morning to the inferiority of the second part of our subject, yet it has an important place, and should be understood by those who serve, that is, the general position of the sons of Noah
{438}
taken account of by themselves. They are not thus taken account of in chapter 9. Japheth and Shem are blessed by their father at the end of that chapter, particularly Shem. It is said of him, "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem, and let Canaan be his bondman". Note "the God of Shem". The blessing is based on his refusing to expose the nakedness of his father -- a very important matter; he looked in another direction. In chapter 10 the three sons and their generations are viewed as by themselves. Although their father still lived on for many years, and we cannot but assume that he exercised influence for good, they are viewed by themselves and they get out of hand. The proposal to build a city and a tower shows the state that had developed amongst them. It is not on the same level as we saw in relation to Noah, but then, we have that level reached in Shem, because Jehovah is his God; the link is with him. "Jehovah, the God of Shem" links strikingly with what is so stressed later -- "the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob".
J.S.E. Do you mean by that, that in Shem, God on the line of sovereignty goes back to His original thoughts?
J.T. Yes. The link of the testimony is renewed in the verses we have read, but God does not pass by the public position, and this ought to be in our minds always in our service, because God regards it -- the sign of the covenant as to it still remains.
W.M.B. Would Paul's address at Athens, speaking of the "boundaries of their dwelling" (@Acts 17: 26), be in line with what you are saying?
J.T. Yes, and in the ordering of the nations God had Israel as a centre. It was a smallness that developed, a smallness of quantity, but of intrinsic worth; greatness of *quality* is the thing now in the line of Shem.
P.L. So that the kingdom of Nimrod and the city of Babel belong to those who have got out of hand.
{439}
The man of faith waits for a city whose builder and maker is God, and seeks a heavenly country.
J.T. That is the position exactly, so Nimrod is the typical man in the public position. His name alludes to rebellion.
Eu.R. Do we see the bearing of this on one who serves, in Saul in the first verse of @Acts 13? He comes in at the end of the list there. Then later he carries through and takes the name Paul, being little, and we have Paul and his company. Then at Corinth he links on with Aquila and Priscilla -- would that be more the spiritual relationship?
J.T. Quite so. The first is the great spiritual characteristic of those who are serving. He is mentioned last, but he soon acquires the first place -- "Paul and his company". In the second reference, at the beginning of @Acts 18, he works with his hands. The more spiritual we are, the more ready we are to work with our hands; and he identifies himself with the industrial class at Corinth. He is descending indeed. The idea had already come in in Genesis 5, Jared signifies a 'descender', and he enters into the life line. God is glorified as we go down, and it is not our time for being glorious publicly. As we go down in the sense in which we are speaking, we go up morally, corresponding with @Philippians 2.
Ques. Does the final parable of Balaam in @Numbers 24: 18 show the triumph of the line of life? "Israel will do valiantly".
J.T. Amalek had the first place, representing the flesh peculiarly, "first of the nations", and Balaam sees him thus, but Israel is to do valiantly. A star is to arise, a glorious prospect for those who are outwardly little now and despised.
W.C. Do we get the thought of intrinsic worth in the reference to "Sheba, and Ophir, and Havilah" (@Genesis 10: 29), linking on with chapter 2: "the gold of that land is good"?
{440}
J.T. Quite so; we can see how that would apply.
F.C.H. Would you say a word as to the blessing in connection with Shem? It says, "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem". It is more than Shem himself. Is it that God is to have a portion?
J.T. Just so. Jehovah is blessed, that is, it is blessing applied to God as from us; but Shem is also blessed.
P.L. You get Shem's seed setting out in verse 30. "Their dwelling was from Mesha, as one goes to Sephar, the eastern mountain". Is that "we rejoice in hope of the glory of God", the idea of the sun rising?
J.T. The right rendering undoubtedly in the next chapter, verse 2, is that those about to build Babel were journeying westward: "they journeyed from the east" when they started to build the city, whereas the land of Shem according to what we have here is eastward. Japheth is westward.
P.L. And is the thought of "the eastern mountain" the idea of the glory secured in divine stability as distinct from the tinsel and passing glory of Babylon?
J.T. "The eastern mountain" is an idea of prospect; it is toward the rising sun. The setting sun is never a suggestion of a glorious prospect, it is the opposite. Faith, of course, expects a setting sun to rise, and looks for it, and so the face is always towards the sun-rising. Hence in Romans "we rejoice in hope of the glory of God", but it is on the principle of faith. So what we have had in chapter 10 is the general thought, and I believe the importance of it is for those serving particularly to understand God's relations with the creation, how they are fixed on the principle of sacrifice. In announcing the gospel we are to "go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation" (@Mark 16: 15). God is already in relation with it on the principle of covenant, but then that does not touch the question of call. Whereas, when we come to chapter 11, where we have the generations of Shem by himself,
{441}
and his offspring Terah, we are on the line of the call, the call of Abraham, so that the history of Abraham necessarily is in mind in the generations of Shem and Terah.
W.S.S. The generations of Shem come immediately after the reference to Babel. There seem to be two great divisions here, the sons of Noah after the flood, and the generations of Shem after Babel.
J.T. I think the generations of Shem given separately are the outcome of the attempt of the sons of Noah, as presented in chapter 10, to undertake to build a city and a tower, which meant independence of God. That is, they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, and so He takes up Shem again, according to the prophecy as to him preceding. Although Shem had his part in the undertaking, God takes him up again as in His mind, according to Noah's blessing. He is Shem's God, and takes him up, and gives us the history so that we may understand what comes out in Abraham. We do not get the generations of Abraham; the next we get is that of Ishmael to show the negative side, but the history of Abraham is in mind peculiarly in all this.
M.W.B. Why do we not get the generations of Abraham? We have it of Jacob, as going on in Joseph, but nothing distinct as to Abraham.
J.T. I think the reason is, that he represents the heavenly side or position. In type as well as in faith and outlook he is the heavenly man. Thus, although personally coming under the generations of Terah, Abraham is, as a type at least, outside the range of generations. When we come to Ishmael, Isaac, Esau, and Jacob, we need to have their generations. The Spirit of God regards them as necessary, as lines running through which should be known, but Abraham is outstanding in another sense, for indeed it is he who is specially in mind in @Hebrews 11. As called out, he belongs to heaven; he is the heavenly man.
{442}
M.W.B. I was wondering whether it was a fuller thought. He was a heavenly man, whereas Jacob as a generation relates to God's ways on the earth.
J.T. Yes; Isaac, of course, although the heavenly man, bears on Jacob and the testimony on earth. He stands in relation to the testimony, typically in relation to Christ glorified and the assembly united to Him in Israel's place *here*. We must get that history. But Abraham's history is, as it were, in heaven; his name is written there.
Eu.R. He heads the generation in @Matthew 1.
J.T. It is on the royal line there. It is not his generation. It is Jesus, "the generation of Jesus Christ". Abraham's is written in heaven, he is known there, and the more we understand the heavenly, the more we shall understand Abraham. It seems that he is honoured; although the great head of the family of faith, he is not brought down to the level of these generations.
H.F.N. Could you help us a little in regard of the great truth of the calling in regard of Abraham?
J.T. The generations of Shem lead up to that. God would say, as it were, to any learner of the inspired narrative, These are the antecedents of this great family. So that we have brothers and sisters in view of the household of faith, so that what is of heaven is down here. Sarah was Abraham's half-sister, and so he calls her sister. Then, from the same family, we have Rebecca and the sisters Leah and Rachel. I think it is to regulate us as to the household of faith.
Ques. What is to be learned from the fact that one of them dies before the face of his father? Is that on the reducing line in regard to Abraham?
J.T. It would be, but he leaves a son, Lot, who links on with Abraham. All this is under divine ordering to bring out what is in the divine mind. So we must have Lot who represents an element in all this.
P.L. So this sojourning family, as it proved to be, composed of brothers and sisters, is in contrast to verse
{443}
18 of chapter 10: "And afterwards the families of the Canaanites spread themselves abroad".
J.T. Just so. That is a mark of man after the flesh, represented in the Philistines, who "spread themselves", whereas the principle of reduction goes with the family of faith.
C.C.E. Have you any thought of the moral meaning of the shortening of the ages of these men after the flood?
J.T. I think it is in view of reduction. It is not now death pressed upon men as in chapter 5. We have the greatest longevity in chapter 5, but death is there -- "... and he died ... and he died". That is carried through even with Noah after the flood: "and he died", but then we have the end of that. Now what comes out is the *cutting short* of human life, but death not mentioned; it is that the lives are shorter and shorter. That helps I think as to the gospel, so that Moses comments on it and brings it down to what we experience now: "The days of our years are threescore years and ten" (@Psalm 90: 10). It is not so much that we die, but that our days on the earth are short. No matter what you go in for here, how quickly you have to leave it. The point is not that we die, but we do not live very long.
J.S.E. Why is Terah singled out here as dying?
J.T. The point is that he died in *Haran* -- where he died; meaning that he did not die in the place of his nativity. That is, he was of the class of those who journeyed, who went out. Not that he is said to have had faith, but he went out and took his family with him.
J.S.E. Is the account of his dying to give us, in our minds, a link with the life line in chapter 5?
J.T. I do not think so; it is rather *where* he died; he was one of those who went over. Of course, Abraham died, and Isaac died; they are spoken of thus as a matter of history, but it is not now death as a matter of
{444}
teaching, but that your life is very short and you may as well accept it. Children are encouraged in Ephesians that their days may be long on the earth; that would hardly fit in chapter 5, for there the lesson is death. Terah has the character of one who went out, but did not go all the way. He died in Haran. Stephen says of Abraham, "after his father died, he removed him into this land in which *ye* now dwell" (@Acts 7: 4). So Terah has not the full status of a pilgrim; he did not fully go on that line.
H.M.S. With regard to the generations of our Lord, to which reference has been made in @Matthew 1, why do we have that question in @Isaiah 53: 8, "Who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living"?
J.T. I suppose that would allude to His manhood as here in flesh and blood: it was unique and His cutting off terminated it; the prophetic eye saw no continuance of it in a generation. His life is taken from the earth -- you cannot make it a subject of chronology, it is out of that range.
D.L.H. "His life is taken from the earth" -- does that not refer to resurrection? The thought seems to be that He is risen, and consequently you cannot account for any generation from Him as viewed here in flesh and blood.
J.T. Yes; His being cut off is stressed. He is taken out of the line of generation in that sense -- in the ordinary prophetic sense He had no generation. In truth, viewed as here "according to flesh", He was absolutely alone -- there was no one like Him, nor shall there ever be. He Himself has ceased to be in that condition. There is no continuance of it. The point made is that He was cut off from the land of the living, from the earth, to which ordinary generations belonged.
Eu.R. Are chapters 10 and 11 a little like, "But that which is spiritual was not first, but that which is
{445}
natural, then that which is spiritual" (@1 Corinthians 15: 46)? Would the brevity of life tend to induce us to go in for that which is spiritual and find our life in that which will never come under death?
J.T. That is the thought; we are prepared for eternal life really. The shortness and uncertainty of ordinary human life tend to enhance the thought of eternal life and direct us to it -- to "lay hold of what is really life".
Ques. Would @Psalm 102: 24 help us here, where it says, "My God, take me not away in the midst of my days! ... Thy years are from generation to generation"?
J.T. Quite so; the Lord felt being cut off early, but the divine voice to Him is: "Thy years are from generation to generation". This asserts His deity. Personally, He was not limited to time. This shortening of human life, running down to Moses, is to be taken account of, and it helps us in the gospel.
Ques. Would you be in any way restricted in your evangelical activities in the last days of the dispensation when apostasy has set in?
J.T. Well, we have to take account of the vessel in which the light is, of course, and actually we are necessarily more limited now than they were at the beginning on account of the breakdown of the vessel in which the light is. The candlestick as owned of God is lost, although responsibility as to it remains. We should take note of the reduction of human life, and how God in all this is taking account of Shem. He is the God of Shem, and He is reminding us that our life is not in what we possess in this world. The man in @Luke 12: 19 says to his soul, "Soul, thou hast much good things laid by for many years; repose thyself, eat, drink, be merry". He had plenty, but God says, "Fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee". That is a word which enters into this. God is reminding us in the generation of Shem that our prospects are not in
{446}
this life. The years are gradually dwindling, and one man dies before his father, so that things are very uncertain. We are to be prepared for the gospel as set forth in one man, and we have the idea, at this juncture, of the Scriptures preaching, saying to Abraham: "In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed". It is the blessing of Abraham now, and the shortening of the days would help us. In chapter 5 death was rolled in upon men and helped them, but now it is the shortening of our days. We have the idea of an organised world after the flood, nations with prospects, glory attaching to each nation. Well, what is the good of it all? It is only a few years and we are gone, and so God is calling out a man and setting up things in him on the principle of life out of death. It is the gospel, so that the gospel was preached to Abraham.
M.W.B. Do you think there is a special link between the shortening of the days and the idea of the call, in view of the heavenly position that is taken up?
J.T. That is the thought in mind. If I have only a few years, what does it matter, because my life is elsewhere.
M.W.B. Would it be right to class Abraham with the "partakers of the heavenly calling" (@Hebrews 3: 1)?
J.T. Typically, that is particularly in mind. They went out not knowing where they were going and looked for a city whose builder and maker was God. You see that things are dwindling here, and that human life is shortening, and the idea is to get hold of the new thought, the heavenly: "Wherefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a city" (@Hebrews 11: 16). Now He was Shem's God, but then Shem had part in the public world, so it is a question of the line that is in Shem: "God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God". It is on moral ground.
{447}
P.L. What operates in gracious instruction in chapter 5 is helping us through governmental circumstances at this point.
J.T. That is the idea. Moses puts it into the form of a prayer, and brings down human life within a very small compass. One day men are flourishing, the next day they are gone. What is it all? he says. That is the idea, and we are enjoined "to number our days, that we may acquire a wise heart" (@Psalm 90: 12). Then Moses goes on to God showing Himself, and letting His work appear, and establishing the work of our hands. That is God returning -- "Return, Jehovah:" he says -- God returning in resurrection and establishing another order of things.
Rem. Stephen accepted in a definite way the shortening of his days, he fixed his eyes on heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus.
J.T. Quite so. That is very beautiful.
J.T.S. In connection with the preaching in @Ecclesiastes 12: 1, is it striking that it says, "Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth", and then you have the conclusion of the whole matter at the end of the chapter. Is that to be in mind in the preaching of the gospel?
J.T. That is an excellent text. The writer gives a description of man when he gets old. The young are mentioned first, but we become old, and the description he gives of the feelings of old men and women is remarkable, and should be noted. He says, "(for man goeth to his age-long home, and the mourners go about the streets;) -- before the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be shattered at the fountain, or the wheel be broken at the cistern" (@Ecclesiastes 12: 5, 6). That is God in mercy gradually bringing men down, preparing them for actual death. The book of Ecclesiastes helps us in this respect, and is intended to help in the gospel. One is speaking about the gospel, for the apostle in @Galatians 3: 8 says that
{448}
the gospel was preached to Abraham. What comes out in Abraham is the basis of the gospel, you might say.
F.S.M. Would it mean deliverance from an organised world? The liberated soul walks in the path of faith, and that should be taken up at the earliest possible moment in view of the brevity of life.
J.T. It should be kept before one in preaching, with a view to reaching man. Of course, men are afraid of death, but prospects in this world is the great element the enemy uses. It is deliverance from the "present evil world". How men are held by the world, and how they become inflated by money and the like.
M.W.B. Would you say a further word on the introduction of the wives, the sisters?
J.T. It is important to keep them in mind in view of the household of faith. You see how the Spirit of God brings them in in chapter 22. As soon as we have Christ in type seen as risen, we have Rebecca brought in. It says, "And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she also has borne sons to thy brother Nahor; ... (And Bethuel begot Rebecca)" (@Genesis 22: 20 - 23). It is significant that the sisters are brought in here in the light of the assembly. The household of faith is built up in relation to kindred, not strangers but kindred; that is, we are all christians, and it is only on that line that young people reach the idea of the assembly. It is a question of kindred, being of the same family.
L.E.S. Do you think @2 Corinthians 6: 17, 18 would have a bearing on this? "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not what is unclean, and *I* will receive you; and I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty".
{449}
J.T. That is good. Your mind is on "sons and daughters", not simply sons, but that we have sisters. So Paul speaks of taking round a sister as wife (@1 Corinthians 9: 5). One can understand how he would have the assembly in mind. It comes in on the line of family relationship.
H.F.N. Do we have the same principle in the Song of Songs in the reference to the sister as well as the bride?
J.T. Exactly; that book helps us on this line.
P.L. So @Romans 16 begins with "Phoebe, our sister", and a number of brothers and sisters are mentioned, and then finally the thought of the mystery is alluded to.
J.J. Why does it say that Sarai was barren in this connection?
J.T. That is another element there. God knows that, too; He needs to show what He can do with a barren person. It is to bring out His almightiness. As has been mentioned, "Come out from the midst of them ... and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty". Well, God can come in for that barren wife, but how much more important it is spiritually. It is a question of the power of God.
H.F.N. "He maketh the barren woman to keep house, as a joyful mother of sons" (@Psalm 113: 9).
J.T. How many come in on the line of such, as Sarah herself, and Rebecca, and Rachel and Hannah. So God needed that, and He ordered it that His power should be displayed in that tender, touching way, making "the barren woman to keep house, as a joyful mother of sons;" as much as to say, the very barrenness helps, for it is disastrous to have a family without housekeeping. It is an occasion for God to come in. What seems to be disaster shows how God can come in in His love.
Ques. Would you apply that to a locality where this barrenness is felt?
{450}
J.T. Yes. It is intended to encourage us. What seems impossible, God can do.
H.M.S. How would you explain the difference between having children and keeping house?
J.T. It just alludes spiritually to the way things are done in local gatherings. Very often gatherings do not grow because there is no housekeeping. If there is to be continuation according to God, there must be housekeeping which is seen in assembly order. What is stressed in the epistles to the Corinthians is that things are to be in order. God is the God of order, and if His order is maintained He gives children. He is the Almighty; He gave children to Sarah, and to Rebecca, and to Rachel, and to Hannah, and so in the Psalm, He makes "the barren woman to keep house, as a joyful mother of sons". God does that; He does it through ministry. He would press it upon us, as the apostle does to the Corinthians, that things must be in order. Then we have the children -- "a joyful mother of sons;" we have joy in the young ones coming in amongst us.
Ques. Do we see this principle in connection with the woman of worth in @Proverbs 31: 27, 28? "She surveyeth the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness. Her children rise up and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her".
J.T. That is a beautiful picture of proper housekeeping.
Eu.R. Does it help in regard to brothers and sisters, that in the naming of the distinctions in connection with the new man in @Colossians 3, it does not say neither male nor female? Does that leave room for spiritual affections to take shape in brothers and sisters alike?
J.T. Quite so; the new man is seen in a sister as well as in a brother. It is not, however, a new woman; it is a new man, there is only one new man; it is a
{451}
question of character; there "Christ is everything, and in all" (@Colossians 3: 11).
J.J. Does he bring the idea into @Galatians 4: 27 for that reason, where it is written, "Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break out and cry, thou that travailest not; because the children of the desolate are more numerous than those of her that has a husband"? Were those housekeeping conditions absent in Galatia, and is that why the apostle brings this in there?
J.T. The allusion is to Jerusalem, that she has more children now than when she had a husband. All christians are accredited to her, but much else, of course, is said elsewhere to qualify this, including the instructions to Corinth.
H.H. I was wondering about your remark as to having lost the candlestick.
J.T. We cannot ignore that. It is not spoken of after Ephesus. From Thyatira onwards, we are in remnant times, and we have to accept limitations in our public testimony, which, of course, would cut across what is called missionary enterprise. The position in all that is really out of hand, and those engaged in it are not subject to the mind of God revealed in relation to these facts. The Lord says to Philadelphia, "I have set before thee an opened door" -- one suited to the moment -- "which no one can shut".
Well, I hope the brethren have been able to follow a little as to this lesson. It really takes us to the threshold of Abraham viewed as a called one, a pilgrim, a heavenly man, and then the development in testimony in Rebecca, that is, the assembly related to Christ in heaven.
P.L. Does not each of the generations involving distinctive blessing, chapters 5 and 11 respectively culminate in the heavenly side of the truth, the first in Enoch and the second in Abraham?
J.T. It is as if God would lead us to that point; He is leading many sons to glory. All else is subservient
{452}
to that; so that in principle Enoch and Abraham have part in that.
P.L. Does that throw a backward lustre on all the operations that lead up to this point?
J.T. Just so, and all the development on the earth, as we shall see in the history of Jacob, has it also in the background. It is a question of the heavenly company known here.
C.A.C. Does that glorify the sovereignty of God particularly?
J.T. That is a beautiful thought, opening up much; for, after all, it must be that. All that happens brings us back to that. It is what God does sovereignly, so that Ephesians is the great culmination of all the teaching. "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (@Ephesians 1: 3). In the greatness of His counsels He has taken us out of a state of death and "made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus" (@Ephesians 2: 6). We have come to that in this reading, and in the two readings to follow we should consider the generations of Isaac, and then those of Jacob; those of Ishmael and Esau coming in on the negative side. Their histories are also given and it is well to understand them.
{453}
GENERATIONS IN THE BOOK OF GENESIS (5)
@Genesis 25: 12 - 23; @Genesis 26: 1 - 6; @Genesis 27: 26 - 29, 37 - 40
J.T. The generations of Ishmael need not occupy us long, but they have a place in the ways of God as affecting His people. What is particularly before us is Isaac: "the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son". The passages read bring before us Isaac as intended to be understood by God's people, not simply as the heavenly man, but as a type of Christ having to do with the whole dispensation -- christianity, as we speak of it. It was pointed out yesterday that Abraham was characteristically the heavenly man, he being mainly in mind in the allusion in @Hebrews 11 to those who went out, not knowing whither they went, and sought a heavenly country. God prepared a city for the heavenly ones; Abraham looked for it, one whose builder and maker is God. That is, his mind was spiritual, his outlook and expectations were spiritual and heavenly. Isaac, although generally regarded as representing Christ as the heavenly man, should rather be viewed as Christ in heaven *in relation to the testimony here*, as it is known in christianity. Rebecca is clearly a type of the assembly as taking another's place as the bride of Isaac; he leads her "into his mother Sarah's tent". Then, what comes out in chapter 26 shows that he is not only a type of Christ personally, but a type of the responsible element in the dispensation, and viewed as such, has to be guided from the divine side. Not manifesting the same exercises and desires as Abraham, God looks after him from His own side, keeping him where he should be, in the land. Chapter 27 shows a certain weakness from this point of view, nevertheless he is able to bless; blessing, according to @Hebrews 11, both Jacob and Esau, so as to stress the thought of blessing throughout our dispensation. I just mention this so that, as following the scriptures, we may be guided aright. It is important
{454}
for us to keep clearly in view that Abraham is the heavenly man characteristically, not only as preserved by God, but as evidenced from his general exercises, outlook, and desires, and his concern as to Isaac, as seen in chapter 24, as to what must be the lineage of the wife to be sought for him.
P.L. Would there be a downward grade in regard to the sons of Ishmael, as disclosed in their names, in contrast to the upward grade of chapter 5, issuing in Enoch? Nebaioth suggests self-exaltation, Kedar, black skin.
J.T. That all may be regarded as instructive and helpful. There is the idea of administrative ability in these generations -- twelve princes. God, respecting Abraham, gave Ishmael a good start in that sense, but what you point out shows that decline marked his descendants, and whilst he dwelt before his brethren, as it says, it was in relation to territory bearing on Egypt and Assyria.
H.F.N. What would Ishmael represent in regard to what you are speaking of as to generations? What would he suggest in contrast to the great thought in Isaac?
J.T. Well, it is the source and outcome of his history; the people of God should know what they have to contend with in him. We know something of it in our own experience. We have to trace back the elements we have to contend with -- whether it be Rome, or the Establishment as in this country, or other religious denominations. In order to understand them aright we have to trace them from their sources. God intends His people to be observant and to have an understanding of what is current around us, so as to pursue our way intelligently in dealing with each element. We know how the Ishmaelites bought Joseph; they were *that* class, dealing in men as chattels.
A.M.H. What would be the difference between Ishmael and Japheth? You spoke yesterday of Japheth
{455}
as spreading abroad. Is Ishmael more a concentrated form of what is not on the line on which God is working?
J.T. Yes. I think these generations of Ishmael and Esau are, as it were, what is near to us, being outwardly related. Paganism is far off, but there is that which is near to us by profession. Japheth is the public world in its leading feature, related of course to Shem and Ham, and we have to discern what God governmentally wrought in him, that is, in the western world as preparing external conditions for the gospel, and for the calling out of the assembly. It began, of course, with Shem, but it is developed under Paul among the nations of Japheth. We ought to be conversant with these things from the scriptural point of view. Ishmael began as a persecutor of him who was born after the Spirit, and you cannot expect much else from him. As under his father's roof he was a persecutor, and when he gets out of hand, he is spoken of as "a wild-ass of a man, his hand against every man, and every mans hand against him; and he shall dwell before the face of all his brethren" (@Genesis 16: 12). You cannot expect much else from him; he is not wishing to get away from the brethren: he settled before the face of all his brethren.
Ques. Was Ishmael the fruit of unbelief in Abraham?
J.T. Clearly, and in Sarah particularly. He was brought in as a contrivance, even after God had assured Abraham that He would give him a true seed.
A.M.P. Would the expression "from the beginning" in @John 8: 44 bear on this? There were those who spoke of their father Abraham, but the Lord speaks of their father the devil, and says he was a murdered from the beginning.
J.T. I think that helps. John deals with both lines, what was from the beginning both as regards good and evil. The Lord is first presented there as existent "in the beginning". In the gospel it is, "In the
{456}
beginning was the Word" (@John 1: 1), but in the epistle it is, "That which was from the beginning" (@1 John 1: 1), and it is said there, "from the beginning the devil sins". God has helped us in getting back to the source of things, which is really a great fundamental feature. The brazen serpent is sin judged not only in man, but from its source -- the devil.
H.H. How far back does "the beginning" go in John's epistle?
J.T. It is the beginning of Christ here on earth, His incarnation, I would say, in a general way, as John presents it: "And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us". What is said in the epistle includes what the apostles saw in Him as risen -- particularly this, I believe.
E.J.McB. Do you consider Adam to represent the great basic principles of God established, and then Noah bringing to pass what is universal on the earth, and now we are dealing with what comes to light in a people called to a heavenly position?
J.T. That is it exactly, so that as we had yesterday, the generations of Shem are in view of a people called out, and the generations of Terah leading up to Abraham. The call was before Terah moved, Terah taking on the character of a pilgrim, going forth out of Ur to go into Canaan. The call was not to him, but to Abraham, and in Abraham allowing Terah to take him and the rest of his family to Haran, we see how, although called, he took on what proved extraneous. So we have a Lot, and yet God turns all into account. Terah, Lot, and Ishmael cannot be regarded as subjects of the call of God, but related to the called one, and resulting really from unbelief. Anticipating our dispensation, all are regarded and treated in grace, and the most possible made of them.
P.L. And calculated, even in their opposition, to bring into lustre manhood in its heavenly character.
J.T. Isaac is the product answering to the mind of
{457}
God, and that is the way he is to be taken account of. He is "Abraham's son", not one of his sons; the others are ignored, because generally they are the product of the flesh. Ishmael is said to be his son, but with the qualification that Hagar bore him. "These are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son;" the Spirit of God would keep him clearly in view.
Rem. So it is "Abraham begot Isaac". Of Ishmael, it is said, "whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's bondwoman, bore to Abraham".
J.T. Quite so. God takes account of these elements that are brought in, in spite of the fact that they are the outcome of the flesh; He does not repudiate them, He makes the most of them. That is another thing to be observed. It is one of the features worked out in this book in view of christianity, that God makes the most of what there is. Ishmael was Abraham's son, and Lot was his nephew, and then, as we were seeing yesterday, the sisterhood is brought to light in the family of Nahor, the son of Terah. We must not overlook that God makes the most of what there is, even although it be the outcome of the flesh, in its relation to those who are called. Hence Esau is blessed too, notwithstanding his character; he is Isaac's son and blessed "concerning things to come", not only present things, but things to come, showing that God maintains His own point of view and makes the most of what is in the sphere of profession.
P.L. You get it in @Romans 9: 3, 4 in regard of Israel "according to flesh;" "whose is the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the law-giving, and the service, and the promises".
J.T. That is the idea exactly.
J.C.-S. In speaking of these generations as near relatives, had you in mind the false systems which have grown up in the bosom of christianity, and adopted its things, but we have to trace them back to the beginning or origin, and name them?
{458}
J.T. Yes. Apostolic succession is claimed by some, but that can be easily repudiated; that is not from the beginning. There is nothing of the kind in Scripture -- and many other like things. So the greatest systems around us are overthrown in that way. But then, there is that which is from the beginning, and is regarded as having links with Abraham, as it were, and God makes the most of them, and we must make the most of them.
Ques. How would you regard Abraham's desire that Ishmael might live before Him?
J.T. It was more a selfish desire, and yet God heard him in regard of it. It is the thought of the predominance of grace.
H.E.S. I think you spoke of what was heavenly characteristically, and what was heavenly in regard of the testimony; would you kindly develop that a little?
J.T. There is that which is heavenly, as you might say, officially. Isaac represents that, but he does not represent much that is substantial. As a type, of course, he represents Christ personally, particularly in chapters 22 and 24, but when we come to chapters 25, 26, and 27 we are more on the line of what he is officially, and how God would keep the heavenly side in view as much as possible. So He directs him not to go out of Canaan, but dwell in that land even although the Philistines were there. That is to maintain the heavenly side officially, so to speak, as we see in the Acts in Paul's ministry principally. In Abraham we have heavenly substance; there is more formation. He is alluded to in the New Testament in that way. He went out not knowing whither he went, and he might have returned with others if he wished, "but now they seek a better, that is, a heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a city" (@Hebrews 11: 16). That is how I think we should arrive at what Abraham represents.
{459}
C.A.C. Do you think we might be on the Isaac line without rising to the Abraham line?
J.T. Yes. Abraham is the characteristically heavenly man, and God had in mind that Isaac should continue that. You are struck with the external influences in regard of Isaac, both on the part of Abraham and God Himself. How concerned Abraham was that he should not leave the land, and that his wife should be of his own kindred. That was all from Abraham's side, not from Isaac's side. It is to bring out the Fatherhood of God really, for I think, in treating of Abraham, we see that God in the Trinity had to do with him. I mean figuratively, but really substantially, for Jehovah Himself came with two others -- three men came to him at Mamre. So we have the great idea of the Deity appearing in relation to Abraham under the figure of the three Persons. The Trinity, I believe, comes out here in order to bring out this dispensation -- first in Abraham, then in Isaac, and then in Jacob. The thought of God is in the Father; the Son and the Holy Spirit entering into it, and standing in relation to it. The great thought of fatherhood is stressed in this book, so that God as Father dominates this dispensation. I have thought over it, and am convinced it is right. It lends great substance to these chapters as having christianity in mind; that which should continue, taking its character from the Father: "to us there is one God, the Father" (@1 Corinthians 8: 6).
Ques. Is that why in chapter 18 Jehovah says, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing"?
J.T. That is the thought; he stands out there as visited. According to chapter 17, he had had a beautiful conversation, and Jehovah said, "It is I". That is, God speaks to him on personal grounds and enters into covenant with him in relation to circumcision, that the relations between Himself and Abraham are to be, not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. "And he left off talking with him; and God went up from Abraham;" and Abraham carries out the injunctions in regard to circumcision
{460}
fully. All the males in his house are circumcised, Ishmael included. Then God, as honouring that, comes in, as I believe, in the Trinity. We know that two of them were angels, but still they speak *together*, and Abraham addressing the Lord, speaks to them as together, and they together accept his proposals for entertaining them; and also "they said to him, Where is Sarah thy wife?" Then Jehovah says, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" God was going to tell him about judgment, but it was because Abraham would "command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice". That is, he is a judge on the earth now, and he recognises that Jehovah is "Judge of all the earth". So the element of judgment, holy discrimination, is now in evidence.
H.F.N. Would you say more about the official thought in Isaac, that you spoke of?
J.T. In view of it we would do well to dwell a little further on Abraham so as to get the characteristics of the heavenly man: more the substantial thought. In chapter 18 he is quite on easy terms with God, God impressing him with the thought of nearness. He catered into covenant with him, and spoke with him, Abraham not being behind in regard of it, for he immediately executes circumcision, so that he is now on the ground of the Spirit. I do not know, Mr. C., whether you agree with what I was remarking about the Trinity. I am using a word which is prevalent. It is not a word found in Scripture, although the idea is there, in this very chapter 18.
C.A.C. Yes, indeed.
Eu.R. Would @Ephesians 4: 6 help? "One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all;" one Lord and one Spirit being referred to immediately before.
J.T. That is right, and so in @1 Corinthians 8: 6, "To us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things,
{461}
and *we* for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and *we* by him".
Ques. Does the conversation between Abraham and Isaac in chapter 22 help in regard to what you suggest as to the Trinity? "Isaac spoke to Abraham his father, and said, My father! And he said, Here am I, my son". Then in verse 9, it says, "they came to the place of which God had told him". I wondered whether the movements there would include the thought of the activities of the Spirit.
J.T. I think that is right. Chapter 24 brings it out more fully in type, Eliezer not being mentioned by name, but as "his servant, the eldest of his house, who ruled over all that he had". There is reference to dignity, the Spirit taking a lowly place and carrying out the will of the Father. I think that is the way we should understand the position. The Father is the dominating thought in christianity, the Trinity first being seen where we are baptised "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit", baptised to all Three. The dominating One throughout is the Father, the other two divine Persons acting in subjection. Their part abstractly remains equal in the Deity, but the Father is the dominant thought in revelation, and I believe it is worked out in type in the three patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
C.A.C. Do the two angels going to Sodom fall in with the thought in any way?
J.T. They take on the executive side. Of course, God does things, and here He is said to be the Judge of all the earth, but the executive side in detail is carried out by the Son and the Spirit. Although *God* judges it is Christ as Son of man, for the Father judges no one (@John 5: 22).
J.C.-S. You said that the Father and what is connected with Him gives character to the present dispensation. Is it right to suggest that the Lord Jesus and the Holy Spirit have taken a relative place in
{462}
this economy, in order that the Father and all connected with Him might be secured in the affections of the saints?
J.T. It is expressly stated that the Father judges no one, that is how the matter stands. The revelation of God involves an economy, and we are baptised to the name of the Three. You could not reverse the order in which they stand -- Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; they are there objectively as we are baptised. In the dispensation as it stands, it is, "to us there is one God, the Father", and in @Ephesians 4: 5, 6, as has been cited, we have, "one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". I believe the more we ponder these chapters in Genesis, the more we shall see the thought of the Father in the patriarchs is stressed in a very full way, pointing to what marks this dispensation. It is *grace* right through. Judgment will be, of course, wrought out in detail, but the Father is carrying on the thought of God revealed in grace before us, and the Son and the Spirit are carrying it out executively in detail, so as to secure the divine end, and in Jacob we shall see that the result is worship.
C.A.C. Does this involve that things should be taken up personally rather than officially, that the saints should be personally characterised by affections as appreciating the revelation?
J.T. That is what we shall come to. We are formed in affection; the Son and the Spirit are operating to that end. The Father is seeking something for Himself, and the Son and the Spirit are operating to that end. In the economy They have been pleased to take a lowly place, and it is most affecting to see the depths to which They have gone to secure the desired results.
M.W.B. Would that be confirmed in chapter 18 of this book, the Trinity moving in unity as one, and then, in chapters 22 and 24, Their relative positions and distinctive work?
{463}
J.T. That is how the matter stands, the Father as in Abraham foreseeing everything and providing for everything. In the instructions to the servant of his house he is considering for Isaac; all, as it were, flows out from him. Isaac says nothing as to the kind of wife he would wish; it is the father.
L.E.S. Why is it the Godhead in @Colossians 1: 19 in connection with what you are saying?
J.T. The word "Godhead" is not there; it is literally just "the *fulness*". The Fulness was pleased to dwell in Christ, and then He is the instrumentality of the reconciliation: "by him to reconcile all things to itself". It is not the personal thought, the Deity is in mind, but in Its fulness. What is presented is "the fulness". The reconciliation is to the fulness; to the Deity, of course, but in the sense of fulness, that is, as It has come out. It is not the Deity in Its abstract relations, but as It has come out, and we are reconciled to that.
A.S.L. In @1 Corinthians 8: 6 the apostle says, "to us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and *we* for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and *we* by him", but no reference directly to the Holy Spirit by name. Would you say a little on that?
J.T. What you say opens up a good deal, but it is a question of how christianity stands. It stands in relation to the Father as God, in order to stress the thought of *grace* in it, and that continues to the end. The One we call the second Person in the Deity is mentioned there: "by whom are all things, and *we* by him". It is a question of instrumentality, that the Lord has brought us in, but that involves the Spirit, because the new birth and all the work of the Spirit is involved in that. Christ is usually referred to as representing the administrative and executive side of the economy. So, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand" (@John 3: 35), that is the economy. Then it says, "God gives not
{464}
the Spirit by measure" (verse 34); the Spirit is seen there. From chapter 4 we learn how the Spirit comes in in the economy. The dispensation is established in the light of God as Father, and the Lord's own words limit that title, in His saying that the Father judges no one. "For neither does the Father judge any one, but has given all judgment to the Son ... and has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is Son of man" (@John 5: 22 - 27). The Spirit *is* involved in the *position* in @1 Corinthians 8, "One Lord" involves the Spirit, because being made "both Lord and Christ", and "having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear" (@Acts 2: 33, 36). That is all executive, in view of effecting things in detail here below.
A.S.L. So, in the prayer of the apostle in @Ephesians 3: 14, 15, he says, "I bow my knees to the Father ... of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named". The words "of our Lord Jesus Christ" are doubtful, and very likely inserted by a copyist who thought they ought to be there. It is the Father, the great characteristic name in the present dispensation.
J.T. Yes, and the more we discern that and bow to it the better, and the more effective we shall be in our evangelical service.
Ques. In @2 Corinthians 13: 14 it says, "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit". Is the thought of Father there, although not mentioned?
J.T. Yes; we have it too in @1 Corinthians 12: 3 - 6. The Spirit is first mentioned, then the Lord, and then God, God obviously alluding to the Father.
H.H. What would be the thought in @John 20: 17, "my God and your God", following on "my Father and your Father"?
J.T. That is in relation to our eternal portion, and the peculiar relations of christians with God as Father. It is not *the* Father there, but "my Father and your
{465}
Father". You only get it there, that is the Father's special relation with us. Generally in John it is either the Father, or Christ's Father. The thought of *the* Father is the stamp of the dispensation to show how God is operating in grace.
H.H. Then, do you connect the thought of "my God and your God" with what goes into eternity?
J.T. Yes; it is Christ's God, which is clearly the greatest thought of God.
L.M. Are you connecting the idea of the Father more with source -- the Father of glory, the Father of mercies, the Father of lights, the Father of spirits -- whereas "our Father" is more the idea of family relationships?
J.T. Quite so. What you quote is specifying that He is the Father of so many things, but "the Father" formally calls attention to God as He is known now in love and grace. He is known in that way; the point is that He is such a One. The Father judges no one, the Lord says, and the Father *seeks* worshippers. When He speaks of God, He says, "God is a spirit", but the seeking is by the Father.
P.H.H. So, in the introduction to eternity in @1 Corinthians 15: 24 - 28, where God shall "be all in all", Christ delivers up "the kingdom to him who is God and Father". Does that mean that God will be known to us as Father in eternity?
J.T. Quite so: "him who is God". That would cover God in all He is in dealing with things, but it adds, "and Father". That is the special relation in which He is known, especially in christianity. Then it is, "that God may be all in all". That is the final thought.
H.B-t. Does not the expression, "the Father", often include the whole of the Trinity, the Godhead?
J.T. What scripture have you in mind? This is the greatest of subjects, and we must go by Scripture; we cannot assume to make everything logical and fit in.
{466}
H.B-t. I was thinking of the Lord's prayer in @John 17, where He addresses the Father. Has He not the Godhead before Him?
J.T. The Lord cannot be said to include Himself in the title Father, although He speaks of the Father as the only true God. "To us there is one God, the Father" (@1 Corinthians 8: 6). God is really an official thought in some senses; it is that the Deity has come out. The abstract relation of the Persons is always inscrutable, and any One of Them can act as God. It is really in a sense an official thought, as I said: the supreme One who does everything, and any One of Them may operate in this sense, but in the economy the One known as the Father is God characteristically, always to be regarded in this way.
J.C.-S. What you have said elsewhere might help at this juncture, that this economy has been a matter of arrangement between the Persons, and the Lord Jesus and the Holy Spirit have taken this lowly place in relation to it. Do you not think that in our desire to maintain His deity we often force ideas into the Scriptures which really lead to confusion?
J.T. We certainly have to follow the scriptural way of speaking -- in this matter above all.
A.S.L. Would you say a word in this connection on this scripture: "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them ... and no one can seize out of the hand of my Father. I and the Father are one" (@John 10: 27 - 30)? Why the change from My Father to *the* Father?
J.T. The Father is God in His general relation in our dispensation. As we have been saying, the Lord is speaking in the light of the economy, and that is really how the truth is developed. What the Persons are abstractly, apart from all else, we cannot say. We know They are there; Scripture makes this plain, but occupies us with the Godhead as in revelation. The Lord is speaking in the light of the economy in relation
{467}
to His Father, and says that His Father is greater than all. He said also, "my Father is greater than I" (@John 14: 28). When He says, "I and the Father are one", He alludes to Their unity in the testimony. In saying *the* Father, the Father's *general* relation is in mind. "The Father" is God thus known. It is not a question of Their abstract relations, but of what They are in what is going on, that They are thoroughly one. No one could use the words, of course, but the Son, but it is simply that He and the Father were thoroughly one in what was proceeding, and it all bears there on the safety of the sheep. The 'Authorised' translators followed certain manuscripts and read "my", but "the" in @John 10: 30 is undoubtedly correct.
Rem. "They went both of them together" (@Genesis 22: 8). They were one.
J.H.T. You referred to the Father as stamping the dispensation to show how God was operating; would the fulness of God's operations be seen, first in the opened heavens: "My beloved Son". Then at the cross, "Father, forgive them". Then thirdly, "raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father". Would that be filled out in the apostle's prayer to the Father that the saints might come into the fulness of God?
J.T. Yes. You can see how the dispensation opened up; in fact, the three Persons come to light at once. It does not say that the Father spoke, but "a voice came out of heaven, *Thou* art my beloved Son" (@Luke 3: 22). It is, of course, the Father speaking, and the Spirit is there in the dove, descending on the Son, so that we have the Trinity, but the voice from heaven is the dominant feature. It is not a question of the other two Persons being in any sense inferior, because abstractly They are not inferior. It is a question of the economy, and if we get that into our minds the matter is simplified. The Son and the Spirit take a lowly place, but They retain Their equality all the time.
{468}
C.A.C. Does this thought of the economy particularly apply to the time of the heavenly?
J.T. I think so, and that is why I thought we might dwell on Abraham as representing that side, and then the Trinity (@Genesis 18), coming in in relation to those heavenly qualities, so that the dispensation is really heavenly.
Ques. What place does the Holy Spirit take throughout the ages of ages?
J.T. I think He will be always the Spirit of sonship to us, and He is always the power subjectively. He will be this, I suppose, in all the families named of the Father. At the very outset the Spirit was hovering over the face of the deep; that is a suggestion that He is always here *feelingly* and affects us in that way.
Rem. In writing his epistle the apostle John says, "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God" (@1 John 3: 1). He uses the same expression there -- "the Father".
J.T. Yes. Children is what we are down here, in that relation to Him and bearing the characteristics of God; what we are in a moral sense before men "in the midst of a crooked and perverted generation". So it is more what *God* is, but that God is the Father.
M.W.B. Would you say something more about the threefold way in which the thought of Father is developed in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?
J.T. The first thing in that relation is to see how concerned Abraham was that the heavenly should be preserved on the official side, so to speak, in Isaac. As Abraham and his young men returned to Beer-sheba, Scripture does not say that Isaac returned, but in chapter 24 Abraham particularly stresses that he must not leave Canaan, that is, that the heavenly position must be preserved. The type has in mind the Father's concern that the dignity of the dispensation should be maintained in the Person who represents the official side being in heaven, and that His bride is to
{469}
be of his own kindred, and brought to Him *there*. Then, when Rebecca comes, Isaac acts, and he leads her into his mother Sarah's tent. He does that, showing how thoroughly he is in accord with the father's thought. Abraham is concerned about the heavenly side; Isaac is concerned about the position of the assembly, itself heavenly, *here below*, and that shows what is in mind. It is the continuance of the testimony here below in its heavenly character.
E.G. Is that why it says that Abraham "dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob" (@Hebrews 11: 9)?
J.T. Yes; typically he would promote the heavenly character in them.
Eu.R. Abraham not only stipulates that the bride must be of the same family order, but must be prepared to follow the servant from the land where she was, to the land where Isaac was.
J.T. She is brought to him in the heavenly position. It involves Paul's ministry. That is her proper place, but Isaac leads her into another position. It does not say that he loved her until he has led her into another position, into his mother Sarah's tent. That is the position here below, and it is in that position he loves her, as much as to say, she is lovable in that position. It is the assembly's heavenly testimony.
M.W.B. Is that the line of the epistle to the Colossians, the earthly setting of a heavenly company?
J.T. Quite so: "Christ in you the hope of glory" (@Colossians 1: 27). This particularly, however, would be Christ among the gentiles, and hence would point to Asnath as a type.
A.J.G. Would it involve that Rebecca was supported in those heavenly characteristics by the love of Christ, too? He loved her in that position.
J.T. The Lord's supper would enter into that. The love of Christ enters into it, but it is in that position she is loved; that is, what the saints are in the testimony
{470}
here. We are loved, and take on lovableness in that sense.
Eu.R. Do both thoughts link together in @1 Corinthians 1: 2? "Called saints" -- would that be the heavenly position, and "the assembly of God which is in Corinth", what we are down here in the light of it?
J.T. Well, quite so, but Sarah's tent is what is in mind. It is how she shines in Sarah's tent, in Israel's place, as we see it in the Acts.
J.H.T. Did Paul serve the Corinthian saints from the standpoint of Christ's love? He says, "Now *I* shall most gladly spend and be utterly spent for your souls, if even in abundantly loving you I should he less loved" (@2 Corinthians 12: 15); and then he also says, "I rejoice that in everything I am confident as to you" (@2 Corinthians 7: 16).
J.T. Quite so. He had espoused them to one Man, to present them a chaste virgin to Christ.
A.M.H. I would like to be a little more clear as to the difference between the Corinthian position and Rebecca's shining in Israel's place as seen in Acts.
J.T. It is perhaps the Jewish setting which is the most difficult -- the assembly developed there. The Spirit shows in the early chapters of Acts how she was developed, and you can see how she would call forth the affections of Christ in the way she shone in testimony at the beginning.
A.M.H. You mean, starting in the Jewish position and developing into what is properly heavenly as in Ephesians.
J.T. Ephesians contemplates the Jewish side -- Jew and gentile brought together, but it also contemplates the gentile side by *itself* in @Ephesians 2: 22, "in whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit". Colossians has this in mind.
A.J.B. Do we see the heavenly and earthly sides in @Jude 1? "The called ones
{471}
beloved in God the Father and preserved in Jesus Christ".
J.T. "Called ones" is simply that they are called out. We have to distinguish between the heavenly calling and the actual call that comes to us in the gospel to which we respond. I think the latter is more in mind in Corinthians and Jude.
Ques. Would you give us a word on the end of chapter 23, having in mind the assembly in Israel's place, and particularly the place it has in the last words of Jacob in chapter 50: 13 "opposite to Mamre"?
J.T. Chapter 23, of course, introduces burial and has the resurrection in mind, and hence the great subject of eternal life enters into it. I think this should be linked on with the burial ground. Jacob stresses it later and it is a question of eternal life, of our being brought in again. The Lord, referring to the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob, speaks of those who are counted worthy to have part in that world and the resurrection, which, I think, alludes to Hebron. Mamre is identified with Hebron in chapter 35: 27. So that we bury in the light of that, and it gives great stability to our souls.
Rem. "Opposite to Mamre" would be in the full light of divine revelation.
J.T. Yes; it was there the three men came to Abraham -- Jehovah thus appearing to him.
Eu.R. Is the one pearl of @Matthew 13 at all like Rebecca? That is to say, you can pass from Corinth which is local, to Rebecca which is universal.
J.T. The pearl is one great idea -- the supreme thought.
Ques. Have you in mind that the testimony in the present period is being carried on by a heavenly people, and in that sense, what God has and what Christ has on the earth at the present moment is greater than at any other period?
{472}
J.T. Exactly, and entering on chapter 26, we see that Isaac was cared for by Jehovah, that he should not leave the land. That is what God is constantly urging upon us, to maintain the heavenly side. In the main Isaac maintains it, and goes to Beer-sheba, where God appears to him on the ground of His engagement -- the place of the oath; it is God maintaining the heavenly side. He is urgent about it and will not be satisfied if it is given up, if our service is on any lower ground than that. It is not exactly a question of Christ personally, but of the responsible element here who are to maintain the heavenly side of the position. Then you see, in chapter 27, how sorrowfully decline set in, but how the blessing goes through, in spite of the weakness in Isaac. We are impressed with God and His faithfulness and mercy in carrying things through in spite of our decline.
J.S.E. Would it be right to say that in chapter 26 Isaac reaches by way of what is official the characteristic thought in Beer-sheba?
J.T. I think he is there seen at his best on the moral side. He is doing something to maintain the testimony of Abraham. You will observe that God speaks to him in relation to Abraham, the true heavenly man. In the beginning of chapter 26 it says, "And Jehovah appeared to him and said, Go not down to Egypt: dwell in the land that I shall tell thee of. Sojourn in this land; and I will be with thee and bless thee". Then again later, "because that Abraham hearkened to my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws". It is the heavenly side in Abraham that is in the mind of God, and Isaac is to maintain it. He is not making so much of Isaac, but doing His utmost to keep him where he should be as representing the heavenly side officially. Jehovah made room for him in the land, Isaac says (verse 22), and he would be fruitful there. The chapter presents him as generally answering to the mind of God. Jehovah appears to him at Beer-sheba
{473}
and he builds an altar there and calls upon the name of Jehovah. He is also seen as free of the Philistines¬ influence, as morally superior to them. The water found at Beer-sheba would support him: it was a testimony to God's faithfulness, which Isaac recognises.
{474}
GENERATIONS IN THE BOOK OF GENESIS (6)
@Genesis 36: 1 - 8; @Genesis 37: 1 - 4; @Genesis 47: 7 - 10; @Genesis 48: 14 - 16
J.T. In connection with the generations of Isaac, we were unable to say anything as to Rebecca and the two nations, which, it is said, were in her womb. They were announced prophetically, and they bring out something of the qualities of Rebecca as representative, with Sarah, of the sisterhood of the family of God. That side is carried through in the Scriptures. The mind of God is indicated to Rebecca as to her unborn children -- that sovereignty entered exclusively into the generations of Isaac. Whilst Esau proved hateful to God in result, he occasions the bringing out of the character of the dispensation, in that he also is blessed by Isaac. His blessing is *stated* in @Genesis 27: 39: "And Isaac his father answered and said to him, Behold, thy dwelling shall be of the fatness of the earth, And of the dew of heaven from above; And by thy sword shalt thou live; And thou shalt serve thy brother; And it shall come to pass when thou rovest about, That thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck". Then the chapter says, "Esau hated Jacob".
In regard of Jacob, it seems that the blessing is *invoked*.. "And God give thee of the dew of heaven, And of the fatness of the earth, And plenty of corn and new wine. Let peoples serve thee, And races bow down to thee ... Cursed be they that curse thee, And blessed be they that bless thee". So that in what accrues -- the good and the evil -- occasion is taken to bring out the character of our dispensation typically, that is, blessing upon *all*, although in result one line is hated. God said, "I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau" (@Malachi 1: 3). Though Esau is ultimately hated, he is here blessed, but the blessing takes the form of a statement of facts; what should be, and brings out what the man really was; whereas with Jacob the blessing is *invoked*
{475}
and he is protected. There is the family of faith running through him, representing what is real in christianity, but still, both are blessed. Another thing that is to be noted in these generations is that they are written from the standpoint of what had developed already. That is, Moses, the writer, being conversant with the facts would speak of them from the standpoint of the testimony of God. So the histories or generations, as we have been speaking of them, are intended to instruct the people of God as to the persons under consideration.
P.L. You mean that where people are in relation to the testimony it becomes the touchstone to their spiritual history.
J.T. That is how, I think, we should look at it, what has come out morally. The instruction clearly has the testimony in mind, for that is what Moses represents; he was feelingly identified with the testimony. The Lord took great pains in His ministry, according to John particularly, to stress the importance of Moses¬ writings, that they were to be believed. They are to be read in faith, so that Abraham, speaking to the rich man in hades, says, "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, not even if one rise from among the dead will they be persuaded" (@Luke 16: 31). We can thus see what a testimony we have in these books, how reliably written by a man who was faithful in all God's house.
Ques. You remarked that the idea of father came out, not only in Abraham, but also in Isaac and Jacob. Is it in the fact that they bless their sons?
J.T. You can see that here. Blessing is the leading thought in the book, and runs right through in a paternal way. So Abraham exercises his fatherly care for Isaac; and notwithstanding the lamentable feebleness of Isaac, he rises to this thought under God. "By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come" (@Hebrews 11: 20). And, having blessed Jacob, he
{476}
undertakes to help and guide him in regard of his wife. So we shall see in considering Jacob how it runs through, he rises even to the blessing of Pharaoh. The less is blessed of the greater manifestly, as Scripture says, and Jacob is able to bless Pharaoh, showing how pronounced the idea of blessing is. Then, Jacob loved Joseph; that is the fatherly thought in regard of what is lovable, and in the end, taking on and elevating the sons of Joseph to the rank of the twelve tribes -- the sons of Jacob. So we are on the up line in his service, and we see, notwithstanding general weakness, how the idea of the testimony is maintained. It is a point of the greatest importance that we do not lose sight of it and drop below the proper level. God brought Isaac to it in the blessing of Jacob and Esau, and then there was the exercise of fatherly care for Jacob that he should have a proper wife, that the line should be kept intact.
Ques. What would you say as to the exercise of Rebecca? Does she suggest something in a subjective way that lays hold of the thought of God, and which, in that way, rises above the declension?
J.T. Clearly, she is brought in with Sarah, and Rachel, and Leah, as developed out of the generations of Shem and Terah, showing the import of those generations and how cumulative they are. So that we should be instructed as to what we have to do with. Rebecca had the mind of God about the two sons; she loved Jacob. That is, she augmented the fatherly thought, because it is not only the thought of God Himself as Father, but the idea of father in those who are responsible -- as you get it with Paul and John and others to whom that title applied. The fatherly thought is often weak amongst the brothers and has to be augmented or supported by the maternal side.
P.L. Would that be seen in Deborah, a "mother in Israel", and would Barak represent the weak paternal side?
{477}
J.T. Exactly; and in Manoah too; you have the maternal qualities in his wife without mentioning her name; the qualities are what is stressed. You have it also in Gideon's mother, who had the right ideal -- her sons, as described by the kings of Midian, show that her ideal of manhood went beyond her husband.
P.L. And like Hannah.
Ques. So would you say that through the maternal help of Rebecca, Isaac sends Jacob away in a most dignified manner to find a wife, not as escaping from his brother?
J.T. Yes. "And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said to him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan. Arise, go to Padan-Aram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father, and take a wife thence of the daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother. And the Almighty God bless thee, and make thee fruitful and multiply thee, that thou mayest become a company of peoples. And may he give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee and to thy seed with thee, in order that thou mayest possess the land of thy sojourning, which God gave to Abraham! And Isaac sent away Jacob; and he went to Padan-Aram, to Laban the son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebecca, Jacob's and Esau's mother". And verse 7 shows that Rebecca joined with Isaac in sending Jacob to Padan-Aram. The sisterly side is brought in and the kindred stressed. All this points to the exercise of fatherly qualities, augmented by motherly ones, which are intended to be seen throughout this dispensation -- of course, principally in the elder brethren, so that we have the line preserved amid all these other generations with which we have to do. Esau, on the other hand, ignored these instructions, and caused grief to his mother, taking wives from the daughters of the Canaanites. Then, when he saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away to take a wife, and that the daughters of Canaan were evil in
{478}
the sight of Isaac his father, "Esau went to Ishmael, and took, besides the wives that he had, Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister of Nebaioth, to be his wife". That is just imitation, and morally is of no value.
P.L. Is that Laodicea assuming the light of Philadelphia without the state?
J.T. Quite so; we have to guard against that. Imitation in the things of God is calculated to discredit what is genuine.
M.W.B. Then you would view Esau as within the christian profession. You refer to Jacob as that which is real in christianity; Esau is profane.
J.T. That is the position. He starts out on that line. He was on the line of nature, a man of the field, but Jacob was a plain man and dwelt in tents, and was loved by his mother. Esau is marked off as a natural man, but still ready to imitate, and if Jacob is blessed, he must get a blessing too. I suppose this kind of rivalry is prevalent throughout christendom, persons trying to attain to what is of God in order to maintain self-importance, but hating those who have divine things as valuing them on the principle of faith.
H.F.N. Would you say a word as to the distinctive features that are to mark a father, and then the features represented in the mother?
J.T. The father, first of all, gives status to the family -- the sons, and undertakes authority, as we see in Abraham and Isaac, to guide and protect according to right principles, because both Abraham and Isaac lay out right principles, as we have just read in the charge to Jacob. Then the mother acts more instinctively, as seen both in Sarah and Rebecca. Sarah was above her husband really in having Ishmael cast out, and Rebecca would have the blessing for Jacob. She knew to whom it belonged; she was not robbing anybody, for Esau had nothing to be robbed of really. It is to him that hath that more is given. Esau had denied himself of
{479}
his wealth, and Rebecca knew from God that Jacob was put first, that the elder was to serve the younger, and she would have the blessing for him. Although we cannot excuse her methods, yet there was determination that Jacob should have the blessing. It is that maternal quality, whether in literal mothers or in the assembly, that has the determination that the young should have the blessing, those marked off for it.
J.H.T. Is that worked out to an issue in the prophet Obadiah: 17, 18? It says, "The house of Jacob shall possess their possessions. And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble; and they shall kindle in them and devour them; and there shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau".
J.T. Quite. In the first scripture read we have the generations of Esau, and we are told again the kind of wives he took, and then in the end of the paragraph (verse 8), "Thus Esau dwelt in mount Seir; Esau is Edom;" so there is no doubt as to him. It is not always easy to determine those whom Esau represents, but in this chapter, I believe the generations of Esau are to help us to discern them.
A.M.H. It is mentioned three times in this chapter that "Esau is Edom". Is that a reference back to the making of his bargain, that it put upon him the terms he had made himself in selling his birthright for "this red thing"?
J.T. Yes, Edom signifying red. Then it will be observed that he had kings: "And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before there reigned a king over the children of Israel". Then again in the end of the chapter, the chiefs of Edom being mentioned, "This is Esau, the father of Edom".
J.T.Jr. It says in verse 6 that he went away from his brother Jacob after he had acquired a great deal of substance in the land of Canaan: has that any reference
{480}
to the departure of certain ones from the truth and what they have taken with them?
J.T. Yes. There has been much of that; people having acquired things amongst the brethren -- that is, in Canaan -- and gone off with it, and set themselves up elsewhere in independency.
J.J. The anxiety of Jacob about the wives of his sons does not appear. The fatherly feature that you have spoken of in regard of Abraham and Isaac as to their sons is very clear, but in Jacob it seems to be entirely absent.
J.T. We see a sorrowful lack in that respect in the history of Judah, in chapter 38. We cannot go into it now to any extent, but it is a chapter of disgrace. The early fatherly qualities of Jacob were weak, but he rises subsequently; indicative of the varied history of the believer -- of all of us. We may have the right thought objectively, but Jacob represents the long, chequered, varied histories of the saints, and how we may rise to the idea of the primary thought of God as we go on, reaching it perhaps in a more spiritual way than had been reached earlier. The history of his family is most distressing but he loved Joseph; he loved what was lovable.
P.L. Do we find in Paul, claiming so rightly to be the father of the Corinthians, one who exceeds Jacob in loving what was unlovable? Is that part of the fatherly service?
J.T. Quite so; we have had it already: "if even in abundantly loving you I should be less loved". God knew that he loved them. It is these fatherly qualities amongst us that are so much needed, to guide the young. Jacob's love is seen in the fact that he loved Joseph, but it is rather in the fact that he loved what was lovable. His mother loved him too, that is, he was brought up in love, and Jacob loved what was lovable, but we have to learn to love like God. That is the difficulty; being able to love saints who are not attractive
{481}
"Love in the Spirit" is the great thing, involving love for all saints. Those are two thoughts which we get in Colossians, that you love in the Spirit, thus that you love those who may be unlovable, and you do the utmost for them.
Eu.R. Esau seems to recognise that what was fatherly would preserve his brother, because he did not suggest slaying him till the days of mourning for his father were over. Does each generation in that way protect what is of God in the generation coming on?
J.T. I think that suggestion is there. He had some regard for his father in that sense.
Ques. How are we to regard the word in @Deuteronomy 23: 7? "Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he is thy brother".
J.T. That is in the early part of the history; nor would God permit Israel to touch Edom on their way to Canaan. All that brings out what consideration Edom had, just as we were saying. He was blessed, and God would act towards him according to the blessing and give him every opportunity to be right. So in @Deuteronomy 2, Israel is directed not to touch him. We are apt to speak severely of those who like Edom have gathered up certain truth amongst us and gone off in independency. We have perhaps to do with them in contending for the truth, but to go beyond that is unwise, for God is caring for them. In fact that is what is happening in other lands today, and we cannot but feel that God would act for them. They have turned away from the truth, but they are in distress and we cannot but feel for them. I think Deuteronomy would show how God's consideration for Edom is in keeping with the fact that he was blessed, but all that consideration proved futile, and the hatred toward Israel deepened. The prophets show how God took account of this hatred in Edom, so the last prophet says that God hated him.
{482}
J.T.S. Does the wonderful patience of the Lord in regard of Laodicea serve as an example for us -- "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking" -- but in result Laodicea is spued out of the Lord's mouth.
J.T. You feel you cannot regard those represented in Edom just as the world; you cannot but think of them according to the early history, and as it says here, according to their generations. It is a question of their origin and what God thinks about them, and it is important to keep that in mind, because we are apt to classify them all as the same, but they are not the same. Edom is not Ishmael, nor is Ishmael Edom, although they are linked together. We see them in the Psalms -- Edomites, Ishmaelites, etc., all attacking Israel, but they all have their identification (@Psalm 83: 6 - 8).
J.C.-S. You said this morning that some of them were near relatives; would we embrace them in our prayers and in service, without violating the truth?
J.T. Surely; I hope we do serve them in that way. In the book of Judges, it is said that Jephthah in speaking to the king of Ammon pointed out how Israel treated Edom and walked round the land of Edom, and reached Canaan as the result of further walking. So we must have patience and give them every opportunity, because it is a question of maintaining the dispensation. Isaac blessed both Jacob and Esau. See what Esau is. Isaac says, "Behold, thy dwelling shall be of the fatness of the earth". I apprehend that means that those typified are in the area in which the Spirit is operating, and so the truth is available to them. "The dew of heaven" is there. Then it says, "And by thy sword shalt thou live; And thou shalt serve thy brother; And it shall come to pass when thou rovest about" -- there is no idea of fellowship in that -- "That thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck". That is the sort of thing. It is not easy to love them, nor indeed can we speak much about loving them in those conditions,
{483}
but we have consideration for them and give them every opportunity to adjust themselves and walk in the truth.
P.L. Do you see it in David's respect for the anointing and his long patience with Saul?
J.T. Quite so; and, as has been remarked with regard to Laodicea, the Lord says, "I counsel thee to buy of me". That is very touching. He says, 'I am about to spue you out of My mouth, but I am ready to give you counsel, and if you do not want grace, a free gift, I am ready to sell it to you -- anything to help you'.
H.F.N. In the blessing of Jacob, the dew of heaven is mentioned first, and then the fatness of the earth and corn and new wine, but in regard to Esau, it is the fatness of the earth first, the dew of heaven coming second. Would Jacob carry on in spiritual power what was seen in Abraham in relation to what is heavenly?
J.T. That is what I understand, and he is to be supported by corn and new wine, to be maintained at the full height of the position. It is that he is furnished with what belongs to the testimony and sustained in it.
H.M.S. In this connection you made some remark as to the link God has with those in christendom.
J.T. We were speaking of these generations involving what was from the beginning, their origin and history. For instance, the claim to apostolic succession -- that is not from the beginning; it never existed, but it is claimed by the greater part of christendom. You ignore that; but then, there are other things that really belong to the beginning, that you feel some of them at least have, and that makes a difference -- you are nearer to such.
J.H.T. The Ishmaelites are those that buy Joseph and sell him into Egypt, whereas in chapter 33, as Jacob meets Esau, it says, "lastly Joseph drew near", and that seems to leave an impression on Esau for the time being.
{484}
J.T. It is Christ really presented to him. It says in that chapter that "Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him; and they wept. And he lifted up his eyes and saw the women and the children, and said, Who are these with thee? And he said, The children that God has graciously given thy servant. And the maidservants drew near, they and their children, and they bowed. And Leah also, with her children, drew near, and they bowed. And lastly Joseph drew near, and Rachel, and they bowed" (@Genesis 33: 4 - 7). You will notice that Joseph is placed before Rachel, that is, it is Christ. Whether Esau had discernment or not, there it was. When Joseph was born, Jacob was affected by that small suggestion of Christ; the spiritual man is thus affected, but was Esau affected? There is no evidence that he was. The true saint is affected by a touch from God, of Christ, in whatever small measure He is presented. Jacob is affected by the birth of Joseph. Esau had this testimony, and that really is the way to get at those represented by Esau; to let the children that *God* has given be seen by them. Let Christ shine in the midst of them; that is, put Christ first -- Joseph is here before Rachel.
H.H. In @Jeremiah 49: 11 it says in regard of Edom: "Leave thine orphans, I will preserve them alive; and let thy widows trust in me". That is, God would bring them down in grace. I suppose there is no inheritance in the world to come for the Edomite, whatever exercise there may be now and whatever care may be bestowed at the present time in relation to the testimony. Is that right?
J.T. Yes. It is in keeping with this dispensation, grace being the ruling thought: "so also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord" (@Romans 5: 21). This should govern us in our relations with all.
{485}
P.L. Do you not see all this in Paul appearing before the Edomite, Agrippa and the appeal to him? And do not Jacob and Esau meet in Scripture in many crises in that way, and the dignity of Jacob shines out?
J.T. It is a very fine example. There can be no doubt that the Herods were Edomites. They came into contact with Christ, but the Lord did not make anything of Herod. John the baptist reproved one of them, and the Lord did not answer Herod at all. I suppose that is the final item in the testimony; he is ignored. The Lord came in under the law, and acted accordingly, but in the dispensation in which we are, grace is reigning through righteousness, and I suppose the apostle before Agrippa is the full expression of christianity in this sense. It is more than Joseph going before Rachel. There was a touch of Christ in that, but see what was in Paul! How he could speak in such a feeling way, that he would to God they were all like him! The idea of the dispensation is there, not only in terms, but in substance. What a testimony for Agrippa! And so he said, "In a little thou persuadest me to become a Christian" (@Acts 26: 28). But he was not persuaded; he remained the Edomite.
J.J. Would the blessing on the house of Obed-edom coincide with the dispensation?
J.T. Possibly. A name meaning worshipper or servant of Edom surely suggests some link with him and would accord with the grace we are speaking of (compare @Deuteronomy 23: 7, 8).
But now, we are not getting on to the end. We were noticing that the fatherly qualities in Jacob were such that he loved the lovable one, but he made no provision for the wives of his sons, and the result is that, as Joseph is sold, Judah falls into disgrace. No doubt we may find a counterpart of that in the history of christendom, that where Christ has been sold for worldly gain, disgrace follows. So that we have to wait for the real generations of Jacob, and only Joseph is
{486}
mentioned until we come to the families of Jacob in the light of Joseph in glory (@Genesis 46). It is Christ glorified now, not Christ as in Isaac, or in Abraham, but Christ glorified among the nations. That is to say, it is the history of christianity from the divine side ever since.
P.L. Is not even that dark history brought in in sovereign mercy in the bringing in of one of the participants, Thamar, into the royal line in Matthew?
J.T. That is another illustration of what we are saying, God making the most of what happens. In spite of the conditions He is working out His thoughts, so that the line is preserved.
M.W.B. Does the fact that Joseph is immediately mentioned in the generations of Jacob in chapter 37 show the way the line is morally carried on, giving the idea of the generation?
J.T. I think that is right. His generation is taken up more definitely in @Genesis 46: 1 - 7, when Jacob is on the way to Egypt. It says, "And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beer-sheba; and he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac. And God spoke to Israel in the visions of the night and said, Jacob, Jacob! And he said, Here am I. And he said, I am God, the God of thy father". That is Isaac, because it is a question now of recovery, of things being secured that had apparently been in abeyance or lost. The yea and the amen of everything is in Christ, the Son of God. Then it says, "And Jacob rose up from Beer-sheba; and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, on the wagons that Pharaoh had sent to carry him. And they took their cattle, and their goods which they had acquired in the land of Canaan, and came to Egypt, Jacob and all his seed with him; his sons and his sons¬ sons with him, his daughters and his sons¬ daughters and all his seed he brought with him to Egypt". Things are being gathered up now, and they are going to
{487}
Joseph, that is Christ glorified among the nations. For that is the point now: whatever has happened, all is secured in a glorified Christ. And then we have the names: "And these are the names of the sons of Israel who came into Egypt". We get all the family now, with their goods, and with their faces towards Joseph, that is Christ glorified. Then, as Jacob reaches Joseph, the fatherly qualities begin to shine again. Already he is owned by Joseph: "Tell my father of all my glory in Egypt". But Jacob never really has his place, as far as I see, from the time of the selling of Joseph until he is in the presence of Joseph in glory. The fatherhood of Jacob shines fully then, so the recovery is on that line.
M.W.B. We need to be under the influence of a glorified Christ.
J.T. Yes; there is a moral element underlying Jacob's condition. He has gone through things which neither Abraham nor Isaac went through. So it is a suffering Christ now. That is what we are coming to in the terrible history of christendom at the end -- how things are secured on this line; it is the sufferings and the glory. So the fatherly qualities of Jacob are now coming into evidence, and he is able to bless even Pharaoh.
Rem. We learn how everything hangs on the personal service of Christ in glory. I was thinking of chapter 37: "These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph".
J.T. There it is. Your mind is to hang on Joseph, but now Jacob is in the presence of his glory.
Eu.R. In loving Joseph there, is Jacob typical of God as Father, or of believers?
J.T. Both; we have to look at it in that way. It is either God, or what God is working out in the fatherly element, the thought of blessing.
P.L. Do we get this thought in the "promise of life, the life which is in Christ Jesus" (@2 Timothy 1: 1)? Is that
{488}
everything secured in the true Joseph, and then the development of these fatherly qualities in Paul, who immediately says, "my beloved child", and then later on, "Thou therefore, my child, be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus" (@2 Timothy 2: 1).
J.T. I was thinking of that -- how much 2 Timothy opens up to us in the last days. Everything is secured in a risen Christ -- even salvation: "that *they* also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory" (@2 Timothy 2: 10). It is outside the range of man now, in One who has gone through unspeakable sufferings, and who is now in glory, but He is glorified amongst the gentiles. So it is a question of going out to Him, and with all our wealth, as has been remarked: "Jacob rose up from Beer-sheba; and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, on the waggons that Pharaoh had sent to carry him. And they took their cattle, and their goods which they had acquired in the land of Canaan". It is all gathered up and carried through -- nothing is lost.
W.S.S. Jacob's sons had no appreciation of Joseph, and could have no appreciation of him and their father until Joseph had suffered and been glorified. Thus we cannot come into a knowledge of the Father apart from the appreciation of Christ as having suffered and been glorified.
J.T. Nor can you have the working out of the dispensation in conditions of deception such as existed in Jacob's house, from the time of the selling of Joseph into Egypt, until Joseph is made known to his brethren. Think of the state and the feelings, the atmosphere that pervaded that house in those ten men, murderers really, secretly conscious of their guilt! What an atmosphere was in that house! There could not be spiritual development in those circumstances, but only in the light, where everything is as clear as crystal, where we stand on the sea of glass in the presence of the divine glory.
{489}
W.S.S. I suppose in christendom publicly there is a marked absence of the appreciation of the Father, so that recovery is in connection with the learning of the Father.
J.T. Jacob returns to it now. It says, "And Joseph brought Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh". Then it says, "And Jacob blessed Pharaoh", as if that was the great effect; and it is. In the end of the paragraph it says, "And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from Pharaoh", but in the beginning it is cited as a great fact to be noted.
H.F.N. Would you say a word in regard of the three thoughts of blessing in Jacob? He first blesses Pharaoh, then the two sons of Joseph come in for blessing, and then finally he calls his sons and blesses them.
J.T. God had made Joseph a father to Pharaoh (@Genesis 45: 8), that testimony was there, but Joseph did not bless Pharaoh. It awaited the true father to do that, and it is said twice over that Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
A.M.H. What does Pharaoh represent?
J.T. He was the greatest man on earth outwardly. It is to show what God is developing in His people and how it rises in superiority and supremacy above the greatest on earth. "Bless and curse not" -- that is the attitude.
Ques. Does Peter suggest the full and final gain of the dispensation in @1 Peter 3: 8, 9? "Finally, be all of one mind, sympathising, full of brotherly love, tender hearted, humble minded; not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing; but on the contrary, blessing others, because ye have been called to this, that ye should inherit blessing".
J.T. Quite so. All that enters into what we are saying, so that we have the idea of the dispensation before us, that is, blessing and not cursing. You see the greatness and dignity of this position: the lord of all Egypt brings this old man, for he was that, and sets him before Pharaoh, and then the Spirit of God says, "Jacob
{490}
blessed Pharaoh". That is the great thought. There was dignity in it. Then he went out from his presence; Pharaoh did not dismiss him, Jacob went out.
Then we come to the passage read in chapter 48, to show how this fatherly quality moves Jacob to take on the sons of Joseph, who had an inferior place to the tribes, and raises them to the level of the tribes, and then blesses one of them above the other, introducing the idea of the fatherly thought in sovereignty. It is the mind of God absolutely; he set Ephraim before Manasseh, and that is a fixed matter. It is not merely a question of what a man does, but what God does, Jacob has come up to that level. We come back to the full thought that God is acting and confirming what is being done, that He is doing it.
W.W. So is the idea of maturity arrived at with spiritual understanding as to the divine mind?
J.T. Yes. The fatherly qualities have risen to that height, that God's mind is expressed in Jacob.
Ques. Why is it Jacob that blesses Pharaoh, but Israel in regard of the two sons of Joseph?
J.T. Israel is the more spiritual thought.
J.J. Why is it said in @Hebrews 11: 21, in connection with blessing both the sons of Joseph, that he "worshipped on the top of his staff"?
J.T. He is viewed there, of course, Godward. The allusion is to the end of chapter 47, he "worshipped on the bed's head". They are really two thoughts, but brought together in the New Testament. The one is Godward and the other is manward. In the blessing of the sons of Joseph, the fatherhood of God is expressed in Jacob; he has risen to the full thought of fatherhood.
Eu.R. Does chapter 45 involve the brethren of Christ, according to John 20, and chapter 48 involve sons with Him before the Father, according to His eternal thoughts?
J.T. That is right. Joseph himself is blessed with a double portion, so you can see it is manifestly God
{491}
now, but acting through Jacob who has risen to it, according to the suggestion in the New Testament, the full mind of God.
Rem First of all, God set out to Abraham that the firstborn was to be set aside. It nearly breaks down in Isaac, but God comes in again and produces a man who needs no prompting, but who acts intelligently, and says, "I know", rising to the full height of intelligent action.
J.T. Quite so; it would have broken down in the hands of Joseph even. So it is the full thought set out to the end, Jacob having risen to it.
H.F.N. In regard to the sons at the end, why is it you do not get the thought of blessing until you come to Joseph, and then you get the richest thoughts of blessing in the book? The first blessing is in Genesis 1 -- does all in the book culminate in the blessing of Joseph?
J.T. It seems so, in the place that he acquires. Of course, he is a type of Christ, but he had failed in that in seeking to hinder the placing of Ephraim before Manasseh, a solemn thing introduced at this juncture. It was not a small matter, it was serious, and in it we are reminded to be on our guard, because the most spiritual might fail in this way. In certain circumstances one may, through allowing natural feelings, set aside the mind of God. Joseph comes back to the truth, and the wonderful place he has in the next chapter shows what he was generally in the mind of God.
H.F.N. Would you say a word on the different thoughts of blessing? There is the blessing of heaven; there is the blessing of the deep that lieth under; there are the blessings of the breast and of the womb. Then "The blessings of thy father surpass the blessings of my ancestors, Unto the bounds of the everlasting hills: They shall be on the head of Joseph".
J.T. It is a big subject, more than we can now enter on. The passage is wonderful (@Genesis 49: 22 - 26);
{492}
it is the most sublime language you can get, showing what a place Joseph had in the mind of God, expressed through Jacob. Chapter 49 is from the father; Jacob says, "Assemble yourselves, and hear, ye sons of Jacob, And listen to Israel your father". We have here the full thought of the father risen to, the mind of God opened up, also the actual history of the tribes. The evil is owned, but they are all blessed; their position is secured infallibly in a risen and glorified Christ.
P.L. Is that fatherly ideal to be cherished; the saints are all ranged under Christ intelligently? Is it developed in the great thought of the tribes round the tabernacle in Exodus?
J.T. Quite so; and you see how Joseph rises up in his greatness in the mind of God in the blessing. But all the tribes are there, so that it finishes by saying: "All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this is what their father spoke to them". How much enters into that! What fatherly qualities and communications there are: "and he blessed them: every one according to his blessing he blessed them". It is very stimulating as we are coming to the end, and the aim is that the dispensation should finish at its distinctive level in a spiritual way.
M.W.B. Could you tell us the leading feature of fatherly grace in each of those mentioned -- Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?
J.T. The leading fatherly feature in Abraham is his thought for Isaac, that he should not leave the land and that his wife should be of his own kindred and be brought to him there. Then the leading fatherly thought in Isaac is that he blesses both Jacob and Esau, not in regard to his own feelings, but in regard to the testimony, as the Spirit of God shows in the New Testament. Then the leading feature here with Jacob is the elevation of the sons to the new platform, and he blesses them with divine intelligence, and speaks to them all
{493}
as their father. So it is, blessing, blessing, blessing, and "every one according to his blessing he blessed them".
A.J.G. The elevation of blessing is according to the sovereignty of God: "In thee will Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and Manasseh!" (@Genesis 48: 20).
P.L. Every family is named of the Father.
J.T. That is it exactly: "the Father ... of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named" (@Ephesians 3: 14, 15).
{494}
THE SERVICE OF CHRIST TO HIS PEOPLE AS IN ASSEMBLY
@Luke 24: 36 - 43; @Acts 1: 1 - 5
J.T. It is in my mind that we should speak together about the Lord's service when we are *in assembly*. There is His service to us individually, of course, but it may not be so clear that we need His service as together in assembly. As the Lord comes in He acts according to what *exists*, so that each meeting is not the same as those preceding it. What happens depends upon the state of the meeting. Another thing is that the assembly's formation and continuation upon earth is according to what the Lord did in it at the outset, and what He does; so that there is a representation of Him in it. Thus in John's account of the Lord's appearing, coming into the midst, there is no adjustment mentioned. In Luke's there is, it is needed too and effected. Whereas in Luke's account in the Acts, what happens is normal, it is the Lord impressing *Himself* upon them, as it says, "having by the Holy Spirit charged the apostles whom he had chosen, he was taken up; to whom also he presented himself living, after he had suffered, with many proofs; being seen by them during forty days, and speaking of the things which concern the kingdom of God; and, being assembled with them ..." It is the Lord impressing Himself upon them, and the Spirit was the power by which things were done. These are the general thoughts that are in my mind, and if they are apprehended perhaps we shall make more room for the Lord in relation to His supper, to act according to what He sees is needed.
H.F.N. Would you say a little more about what you have in mind as to the contrast between the individual service the Lord renders us, and the service rendered in assembly?
{495}
J.T. Well, each one is conscious, I am sure, of the need of help from the Lord in view of assembling. You see in the letter to Corinth how much is said before the actual assembling of the saints is reached. Each needs a fresh touch, I think, and therefore, in view of the assembly, it is wise to have to say to the Lord, as we have opportunity, and especially in regard of our houses, our relations in our houses, so that our minds are free in assembling together. That is a matter, of course, of the Lord's official service -- "always living to intercede for them" (@Hebrews 7: 25), and "we have a patron with the Father"(@1 John 2: 1), and the Spirit also is here to help us. So that we are not in assembly in an incongruous state or attitude, we are there suitably; we come in suitably and take our places suitably. It is said of the Lord Himself that "when the hour was come, he placed himself at table, and the twelve apostles with him" (@Luke 22: 14). His deportment would be exemplary. Then, as sitting together, we need help, and particularly as He comes in. What I have been remarking is preliminary, but as He comes in, as He is discerned there, what scope is He given? His coming in tests us. As we have observed, according to Luke 24, what preceded His coming to them was quite in order; they were speaking about the Lord, how He had appeared to Simon, and how He was made known to the two at Emmaus in the breaking of bread, but His coming in caused derangement and perturbation; a condition that was unfit for Him, and yet He was there.
L.M. Have you in mind that the chapter shows how the Lord served personally in relation to the two going to Emmaus, preparatory to the assembly?
J.T. That helps to show the difference between the help we may receive from Him individually, and how He serves us in the assembly.
H.F.N. Would you open up the character of the Lord's service in relation to the assembly?
{496}
J.T. Well, I think many have the thought that His headship comes into view at once, but that would depend upon conditions. It is not headship that you get in these verses, for adjustment was needed by the *company*.
N.K.McL. What do you connect the service with? Is it in relation to setting them free Godward in Luke 24, in relation to the covenant particularly?
J.T. That is involved, but we have to be sure as to Himself. Can we discern the Lord? They did not know it was the Lord, they supposed that they beheld a spirit. That illustrates what I had in mind -- the confusion there may be with us. When they came together at Corinth, apparently, there was room for spirits, bad spirits, and they had to be discerned. The Lord in this sense is not a spirit; He is a Spirit in another sense. "The Lord is the Spirit" (@2 Corinthians 3: 17). But He is a *Man;* so that He has to instruct them as to *Himself;* we have to be instructed as to how we discern the Lord and how we apprehend Him in assembly. Then when He is apprehended, we being in accord with Him, He will proceed as the Minister of the sanctuary. When He has His place in our minds, He is free to proceed, but if He is misapprehended, obviously He has to stop to adjust us.
A.M.H. Do you think that not discerning the Lord with us is not discerning the touches He has given in thanksgiving? Would it take the form of not recognising some touches in thanksgiving in which features of Himself are brought before us?
J.T. That is it; it is in the "breaking of bread". He is discerned in what *He* did at the outset. So that both in regard of the bread and the cup it is said "in remembrance of me", (@1 Corinthians 11: 24, 25). It is in what *He did*. It is not a spirit we see, but we apprehend Him as being made known in the breaking of bread. He is to be apprehended in that way in assembly. That will not hold eternally, it is while we are down here -- a question
{497}
now of His acquiring a place in our minds. We will see Him literally there, but not now. The assembly is inaugurated and constituted and continued by what He did; it is not a man-made thing, it is really out of Christ. "This do", He says, both in regard of the bread and of the cup, and He is made known in that. So that it is not a spirit, but what He did with His hands and in giving thanks. He took the loaf and having given thanks, broke it, and He took the cup and blessed it.
C.L. Would the breaking of bread suppose that they had a previous knowledge of the Lord in so doing?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. It is Christ that began it, the assembly was inaugurated and is continued by what He did and said. He says, "My assembly". How is He to be apprehended in it? Not as a spirit, for He carefully points out that "a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having".
E.C.M. Why does the Lord specially draw attention to His hands and His feet?
J.T. It is Luke's thought, it suggests *service*, it is a question of Him serving, that is, He is to be understood in the assembly as serving. He is free to move wider than that, in the sense that His feet carried Him here in grace; but the idea is that He should be apprehended as serving in the assembly. John mentions the side instead of the feet, because he is not stressing the service side of His position as Luke is. Luke includes the priestly side as well, for it is priestly service, compassionate service. It is doubtful whether any of us could be in the assembly without it.
E.F.S. Do we need that service every time we are in assembly? We cannot be in the assembly without His service.
J.T. Quite. Hence it is a new matter every time. So the state of the meeting comes into evidence, it cannot be ignored. The Lord will not ignore it, nor will He pass by any incongruous condition; He is ready to serve, and will effect needed adjustment.
{498}
A.J.B. Would the presentation of the hands and feet be expressed in a hymn or thanksgiving?
J.T. Certainly; He comes to us in what is done mediately. When you think of the hands, the Lord *took* the loaf and the cup. It is His own side, His own activity, and it is to be apprehended in that way. But then much more comes into mind, many things attaching to Him in that position. He is Mediator of the covenant, and He stands in relation to the assembly as *His own*. His relations to the assembly have to be recognised too, and what He would do in the way of support. "His left hand is under my head, And his right hand doth embrace me" (@Song of Songs 2: 6).
Rem. It is quite possible to be saying right things and yet not apprehend the movements of the Lord in assembly.
J.T. I am sure that is so. We are, perhaps, too theoretic in our service, without taking account of the actual state of any given meeting.
H.F.N. Is your thought that the sense of grace in the Lord's service would enhance the position and dignity of the assembly to us?
J.T. Yes; and He would intimate that He wishes to have things in a certain way; it is a question of what is suitable. He maintains His own rights in the assembly, and His own standard; He gives us to understand how things are.
Ques. Is this preparatory service in view of a response to Himself, and His further service in view of a response to God?
J.T. Quite so. There must be a response to Christ in the assembly, that cannot be passed over, though I am afraid it *is* passed over. Then what God is to the assembly, covenant-wise. So that there must be some room for Christ as Mediator of the covenant.
Ques. Do I understand you to infer that the character of the Lord's service when He comes in is determined by the condition of the meeting?
{499}
J.T. Yes. The condition of the meeting comes before Him. As to His entrance into Martha's house, for instance, it says, she "received him into her house". That was good, but then, conditions were not right, they were very uncomfortable, so far as she was concerned they were very uncomfortable, and it may be that those leading in a meeting, those responsible more particularly, are not just right, and He has to set them right.
Ques. Would it be assuming too much to say that the Lord would commence as Head immediately if the conditions were right?
J.T. No doubt; He is to be discerned as present. Conditions have to be such as headship requires, that is the assembly characteristically. He is Head of His body the assembly.
H.F.N. You allude to the Lord's service, first in relation to adjustment, then as Mediator of the new covenant, then as Minister of the sanctuary, then as Head. Would you indicate the line on which the assembly comes into these spiritual features?
J.T. The Lord needs the *assembly* for headship, not simply so many persons nominally breaking bread. He needs the assembly characteristically, that we should be set together in affection for one another. If that be not there, He moves that it should be there, that our relations, our attitude to one another, should be right. That is really priestly service. He is compassionate upon the ignorant and the erring, so to speak, to get us into right relations with one another. Then there is His office as Mediator of the new covenant: He effects the covenant, He makes it effective. Then there is His relation with the assembly as such, on His own account, not only to lead her, but for reciprocal affections. The Song of Songs helps greatly on this line, that is, the relations between Christ and the assembly, *when the assembly is there*, when He *has* it, in a characteristic sense. Then He is Minister of the sanctuary, that is a wide thought. He has to do with the sanctuary, that is
{500}
not simply the assembly viewed locally, but the saints viewed as sanctified, their holy attitude and relation, linking on with "heavenly places". He is Minister of the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, that is, it is pitched according to His mind; it is the saints in relation to one another. He is Minister of that and takes on the whole service, and the service primarily is Godward. "Let my son go, that he may serve me". That is the basic thought in the mind of God, but all this intervenes in order that that thought should be reached.
H.F.N. Perhaps we have been in too great a haste to move, and have not been prepared to wait in relation to the Lord's gracious service to the assembly. Is it your thought that we should have more affectionate intelligence as to the Lord's service before we move on to the Father's realm?
J.T. Those of us who might be ready to enter into the full thought of service will not lose by waiting. Mary had to wait, but she was there, she was sitting at the Lord's feet; she was not losing anything that was said to Martha. But if conditions in Martha's house were to be right, Martha had to be put right in relation to her sister.
L.M. As Mediator of the new covenant, is He to be viewed on God's side ministering it to us?
J.T. It is rather on our side toward God; He is Minister of the sanctuary, that is, He is there. The whole range of the sanctuary comes into view. It requires *Him, we* are not equal to that without Him. It requires Him to be there; it is a question now of the sanctuary and of what proceeds there.
Ques. Do you think that the service of Moses in the book of Deuteronomy corresponds in any sense with the service of the Lord as you are presenting it? I was thinking of the closing words of the great mediator; he serves the saints up to the border of the inheritance. Then as in the land, the Israelite was to
{501}
bring his basket of first-fruits to Jehovah (@Deuteronomy 26: 1 - 5).
J.T. Of course Moses represents Christ as Apostle, but the principle of leading to a point is seen in him, as referred to. The priesthood entered into that, as representing needed help and sympathy. As in the inheritance the worshipper comes with his basket to the priest, and the priest takes it and sets it down before the altar of Jehovah. All depends on the priest. I mean that the position is dependent upon the Lord in all these functions, and we shall not lose in any of them, but shall be gaining as gathering up wealth all the time, as waiting upon Him. We are dependent upon the Lord, His features being discerned in the midst, how He moves and how the sanctuary comes into view and the service of God takes form. So that it is not of this creation, we have to learn to be spiritual and see what is in mind, what eternal things mean, what heavenly things mean.
C.L. Is that why the Lord is seen in Luke leading them out? He did not go without them, He led them.
J.T. Quite so. "He led them out as far as Bethany", showing that He limits the movement to that place -- already known as marked by response to Him. It is not the heavenly side, however, not the place of the full thought of the service of God. But in the corresponding point in assembly service there is a change and we then proceed in the liberty of sons.
In what we have been saying, we are seeking to keep before us the saints viewed as *in assembly*, and how the Lord serves, how essential His service is to us in it. What features there are of His service -- the need of priestly service, having compassion on us; it would help us to disallow in our minds any incongruous thing, and regard each other in affection, thus answering to His thought in the body. It is a most testing thing, whether we sit down together, so that He has us in such wise as suits His thought. He stresses the thought of love -- that we might have love. Moreover, He said
{502}
as a general principle to Peter, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me" (@John 13: 8). It is not simply 'Unless thou art washed', but "Unless I wash thee". He must have His part in it. Then what His relation is to the assembly; you might say marital relations, what she is to Him, and what He would look for in the way of response to Himself, because all that enters peculiarly into the Supper: "This is my body, which is for you". He is also Mediator of the new covenant, so that we might enjoy the love of God in these circumstances, and that God might have His part too with us as His people. Well, all that involves great enrichment for us; it involves enlargement as it proceeds. It is cumulative, too, so that there is something there for God; and the idea of the assembly opens up to us, and its heavenly relations. The Lord is equal to that service, for it is said that "we have such a one high priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens; minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man" (@Hebrews 8: 1, 2).
That is an immense thought. We are to see what thus proceeds and how we are brought into it, having part in the heavenly service.
Ques. What is suggested in the broiled fish and the honeycomb?
J.T. It is a question of what *they had*. Verse 41 says, "While they yet did not believe for joy, and were wondering, he said to them, Have ye anything here to eat? And they gave him part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb; and he took it and ate before them". Now He would take up what they had; they gave Him a part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb -- *part* of it; He would have part in what they had. They were now with Him on easy terms, speaking reverently. "Part of" would allude to others besides the Lord participating, and the honeycomb is certainly a mutual thought; but all that is because they did not yet believe, and to
{503}
show how real His presence is in spite of conditions; all the time He is adjusting the conditions.
Ques. Does that emphasise the grace of the service?
J.T. It does, how He comes down to us in order to lead us into what He has before Him. He says, 'What have you here?' as if to say, 'I will make the most of it'. It says, "while they yet did not believe for joy, and were wondering, he said ... Have ye anything here to eat?" They were believing partly, but now *joy* was hindering them -- a remarkable state of things!
Ques. Was all that to make them believe that the Lord was there bodily, it was not a spirit?
J.T. Yes. "It is I myself". The Lord wishes us to know that it is Himself. He comes down to where we are, and if there is anything that He can appropriate, He will take it on. Of course, *now* He comes in a spiritual way -- not corporeally.
Ques. Was it not a joy to the Lord that they had something for Him? It was after He had shown them His hands and His feet, that is to say, what *He* had done for *them*.
J.T. No doubt, but notice it is "while they yet did not believe for joy". They were still in a mixed state, they had mixed feelings. He is seeking to get them into accord with His own mind, and surely He is entitled to have things His own way in His own assembly. It is blessed to get to *His* side of things.
C.L. Properly the assembly is His side of things, and He would have us have part with Him in it.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. I suppose these things did not spring up exactly as the saints were there? They must have brought them.
J.T. Quite; it is, "Have ye anything here ... ?" not simply 'Have ye anything?' It points to the local company, what they have. It may be said that in every meeting in fellowship there is *something* for the Lord,
{504}
although there may be a good deal He does not care for; and He would make the most of it.
Rem. What I meant was that we must not expect things to spring up in the meeting; we have to bring something.
J.T. This fish and honeycomb had to be acquired beforehand, you mean; it would thus be something that you *have*. I do not say that the thing would *not* spring up; in spiritual matters it is remarkable if you are alert what does spring up in your mind as you proceed, but it would be there already, in principle at least.
H.W.R. How would joy hinder your believing?
J.T. It is joy and wonderment combined, they were not balanced. What you observe is, things were going well until the Lord came in. It was the Lord's coming in that upset things, and that is a sorrowful state of things, but it is what happened here. If He comes in, why does it not promote all that is right? Instead of that a perturbed state came about, but the fault was theirs. They were gathering together and saying, "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon. And they related what had happened on the way, and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread. And as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst". It looks as if He was pleased with what they were saying. They were saying what was right, they were really talking of the two leading thoughts that pervade the assembly, that is, grace, expressed in the Lord appearing to Simon, and the breaking of bread. They maintain the dispensation. Now if they were in keeping with what they were saying, the Lord's coming in would have confirmed them in it instead of disconcerting them.
A.N. Would you say that the conditions among the saints to which He would come were to be the fruit of His own service to them earlier? I was thinking of the two disciples at Emmaus: He was there
{505}
to promote conditions that would be contributory to that.
J.T. Yes, and they came back to Jerusalem; they were contributory to Jerusalem by their returning, they came back with ability to say things that were really to enter into the constitution of the assembly. His appearing to Simon, His exposition of Scripture to the two, and His breaking bread at Emmaus -- all bore on assembly conditions.
A.N. I was thinking of what you remarked at the beginning, that the Lord's service to us individually precedes what we have collectively.
J.T. It does, and it produces what is contributory to the wealth of the assembly, because what they were saying involves the truth that runs down and maintains freshness in the assembly. "He was made known to them in the breaking of bread". That maintains a freshness which is not found at all in general current christianity; there is no freshness there. Whereas what they were saying was the effect of His gracious dealings with them at Emmaus, and was contributory to the whole service down here, showing how far-reaching an individual contribution may be. We should have this in view when we "come together in assembly".
A.N. I wondered if that would be illustrated in @Hebrews 8: 3, "Whence it is needful that this one also should have something which he may offer". That is service Godward, but in order that there might be conditions, He administers a new covenant for the promotion of those affections which He would use. "But now he has got a more excellent ministry, by so much as he is mediator of a better covenant" (@Hebrews 8: 6).
J.T. That is right. @Hebrews 8, 9 and 10 (to verse 18) deal with the new covenant, so as to enrich us to "approach" (@Hebrews 10: 22).
N.K.McL. How would this joy and wonderment, coupled with unbelief, express itself in our meetings?
{506}
J.T. Well, perhaps in undue speaking, restlessness. The state was really perturbation -- they did not believe for joy and wonderment. Some might think they were in a very happy state, but they were unbalanced; there was a want of faith, they *did not believe*. What was needed was faith and understanding suited for the great occasion; the Lord is really there; it is Himself.
Ques. Do you think that is where our lack is? We are not sure when He comes in.
J.T. I think there is want of faith as to what is suited to assembly conditions. There would be less restlessness, there would be more quietude and subduedness, making room for what He may have in mind.
C.L. The Lord speaks of His sufferings, too. That would bring in sobriety.
J.T. Yes. He *had* spoken of His sufferings to the two, so that it should have been in their minds. But a state of faith was lacking. The dispensation of God is in faith, faith suited to the position, not merely faith for my salvation.
H.F.N. Would you say a word in regard to the passage read in Acts? Is this all paving the way for that?
J.T. Yes. I think the passage in Acts has in mind what is to be developed in that book. The endings of the gospels really do not make room for Paul's doctrine as much as the beginning of the Acts does. We have the Lord coming into the midst in the end of the gospels, that is, in Luke and John, but in Acts 1 the writer begins with the "things which Jesus began both to do and to teach, until that day in which, having by the Holy Spirit charged the apostles whom he had chosen, he was taken up; to whom also he presented himself living, after he had suffered, with many proofs". That alludes to what we have in the endings of the gospels. Then it goes on, "being seen by them during forty days, and speaking of the things which concern the kingdom of God" -- not now adjusting
{507}
them. He was speaking about the things concerning the kingdom of God. Then it says in verse 4, "being assembled with them, commanded them ..." You do not get that in the endings of the gospels. It is now the assembly definitely, and how He presents Himself to it, so that the assembly should be impressed, and the things spoken of there are understood, the things concerning the kingdom of God.
A.N. Why should it be "the things which concern the kingdom of God", and not the assembly?
J.T. I think it is a general thought. "The things which concern the kingdom of God" is what had been inaugurated in that sense, the kingdom viewed in its moral bearing. The ministry of the twelve scarcely went beyond that. Later the saints are seen "assembled to break bread" (@Acts 20: 7), that is in relation to Paul's ministry. I think the assembly in relation to the breaking of bread awaited Paul, but the general teaching of the twelve is the kingdom of God. It waited for Paul to bring out the great thought of the Lord's heart, that is, the assembly as the vessel of service.
H.F.N. How would that link on with what you referred to this morning in regard of John, the Lord laying His right hand upon him and then saying, "Fear not; *I* am the first and the last, and the living one: and I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages" (@Revelation 1: 17, 18)? Would that link on with this scripture?
J.T. I think it does. It is a question of *life*. Here the Lord presents Himself living; there, He lays His right hand upon John to revive him, telling His bondman that He was the living One. In Revelation it is the presentation of Himself in a judicial way, meeting breakdown. But where there is a true soul He lays His right hand upon us and makes Himself known as the One who became dead and lives for ever. I think we need that touch now in view of the breakdown. Then it goes on to say that the Lord charged the apostles *by the Holy Spirit*. That is the principle
{508}
introduced at once: and the constitution of the assembly and all that goes on there is by the Spirit; even the Lord's coming in now is by the Spirit. He comes in Himself, the Spirit is the medium -- He comes in in that way. The presence of the Holy Spirit is absolutely essential to the constitution and service of the assembly.
W.M.B. Is the change of the Lord's position to be discerned by the Holy Spirit?
J.T. I think so; all is contingent on the Spirit, as I apprehend; all His service is in that way, but it is *Himself*. It is beyond us to define how it can be. Jehovah came in in Old Testament times evidently by angelic means, but now it is Spirit-wise. The assembly is the "habitation of God in the Spirit", but then it is *God* who is there. And so the Lord Himself comes to us, and thus the Supper has a peculiar place, because it brings in the humanity of our Lord -- what He did as a Man. He is called to mind in that way, it is Himself. All is on our side too by the Spirit. It is properly by the Spirit we have part in the assembly.
L.M. "He presented himself living ... with many proofs". Does He continue to give these many proofs?
J.T. In a way, I think, He does. Then the forty days -- "being seen by them during forty days" -- being the *full* period of impressing, of instructing them with the idea of spirituality. That is where the great difficulty lies, the want of spirituality; not the want of facts and doctrine, but the want of spirituality, and that is why Acts gives us the forty days, as much as to say, there is ample instruction by example in what He did as to what spirituality signifies. These forty days are intended to teach us spirituality. There is in them the fact that the Lord may change His form: "he was manifested in another form" (@Mark 16: 12).
A.J.B. What is the thought of "the promise of the Father"? Why that character?
{509}
J.T. That is the Spirit. It is a question of the dispensation; it is God in that relation. The dispensation is stamped by the Father.
Ques. Would you say that the thought of the kingdom would provide a moral and spiritual foundation for the Spirit of God in our coming together?
J.T. It is a moral thought -- God is here in rule. There is that brought in in a moral way to subdue us and make us fit for the divine purpose. It is suggested in the *beaten work*, of silver or gold; God would make some use of us. We do not get the thought of the assembly in relation to the breaking of bread until we come to Paul. The assembly was formed as the Spirit came down, of course, but it is seen fully as related to the service of God in Paul's ministry. Peter had the keys of the kingdom of heaven; Paul had the ministry of the assembly, the mystery.
Ques. Would the ministry of the twelve be connected with the assembly as the seat of heavenly government?
J.T. Yes. The heavenly city in Revelation is seen in relation to heavenly government, and is connected with the twelve. We are dealing now with the *inner* thought -- that is Paul.
Ques. The Minister of the sanctuary would appear to be connected with the throne and the majesty on high; would that not flow out from the ministry of the twelve?
J.T. Christ's place "on the right hand of the greatness on high" (@Hebrews 1: 3) is mentioned to show His greatness as Priest; and of course His ministry went on from the time that He went up on high; but Paul brought out the full thought of "the sanctuary". I have no doubt that Paul wrote the epistle to the Hebrews. Paul's ministry completed the word of God (@Colossian 1: 25), and in it you get the assembly as the body of Christ and the vessel of the service of God. The completeness of the divine thoughts generally awaited Paul's ministries. Peter in his first epistle
{510}
touches Paul's teaching and in his second epistle formally supports it.
W.R. What are we to learn from the thought of the Lord appearing in another form?
J.T. You cannot compass Him, you have to be always on the alert for Him and what He may do, and how He may appear. It is Christ, the Person, we have to do with, not only in the kingdom, but in the assembly -- what He is *there*. I mean to say, you see Him as He is there, that is the great thought, you see Him in the sanctuary. "In another form" is only said in Mark, and it alludes to service in relation to failure among the saints, a solemn thing, for the Lord will appear as circumstances require, as we see in Revelation 1.
Rem. Seeing Him forty days would give the thought of educating us.
J.T. Yes. It is to inaugurate a great spiritual state of things. In the millennium they will not have such instruction, they will not have Christ in that way. These instructions are in view of the assembly, and the spiritual state of things *now*.
{511}
THE PRODUCT OF TRAVAIL
@Revelation 12: 1, 2, 5; @1 Samuel 4: 21, 22; @Genesis 35: 18 - 20
What is in my mind to engage us is of a somewhat solemn and exacting nature. It may not be much to stimulate, but rather to sober us and to promote a sense of obligation in regard to the interests of God in this world. Those who, from the outset, had to do with God's interests on earth since sin came in, have been characterised by sobriety, by gravity, and a sense of obligation, and this comes out peculiarly as we pass through crises. The Lord has been very gracious to His people in recent years in saving us from the wolf who scatters, so that there has been preservation from general scattering of the saints, for which we all should give thanks to God constantly and pray that the measure of peace which we have had may continue and increase. So that we "pray for the peace of Jerusalem".
There is, however, much in the way of local eruptions and cleavages and these cause their own exercises, and I take the liberty of regarding these exercises as "travails", so as to bring out, to make clear, that each of these travails is intended to bring forth something -- that the state of the meeting is better than it was before the sorrow began, and not worse. If it is worse, it shows there has not been strength to bring forth, as it is said in the prophet, "the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth" (@Isaiah 37: 3). What is to be brought forth in a general way is a *man*, not an individual but a man in *character*. From the outset of the incoming of sin, bringing forth has been by travail and pain, and the Spirit of God takes it up and applies it constantly in the sense in which I am speaking of it.
We use the word 'exercise' for the word 'travail' which is one of the best words we have and the most
{512}
useful; but I am not using it now, for it is hardly strong enough for what I have in mind. "Travail" is the word; you find it applied in Galatians where the apostle is in great distress as regards the saints there, for they were missing the point for the moment, the point of sonship: the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. He applies the word to himself, he spoke of travailing *again;* he had already had his concern about these same saints, as indeed he had, no doubt, about every assembly formed by his ministry. What he had in mind was that Christ should be formed in them.
Then the Lord Himself uses the figure, at a crucial time, on the eve of His being taken away from His disciples. They loved Him and the very thought of His being taken away caused sorrow, but He clothes them with the great thought of travail, having in mind the result; that there should be gain from that very sorrow. Indeed, He was about to enter into the greatest sorrow. The Lord was entering on the most terrible series of sufferings conceivable, but they were to issue in something. He speaks of what would issue because of the saints¬ participation in this, in the measure in which they could participate in it. He says, "I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice" (@John 16: 22). They would be better off, there would be as a result a great improvement on their then circumstances. So that He uses the figure of which I am speaking; He speaks about joy occasioned by a man being born into the world. The great accession of gain alluded not so much to Himself personally, as to what is brought forth, His own characteristics developed, brought forth. The book of the Acts shows that the children had not only come to the birth, but there was strength for it -- marvellous enduring power in the disciples! -- and the great result is brought forth, but not without travail. So I am speaking now,
{513}
as I said, in a very sober, solemn way as to these local matters coming up, and they *will* come up, for we cannot hide from ourselves the fact that they come up constantly; they have come up, they are coming up, and they will come up. It is well to face the position.
Now in regard to the first passage, in Revelation, what is in mind is that in approaching these sorrows as they come -- I do not say they are always cleavages or divisions, for there may be attacks from the outside occasioning the same thing, as in this passage in Revelation -- but in approaching these crises, whatever they may be, let us see to it that we have right thoughts of the saints, that they are clothed rightly in our minds. Some have turned aside in these sorrows, grown weary, blaming others rather than themselves, and turning away, perhaps glad of the excuse. One has to say that sorrowfully, but it is because we have not learned to clothe the brethren aright. Take any local meeting, however small and feeble, we may not clothe it rightly. Were we to get to the side of heaven, were we to get into heaven and see the heavenly point of view, we would see the meeting very differently, and also each of those who compose it. As we do get heaven's view, then the matter is settled in our minds because we cannot but stand by and see it through, taking our share in it, with the result that the end is better than the beginning. That there is definite gain, that what is brought forth is in the character of a *man*, that is to say, a man in the sense of full growth. I am not speaking now of any individual, but of characteristics. The apostle had that in mind in his first letter to Corinth, that there should be men; men, I apprehend, in the order of dignity. God would have men in His house. "Quit yourselves like men" (@1 Corinthians 16: 13), he says. You get strength to go with it. That was what he had in mind, that the meeting at Corinth would take on this dignified character in such a way as they had not had it before. I believe Corinth was greater after the crisis than
{514}
before, and the apostle intended to go the whole way in dealing with the matter there.
We have to act wisely in dealing with evil in local companies, and await the time to deal with it finally, and to go the whole way with the matter. So that the apostle directed them what to do with the gross side of the position, the shameful condition that existed, that a christian assembly should be allowing something that would not be named even among the nations, among the corrupt people of Corinth. The judgment was to be thorough. The sin in question reminds us of what we are capable of in our local companies, and how Satan would bring the testimony into discredit publicly by someone's conduct in that way. He ordered that to be dealt with and told them in detail what to do -- "ye and my spirit being gathered together, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 5: 4). That is, the whole christian economy can be brought into that action, so as to retrieve the position, to lift the testimony from the degradation of such a gross state of things, into dignity. Then he says, "Remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves" (verse 12). That is addressed to the whole company, they had to do that; but then there is much more than that. @2 Corinthians 12 shows that there was much more of the same kind of thing. He did not forget it, he knew all about it and would deal with it in due course. He would prefer that *they* dealt with it, and wrote to them that they should do so before he came; but he says, 'It must be done'. The danger is the leaving of things, dear brethren, dealing with them in a certain way and yet leaving them in detail, so that the leaven takes root again and spreads abroad. That is the malady that exists in many cases.
So the apostle says further, "having in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled" (@2 Corinthians 10: 6). That is, when the saints generally would come round to obedience, he would deal with the
{515}
more salient evil, not now only immorality, but bad doctrine and rivalry with himself. Picture a nominal brother in that meeting saying, as regards the apostle Paul, that "his letters ... are weighty and strong, but his presence in the body weak, and his speech naught" (@2 Corinthians 10: 10). Think of what was behind that! The apostle did not shrink from saying as to that, "Such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ. And it is not wonderful, for Satan himself transforms himself into an angel of light" (@2 Corinthians 11: 13, 14). He would deal with all that in time. What is in mind is that things are not to be left; we may feel powerless, but we must not leave things that way, they *must* be dealt with, and God will not fail us as we turn to Him.
I am speaking of the clothing of the saints rightly, as a local gathering and generally; so that, in this passage in Revelation, the woman is "clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars". Now we are to understand what this means, what a realm of governmental glory we are in the midst of here. These are all thoughts attaching to the saints; they attach to Israel, for it is Israel here, poor though she seemed to be as this event took place historically, but the divine thoughts were there. Simeon and Anna and many others in those days recognised what existed in these thoughts. So it is, dear brethren, that our salvation and preservation and participation in the conflict, requires that we should have these thoughts about the brethren, about the assembly. What glories attach to us! Is it not worth standing for? Is it not worth travailing for, so that there may be brought forth something that will maintain it? It has not been maintained: that is the idea. The history of Israel shows that although these thoughts had attached to Israel, they had never been maintained properly. In David and Solomon, of course, they were maintained to some extent, but all that had lapsed, and a very sorrowful state of things existed. Now the
{516}
time has come for one to be brought forth, and it is a "male son", meaning, as I pointed out, that the male side, the "man", is emphasised. That is what is needed. We are living in times when that side is greatly set aside publicly, with the consequent results of weakness in government, and evil allowed beyond anything perhaps ever legalised before. Not only is evil allowed, but it is legalised; it is the weakness of the position. Where evil is legalised, it simply means that there is no power to resist it, to overcome it; and that may creep in amongst us. There are those who excuse what exists and say, 'Leave it alone;' but that is only weakness. Wisdom may require that we be patient, but the thing must be met; and in the passage before us it is about to be met, and Satan knows it -- he understands what this woman means. He understands what any meeting means, any gathering of God's people in relation to the name of Christ -- gathering together, as the Lord says, "unto my name". He understands that and is set to defeat it: first by corrupting it, and then, if there be travail as to it, to defeat, to nullify, the normal result of it. That is what he is set for. So that the meeting would be even worse than it was before. Now that is a most lamentable thing, and the secret of it is that we do not go *all* the way in dealing with evil.
Now, it is a "male son" that she is about to bring forth. It does not say that the enemy knew what the product would be, but whatever she would bring forth he would destroy it. He knew what she represented. All these things were there potentially, but they were not carried through and maintained, as in the days of David and Solomon, nor as will be in the glorious days of the Messiah, when He will take up the government, when God will judge the world in righteousness by that Man whom He has ordained. The government had lapsed, and Satan knew that that woman, Israel, represented what was in the mind
{517}
of God, and he knew that anything she would bring forth must be destroyed, or his schemes would be overthrown. But the Spirit of God tells us that it was a "male son" she brought forth; it was a completed matter, the exercise was completed. So that we have One whom God is pleased with, and He is caught up to heaven. Any exercise short of this, any product short of this in our exercises, dear brethren, is not sufficient. It is a matter of what God can take up into heaven, what pleases Him. He took the Son born, up to heaven, to His throne. There can be no doubt that prophetically the assembly was included in this, for it is what is out of Christ, all that belongs to that great result is caught up to God and to His throne, beyond the reach of Satan. I am endeavouring to apply this in a simple way to our local meetings, for if in these crises that we go through, the result is not morally great enough to be caught up to heaven, there is nothing gained. If the state of the meeting is not better than it was before, ground has been lost, and the secret is that we do not go the whole way in the matter.
Now I turn to Samuel, to show how a women had a right judgement of the thing negatively. It was one of the darkest days in Israel's history, and meetings have their days of that kind, God orders them so as to make men out of us. I say, God *orders* them; you may say, He allows them, but it is more likely that He orders them to bring out what is latent, what is not active. He would bring out what there is of Himself and make the most of it, and very often a conflict does that. I need not dwell on this dark day in the early chapters of 1 Samuel, it is well known amongst us, I doubt not. Samuel is not seen here; he is seen in the previous chapter; he is ready; he is there. The prophetic ministry is available, but he is not seen in chapters 4 to 6, not till chapter 7. Now what is in mind in these chapters is that every saint, every nominal christian,
{518}
every person in the meeting, is to take things to heart, and not to rely upon a Samuel. God has His Samuel, for which we thank Him -- he may not be known to all, but he is there. Before His Samuel takes up the matter, the saints have to be brought into it, they have to go through the things they have brought upon themselves. It will not do to bring in a powerful ministry, and carry things on for a time over the heads of the saints; God wants to bring every one of us into it, the youngest in the meeting.
Now this woman -- the wife of Phinehas -- represents that side; she *feels* and *names* the conditions. She dies, alas -- it is a sorrowful scene -- but in her death we have brought to our attention that the condition of things in which she lived will not do for God. She died; she represents in a typical way the feeble state of things. There were those who were content with that state of things, but *God* was not, and the point is to get into the mind of God. He had already revealed to His prophet, that is to Samuel, His mind about the matter -- a young man, a boy, you might say, receiving the mind of God about an old man, about Eli. The mind of God was disclosed, that is the background; and the man to whom it was disclosed was there -- he is a potentiality, he is *there*. Faith always looks for this, but then, faith looks for the saints to be brought into it first, because before you get a deliverer the saints should feel the need of a deliverer. This woman died, as I said: it is solemnly and sorrowfully stated, she died in her travail. You might say, she died for the people in that sense, to bring home to them what the state of things was. It is often so in our meetings that one has to accept death to bring home to all the state of things, for God is bent on reality amongst us, and He would draw all the saints into what He is about to do in these last days. As this woman dies in the travail, what does she bring forth? A son -- alive: the great product of travailing.
{519}
And what is his name? Ichabod. Though not positive blessing, it affords *light* in a negative sense: a solemn humbling fact, but that is the state of things -- there is no glory. What is our service? What are our preachings? What are our morning meetings, as we call them? What are our Bible-readings -- if there is no glory? God's thought is that there should be glory. He is spoken of as "the God of glory" in calling out Abraham. He *is* the God of glory, and the assembly is the residence of it. Every meeting having in principle assembly status is intended to be the residence of glory.
Now, what a great thought this is, dear brethren! How it brings the thing close to us! It is not an abstract thing, the assembly is the residence of glory. Well, this woman in her dying moments says, No glory! Where is it? That is the meaning of Ichabod. She says, "The glory is departed". It was once there, thank God for that! There are many so-called meetings of brethren that never had the glory. How could a meeting set up in independency have the glory of God? It has not any, whatever its pretension; those composing it have departed from the glory. Any person or persons moving away from where God is, have departed from the glory; so they are left! We need not speak of them, save to enlarge on what is in mind here; they never had the glory, the glory was never part of these independent meetings; they have left the sphere of it in independency. But those who follow righteousness, faith, love, and peace, calling on the Lord out of a pure heart, may count upon the glory; it comes in constantly.
Now, this woman had a clear view of the position. She says, "The glory is departed from Israel", and her product has this stamp on him; everyone who speaks of him by name is reminded that a change has come about, that the glory that once was there is gone. That is the secret of the recovery: one dying with the sense that the glory has departed -- acknowledging it, naming the product of her travail in that way. He is, as you
{520}
might say, a living testimony in Israel to the shame of the condition that existed, and that is the secret of recovery. Samuel comes in and the Philistines are routed, but that is later on, not before this, not before you have an Ichabod. It is a product, in a negative way, of right feeling as to a bad state of things amongst us. God intimates in the history here that He sees to that, He acknowledges the confession of this dying mother, by coming in. He awakens as a man out of sleep and shouts as a strong man by reason of wine, and puts His enemies to a perpetual reproach, and brings the ark back. He had delivered His strength into captivity, and His glory into the enemy's hands, but He brings it back (@Psalm 78: 61 - 66). He sees to it Himself, without a priest, without a Levite; He brings the ark back, showing what God can do, but He does it evidently in the light of this confession; this acknowledgement that the shameful state of the people caused the glory to depart.
Well now, I go on to Genesis, to bring out another travail -- that of Rachel. She is the wife of Jacob. It is Israel again; but Jacob is travelling on the way from Bethel to his father Isaac, and this occurs near Bethlehem. It is a prophetic scene, having its results later, for Rachel is carried down honourably through Jeremiah into Matthew's gospel. Her weeping is connected with the place of the birth of the Lord Jesus -- "Rachel weeping for her children", not for her son, but for her children, thus referring to Israel -- the remnant. She is Jacob's wife, his first-loved; that is, it is Israel that is loved. She is not here clothed with the sun. It is a question of Jacob's affections, that is to say, it is the meeting, as I have been speaking of it, if you will allow me to use the figure. It is the meeting that is the object of Christ's affections. He loved the assembly and delivered Himself up for it. It is an honourable state of things, so far; but Rachel dies, and I speak of the product, how that Benjamin,
{521}
the product of the exercise, is a full type of Christ -- that is, in an active sense. His name is Benjamin. The name of the child in @Revelation 12 is not given; it is a "male son", which faith understands. Here it is Benjamin, and, dear brethren, this is the final thought I have, that she who travails is loved by Christ. It is not the glory attaching to it, as in Revelation 12, but one loved by Christ. The Lord has great pleasure in our meetings in this aspect, and He would make them better. The apostle Paul stresses the thought of increasing more and more, and the exercise is to make the condition better, that there may be more to be loved than there was, before.
Rachel dies in a very sorrowful way, and she names her child Benoni, as she dies -- the *son of my affliction*. That does not go far enough, dear brethren. If we have what only represents Rachel's sorrow, we have not the needed result; that does not go as far as she had prophesied of this son. She had said when Joseph was born, "Jehovah will add to me another son". Well, we must understand what this *other son* means, that it is not terminated in the remembrance of a mother's sorrow, but in the *completion of a divine thought*. Now that is what I want to make clear, that in our meetings there should be some idea of this completion of a divine thought. It is a great thing not to move along in a day-in-day-out sort of way, but to have a true conception of the divine thought in the position in which we are set, one that is complete: it is a question of *twelve*. The woman that was with Rachel said, "Fear not; for this also is a son for thee", that is to say, 'Your own thought of addition'. It is a question of God's thought, that God would have twelve tribes. How great it is to get to the divine side in our sorrows, and to see that the result, the product of the exercise and travail is a complete thought! The woman says, "This also is a son for thee" -- it is what you ought to expect. The dying woman was not equal to
{522}
it, she called him *Benoni;* but Jacob was equal to it, he called him *Benjamin*. When Eve bore Seth she called him Seth, and Adam called him Seth; she went the full length, she had learnt from experience. Jacob does not call his twelfth son Benoni, he calls him Benjamin, that is, he has the mind of God -- Benjamin is son of the right hand.
This is a remarkable chapter; there is much death, but we have a Benjamin, symbolic of power. Jacob is on his way to Isaac, and he names the child Benjamin, implying that he is son of his father's right hand. It involves a divinely complete thought, for in the number *twelve*, Benjamin being the twelfth son of Jacob, we have what God can use in the effectuation of the counsels of His love. And in the son of His right hand, God will do the *best* for us. If there be need of ministry or the like amongst us, it is a question of travailing for it, having intelligence as to what is needed, and God will give us what we need, that is to say, somebody that can do the thing that is needed, that is Benjamin, the son of his father's right hand. The right hand is the symbol of power; God's heart is there, His heart is at His right hand (@Ecclesiastes 10: 2); that is, all His power is subservient to His love. Now He has a man He can use. Benjamin is a remarkable type of Christ, but what I am speaking of is Christ in *character* coming out amongst us, generally and locally: that which God can use to do what is needed and to do it well and in power; like the Lord in the gospel of Mark, for Mark sees "the kingdom of God come in power". Ministry requires power: it is Benjamin, the son of the father's right hand, as the product of exercise.
May God bless these thoughts to us!
{523}
SPIRITUALITY NEEDED IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
@Romans 8: 8; @1 Samuel 9: 27; @1 Samuel 10: 1 - 12
I have in mind to speak about spirituality and how it is acquired, particularly as bearing upon rule -- the administration of government. Spirituality depends not only on the presence of the Spirit here and the acceptation of the Spirit, it depends not only on the believer having the Spirit, but also on environment, divinely provided; that is, on what is external to us, but within our range, the range of our observation. It depends, of course, on the Spirit in us.
@Romans 8, the section of it from which I read, treats of the Spirit. In chapter 5 His service to us is to shed abroad the love of God in our hearts. That would be to bring us into accord with God, not only mentally but feelingly, as possessed in our hearts of the Spirit, and the love of God placed there by the Spirit. Chapter 8 contemplates that room is made for Him. The intent of chapter 7 is to make room in us for the Holy Spirit -- it involves a process, a very humiliating one, too, by which we are caused to analyse our inwards, so as to discern the workings of those organs that are automatic. There are organs that are subject to our wills, but there are organs that work independently of our wills.
The Holy Spirit takes charge of all this as we allow Him to do so. "*I myself*" is the personality of the believer, who, having found his feet through the process, announces that he with the mind serves God's law. It is "*I myself*" -- so he announces that he is proprietor, as it were, of the house. That is, the rule -- the governing principle -- is the will of God, the law of God, and the Spirit coming in fills all the space available, and He will fill all the space you afford Him.
{524}
Man's spirit is said to be "the lamp of Jehovah, searching all the inner parts of the belly" (@Proverbs 20: 27). This passage enters into Romans 7, enabling us to discern what is in us and take up the attitude of refusal of all that is contrary to the law of God. "*I myself* with the mind;" that is, the mind -- the greatest faculty man has, I suppose -- is in action. It says, "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". So that there is authority and control in the house, as it were, using the figure of the house as the person in all his parts.
The type in @2 Kings 4 helps us, that is, vessels not a few. The oil is available, all the vessels are available, every vessel is to be filled, the oil stays when there are no more vessels, meaning that the Spirit fills all the room that we afford. So that whilst the Spirit is divine, a divine Person all powerful, yet we may limit Him, and do, alas. Of course He is limited in a human creature, but not in the Lord Jesus; He is limited in us creatures, but still, as we give Him room, He acts. That is what is in my mind as to chapter 8, so that the word is that we be spiritually minded, not only authoritatively minded, not only righteously minded, not only holily minded, but spiritually minded. That is a great -- in a way indefinable -- thought, but a very real thing.
I want to show from the passage read in Samuel how, from the divine side, Saul was to come into all this, I mean in figure. I wish to speak of him as representing a young christian, as I see that perhaps the greater number here are young, and one wanted to seek to make this service bear upon them, for the word is always written in large letters in front of such a company, The Lord has need of you -- but on His own terms, and that is what comes out here. First, Samuel says to Saul, "stand thou still now, that I may cause thee to hear the word of God". The believer is now regarded as having the Lord
{525}
near. The sequel of this history shows that some of us turn out to be Sauls, alas, often making a good show at the outset, but turning out to be rejectors of the truth; hence the importance of noting well what is presented of God initially to the young christian. It is not merely what a servant would do, but what God would do. Samuel, representing God here, says, "Stand thou still now, that I may cause thee to hear the word of God". So, dear brethren, it is not merely what I have to say to you, but the word of God. Indeed I should not be here had I not something to say in the nature of the word of God. These meetings are of no value aside from that. How wonderful it is that God in this very hall, at this very hour, should be ready Himself to speak a word into our ears! And not only that, but to cause us to hear it! That is the gracious service of God Himself through the Spirit, through Christ mediatorially, to cause us to hear. We are slow to hear, very slow, whereas the divine injunction is, "swift to hear, slow to speak". Swift to hear when you come to the house of God; but in our scripture it is not only to hear, but to be *caused* to hear aright. So that the Lord says, "Take heed therefore how ye hear".
Now that is the first thing, it is the ear of the young believer. Saul had his beginnings here. Samuel, it says, "took the vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him, and said, Is it not because Jehovah has anointed thee prince over his inheritance?" How beautiful that is, for Samuel still represents God! It is love according to God here: Samuel had not known Saul, as far as we can see, before, but he had been apprised of him by Jehovah, and his affections had been drawn out to him because he was chosen of God for this service. And then we have presented to Saul a series of spiritual thoughts. So it is with God that He introduces, it may be briefly, but He introduces initially His greatest thoughts. The gospel as presented by us should carry with it the seed of the greatest
{526}
thoughts of God. It is said to be the glad tidings of God concerning his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. It is intended to represent the greatest thoughts of God, for we are to be conformed to the image of His Son, and thus we see set out the greatest thoughts. It is well therefore to note that Saul is *caused* to hear the word of God.
Then it says, "When thou goest from me today, thou shalt meet two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say to thee, The asses are found which thou wentest to seek, and behold, thy father has dismissed the matter of the asses, and is anxious about you, saying, What shall I do for my son?" This is a very touching matter, because young people, young christians, are sure to be more or less self-occupied. I do not say this in any disparaging way, because it is true of all of us and God knows it. It takes us a long time to get rid of self; who is he that has got rid of self entirely? One is conscious of how self is there, but it is almost permissible in the early days of a young christian. But we are to be assured that other people are thinking of us; let nobody think he is alone and nobody cares for him; there is no such thing as that in the household of faith. Satan would occupy you with yourself, as if there were not a person in the whole universe thinking of you. There are many. Heaven is thinking about you and the saints are thinking about you, but then I am speaking now particularly of your own household, the christian household, your parents are sure to be thinking about you. You may not be worthy, in fact there was not much credit to Saul here, he was sent out on an errand and he failed in it; he is viewed now as not having found the asses. How humiliating! The asses were lost, now they are found and Saul is regarded as lost. It is a good thing to get the experience of being lost; indeed God intends that we should have this experience, and He too, therefore,
{527}
feels the loss. "This my son was ... lost and has been found" (@Luke 15: 24).
The prophet now says, "thou shalt meet two men by Rachel's sepulchre". If he is capable of feelings at all, spiritual feelings, he will be greatly affected by this. The mother of Benjamin -- for Saul was a Benjaminite -- one of the great builders of the house of Israel, is brought to his mind; he is at *her* sepulchre. Everyone knows what it is to be moved at the sepulchre of a loved one, and God takes account of this, how we are capable of being moved at the sepulchre of a parent. Two men were there. Why were these two men at the sepulchre of Rachel? They had some purpose in being there. Can I share their feelings? It is a question of spiritual history, not mere natural sentiment, but spiritual history, and it is intended to be that in the christian from the very outset. In the scripture we have spiritual elements presented objectively -- they are set there from the very outset of God's dealings with man, so that man should become spiritual. The greatest spiritual era, that is the period containing the greatest spiritual suggestions, is the forty days in which our Lord Jesus was down here after He rose from the dead, before He went up into heaven. The whole period is full of spiritual suggestions; at the outset, the disciples resorted to the sepulchre, they were looking for the dead. If I were to stand by Rachel's sepulchre, or by the cave of Machpelah, I would not be thinking of the bodies in the grave, but of the *resurrection* -- they all live for God. The disciples were looking for the dead, they had no thought that Jesus was risen, but the spiritual education lay in His resurrection. The position of the linen cloths, of course, taught something, and Peter saw the linen cloths lying. It says, "he sees the linen clothes lying there alone" (@Luke 24: 12). It is a question of *how* they were there -- there was the handkerchief by itself folded. All that was spiritual, it was
{528}
to make them spiritual and they discerned it, for the other disciple "saw and believed". Well now, in connection with these two men, he says, You will find them there, and they will tell you that your father is sorrowing for you. How Rachel had sorrowed! Is Kish a true son of Rachel? Yes, he is sorrowing for his son: we read of "Rachel weeping for her children ... because they are not". I mean it is a question of spirituality, as learning at the outset of our history as believers how to *feel* things, how to feel them spiritually. What is the lesson here? Well, it shows somebody is thinking of me, somebody is sorrowing for me; am I the occasion for sorrow? It is for each of us to answer this, but it is a comfort to me to know that if I am the occasion for sorrow, that somebody is there to comfort me, to think of me. So these two men tell this young believer, with great prospects before him, that his father is sorrowing for him, and it says, "the asses are found which thou wentest to seek". What a humbling thought that is! "The asses are found", but you did not find them -- it was no credit to him that the asses were found. I have missed that piece, I have not done my work, the little bit I have been given to do I have failed in, but somebody is thinking of me, somebody is sighing for me. That is a great matter -- it is the house to which the believer belongs, the Father's house, we may say, it is a question of personal interest here. Saul belonged to the tribe of Benjamin, and Benjamin was the son of Rachel, and Kish was the son of Benjamin, and Kish was capable of sorrowing for his son; he thought of his son. All this is very essential in parents; let our youths understand they are being thought of and sorrowed for. How much sorrow they give! But what a comfort it is to know that there are parents who sorrow for their children! The secret of many going astray and remaining astray is want of this deep feeling of sorrow for them.
{529}
Well, the next thing is the third verse -- that is, it is not simply coming to a meeting like this and listening to what is said and perhaps talking about it afterwards, it is that you should become spiritual, that is the intent of God. You go forward from that point, you have learned that people are caring for you, sorrowing for you, and that in truth you are in the position of a lost one -- a very wholesome feeling: I think of the one who is lost and the parent who is sorrowing. Maybe there is someone like that here tonight, may all this be a cheer to your heart! -- Rachel weeping for her children. But I am speaking of verse 3: "Thou shalt thou go on forward from thence, and shalt come to the oak of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three men going up to God, to Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another carrying three cakes of bread, and another carrying a flask of wine". So far Saul is not carrying anything; he has not entered on levitical service at all, but these are a carrying people, but mark it, beloved young people, this is an environment, it is an objective thing, divinely arranged for you. We have had three days here, remarkable days; well, these three days afford objective thoughts for young people, because spirituality arises not only from the fact that you have the Spirit, but that you have spiritual suggestions presented to you. The forty days were replete with these, the Lord presenting Himself, and then being *seen of* them -- it is where our eyes are; the spiritual suggestions are to be absorbed. The natural mind does not absorb them at all, although it may take them in superficially. It says in Hebrews, "partakers of the Holy Spirit ... and have fallen away" (@Hebrews 6: 4 - 6). That does not refer to real christians, it refers to such persons as Saul here, taking part in things externally and yet failing in them entirely. So that, as I said before, we have to get into our minds, if we are to be spiritual, the idea of a divine environment presented, and God has brought it in here. It is an
{530}
environment which is suggested, and we are to absorb what it presents. If I am not born again I shall never really absorb anything spiritual.
What I am saying is of great importance, as the apostle Paul says, "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit" (@2 Corinthians 3: 18). He is working, but then it is on persons who are absorbing from an objective environment, that is the glory of the Lord: think of what that means! He operates as we are occupied with the environment, as I said.
Now these men, as you will observe, are going up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids, one carrying three cakes of bread, and another carrying a flask of wine. There are three men, three kids, and three cakes of bread; that is God is giving abundant evidence of what is in His mind. The numeral three is a most important matter in what I am speaking of; it is a *complete* testimony. Somebody is carrying your burden for you, not only sorrowing for you, but carrying your burden for you -- freighted with something for you. You are not the only object of interest, because the house of God could never be exclusively occupied with one person. The house of God is a great thought and these men are going up to the house of God, they are going up to God to Bethel -- *God* is their objective. How many have you met like that? Thank God they are to be met, but there may be those here who do not understand what I am saying; I can assure such that throughout the world in hundreds of places these people are to be met. It is very beautiful to my mind, and it is beautiful to heaven, I am sure, to think of these saints as they issue forth from the dwellings of Jacob, freighted with these heavenly things, going up to God. God is the objective of these three men, not of Saul yet, but God is seeking to bring Saul into it, as He is seeking to bring every young person into it.
{531}
Now as you make God your object you come into His house, not to any merely religious building, but to where God is and to where God is known of a truth. It is said of the assembly, God is among you of a truth. You find out that, and go there, but you are drawing near to God. These men are not going empty-handed, and this is a very important matter. Saul is to go forward and he meets them going somewhere, they are going up to God to Bethel, and they are freighted with three kids, three cakes and a flask of wine. Such men are not selfish. God is very kind, He is a giving God, and the believer being of His house understands it and takes on His character. This is all educational, hence I would encourage all young people here to get to meetings and see how the brethren move to God and how they reflect heaven in going. They do not give Saul all they have. They do not give him three cakes of bread, they give him two loaves, and they do not give him the wine; it is not the time for it. I am not advocating prohibition, I never did and never would, I regard it as against the truth. The flask of wine here represents what is spiritual, it is a question of what stimulates spiritually, and it was not the time to stimulate Saul yet, he just needs sustenance and he is given enough to sustain him. Two is adequate to represent what is in mind, that he be nourished: that is the next thing -- on my way I am nourished. See the objective, see the suggestion of these devoted men carrying loaves and kids and a flask of wine, going to the house of God. How sober they were, having God in mind! God would keep Himself before us and sober our hearts, so producing piety in us, for piety is profitable for all things. Samuel says, "they will ask after thy welfare, and give thee two loaves; which thou shalt receive of their hands". That is another thing, do not forget to receive what is available in this way. Some of you are listening to me, perhaps you will speak about what I am saying,
{532}
but are you *receiving* the thing? It is what God is saying to you and you are to receive what He has for you. The apostle said to the Corinthians, "which also ye received".
In verse 5 we have, "After that thou shalt come to the hill of God". Now let us follow and see if we can grasp what that means. God has a hill, which is a great thought running through Scripture; it causes envy later on, God having desired it for His abode, as @Psalm 68: 16 tells us, but here it is in the hands, as you will observe, of the Philistines. How sorrowful that is! We have been speaking about sorrowing; it was a great principle introduced into the house of Benjamin -- the idea of sorrowing for others. Now, can I sorrow for God? Can I think for God? Can I sigh and cry for the abominations that affect the house of God, as I look abroad in christendom and see how the hill of God is in the hands of the Philistines? That is, the big men in christendom; by them Christ is shut out; I refer to what is public. Can I feel as to that? Can I sigh about it? God loves these sighs. He says to the man clothed with linen, who had the writer's ink-horn by his side, "Go ... through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that are done in the midst thereof" (@Ezekiel 9: 4). Is Saul equal to this? Well, are all the young people here equal to this, to turn away from their ordinary matters and begin to think of God and His house and of the abominations which are in it in a public sense? So it goes on, "it shall come to pass, when thou comest thither into the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets coming down from the high place with lute and a tambour and pipe and harp before them; and they themselves prophesying". Now this is an attractive way of presenting the matter, it is not now taking a sword by your side and attacking the Philistine on the hill of God, that will come later, and
{533}
one would recommend the consideration of Jonathan in that respect, how manfully he and his armour-bearer attacked the Philistine. Here it is the attractive side, they have musical instruments, and you are to be called into this; it brings me to the subject of prophesying.
One of the greatest matters in these recent times amongst the brethren is the subject of prophecy; this first book of Samuel is marked by it. If Saul did not enter into it, as history shows us he did not, there were those who did and there were those who came under rule in their prophecy. This book later on presents Samuel as presiding over a number of prophets who were prophesying, and I would urge it upon every brother and sister here (sisters prophesied too in the early days), why not get into that company and learn how to prophesy? Well, you say, that is a gift. Of course, but it has to be learned; Samuel is said to have been presiding over them, and so great was the spirit of prophecy that Saul, who was seeking to murder David, came under the power of the spirit of prophecy himself, as we read in chapter 19. So you see the mind of God is to bring in this in the presence of the Philistines, to bring in this powerful service, which brings God in; prophecy brings God in, so that God is known of a truth amongst us. What can the Philistines do against God? If God comes in they must go, and that is the great point in the two letters to Corinth -- to bring the Philistine, the big man, down by bringing God in. Thus it is said, God is amongst you of a truth. What can a man of the greatest human learning and experience do in the presence of the power of prophecy? He can do nothing. Thus Saul is called into the prophetic scene to learn how to prophesy. They have a lute, a tambour, a pipe and a harp. That is, that which appeals to and draws out spiritual feelings; this is largely the idea of musical instruments in Scripture, they are to draw out the best spiritual feelings we have.
{534}
When Elisha had to answer to the requirements of the kings, he said he would not speak to them unless Jehoshaphat were there, but, he says, "bring me a minstrel". That is, the atmosphere was difficult, as it often is in our meetings, the saints are so low down that there are no opportunities to prophesy, and the spirit of a meeting has a great deal to do with what is said. Here we have musical instruments and the prophets are prophesying; they are not merely professing prophets, they are actually prophesying. So it was with the daughters of Philip, they prophesied, they were not merely prophetesses. Let us not talk about being servants and so forth, the point is to *do* the thing, that is all that is needed. Philip had four daughters and they prophesied; and so they were prophesying here, and the Spirit of Jehovah was to come upon Saul. You may say, What can I do? I have not any gift. God is ready to furnish you for any service as you are ready for it; He is just waiting for you. So it is here, "The Spirit of Jehovah will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man". That is what is needed, another man; the suggestion there is that I have not been right. Think of what Saul was, as he was known in his locality. Every one of us is known in our localities; people have a judgment about you young people, they are talking about you amongst themselves in the houses of the saints, and rightly, too, because we are to judge in that sense. I often say, without any hesitation, I have a judgment about everybody I know; I mean that is the attitude in one's mind. Abraham inquired if God would spare the city if there were fifty righteous in it. Could he tell if there were fifty righteous in Sodom? He certainly could, and he knew there were nothing like fifty, so he quickly dropped down to ten. He knew well enough; he was a judge, and God would make us judges in that sense, not critics, of course, but holily and justly able to form an estimate of our brethren. So
{535}
that we are well known, we do not escape. Saul became the occasion of a proverb: "Is Saul also among the prophets?" His subsequent history confirms this ironical proverb. He failed, alas! How many have done that! The time comes when God says, "It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king".
Then we are told in verse 7, "And it shall be, when these signs shall come to thee ... God is with thee". That is another thing, the sense that God is with you; God is with you, even with a Saul. Is this all unattractive to the young people here? Think of having God with you! His Spirit is come upon you, and now, after these signs, God is with you. Then it says, "Thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and behold, I will come down to thee ... and inform thee what thou shalt do". This is a most solemn matter because God is going to test me, to test me as to whether I can wait for Him, whether I can be obedient. That was the great test of Saul; and that was what lost him his kingdom, he failed in obedience, he failed to wait his time -- the great lesson in Gilgal has to be learned. How incorrigible the flesh is! Circumcision means that it has to be dealt with drastically. If I cannot wait there I am disqualified and that is what happened in the case of this man. As the passage goes on it says in verses 9 and 10, "it was so ... and all those signs came to pass that day ... and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied among them". So that immediately before he goes to Gilgal he is able to do something, and one has often seen that with young people, they can do quite a little, but the real test is Gilgal -- being able to wait for God there, and in waiting you are impressed every moment and you are tested with the incorrigibleness of the flesh; that is what impresses you at Gilgal. All the feelings that are there are against the flesh -- can I wait there? Saul could not wait, but that is anticipating his history -- I cannot go into that, but it is well to see that, dear young people,
{536}
because I may preach to others and myself become a castaway unless I have learned the lesson at Gilgal and am waiting there on God.
"Then the people said one to another, What is this that has happened to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?" That is what people say among themselves, what brethren sometimes say in their houses after a meeting. A young brother is prompted to say something in a ministry meeting -- pardon me for being simple and practical -- well, the brethren say, What do you think of that, what do you think of so-and-so, he has attempted to prophesy, but what is his external conduct and is it in keeping? It says, "The people said one to another, What is this that has happened to the son of Kish?" It is a searching matter. I am not saying that you should not take part in ministry, but then have you given occasion for this table talk? I am not saying that the brethren should enlarge on it, I know how they do, often far beyond what should be spoken of, but here the question is asked, What has happened to the son of Kish? Why, he goes out and plays cricket, and plays tennis, and goes off on the Broads in the summer-time, and other things like that, and yet he is prophesying!
It is a solemn thing that the brethren have a judgment about you, and heaven has a judgment about you, and yet heaven wants you and heaven is doing its utmost to help you to serve as a true levite. You will understand, dear brethren, I am not here to whip you, far otherwise, but to seek to help all of us to get into accord with heaven and to become spiritual, to enter into the environment that God has placed for us here, to absorb the suggestions of the spiritual environment in which we are set, to take them on constitutionally, so that we become spiritual. Saul never did: if he had done so, we should never have had the proverb, "Is Saul also among the prophets?" This is written again after his history was well-nigh finished
{537}
(chapter 19); the proverb, I am sure, would never have been recorded, had Saul judged himself at the outset, but alas, he did not. So the proverb remains; it says at the end of verse 12, "It became a proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets?" I would not like to be the subject of such a proverb: Saul was, and why was he? Because he failed in this great test, he failed to take on spirituality through what was divinely presented to him; and he failed to wait at Gilgal. Had he taken in these great spiritual thoughts he would have said there, 'I am not in keeping with them;' for it was the place of circumcision, and this accepted is the acknowledgment that the flesh is incorrigible and has to be put off. Gilgal is "the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ" (@Colossians 2: 11).
God is calling upon us for reality and particularly spirituality in our reality, so that you have another thought here and that is, "A man of that place answered and said, But who is their father?" Someone there had that thought. As most of you know, the subject of our reading meetings during the last three days has been the ten generations spoken of in the book of Genesis, the word denoting origin, and so it is that someone in the place where one takes up service says, What about the parentage? This must apply to us all. The service of God requires more than profession, our origin spiritually must be manifest, and this is a root matter. The history from the outset must be gone into. The history or generation of Saul in that sense is gone into and this proverb is written across it: "Is Saul also among the prophets?" It is derision; a sorrowful thing as relating to one prominent in the service of God. It is written as a warning. On the other hand, the scripture before us is most encouraging as showing the pains that God takes with us so that He might have us for Himself in service, whatever it may be. May He help us all to profit by the great care He expends upon us!
