{1}
Pages 1 to 364, "Divine Activities in Support of the Testimony". Readings and Addresses at Brisbane and Melbourne, 1947 - 48. (Volume 176).
DIVINE ACTIVITIES IN SUPPORT OF THE TESTIMONY (1)
@Hebrews 1:14;@Hebrews 12:22 - 24
J.T. I have in mind the peculiar situation, which exists in these countries. The power of human associations to set aside what is of God, and whether the brethren are aware of it, and how it is to be met, and the means God has given to us, which is of course the Spirit, but the Spirit in a special way, that is what we have come to in the book of Hebrews: "Ye have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem". I thought a little of the instrumentality of the Spirit in that sense, and what we have come to, amongst other things an innumerable company of angels, and whether we apprehend this in the book of Hebrews, and whether we are bringing these things in in prayer. The expression "Ye have come to", is not necessarily what we have personally and individually appropriated, but to what we have come. That is to say, it is available. It is a question of our nearness, and, of course, that would depend on our state. The expression "The Lord is near" (@Philippians 4:5) is to indicate that He is not far away, but ready to join in where He is needed. So that it is a question of what brethren discern is needed.
R.P. There is a system of things operating in Hebrews administratively under the Lord's hand.
J.T. That is right, a system of things, Christ being the Head of it. Hence we have to learn to speak systematically, and to understand systematically, using our senses. So that Luke said he wrote
{2}
with method. Every person, who believes is brought into the system, as at Pentecost three thousand were brought into it, and so as Peter finished, those who were affected spoke to Peter and the others; that is to say, they recognised the system. Peter was not everything; the Lord, of course, was everything, but yet in another sense He was not, because it was a system and included all that were added, because it says "the Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved (@Acts 2:47)". The system was there and was added to.
P.A.H. We are brought into this living system then, as added persons.
J.T. The system did not begin until Christ ascended into heaven, and the Spirit came down. Certain things had to happen, and they happened in order; first Christ had to be installed in heaven, where He is, and then He received from the Father the promise of the Spirit, and shed It forth. So the Spirit was there to be heard; "which ye now see and hear (@Acts 2:33)". Then those who were affected said to Peter and the other apostles, "Men and brethren, what shall we do? (@Acts 2:37)" and Peter answered them, and we are told that they who accepted his word persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles; not of Moses or the prophets, but of the apostles. The Lord had fitted these men to speak, and they spoke, and so the system began and functioned, and it functions still, although centuries have elapsed. It is the same system, and it functions still, and so the question now is, how are we applying what is available to us in it to meet current conditions?
E.N.J. Are you thinking that the Holy Spirit has the chief place in this system which you have mentioned, and then that the angels have a place in it and are available to us?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. We have come to the system, including the angels. Persons come
{3}
into it, like the woman of Samaria. She came out to draw water; she was identified with her vessel, but she left it. She left her vessel and went away into the city and came to the men, and said, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" @John 4:29. She then, in that practical way, became an item in the system.
C.G.McC. In this system have we everything that we need to maintain us in the pathway?
J.T. That is it. Everything that is needed, not any extraneous things there, all needed things. There is much more that God has that is needed, but that is not for our system. He will have another system, and have suitable persons to work in it, but now He is working in the assembly.
R.P. Does the administration of angels stand in relation to physical conditions through which the saints are passing?
J.T. Yes, it would. We can easily show that from various examples throughout the book of Acts, and the epistles, as well as throughout the Old Testament. In the Old Testament we have an early instance of angelic ministry in the visit to Abraham. Two of the visitors were angels, the other was Jehovah. It soon became evident that they were detached for the moment from Jehovah in order to attend to Lot in Sodom. God said, "Shall I hide from Abraham, that thing which I do (@Genesis 18:17)". The thing was not hidden from Abraham; he came into it and interceded for Lot. Then, of course, there are other things that could be said about them, how angels acted for the saints, and how they are still acting for the saints, as in @Acts 12. Peter was in prison and he was aided to clothe himself, and one thing after another happened until he came to the iron gate, and it opened of itself; and so he came to the saints, but the saints were not ready for him; although they had been praying, they were not ready
{4}
for him. There was one who listened, who knew his voice; that was Rhoda. Hence the movement began and Herod was smitten; it was angelic action against physical conditions. Now we have an opposing system of men and women, but particularly of men, and they are ready to apply physical conditions, even violence if necessary, and that is what we have to contend with.
E.N.J. You would attribute the opening of the iron gate to angelic power, and that would be suggestive of what angelic power might do in relation to the Roman Empire at the end?
J.T. The immediate instrumentality of that is in the prayers of the saints. They prayed in Jerusalem urgently for Peter, but then they did not have faith in their prayers. They did not believe it was Peter, but it was really Peter, and Rhoda said that. She insisted it was Peter, and that is the thing; that we are assured of what we are doing, and what is acting for us. So Peter himself says, "Now I know certainly that the Lord has sent forth his angel and has taken me out of the hand of Herod (@Acts 12:11)". So Peter came to himself. He came down one street, showing how God comes down to our natural physical circumstances, and, if necessary, to act against them if they are adverse. Not indeed that we join the army; we do not need to do that. We are obligated by God to refuse to take men's lives, but we may thank God that the governments today are allowing us to serve in other ways than to take men's lives, and it may be that God would help us too as to these unions, that they may have to recognise human rights, and prayer may lead them to come to that.
E.N.J. There seemed to be a combination of power against the apostle and those with him on the boat in @Acts 27:23,24, and Paul says, "For an angel of the God, whose I am and whom I serve, stood by me this night, saying, Fear not, Paul".
{5}
J.T. That is very good, and in accord with what we are saying, that God will come in for us. Many of us older ones know that God has come in for us, for the Lord's people, through two terrible wars, and has caused them to stop; and He can do more than that. It is a question of our having confidence in God, and that is the point in these chapters read, that we have come to mount Zion. It is the verse that refers to power. The mountain is power, hut it is mount Zion; it is not mount Sinai. It is grace reigning through righteousness, so that we are on those lines, and hence we have the prayer meeting on Monday night, and God recognises the places where prayer is wont to be made, and answers the prayers.
P.A.H. So we need to recognise that myriads of angels are in this system to which we have come; perhaps we have not thought sufficiently about the service that God would render through them.
J.T. The word 'myriads' is used, showing there are a great number; we might say uncountable as far as we are concerned. The Lord says, "more than twelve legions" of them; He could ask for them.
J.M. Would it be a parallel in @2 Kings 6:17, when Elisha prayed that his servant's eyes might be opened that he might see?
J.T. So @Psalm 68:17 says, "The chariots of God are twenty thousand, thousands upon thousands; the Lord is among them". The prophet asked that the young man's eyes might be opened to see this, and perhaps that is the point now, that our eyes might be opened to see what is in our favour.
P.R.P. Why do you think this power has not been manifested more than it has?
J.T. I would say because it has not been asked for. It is not that God is dependent on what we ask, but it does say He is able to do more than we ask or think. All power is subordinated to the
{6}
present position, of Christ: "Sit at my right hand until I put thine enemies as footstool of thy feet", (@Hebrews 1:13). So in chapter 2, verse 5, we are told that, "He has not subjected to angels the habitable world which is to come, of which we speak";(@Hebrews 2:5) that is, He has not placed that under angels. The millennium will not be placed under angels any more than our dispensation is formally. Our dispensation is placed under Christ; everything is put under Him; principalities and powers are put under Him.
J.S.P. It was not until God heard the groaning of the children of Israel that He came down to deliver them.
J.T. God said that He heard their groaning, showing that it is well worth groaning if we need something.
P.R.P. Is there to be a moral accordance with us along with this asking?
J.T. Just so. The Lord may do things for us With which we are not in moral accord, because we are His people. He thinks of us in that light, and we are told much of asking, even as to the Spirit of God: "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" (@Luke 11:13). That shows how much God is ready to give us on the ground of asking.
C.E.J. Would @Daniel 6:10 suggest the same thought? When he knew that the writing was signed, "he kneeled on his knees three times a day, and prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime (@Daniel 6:10)". Later he was able to say to the king, "My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions¬ mouths (@Daniel 6:22)".
J.T. Very excellent example. The book of Daniel affords much in that sense for us.
P.R.P. Do you link up the matter of faith with this?
J.T. Exactly. Without faith it is impossible to
{7}
please God. So we do well to link it up with it. Even if we are to have forgiveness of our sins, we have to have faith to get it.
R.P. James makes much of individual faith, saying, "The fervent supplication of the righteous man has much power", @James 5:16.
J.T. Showing what righteous men do, and so it is that Abraham was heard, because he was righteous: "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do; ... for I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him", (@Genesis 18:17 - 19). God bases things on what Abraham would do.
P.A.H. Would angels be active today, do you think? The angel said to Philip, "Rise up and go southward", (@Acts 8:26). Do you think angels would be serving in that regard today?
J.T. Yes, only the dispensation requires that we ask for things which are named. We ask for angels, but then there are only two that are named; although there may be many, because God names all the angels as He names all the stars. He is not making much of them; though He might make much more than He makes in the scriptures we have, and there may be much more made of them in a further dispensation, but it is for us to go by the words written; as the Lord says, "It is written". When He was attacked by the devil, in every case He says, "It is written". We go by the words written.
E.N.J. In relation to things that are done, and the power that is required, in relation to the assembly and its functions here, should we speak to the Lord, or the Father, in relation to the presence of the Spirit? I was thinking, too, in relation to angels, is it not more in connection with the nations and the powers that be?
J.T. I think it is what we might call governmental things, things which stand in relation to God's
{8}
government on the earth; He might use unconverted men. We would not like to ask Him to use an unconverted man, and yet God is using such men.
R.P. Would that not mean salvation in a practical sense? "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?"
J.T. That is what it says here in the verse read. We cannot say how many there are, but we can say there is an innumerable company, but it would hardly be intelligent for us to ask Him to send Michael. We have to go by what is written. Although we do know that Michael contended with the devil about the body of Moses, and we do know that Michael will make war with the devil and his angels. But he is only one. Therefore the intelligent way would be to ask God to send the necessary power on our behalf.
J.McN. We see how the Lord could say that the Father could furnish Him with more than twelve legions of angels; but He pointed out the necessity of the Scriptures being fulfilled.
J.T. Very good. We are not told the Lord asked for them, either.
G.W.A. Is there to be agreement with us in relation to this matter? @Matthew 18 suggests we are agreed in relation to our requests, if there is to be power.
J.T. That is a very good point, and it is to draw us together, that we are all one, one body, one Spirit, one according to @Ephesians 4:3 - 6 "Using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace. There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". So that we can easily name what we want, what we will ask for. And so it says,
{9}
"It shall be done for them", @Matthew 18:19. Not simply done, but done *for them* . That is to say God is taking account of the ones who are asking.
J.J.J. Would fasting come into this? You referred to the book of Esther in relation to fasting.
J.T. Well, some of us were speaking about that today, how Mordecai urged Esther to come into the matter, although she had already become queen, because the Jews were appointed to death because of Haman's influence with the king. She took her life into her hands and went and asked the king, but she did not ask the Jews to pray, but asked them to fast. God was working for them, although hiding His face from them.
J.M. Are our faces to be set in the direction of our prayers? In Daniel, in relation to the three Hebrew children, it says they were not prepared to bow. Their face was set in that direction.
J.T. Then they had Another with them, there was a fourth. It is a great addition, because it shows that the Son of God intervenes to help us in what engages us. *We ask everything in His name* .
P.A.H. On their side they were prepared to yield their bodies. It reads, "And yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god, except their own God!"(@Daniel 3:28) That is their part; they were prepared to suffer.
J.T. That is what Esther did. She did what she should not have done according to the law, and she found favour in the king's sight. Well, we can count on that. The ground she acted on was fasting, denying herself something, and exposing herself to the greatest danger, the loss of her life. So we have to die for the truth. "Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake", (@Philippians 1:29).
P.A.H. Esther says, as she took her life in her hands, "If I perish, I perish (@Esther 4:16)".
{10}
J.T. Just so. It was a noble commitment, a noble sacrifice, and God honoured it. It is the most remarkable illustration we get, not of prayer, but of fasting. We get a great deal of it in the Old Testament, but we get it from the Lord's own words: "This kind does not go out but by prayer and fasting", (@Matthew 17:21). So if we have to face a difficult matter, we have to fast for it.
E.N.J. Would you open up a little what you have in mind as to fasting in a spiritual way?
J.T. Well, of course, it would not be denying ourselves of going to a theatre. That would not be much. It is more the things that are legitimate that are in mind in fasting, things that are legitimate in themselves. God honours our denying ourselves of them.
C.E.J. Is your thought that fasting makes room for the Holy Spirit?
J.T. I think it does. It displaces the natural, which has no part in the thing. Fasting is a displacement, and the Spirit of God takes up the room made. It is a real sacrifice for the sake of getting certain power.
P.R.P. Were you going to say more about mount Zion, suggesting grace to us?
J.T. Well, we have spoken of that already. We might look at the other things that are mentioned in the twelfth chapter. Mount Zion is the first, then the city of the living God, which goes with it. It is a question of life, the city of the living God, and we know it is called here heavenly Jerusalem. And then the third thing, myriads of angels, which is what we are speaking about, beings that can be used in a physical way if necessary; they are the universal gathering; that expression refers to how the States of Greece assembled together on certain occasions. And then further, the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven is undoubtedly the assembly
{11}
that we often speak about; it is ourselves. It is not at a distance from us; we are the persons who form it. We have come to that.
E.N.J. The assembly of the firstborn ones; if we could lay hold of that would it help us to see how unsuitable it is to be connected with any other associations?
J.T. Quite so. The firstborn ones; each of them is a firstborn. It is difficult to grasp the idea of each one being a firstborn, but God has that in His mind. We are all on the same footing; we belong to the assembly of the firstborn registered in heaven.
E.N.J. That would be not only what is in view, all firstborn ones, but we are made firstborn ones constitutionally.
J.T. Exactly, showing how dignified the assembly is. There is nothing else on earth or in heaven to be compared with the assembly. It is a question of persons called firstborn ones.
C.G.McC. What are we to understand by coming to these things? Is it that we have come into the light and truth of them?
J.T. Well, the Spirit too; we have the Holy Spirit, and He operates in us according to that light, so that we learn to pray and ask for things intelligently. There is nothing like it in heaven or on earth. It is the first family. All the families are named of the Father, but the assembly is the first of the families. That is what is alluded to here, the firstborn ones. Then it says "to God, judge of all". What can we have greater than that, because it goes right on to the lake of fire? It is a question of the Judge of all. God has rights in all these things and as to persons.
J.A.A. So that as having come to this system we would have our judgment in accordance with God's mind concerning what is around us.
J.T. That is the ground we take in our prayer
{12}
meetings. So that God is the Judge of all. That is the very top. You cannot get higher than that. As to persons, God is the Judge of all, and He has everything in His hands. And then as to spirits of just men, the angels are spirits, but they are not spirits in the sense in which we have spirits. We are not yet wholly spiritual. The Lord is Himself always a Spirit. He is God, but then He has a spirit too, because He is a Man, spirit, soul and body. We are speaking reverently, but we apprehend that He has a spirit, too. He committed His spirit to God. We have come to the spirits of just men made perfect. We have the light that we shall all be raised from the dead, and Matthew would sustain us in that, because he says "many bodies of the saints fallen asleep arose, and ... entered into the holy city and appeared unto many (@Matthew 27:52,53)". The idea of the resurrection of just men is seen here. We cannot say just where they are, but we know they are somewhere; we can leave that with God, but we know they rose after Christ arose. We have come to that sort of thing, just men made perfect.
C.E.J. Would you say a word as to how we are to be affected as coming to the spirits of just men made perfect?
J.T. I think it is a question of light. We are to take in the light, and believe in it, "While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light", (@John 12:36). It is a question of believing.
R.P. Would that be a manifestation of the work of God? You can take account of the spirit of a man like Moses or David. That is the work of God.
J.T. They were *just* men. Abraham was, although God told him in @Genesis 15 that he would die, still he had a vision and everything was made real to him. It says a great darkness fell upon him, but he saw certain things which would form him and make
{13}
everything real to him; so that we can discern Abraham. The Lord Jesus says of him, "Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad", (@John 8:56). How real it was in that way! The Lord could say "he saw it, and was glad".
P.A.H. We are connected with a living system of things; God is God of the living, not of the dead. In that system we have come to the spirits of just men made perfect.
J.T. Just so. When the Lord said to the disciples, "Who do ye say that I am?" and one of them says, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God", (@Matthew 16:15,16) that was a revelation given to Peter, but we come into it; and it really is the basis of the assembly, for it is built on Christ as the Son of the living God. It is a living system.
{14}
DIVINE ACTIVITIES IN SUPPORT OF THE TESTIMONY (2)
@Acts 4:1 - 37
J.T. This chapter shows how God acts, we may say, in a physical sense, to enforce His mind, to enforce the truth of the gospel. The book begins in the main at the second chapter, which relates Peter's gospel address, the result being three thousand souls; the chapters following show how the enemy set to work to oppose, and the facts related indicate, as we said, that God acted as we might say physically, or through physical means, to advance the truth of the Scriptures. Hence it is said in the beginning of this chapter that as "they were speaking to the people, the priests and captain of the temple and the Sadducees came upon them, being distressed on account of their teaching the people and preaching by Jesus the resurrection from among the dead; and they laid hands on them, and put them in ward till the morrow". Now the intervention of God is seen in what we have read. The general thought is that many of those who had heard the word believed. We have already been told that there were three thousand converted, but now it is said here that many of those who had heard the word believed, and the number of the men had become about five thousand, so that God's work was proceeding in great power and with great results.
Then the enemy continued his efforts. It says, "It came to pass on the morrow that their rulers and elders and scribes were gathered together at Jerusalem, and Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the high priestly family; and having placed them in the midst they inquired, In what power or in what
{15}
name have *ye* done this? Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, Rulers of the people and elders of Israel, if *we* this day are called upon to answer as to the good deed done to the infirm man, how *he* has been healed, be it known to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean, whom *ye* have crucified, whom God has raised from among the dead, by *him* this man stands here before you sound in body. *He* is the stone which has been set at nought by you the builders, which is become the corner stone. And salvation is in none other, for neither is there another name under heaven which is given among men by which we must be saved". I thought we had a plain statement there of God's way of furthering His interests on earth, of advancing His testimony and asserting it; and how His people are brought to the truth, and how others are converted.
E.N.J. Is the position held in salvation by what is said in the twelfth verse as to the name?
J.T. Just so. It was really a question of a building, because it was a structure. God intended to rear up a structure, which we know now to be the assembly, and so, *"He* is the stone which has been set at nought by you the builders, which is become the corner stone. And salvation is in none other, for neither is there another name under heaven which is given among men by which we must be saved".
P.A.H. That would stand good at all times, whatever the position of the testimony might be. That name is all powerful, is it not?
J.T. Just so. At the end of nineteen hundred years or so it is still as good as it was then. It is the rock, as the Lord Jesus said, "On this rock I will build my assembly (@Matthew 16:18)". It is a rock that cannot be overthrown. It ought to stimulate our hearts to know that we are thus supported. It is our
{16}
privilege *to* suffer for the truth, and we see here how it is supported.
E.N.J. You were thinking of the maintenance of the position. The lame man in the first place was healed through that name, the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean. There is the maintenance of the position, whatever the attack might be.
J.T. Quite so. Whatever the attack might be. That is a good way to put it. There have been many attacks, and they are varied. It would greatly help and strengthen us in our testimony whatever it might be, the testimony as to the gospel, or the testimony of the assembly, to have the sense that God is with His people, as He has promised: "The Lord is with you, while ye be with him", (@2 Chronicles 15:2).
J.M. "But seeing the boldness of Peter and John, and perceiving that they were unlettered and uninstructed men, they wondered; and they recognised them that they were with Jesus". Is that the position?
J.T. Quite so. "The righteous are bold as a lion" (@Proverbs 28:1), so that we need not fear. The Lord indeed had already said, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world".
P.R.P. "The name of the Lord is a strong tower", (@Proverbs 18:10). Would you bring that in?
J.T. Quite so. "The righteous runneth into it, and is safe (@Proverbs 18:10)". It is a question of the strength of the tower.
Rem. Is there significance in what is said, that the name is "given among men"? We are among men in our associations.
J.T. Showing that God is thinking of men in His testimony; not angels, although He has them under His hand, for His purposes. We shall see that in the next chapter, where it says in verse 17, "The high priest rising up, and all they that were with him, which is the sect of the Sadducees, were filled with
{17}
wrath, and laid hands on the apostles and put them in the public prison. But an angel of the Lord during the night opened the doors of the prison, and leading them out, said, Go ye and stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life @Acts 5:17 - 20". That is, the words of the life of Jesus are to be asserted. The angel is ready; as we have already had, we cannot say how many there are. We read of a great multitude of them, but they are available for service, "sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation (@Hebrews 1:14)".
P.A.H. So that there is, in the face of opposition, a positive testimony as to the truth, which is important, you would say?
J.T. Quite so.
E.N.J. There seems to be a tendency right from the very outset, for the enemy to band together certain persons and certain companies to increase their power, if possible, against the testimony. We read here that "the priests and captain of the temple and the Sadducees came upon them".
J.T. We see the character of the combination, the Sadducees being infidels really. They do not believe in angel or spirit, and now they are in power instead of the other sect, and therefore arrayed against the truth of the gospel.
R.P. Really setting aside the truth of resurrection on which everything is based in Christianity. All there is for God is on resurrection ground.
J.T. Quite so. It is an invulnerable position. The power of God is centred in resurrection. "Now is Christ risen from the dead", is the testimony in @1 Corinthians 15:20, "and become the firstfruits of them that slept". "How say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?" (@1 Corinthians 15:12) That is the thing the Sadducees were saying, and so we know what the nature of the opposition is.
R.P. Do we not see that spirit operating today
{18}
with men, using material things to set aside the rights of God?
J.T. Quite so, moving in relation to material things, binding themselves in bundles, as it were, to defend their thoughts. They disregard the thoughts of God, and disregard the gospel.
P.R.P. Is this matter of salvation one feature which is very delightful to God? He delights to be known as the God of salvation.
J.T. Quite so. It is the testimony of the prophets really, but now verified fully in the resurrection of Christ. "Now is Christ risen (@1 Corinthians 15:20)". That is the point Peter is making in this chapter. In chapter 3 we are told that "Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, which is the ninth hour; and a certain man who was lame from his mother's womb was being carried, whom they placed every day at the gate of the temple called Beautiful, to ask alms of those who were going into the temple; who, seeing Peter and John about to enter into the temple, asked to receive alms. And Peter, looking stedfastly upon him with John, said, Look on us @Acts 3:1 - 4". So that the interest was directed to Peter and John. They were the witnesses there to be looked at, to see what kind of people they were; what Christians are, they are well worth looking at.
J.M. Would there be a correspondence in them to the Man who was raised from the dead? "They recognised them that they were with Jesus", it says.
J.T. Quite so.
R.P. Peter had announced in his preaching, in which three thousand were converted, that God had made this same Jesus, both Lord and Christ. Jesus was supreme in the matter.
J.T. God has settled the matter as to who is to rule. It is a question really of the Jews and Jesus. Jesus came on the behalf of God, and the Jews attacked Him and crucified Him, and now God shows
{19}
that He is taking on Jesus. He has raised Him from the dead. The enemy still continues to oppose that Man in one form or another; that Man is always the object of attack, and Peter and John are on His side as witnesses, as we see. "*We* are his witnesses, (@Acts 5:32)" Peter says.
J.McN. Have we in Peter and John a sample of the material of the temple, of which Christ is the corner stone; the building which is impregnable to the attack of the enemy?
J.T. Exactly; the word 'Peter' means a stone. He was the leading apostle, as we know, and so he represents the material of which the building is reared up. The Lord said, "*Thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly", (@Matthew 16:18).
E.N.J. Are you thinking that if any of the Lord's people are called upon to give evidence publicly before men, in relation to this great exercise as to associations, there should be something specific in them which would be a testimony to those who inquire?
J.T. Therefore Peter says, "Look on us". They were worthy of attention.
P.A.H. Then further in verse 14, "And beholding the man who had been healed standing with them, they had nothing to reply".
J.T. There was incontestable evidence of the power that was at work on God's behalf towards men.
R.P. They had the opportunity of taking account of this power when Christ was here with Israel. "The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner", had been said by the Lord in power, according to @Matthew 21:42, and here is an evidence of the same operation in the saints here below, in the power of the Spirit.
J.T. So, "Beholding the man who had been healed standing with them". He is now identified
{20}
with the apostles, he is standing with them -- "they had nothing to reply". Then it goes on to say, "Having commanded them to go out of the council they conferred with one another, saying, What shall we do to these men?" That is the whole problem now; what is to be done with these men, that is to say, the witnesses of Jesus. They had put Jesus to death, but now He is taken out of the way, He has gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being made subject to Him; but His witnesses are here, and the enemy attacks the witnesses.
Ques. Is boldness necessary that the testimony may be witnessed to before men?
J.T. Well, that is the idea. These twelve men, that is to say, the twelve apostles, were constituted witnesses; they were not ordinary men, not even ordinary believers; they were constituted powerful men, who were able to stand in the breach to defend the truth, and they can be looked at. You can see them, where they live, and how they live.
J.A.A. It says, "they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and spoke the word of God with boldness".
J.T. That is the point. Our position requires that we are filled with the Holy Spirit; not simply that we are sealed with the Spirit, but filled, at least in measure. There must be some evidence of being filled with the Holy Spirit.
J.S.P. So that they would be in accord with their testimony?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Do these men become irresistible on account of what they are, as formed by God?
J.T. Just so. There were none like them. God added after that, but there were none like these twelve. One of the disciples had betrayed the Lord, but he had been replaced by another, so the idea of the twelve is maintained. It is increased, but it is
{21}
maintained. The idea of twelve is administration, capable administration.
Rem. While we are living in a day of weakness and breakdown, what was set up in an inaugural way goes through.
J.T. That is the idea. What was inaugurated stands. "These that have turned the world upside down", (@Acts 17:6).
J.M. So that the rulers say, "That indeed an evident sign has come to pass through their means is manifest to all that inhabit Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it".
J.T. Yes, something evident; and the point for us is to make things clear; what we have believed, and what we are in consequence of having believed.
J.S.P. It says that they took account of them that they had been with Jesus. The thing was working out.
J.T. Quite so, so that the Lord is seen in the gospels, "Jesus alone" (@Matthew 17:8) or "Jesus alone with themselves", (@Mark 9:8). That was the thought at the beginning, but now there were a great many more. You can see now the movement is growing, because we are told here that they had become about five thousand, and we shall see it is still growing later.
E.N.J. Is it significant that it is *men*? The number of the *men* had become about five thousand.
J.T. Yes; not yet men, women, and children, but men; as if to show that God is taking up men. The book of Proverbs gives the idea. It speaks of wisdom, the wisdom of God, and its delights were with the sons of men; not simply men, but the sons of men; that is, the idea of men viewed in sonship. So that they are in every way attractive as on God's behalf in testimony.
C.G.McC. As we are enabled to speak with boldness, will there always be increase for God?
{22}
J.T. I would think so. Wisdom's delight is sonship. Wisdom is a great quality; it is not simply a person; it used to be thought to be a person in @Proverbs 8, but it is a great quality, but a quality in God Himself, and its delights are with the *sons* of men, not with angels, and not with men merely, but sons of men; that is, men in that relation.
J.S.P. This matter of wisdom seems to be very important, because the apostles not only knew the Lord here in flesh and blood, but they knew Him in resurrection; so having to do with men we need to be grounded, so that we can give right witness and right testimony.
J.T. Quite so. The Lord had remained with them forty days so that they might know Him perfectly. In fact they had eaten and drunk with Him after He arose from among the dead.
Rem. Their great concern in their prayer does not seem to be so much their own deliverance, but that they may go on furthering the testimony.
J.T. Quite so. The thing is to be increased. It is a great movement of God. That is the idea of Christianity: a great movement of God, and the quality is there that God can approve.
R.P. The thing is consolidated, would you say? What comes to light is mutual affection, body feelings, unity among the saints.
J.T. We have already alluded to the stones, and that it is a structure; a firm one, an indestructible one, and there is no salvation in any other than in Jesus; and then we are told that they were bold in their efforts, in their preaching. The elders of the Jews saw that, perceiving that they were unlettered and uninstructed men. That is to say, they were not specially polished men. God can get along with them as they are. They were fishermen really, but God could use them, and use them effectively, so that we are thus delivered from mere human education
{23}
in the service of God. Not that we are to despise ordinary education, which enables us to read and write, and all that, hut we are not embellishing our young people, making them especially college people. God takes us up as we are, and it is a question of His education, and what He will make of us.
E.N.J. Is this lame man an excellent example of what you have drawn our attention to lately, as to the way judaism is to be set aside? That is to say he is an example of where the Jews were at the time.
J.T. Yes. The truth had come out, and it had become apparent that judaism in itself was failing to be a testimony to God. The epistle to the Hebrews opens up what *had* been there, and Paul, who, I have no doubt, is the author of the book, speaks of what God had spoken, and that He had spoken in His Son. Everything now is a question of Christ, so that we have come, it says, to mount Zion, the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, and then we are told of the kind of men that are in that system.
E.N.J. You are referring to the firstborn ones?
J.T. Quite so, the assembly is formed of them. And @Hebrews 12 brings out the elements that are noted in that remarkable chapter, amongst which were men of that kind. I was thinking of "the spirits of just men @Hebrews 12:23". We have come to them, to their spirits; not disembodied spirits, but to the spirits of just men made perfect. Actual Christians are of that kind of men to which we have come.
R.P. Those who have filled out their part in the testimony even in a past dispensation. We can take account of them in their own dispensation.
J.T. We can see the types there, like Abraham, who is a great type for us. He is the father of us all, and he was constituted righteous because he believed. That is the kind of man there. Abraham and David and the prophets all show the kind of
{24}
men there are in Christianity: "The spirits of just men made perfect (@Hebrews 12:23)".
C.P. Would these men not only be justified, but be just men?
J.T. Just men, that is, righteous men. The most important thing to be before us is, I believe, to be righteous, to follow righteousness, faith, love, peace; but righteousness first. Righteousness is our leader.
C.E.J. So it opens in verse 19, "If it be righteous before God to listen to you rather than to God, judge ye".
J.T. It was what Peter and John answering said to them. This is a Peter and John chapter. They say further, "As for us *we* cannot refrain from speaking of the things which we have seen and heard". There is the testimony. We cannot refrain; we must do it; we are bound to do it on God's behalf.
Rem. These things were the joy and power of their own life.
J.T. Quite so. Now we see in verse 23 how they come together. They love one another; they are a band of their own. "Having been let go, they came to their own". The word 'company' is not there, but the idea is there. It is a question of *our own* , that is righteous people, people who love one another. "They came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said to them. And they, having heard it, lifted up their voice with one accord to God, and said, Lord, *thou* art the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them; who hast said by the mouth of thy servant David, Why have the nations raged haughtily and the peoples meditated vain things? The kings of the earth were there, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ". The testimony is clearly set out, and these men are in defence of it.
{25}
E.N.J. So that it was no new thing for men to be banded together against Christ; and now they were banded together against what was of Christ in the brethren.
R.P. That is really what is set out in testimony, is it not, the substance of what had been revealed to Peter had come out in testimony? "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God".
J.T. Quite so. Christ is the One who does things for God. That is the way I look at it, the way it is presented in the Old Testament. God said, "I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who shall do all my will", (@Acts 13:22). And it is a question of being with that Man and following Him. When we come to Paul, we shall see how he was formed after Christ, and he put himself forward as a model for the believers.
C.E.J. We get help on this line if we accept authority, in the recognition of the term "Lord". "Lord, *thou* art the God who made the heaven and the earth".
J.T. Well, these words would have to be carefully examined to get the full meaning, because the word "Lord" in verse 24 is 'despot', meaning one that is to be thoroughly submitted to.
R.P. He had rights in the universe, and they are to be recognised.
J.T. Quite so. The attitude of master and slave is the idea. That is to say we are subject in that sense, we are thoroughly subject as coming out on the side of Christ, and we cannot afford to be otherwise. We cannot do anything else, but be subject to Christ. And then we read in verse 29, "Now, Lord, look upon their threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word, in that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders take place through the name of
{26}
thy holy servant Jesus". That is to say, these men are not lawless, or against men. They have in their minds that men should be saved, and so they pray, their weapon is to pray. "And when they had prayed, the place in which they were assembled shook, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and spoke the word of God with boldness". We have already noticed that God is acting now in regard to material things, using material things, because it says the place shook where they were assembled.
R.P. There is an outward manifestation of power, and there is an inward result too; they were all filled with the Holy Spirit.
J.T. And they pray *as* to what is in their mind. It says, "The heart and soul of the multitude of those that had believed were one, and not one said that anything of what he possessed was his own", that is to say, they are not asserting their rights in material things; what they had they were ready to give away. It says "not one said that anything of what he possessed was his own, but all things were common to them", that is to say, love was operative: not banding together to defend property, but simply to give it away, if need be, to help others. "And with great power did the apostles give witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all".
P.R.P. Does this raise a question as to how we hold material things?
J.T. I think it does. It is a question, if we have anything, to hold it in love, the circulatory thought; that if we have anything, it is to go round, to circulate.
P.R.P. I was thinking of our occupation. Possibly we are too concerned about it, and not thinking sufficiently for God.
J.T. Too concerned to keep our jobs, and afraid of losing them, instead of thinking of principles. Of
{27}
course, we have to work; it says in @2 Thessalonians 3:10, if a man does not work, neither let him eat; but still the concern to keep our jobs is too urgent in our minds, whereas it is a question of the will of God, as this chapter shows us clearly. We are to be here for the will of God, and if need be to suffer. "To you has been given, as regards Christ, not only the believing on him but the suffering for him also", (@Philippians 1:29).
W.J.B. Does Peter's epistle help? "Let them who suffer according to the will of God commit their souls in well-doing to a faithful Creator", @1 Peter 4:19.
J.T. Quite so, and suffer as a Christian too. "If as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in this name", @1 Peter 4:16.
E.N.J. It says, "Great grace was upon them all". Is that suggestive of the spirit in which we should meet this position?
J.T. Instead of being exacting, and demanding higher wages, and all that sort of thing, great grace is upon us. It is a question of love acting.
E.N.J. It is remarkable that Luke is saying this, because he is the one who was so deeply touched with the grace that was in the Lord Jesus in his gospel.
J.T. "All ... wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth @Luke 4:22". Beautiful testimony!
R.P. This is the character of the testimony that was seen in the assembly in the beginning.
J.T. Therefore the assembly (an appropriate word, meaning a called-out people) is marked by grace, by love, by the idea of giving. God loves a cheerful giver, we are told. "Give, and it shall be given to you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over", (@Luke 6:38).
{28}
The dispensation, is to be maintained. God has designed to keep it a certain time, and He is keeping it thus. It may stop at any moment, but it has not stopped yet, and the point is to be in the spirit of it, the spirit of Christ.
P.A.H. "In that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal", would be in keeping with that?
J.T. Quite so, very beautiful. And another thing here at the end of the chapter is Barnabas, a typical Christian you might say: "Joseph, who had been surnamed Barnabas by the apostles (which is, being interpreted, Son of consolation), a Levite, Cyprian by birth, being possessed of land, having sold it, brought the money and laid it at the feet of the apostles". He did not give it away, he did not sell it to make money out of it, to put it in the bank; he brought the money and laid it at the feet of the apostles. He made the best use of it, laying it at the feet of the apostles to be administered.
Rem. He was serving divine interests.
J.T. Quite so, and he is ennobled, he is surnamed, showing that that is the idea; as the truth progresses, these things come to light. There is the idea of nobility, not nobility in a human sense, not man-made titles, but nobility in a true sense according to God.
R.P. Barnabas acquires a place among the saints on moral grounds.
J.T. Just so.
P.R.P. There is a tendency with us to recognise the blessedness of what we have had before us, but also a tendency to say that we are not equal to it ourselves, that we have not faith for such a position. I was wondering if you would help us as to what would encourage one. We feel very weak as having to face men in relation to such matters; we say we have not faith for it.
{29}
J.T. We have not faith! We are not Christians, if we say we have not faith: "whatever is not of faith is sin", (@Romans 14:23). If you stand up and say, I have not faith for this and that, it is sinful.
P.A.H. Is it a question too, of righteousness? Referring to verse 19 again, "If it be righteous before God to listen to you rather than to God, judge ye".
J.T. How clear that is, and undeniable too. God must be first in everything; and in all these exercises that our young brethren have to face, to my knowledge and that of many others here, their appearing before tribunals and their spirits in this, have been a testimony to God. This has been through the grace in which they have met the tribunals and submitted to them in readiness to do anything that was short of killing; they were ready to work thus for the authorities. That is the kind of men that God will commend; but not those who say, We have not faith for it. That is not Christianity at all. If I have not faith, I am really not a Christian.
C.G.McC. We get great help if we pray. It says here that they prayed that they might have boldness to speak the word of God.
Ques. Is it important to see that they lifted up their voice with one accord to God?
J.T. That is the thing, I am sure. The secret of the victory for the truth is the spirit of prayer. We were speaking about Esther; with her it was a question of fasting, but for the moment we can leave that; here it is a question of prayer.
Rem. At the close of the chapter it says, "neither was there any one in want among them". If we face the matter together, there will not be any want among us.
J.T. Quite so. There was not anybody in want. That is to say, love was operative, but it is a question
{30}
of circulation, the circulation of love; but that would mean the circulation of money too, and whatever might be needed for our bodies, but the matter of circulation is a great matter.
E.N.J. One word as to faith. The Lord says, "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed ... nothing shall be impossible to you", (@Matthew 17:20).
J.T. Quite so. How good and clear that is.
{31}
DIVINE ACTIVITIES IN SUPPORT OF THE TESTIMONY (3)
@Acts 5:1 - 42
J.T. What was remarked this morning is also true of this chapter, that God acts in support of His testimony, and for the help of His people. He acts on physical things and by physical things, as well as spiritual and moral things. He can do this in His own right as God. And so this matter of Ananias and Sapphira serves to promote this thought. It is a matter of discipline, of course, often alluded to and constantly needed, and, of course, more drastic than is usually applied, for it became a question of death; but still it was discipline, and indicates how God may resort to physical things to carry out His thoughts.
R.P. There was this lying to the Holy Spirit right at the beginning of the assembly's history.
J.T. Yes, as it were stressing the thing, so as to impress us at all times with it, just as in @1 Corinthians 5 we have a similar drastic matter, but not so severe as this; but still such as we may make allusion to. God may act severely, for the purpose of establishing a principle which runs down the dispensation. It will be noticed that Peter did not himself have recourse to anything physical in the matter, it was God Himself, but Peter indicated the truth.
C.W.A. Is it important to see in all these matters how these things affect God?
J.T. Quite so; the whole matter is a question of God, really, the whole matter of the dispensation. "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son (@Hebrews 1:1,2)".
{32}
But it is a question of God; whether it is the Son, or God. Himself, the Father.
J.McN. Is this to show that God is a consuming fire even in a day of grace?
J.T. Quite so, and it is "our God", remember. That is to say, the Christian's God, not merely the God of the Jews.
R.P. If we have to have part in the assembly vitally, we have to be consistent with the God who dwells there.
J.T. Quite so. So in the epistle to the Hebrews already alluded to, it is a question of the Son over God's house, whose house are we. So in the book of Revelation, when the Lord Himself writes to the assemblies, He is seen as the Son of God in relation to Thyatira.
E.N.J. It would be a serious matter to lie to the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Quite so; there are several allusions to that very thing. You will perhaps name them all for us.
E.N.J. I was referring to the third verse: "But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart that thou shouldest lie to the Holy Spirit ... ?"
J.T. Then there is another allusion in verse 4, "Thou hast not lied to men, but to God". That is to enforce the thing. Then in the ninth verse, "Why is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord?" So that the thought of divine Persons is brought in strikingly in this matter of discipline, and the severity of the action taken, because we are to behold God's goodness, but we have also to think of His severity: that God is severe if He has to be.
P.A.H. It produced a great effect upon all who heard it. That seems to be the effect of this severity and discipline.
J.T. You allude to the eleventh verse, "Great fear came upon all the assembly, and upon all who
{33}
heard these things". That is the intent of it, to subdue us and to cause fear, because God is to be feared in all who draw nigh to Him.
P.A.H. That scripture already alluded to as to our God being a consuming fire, also speaks of serving Him with reverence and godly fear.
R.P. There was much at stake. It was the effort on the part of the enemy to set aside what was coming in.
J.T. As we have already remarked, we get things stated at the outset that run down. We have to learn what God is in the severity of judgment against evil. In fact I believe God is calling attention to that, because the book of Revelation is especially intended to stress the thought of judgment, even the lake of fire being mentioned.
P.P. Are you applying this matter specially to the saints?
J.T. Well, it is a question of the saints of course, that Peter is dealing with. Ananias and Sapphira were ostensibly of the assembly, and, of course, the assembly is amenable to the discipline of God. We should there learn what God is in judgment.
Ques. Do you mean that God is very jealous as to His rights in the assembly, and in this matter of associations we should see that God is jealous also?
J.T. Particularly so. Associations mean banding together. They began in @Genesis 11, where they banded together and one said to his fellow, "Come on, let us build ourselves a city and a tower, the top of which may reach to the heavens; and let us make ourselves a name, lest we be scattered over the face of the whole earth @Genesis 11:4". "The whole earth had one language, and the same words. And it came to pass as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar @Genesis 11:1,2". That is the secret of all these combinations, power being vested in the idea of combination. "Let us build ourselves a city (@Genesis 11:4)". It is
{34}
*ourselves* . The secret of all these combinations is in that passage.
J.M. Are you bringing before us the importance of what Peter says in verse 9, "Why is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord?"? Is this the introduction of evil into the assembly?
J.T. Yes. Agreeing together. That was the idea at Shinar, to have something great. It is pure selfishness, the thought of exalting themselves.
R.P. Is not the great effort of the enemy at the present time to introduce what is counterfeit? What was so beautiful and glorious at the beginning was the saints moving together, and God being the inheritance of the saints, and love operating among the saints. Is there not a great effort at this time to bring in influence on that line; the idea of security, and universal brotherhood, and the like?
J.T. Quite so. And the word is taken out of its proper setting. The proper setting of the word "together" is in @Matthew 18:20, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". That is the precious setting of the matter, leading up to the truth of the assembly, and confirming it; whereas men band together with selfish motives, and with a view to exalting themselves, which reverses everything. Power belongs to God, but this idea that we are dealing with is power vested in men, by themselves, not by those above them, but by themselves.
C.W.A. This works out in @Acts 19, where the artisans of Demetrius's trade banded together in a way that is suggestive of the operations of men now for their own purposes, regardless of what God was doing in the assembly, but God's work was going on.
J.T. Yes, it was a question of business.
P.R.P. Would you say that the enemy is sadly
{35}
using this to make inroads into the assembly, and to divide the saints?
J.T. Well, this sort of thing would divide the saints and make them selfish and deceitful, and the word is stressed as to lying to divine Persons. There is also mentioned lying to one another, and also agreeing together to lie, which is the point stressed here.
E.N.J. I wondered if it would help us to see how intolerable this matter of unionism is, if we could lay hold of the fact that this is where the Holy Spirit is operating; and in Ezekiel the Lord, in speaking of His house, says, "This is ... the place of the soles of my feet", @Ezekiel 43:7. Then in relation to angels which you have brought before us, they are said to be "the holy angels", (@Mark 8:38).
J.T. I think we ought to touch on this matter of angels at this reading, because although we have already touched on it, it comes in here in this chapter in verse 19. The angels are to be in our minds. They are great intelligent agencies of God for dealing with matters that we cannot deal with because of our belonging to this dispensation. They belong too, to what is outside the range of the time of man, because they existed before men, and were there, we are told in @@Job 38:7, when the foundations of the earth were laid; they then shouted for joy, showing how sympathetic they are with God.
Now this is a great matter, and God has His means of dealing with it. In all these evil wars that have come upon the saints in this dispensation, especially recently, there has been need for great power to deal with the evil, and to rescue the saints out of it; and so I think the Lord would help us as to the place that angels have. So here in verse 19 we have, "an angel of the Lord during the night opened the doors of the prison, and leading them out, said. Go ye and stand and speak in the temple to the people all the
{36}
words of this life". Notice that it is "all the words of this life", in order to bring out the importance of that life, the preciousness of it. And the angel is directing the apostles here, "Go ye and stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life". So we can see how much the idea of angels enters into what we are saying.
E.N.J. Would that preserve us from taking up one thought or one line of doctrine, and remaining around it?
J.T. Very good. I believe the Lord has greatly helped the brethren as to how to study the Scriptures, and how to read them, to study them carefully, and spiritually, and to take account of all that has been said. How great the volume of things in the life of Jesus!
C.E.J. Would you say that we should be free to pray in our prayer meetings that God may set the angels in activity in relation to His people?
J.T. It is just as well to bring that up, as to how they are to be brought into our prayers. There are a great many of them, but we are not given many names, so far as I can see only about two; but obviously there are many. If we pray for the Lord's servants, we pray for them by name. We can ask the Lord to send a brother known to us, if He was pleased to do so, if we thought he was suitable to meet any condition in this country; that would be quite in order. But you could not speak of the angels in that way, because we only know the names of two of them. Therefore it is a question of asking God as to a matter; and I verily believe that, as to men in this world, in the recent war and the previous one, God acted through men who were perhaps not converted at all.
E.N.J. This chapter brings forward Gamaliel as one God could use as having influence, and similarly
{37}
the queen in @Daniel 5, who remembered Daniel and what he had done.
J.T. Quite so; we get that too, in the book of Nehemiah. The feminine side is of great importance because of the influence that woman may exert in all matters; and the sisters among us certainly ought to be ready to speak a word of truth as regards this current evil that we have now before us. We all ought to be ready to speak a word, as we have opportunity, to guide persons, it may be persons we are working with. So we get throughout the Scriptures the influence of women, and Esther is not the least. We have often spoken of her; she asked for fasting. We spoke of it before, but it is well to speak of it again, the idea of fasting, and the importance of fasting. Then again, it does not say that the queen in Nehemiah said anything; she was sitting by, but evidently she had influence, and so we are reminded that we should think of what an influence the sisters may have, as they have opportunity to say what is right, especially about what is current now. Referring again to Gamaliel, he is one of the outstanding agents in this chapter. He comes in at the end, but then there were others also, and we are told too of the influence of the people themselves in favour of the truth.
R.P. Are there two lines seen representatively in Michael and Gabriel? One is a military angel, and the other the priestly angel. Gabriel says he stands before God. Michael contended with the devil for the body of Moses, but brought no accusation. He said, "The Lord rebuke thee (@Jude 9)".
J.T. That would mean that Michael had regard for the primary place that Satan had, because evidently he was in God's service at one time, and it is important to bring that in, that we may be respectful as to dignitaries. The agencies we get in this chapter are brought in one after another to help to promote
{38}
the matter in hand. It says the captain and the officers feared the people, showing that at times we may be helped by the people. We may not be helped by the leaders of them, but we may be helped by the working man.
P.P. Is there some instruction in the way that this help comes to us? I mean God seems to hold it in reserve until a certain point arrives in the souls of the saints. I was thinking of it in a general way as to Gamaliel, who has been referred to, and then as to the angel coming and releasing them from prison, as to whether God allows the saints to go through pressure, and so bear testimony to Him, and then He comes in in power.
J.T. Quite so. It is well to take the events of the chapter up in the order in which they are mentioned, and how God uses them for the purpose in hand; and so this matter of discipline of the man and his wife. How important it is that husbands and wives should not be in collusion in any matter to promote evil, but that there should be transparency. Also as to any testimony that may have to be rendered, that it may be rendered in a pure unselfish way, because it is a question of the government of God in the assembly, and that ought to be carefully watched for.
P.A.H. It is important to see that discipline is exercised in the assembly, and then following that later in our chapter, how God comes in in an external way through angelic service, but first of all discipline in the assembly is maintained.
J.T. Quite so. Angelic service deserves the most particular attention, because it is the one we began with, and I believe God has followed it up ever since. God reserves the direction of angelic service to Himself, and so you get the angel in the book of Exodus, who was to conduct the people into the land. They were to fear him. He would not tolerate
{39}
any evil, but they had to fear him (@Exodus 23:20 - 22).
R.P. Should we not look for something of that nature in circumstances today? It says in verse 19, "An angel of the Lord during the night opened the doors of the prison, and leading them out, said, Go ye and stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life". Should we not look for intervention in circumstances under God's hand in relation to the testimony?
J.T. That is just what I was meaning. The angelic side is of prime importance in what we are dealing with, because the service is so near to the ordinary service of the Christian. It is not an angel doing anything in the way of dealing with military matters, but one dealing with the saints who are engaged in the service, and telling them what to do, to go and speak to the people in the temple all the words of this life. That is, it was the Spirit of God speaking to the apostles, through the angel, telling them to go and stand in the temple. It seems to me that the angel is brought into almost the same position as the apostles for the moment.
E.N.J. Their response is very ready. It says, "When they heard it, they entered very early into the temple and taught".
J.T. The apostles themselves heeded the angelic word.
R.McC. Whilst there are myriads of angels, one is sufficient here. Does that give us an insight into the great power that is available?
J.T. There is more to be said on that. One hundred and eighty-five thousand men were slain at one time by one angel in the days of Hezekiah (@2 Kings 19:35). That is a very important thing as to the power of an angel, and what is available to us in that sense.
J.P.B. Daniel said, "My God hath sent his angel and hath shut the lions¬ mouths @Daniel 6:22".
{40}
J.T. That is one angel. But I think it is well to think of the one hundred, and eighty-five thousand that were slain at one time by one angel.
P.A.H. You are distinguishing between the speaking of the Spirit and angelic service?
J.T. It is distinctly distinguished here. An angel tells them to do it. It says in verse 19, "an angel of the Lord during the night opened the doors of the prison", and so on, and they did exactly as they were told.
P.A.H. And would the speaking be by the Spirit, through the angel?
J.T. Of course, the Spirit of God would be the agent. When you come down to the actual words of the Lord Jesus in His ministry, it would be a matter of the Spirit. At the same time the angel's word is heeded, and acted upon.
J.M. The apostle in @Acts 27:23,24, speaking of an angel of God serving him in relation to God's work, says, "An angel of the God, whose I am and whom I serve, stood by me this night, saying, Fear not, Paul".
J.T. If the brethren are free to move a little into chapter 8, we shall see the directions given to Philip. It furnishes a distinction that would be helpful to us. First we are told, in verse 4, "Those then that had been scattered went through the countries announcing the glad tidings of the word. And Philip, going down to a city of Samaria, preached the Christ to them; and the crowds with one accord gave heed to the things spoken by Philip, when they heard him and saw the signs which he wrought @Acts 8:4 - 6". Then the angel speaks to Philip saying, "Rise up and go southward on the way which goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza" (@Acts 8:26). Then verse 29 shows that Philip increases in importance in his service. We begin with the thought that he went down to Samaria and preached Christ. He is not told to do it, as far
{41}
as we see. That would point to the importance of open-air preaching, which is a service any young man can do. He does not ask the brethren to do it, he can do it himself; if he gets a message from God that he can speak to men about, there is no reason why he should not do it, and it will soon become evident whether he has power. So Philip had power, but it is not said he was sent to preach. Then when we get down the chapter, the angel spoke to him first, and then the Spirit spoke to Philip, and said, "Approach and join this chariot (@Acts 8:29)". And Philip ran and heard the eunuch reading the prophet Esaias, and said, "Dost thou then know what thou art reading of? And he said, How should I then be able unless some one guide me? (@Acts 8:30,31)". So we have now come to real and spiritual work in Philip's case in chapter 8. I thought it well that the brethren might have this before them, because it will greatly help us as to open-air preaching. There is no reason why any young man should not go and preach if he has liberty to do so.
E.N.J. Guiding is a great matter. The Spirit seemed to guide Philip as you were saying, and then Philip is able to guide the eunuch.
J.T. But then Philip went down to Samaria, and preached the Christ, and he had power without being sent.
E.N.J. He was not guided there?
J.T. It was a question of his doing it himself. We hear of persons complaining because they are not invited to preach, but then the streets are open, there is plenty of opportunity to preach if we have anything to say. Philip went down to preach.
R.P. Heaven is taking account of the service, and angelic means seem to come in to further the service. Should we not look for that to make things practical? God undertakes for us providentially in relation to our circumstances.
{42}
J.T. You are thinking now of a brother being in business and sent by his firm to a certain part, and he may have an opportunity there to take up the service. That would be a providential matter. The angel really represents that side in the guidance. It is a providential service. Another thing is that the government of God often affords us opportunities of preaching or teaching, and the thing is to be ready when these opportunities open up, that is to say, our business may open up ways of service from time to time, and the thing is to be ready for them.
E.N.J. Would you say, in that connection, that the way in which Joseph prospered wherever he was placed, whether it was in the prison house, or Potiphar's house, or with Pharaoh, is significant?
J.T. That is excellent. Joseph was in the service of God, but Pharaoh's servant forgot Joseph, and he has to remind himself afterwards of his sins. I call attention to it now as regards the providential dealings in the ways of God. How much there may be for us in His service in that sense!
J.P. So that you suggest we should be ready to preach in our conversation, even in travelling?
J.T. Just so. If you are a traveller, for instance, you may have many opportunities, but, of course, the next thing would be to keep pure and holy for the service, to be ready for it in holiness. There is the man who was befriended by Joseph, but he forgot the request that Joseph made to him to remember him when it was well with him. The butler has to remind himself of his sins later on.
E.N.J. Were you thinking we might, if we looked back, find we had been remiss in the confession of the Lord's name in the places in which we have found ourselves?
J.T. Quite so, and even schoolchildren may be reminded of this. They say they have confessed the Lord, but it is not enough to do so to their father or
{43}
mother. The children are to confess before their schoolmates, or better still, their teachers.
R.P. It would help immensely in taking up the path of responsibility.
J.P. The more we confess the name of the Lord, the more power we have in that way.
J.T. Well, that is where the power is, where we confess. The reproach of Christ is regarded as greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. That is where the testimony lies, in reproach. You are not ashamed to confess Him.
J.M. There had been great failure on the part of the butler, but he confesses the help he had had from Joseph in the presence of Pharaoh, and he said, "I do remember my faults this day (@Genesis 41:9)".
J.T. I was speaking about that. He had to recall his own sins to say something to Pharaoh. That is how he had to make his confession, but he should have made it before; he did not remember Joseph.
P.P. Referring again to open-air preaching, what qualifications would you say are required? You referred to Philip as not being sent, but would he have some qualifications?
J.T. He certainly did, because what he said the Spirit of God commends, and it was resultful; but at the same time he was not directed by the Spirit at first. Firstly he went by himself, then as directed by an angel, and then by the Spirit. He progressed as he went on.
P.P. Is it affection for Christ?
J.T. Well, quite so, it would be that, but there is more than that. You ought to be able to speak coherently, up to a point: "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God (@1 Peter 4:11)". That is to say, what power of speech have you? Can the Spirit of God use it? Has it proved itself to be telling in the testimony?
{44}
P.P. You have spoken of the danger of just being a volunteer without having a message.
J.T. I think there is that danger too.
J.M. Paul says in Romans, "For God ... whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son @Romans 1:9".
E.N.J. Would it be appropriate at this moment to ask for a little more as to Gamaliel? You have spoken about the people and their being instrumental to help the position, and then the angels¬ place, and then what God has in a man like Gamaliel.
J.T. Well, I think Gamaliel is an outstanding agent here. He is not a Sadducee. The Sadducees were infidels, who had no regard for God at all, no regard for the Scriptures; but Gamaliel is not like that; he is a man such as Paul. I believe God had respect for Paul as a man, because, even although he was a Pharisee, he was a man who believed the Scriptures and believed in angels. He was an orthodox person. God is more likely to take up a man like that than a Sadducee, an infidel, who is more likely to be a leader in what is false, such as we are dealing with now. Gamaliel is the man whom God takes up; he is not made much of, but there is more in him in a way than in others, because he knows the truth so far.
E.N.J. He would not represent a brother in fellowship, but he would be one who has some work of God in his soul, perhaps, and he finds himself near to the powers that be, and makes his presence felt as, for instance, Pilate's wife did.
J.T. Very good. I think that is very true. Gamaliel is here in a similar way, and he is taken up by God because he recognises the Scriptures. But if a man comes forward who holds infidel beliefs, I would be afraid of him at all times, and we know such as those that the enemy is working in at the present time politically. I believe the enemy is working through Russia at the present time. Then
{45}
there is this trade unionism, which would be a similar thing, an agency of the enemy against the truth, just as Russia is in another sense.
R.P. Do you not think that the governments in these countries are in some ways alive to these elements?
J.T. I marvel at what has come about in the United States of America, what a change has come over that country. I believe it is all the government of God. There is such a change as to certain principles that it used to ridicule, and we are to be on the look-out for these things, so as to be ready for any change that may come in, for we do not know what may happen in view of the political situation abroad.
E.N.J. All this should stir us up, after hearing what the Lord has brought before us, in regard to our prayer meetings, availing ourselves of the mighty power of the angels to come in for us in Australia and New Zealand.
J.T. I marvel that this thing has acquired such power in these countries, because it has not the same power in the United States, and I think the change is in God's ordering.
E.N.J. Perhaps we have to humble ourselves as we find ourselves in the position of the butler, that we have been remiss as to this.
J.T. Quite so, we have to recall our sins.
Rem. The angel told them what to speak, all the words of this life; and they went out and taught, and then there are various other allusions to teaching, and finally at the end of the chapter they are found teaching.
J.T. Well, you would understand the apostles would not wait on the angel to guide them as to the subjects of their ministry, because he is just an angel, whereas the Spirit of God is here in regard to the testimony, and the ministry, and the preaching of the gospel, and the servant ought to be looking to the
{46}
Spirit of God for that sort of thing, that is to say, for the actual scriptures he takes up, and the subjects he takes up.
R.P. That is seen in verse 32, "*we* are his witnesses of these things, and the Holy Spirit also, which God has given to those that obey him".
J.T. They are accredited witnesses of God. Gamaliel is not that, nor is anybody else of that kind, but still God in His governmental ways may take up Gamaliel, as He does here, and turns the whole matter; but the actual power for ministry is the Spirit of God, and the agents of it were the apostles, at this particular time; others were added, of course, later.
E.N.J. Gamaliel has a sense that you cannot overthrow any matter that proceeds from God, and if there is a member of Parliament, or a man in power or authority in the land who has that sense, he will be used of God to help the saints in the testimony.
J.T. I think that fully. I have seen some remarkable quotations from members of Parliament in this country. One of them was that every liberty we have is due to conscience. There are so many brethren in fellowship here that one marvels we do not hear more of what they are saying about this very question.
C.E.J. Do you think it is because there is not sufficient witness, and that would involve what you have been suggesting to us as to open-air speaking? "*We* are his witnesses of these things".
J.T. There are not sufficient persons who are obviously witnesses. That only stresses what we are saying; the importance of what we say in ordinary business life, whether we are conveying light to persons we have to deal with.
J.P. In Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar was brought to know that God ruled over the kingdom of men.
J.T. That is good.
J.P. He may have had a Gamaliel, as you say.
{47}
J.T. Just so. At the same time we would be very cautious about giving out things said by others if they are not characteristically witnesses. I would be very concerned, for instance, in making up a hymn book, as to taking on the hymns of persons who are not in fellowship. We would be cautious of anything of that kind, printing or publishing in relation to the truth anything that men who are not characteristically moved by the Spirit might say. Even though the things said may be right, we are afraid of the source of them.
{48}
DIVINE ACTIVITIES IN SUPPORT OF THE TESTIMONY (4)
@Acts 6:1 - 15; @Acts 7:51 - 60
J.T. It is thought that we should note that in the book of Acts the truth was dealt with, and as any difficulty arose, such as we see here in chapter 6, it was met by the wisdom which was there in the Spirit, but particularly in the apostles; the apostles are in mind throughout as the leaders of the whole position, and hence it is said in chapter 2 that the converts, through Peter's preaching, "persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers @Acts 2:42". So that the dispensation is marked off in this way as under the guidance and leadership of the apostles, the blessed Spirit of God being there with them; chapter 2 brought out that fact. So that what is before us now is this question of deaconship, according to the facts presented.
It says, "In those days the disciples multiplying in number, there arose a murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews because their widows were overlooked in the daily ministration". That was the problem that now faced the saints, and immediately we are told, "the twelve, having called the multitude of the disciples to them, said, It is not right that we, leaving the word of God, should serve tables. Look out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we will establish over this business: but *we* will give ourselves up to prayer and the ministry of the word". So that we have here what has been intimated, that the apostles are, under the Lord, under the Spirit, in complete charge: and it is apparent that they are definitely imbued with wisdom to meet this serious difficulty that had
{49}
arisen. It was really a sectional matter, such as often comes up amongst us. It was sectional in the sense that the Hellenists, who were Greeks, were affected against the Hebrews.
P.A.H. What does that really suggest to us? Is it national feeling there?
J.T. Yes, and it is a common thing which has often arisen amongst brethren since Pentecost. But it may be linked on with what has been engaging us, which is not exactly national, but an industrial matter, which has brought about a combination of men of all kinds, and all nations and religions, in order to better themselves through that combination, disregarding whether divine principles are involved or not; so that we are therefore in the presence of a most serious matter, and one that deserves the full understanding that God has given to us, so that we may do His will, and not man's.
E.N.J. Do you link this matter of combining together with those in @Genesis 11:4, who said "Come on, let us build ourselves a city and a tower, the top of which may reach to the heavens"?
J.T. It is the beginning of all combinations of men arrayed against God, because that is what really developed; but it was to make a name for themselves. That is really the secret of all these combinations that we are dealing with. It is a question of human aspiration to a name. "Let us make ourselves a name, lest we be scattered over the face of the whole earth (@Genesis 11:4)". But then God met that by scattering them, so that the whole human race was scattered, and God can do that again. That is to say He can act against all such combinations, with a view to the deliverance and preservation of His people, and of the truth. Then we have verse 9, which is in view of what has been established by the apostles; that is, the seven deacons. "There arose up certain of those of the synagogue called of freedmen, and of
{50}
Cyrenians, and of Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with Stephen". So that they have a man now, representative of God, but thoroughly qualified, as filled with the Holy Spirit, to attack. That is, there is a point of attack in this man Stephen, who was the first one mentioned of the seven.
P.A.H. This really suggests to us the way a difficulty can be met: "Stephen, full of grace and power". Is it that?
J.T. Well, that is the point for us today. It is a question of wisdom, the wisdom which God is ready to give us in this crisis. It is said, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not", (@James 1:5). James always has a word of wisdom for us. So it is a question of the brethren understanding what is the point of attack of the enemy, and what God is putting forward, and how the enemy is attacking it, and how that attack is to be met; and I thinly we have an example in Stephen, and including, of course, the others of the seven. We have examples in them to go by.
R.P. Do you suggest that wisdom is a quality which comes to light when the exercise arises?
J.T. Yes, it is a quality of God. In earlier days we were accustomed to regard wisdom as a person, the Person of Christ really, but it is to be regarded as a quality, for that is how the book of Proverbs treats it. But then we have in the New Testament that Christ is the wisdom of God, and the Spirit of God is here on those lines; and hence the wisdom that Stephen has, as we see here in verse 8. "Stephen, full of grace and power, wrought wonders and great signs among the people".
C.W.A. Is this consequent on his being full of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Well, that is just what is said in verse 3,
{51}
"Look out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men, well reported, of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we will establish over this business". "Full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom" is the point stressed.
P.R.P. Have you something more in mind as to this matter of the Hellenists and the Hebrews, as being features amongst the saints? I mean it is not a worldly feature so much, but it is among the saints.
J.T. Just so, it is what had arisen amongst the saints. It is really the first attack, although Ananias and Sapphira came before, in chapter 5; but this is more specious, because it is a question of a sectional feeling; that is to say the Hellenists on the one hand, and the Hebrews on the other.
P.R.P. I was wondering if you had something more in mind as to this, as to the judgment of the evil associations of men outside. We need to be careful that we do not allow anything of that character inside.
J.T. And, of course, it was not allowed, because in the first attack Ananias and Sapphira died, but it does not say that Peter slew them. He did not; it was a question of God intervening; that was the end of that attack. But now we have these Hellenists, or Greeks, and Hebrews. That is to say it is somewhat more national. Of course, that is the thing to watch. Then on the other hand we have the combination in verse 9, "there arose up certain of those of the synagogue called of freedmen, and of Cyrenians, and of Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with Stephen". There we have a combination of men. Whatever they may have been, their names are given here, but they are not as those who were among the saints, such as Ananias and Sapphira were, because they were nominally Christians, but these are not.
{52}
E.N.J. Those beautiful conditions that we were looking at previously in the fourth chapter, when "the heart and soul of the multitude of those that had believed were one, and not one said that anything of what he possessed was his own, but all things were common to them", @Acts 4:32 were the conditions that the enemy sought to attack.
J.T. Quite so; it was really a continuation of what is seen in chapter 2, when the Spirit of God came in freshly.
R.P. The enemy is relentless, and his attack is against the testimony, either against Christ personally, or Christ in the saints.
J.T. Yes, and we need not expect any change in that. Indeed we can expect more, because it is getting near to the end of the dispensation.
J.M. Would this be an example of what we saw earlier, that they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers?
J.T. Well, it is a continuation of it, showing that the work of God was still continuing, until it was hindered through what is mentioned, the feeling of the Hellenists against the Hebrews, because their widows were overlooked in the daily ministration. There may have been some error on the part of the Hebrews in the matter, but apparently it was overcome.
W.B. It says, "Look out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves". Does the solution lie with ourselves; love would find the answer to the difficulty?
J.T. It is a question of love among ourselves; that is the point. The Lord said, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", (@John 13:35). It is a question of what is amongst ourselves.
J.A.A. It is a good thing for us to take account of
{53}
spiritual brethren among us, and seek wisdom from those going on with what is spiritual?
J.T. Quite so. Then you see the happy outlook and feeling in the third verse. "Look out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we will establish over this business". That is to say the apostles have authority to say, "we will establish". That is a point to be before us, the idea of the establishment of what is right in the business to be attended to, whatever is to be looked after, there are those ready to do it; and that is what the apostles have in mind here, that these seven men should be full of the Holy Spirit, and thus qualified to take on this business, as it is called.
R.P. There is no succession of the apostles today, but if there is service to be rendered, the power lies in the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Exactly, and then in the saints themselves. The Spirit being here, the saints are indwelt by the Spirit as they were then, but we have not such an exhibition of power as there was then. Still the Spirit is here, and the saints are here, and God is here.
P.A.H. There would not be any difficulty in relation to the selection of these seven men. The multitude of the disciples would select them, and as love would be there, there would not be any element of rivalry in the selection, would there?
J.T. Although it has been remarked recently as to the large number of brethren in Australia, especially in Sydney and Melbourne, yet there are nothing like the numbers they had here. They began with three thousand, and then we have in chapter 4, five thousand, and then further a greater number than that; so we are now in this scripture in the presence of a great number of persons, perhaps five to ten thousand, and therefore there was a greater problem than even our brethren have in Sydney or Melbourne
{54}
or London. We may as well accept that, that we are in a day of small things.
J.P. Would you say that there are always those among the saints whom God would use to help in regard to every difficult question that may arise?
J.T. Well, God is determined that there should be no chaotic condition as there was at the beginning of the creation. There was a state of chaos which God had to face, according to @Genesis 1, but now we are in the presence of the Spirit of God come down, and a large number being converted by Him, and we can see that God would be determined to maintain order. So we have these seven men; the number is to be noted; it links on with the Old Testament. As to our brethren in care meetings and the like, it is not a question of the number seven, but it is a question of spiritual power; that is the point.
J.P. So that the apostles did not leave their work, but others are brought in. The apostles carry on with prayer and ministry.
J.T. Quite so, things are set in order, and persons are to be known; we are to know each other, and when a crisis arises, we know who is fit to face the matter, where love is operating.
J.A.A. Is that why these men are named? Each one is named definitely as known, and able to take things up in faithfulness.
J.T. Just so. It suggests to us that we should know each other, and I believe it is quite right for each of us to have a judgment of the others; not to be critical, but at the same time to have a clear judgment of who there is amongst us, who is likely to be helpful.
E.N.J. And it is a good service to know how to bring such forward. There is something to be done, and things are not revolving round one, or two, or three.
J.T. Quite so. It has been suggested that in
{55}
certain places persons are named who are to be in the lead. Well, it is a question of what each local company may have, because the idea of local companies is indicated in the first epistle to the Corinthians. That is to say, "the assembly of God which is in Corinth", @1 Corinthians 1:2 and "with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours", so that we have to know each other. In Corinth, or in whatever other place it may be, we have to know the persons, and when a crisis arises we know who is who, and who can do things that may be required. So we do not appoint leaders formally now to lead the brethren. It is a question of what each brother has, and the Spirit of God being always here ready to help whatever is of God.
R.P. A principle is to be seen in bringing them before the apostles.
J.T. Just so, that is the point we get here; they apparently knew each other, because it says, "Look out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we will establish over this business: but *we*  will give ourselves up to prayer and the ministry of the word". And then it says, "The saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen", and so on. We have the seven men named, and Stephen is put forward at once as having peculiar qualities for the crisis to be met.
C.McC. Is that why Stephen is attacked in a special way, as one specially approved of God?
J.T. Well, the devil is in verse 9, whereas God was in the earlier verses, and Stephen is put forward because he is specially qualified.
R.G.W. Do we get the superiority of our resources, and the poverty of the enemy's resources here?
J.T. How beautiful! The Spirit of God brings out what Stephen was, and how it justifies the saying in @1 Timothy 3:13, as to deacons. It says, verse 10,
{56}
"they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he spoke"; and then it is said, "They set false witnesses, saying, This man does not cease speaking words against the holy place and the law; for we have heard him saying, This Jesus the Nazaraean shall destroy this place, and change the customs which Moses taught us. And all who sat in the council, looking fixedly on him, saw his face as the face of an angel". What a wonderful testimony is immediately brought in, corroborating what we have had elsewhere -- the place that angels have in this dispensation. Why do we not count on them more? This man has a face like an angel.
E.N.J. What would you say as to that; what is the outstanding feature of the face of an angel?
J.T. Well, I would say it was heavenly.
E.N.J. The Lord says that in heaven angels always behold the face of His Father.
J.T. There the angels behold His face as representative of the children, showing that the idea of the angels¬ service is representative. This matter of children is very important. Children are so signalised that their angels behold the face of the Father. It is a question of angelic representation.
P.A.H. So that Stephen really stands in that place here, as representative of heaven.
J.T. Well, I would think that. It is very remarkable that he should come in so soon, and then that he should be honoured so quickly. He had great ability to bring out the truth, not simply to do deacon's work, but to bring out the whole truth from the outset to the end. And how he dies! Such a testimony to the Spirit of Christ!
J.McN. Is this stated to encourage us to avail ourselves of the same power of the Holy Spirit in order to stand in the broken day in which we live in the same power as Stephen did?
J.T. Well, I think so. It is a question of what
{57}
God has raised up. Of course, the Holy Spirit is not raised up; He has come down from heaven, sent down in fact, and always here; He remains here till the end of the dispensation. But then there are men too, whom God has raised up and sent out, and they are to be models for us. So we have a great cloud of witnesses according to @Hebrews 12. They are all around us, as it were, persons who have been faithful to the truth from the very outset, and it is for us to notice what they have done, because we are now occupying the ground; they are not here, but we are, and it is a question of taking up the position and serving in it faithfully as they did.
D.H.B. In verse 5 it says also that Stephen was full of faith. Would that help us?
J.T. Showing that he was a real man in the sense of personal faith in God, because if we have not faith we are nothing.
R.P. Is that why it refers in the great preaching in the next chapter to the family of faith?
J.T. Quite so; it may be profitable to compare that with what the writer to the Hebrews says in chapter 11.
C.McC. Is there something to learn from the fact that Stephen's testimony is irresistible before worldly men? It was worldly men who saw his face as the face of an angel. They had to take account of that.
J.T. Just so. It was all who sat in the council who are specially noted; not the Lord's people, not Christians, but those who were in the council in Jerusalem.
E.N.J. Would this all help us, in view of the fact that some may be called on before long to testify in the presence of worldly men, as to how we feel about this question of associations? One was thinking of formation with Stephen, and unless there is formation with us the testimony will be weak.
J.T. I do not know of anything more profitable
{58}
for us as to this point that we are now looking at than the war of 1914 - 1918. How the so-called non-combatants were treated, and how they suffered, and how patient they were in simply saying that they could not take human life; I think they were models. And then in the next war, 1939 - 1945, both in Great Britain, here, and America, the same thing came to light, only the authorities were more lenient and more respectful, seeing that there was something in the Christians; that is to say, those who say they cannot take human life. They cannot become the instruments of taking human life, and God is honouring that.
R.P. In a crisis of the testimony, do we want to understand where we are and where the assembly is in its history? Paul wrote to the Thessalonians that they were not to be soon shaken in mind, and referred to a day of evil yet to come. Are we to understand the evil that is *present* in the passage of the testimony?
J.T. It is a question therefore of beginning with what we have here, that is the book of Acts, and then our own times, or the last one hundred and fifty years, or thereabouts: what God has been doing, and that one after another has been here to witness in the service of Christ, and they have been taken to be with the Lord; and now we are here, and it is a question of what we are doing, and whether we are taking example from those who have gone before. Hence in the book of Hebrews we have again an exhortation to remember our leaders, and then to obey our leaders; this would mean that those whom God is using and putting forward amongst us are to be models for the others, and as such they are to be considered. They are to be followed, as it were, so that we may have a continuance of ability in the testimony that is needed for the teaching of the saints.
E.N.J. I think you inferred earlier that Stephen
{59}
would, be a sample of a Christian. Would, this indictment have any part in present testimony?
J.T. Well, it is a remarkable thing. I think it is one of the most remarkable portions of Scripture we have; it is Stephen's testimony running right through chapter 7. He addresses them there: "Brethren and fathers, hearken. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, and said to him, Go out of thy land and out of thy kindred, and come into the land which I will shew thee", @Acts 7:2,3 and so forth, and he continues down until we come to the verses we read, where he says, "But the Most High dwells not in places made with hands; as says the prophet, The heaven is my throne and the earth the footstool of my feet: what house will ye build me? saith the Lord, or where is the place of my rest? has not my hand made all these things?" @Acts 7:48 - 50 And then the terrible indictment in the words, "O stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, *ye* do always resist the Holy Spirit; as your fathers, *ye*  also", and so forth. So that we have here a perfect testimony on God's part, and an indictment, too, of the Jews, as to the way they had murdered Christ. It is just an indictment by the actual facts of the history of the testimony from the beginning to the end, up to that time.
E.N.J. Would one able to speak clearly of the great events of the last one hundred and fifty years be a parallel to what Stephen had to say?
J.T. Very good, because God raised up remarkable men during those years, some of them within our own times, serving the Lord, and God helping them; and it is for us now, the younger men of us, to use what was in them and to follow their example.
R.P. The life of Stephen, possible a comparatively young man, was remarkable, was it not?
J.T. It is remarkable what a short time Stephen
{60}
had, and how much entered into it. It is marvellous that so much should enter into one man's testimony.
J.P. He begins right from the very beginning with Abraham. He covers the whole of the testimony from Abraham to the time then present.
J.T. Just so. Our attention is called to what God is, and what His testimony is, that it is one testimony.
J.P. And he follows the truth of the Scriptures all the way through.
J.M. Would verse 55 suggest that the position seen in Stephen corresponds with heaven? It says, "But being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God".
J.T. Showing that Jesus had gone the whole way, the faithful and true Witness. That is really what is in mind.
J.M. And does it mean that the same thought is continued now in Stephen? He holds the position on earth corresponding with what was seen in heaven.
J.T. Paul calls him "thy martyr Stephen", @Acts 22:20. Stephen is honoured thus by Paul himself.
C.P. Stephen charges them with being uncircumcised in heart and ears. Would that indicate that Stephen himself was in correspondence with the death of Christ?
J.T. Circumcised in the spiritual meaning of it. Would you enlarge on that, as to what is in your mind?
C.P. Stephen in charging them with being uncircumcised was one that had thoroughly judged himself before God, and hence was full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom.
J.T. Quite so; hence the word of Paul, "*we* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God,
{61}
and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh", (@Philippians 3:3). Such was Stephen.
W.B. Do these "freedmen" that are spoken of represent an element which is abroad in the world today, which would seek to be vehement in their judgment of what is of God?
J.T. I think we have already alluded to what we are dealing with here in Australia, and we do not want to be personal at all, but this character of men is seen all round us, and we have them named here in the chapter we read. In verse 9 it was a question of the synagogue. The Lord uses the word synagogue too, in the book of Revelation, and He calls it the synagogue of Satan. I do not think we should call these men the synagogue of Satan, but it is remarkable the similarity between this and what we have in the book of Revelation named by the Lord. So it says "there arose up certain of those of the synagogue called of freedmen, and of Cyrenians, and of Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with Stephen". They are banded together and the names indicate whence they come, and they are disputing with Stephen, who is God's witness. Stephen is in the front now; the apostles are not so much in evidence; it is a question of Stephen, whom God puts forward in His testimony.
A.M. Why do you think Peter's testimony is so different to Stephen's? He says, "I know that ye did it in ignorance, as also your rulers" (@Acts 3:17), whereas here Stephen is most definite and severe in his indictment of them.
J.T. It is just a question of where the Jews were. Whether they are treated as murderers, or whether they are treated as innocent, doing a thing ignorantly and in unbelief; and I believe the point is that this chapter is now indicting the Jews for their wickedness in murdering Christ, whereas in the third chapter they are viewed as having done the thing ignorantly
{62}
and in unbelief. The idea of the city of refuge is opened up in the third chapter, but not so in this chapter. There is no refuge for the Jews now; they are exposed.
A.M. Do you think we should be able to discern the change in the attitude of men? The apostasy coming in fast, our attitude is to be different from what it might have been in earlier days?
J.T. I would think so. Take the Reformation; I should not think that the Spirit of God would specially stress the apostasy at the time of the Reformation, because it was a peculiar time. God was opening up things and was favourable to men notwithstanding the history of Christendom, but now we have come to another time and things have changed. Wickedness and bad doctrine of every description are current and openly avowed, so that the time has come for God to bring forward the book of Revelation. The book of Revelation is a very late part of the Scripture, and it is intended to be a weapon for the ministry as to current conditions and the judgment that is coming, so that men might fear, and that the saints who are now walking in the truth might be confirmed. The wickedness that is to be dealt with presently, as the book of Revelation shows, is awful, so that the beast and the false prophet, who represent moral wickedness, are cast alive into the lake of fire. It is all to bring home to us at the present time what wickedness there is, and how God is going to deal with it.
J.A.A. Why does Stephen refer to the Lord as the Son of man, in verse 56? "I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God".
J.T. I think because he is moving away from the Jews. It is a question now of men, not the Jews especially. When the preaching began, it was the Jews first, but it is not that now. I think that is
{63}
what is meant; the Lord has taken the place of the Son of man.
J.A.A. While Stephen is in power in relation to the judgment of God, is he still manifesting the dispensation of grace? He was full of grace and power, the Spirit of God says. In relation to the Son of man, grace is still coming out to others; so Stephen maintains the dispensation.
J.T. Yes, I think it is important to see that the attitude of the Spirit of God has changed here; that is to say, the Jews are no longer in mind as at first. It is a question of the Son of man standing at the right hand of God, having in view the whole of humanity, instead of the Jews, so Paul agreed with that in saying later, "We turn to the Gentiles (@Acts 13:46)". The time had come for that in the closing chapters of the book of Acts.
Ques. Is it a question of God's rights here? Stephen saw the Son of man standing. The *standing* is significant.
J.T. Mark says that the Lord Jesus "sat at the right hand of God @Mark 16:19". That is a feature of permanency; He has taken up a position at the right hand of God, sitting there, He has title to that. But here He is standing. The Lord is ready to take that attitude, to stand at the right hand of God, ready to serve the gentiles. And we have come into it. We have come into this gracious attitude of the Lord standing at the right hand of God.
J.M. Is there something akin in Revelation when He says, "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock"? @Revelation 3:20
J.T. Quite so. The Lord is ready to come in, if anyone opens to Him, but you do not get that thought here. It is the general position of mankind here, and the Son of man ready to act because He is the Son of man. It is a question of His relations with men. "There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 2:5. That
{64}
is the position. The Jews have no longer a claim to God. He has now turned to the gentiles, and we are in that, so we ought to glory in it. The epistle to the Romans shows that the gentiles¬ time will come too, when they will be dealt with, and so the writer, in chapter 11, urges the gentiles to fear, lest the judgment come upon them. God is going to return to the Jews, although He has abandoned them at present, but He will return to His ancient people because of the fathers. He loves them for the fathers¬ sakes, and will return to them, but He is not doing it yet.
E.N.J. In verse 57 it says, "And they cried out with a loud voice, and held their ears, and rushed upon him with one accord". Is that condition developing rapidly now in Christendom?
J.T. It seems so. How the servants of God are being threatened!
E.N.J. Holding their ears would indicate that they did not want to hear the testimony.
J.T. Then the solemn thing is that our own apostle Paul is seen keeping the clothes of those who stoned Stephen. A most solemn thing! But he was converted nevertheless, so that he says he was shown mercy "for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal", (@1 Timothy 1:16).
{65}
DIVINE ACTIVITIES IN SUPPORT OF THE TESTIMONY (5)
@Acts 8:1 - 40
J.T. The Spirit of God seems in this section to have in mind to stress how the work of God continues in spite of difficulties, the opposition being particularly stressed, and firstly the attack on Stephen, his death and martyrdom. Paul says, "thy martyr Stephen", (@Acts 22:20). Now the work is proceeding. Stephen was the leading one among the deacons chosen by the disciples and confirmed by the apostles, and now another one, Philip, is purchasing to himself a "good degree, and great boldness in the faith", (@1 Timothy 3:13). But another thing intended to affect us in view of the current exercises of the brethren, is the appearance of Saul of Tarsus, and his persistent violence in attacking the assembly and those who formed it.
E.N.J. Would this suggest that even those who have been instruments of the enemy might be blessed, if our exercises are taken up definitely?
J.T. That Saul should be blessed at this juncture is very striking, and shows the persistence of heaven in pursuing the dispensation, and maintaining it in its full height, the conversion of Saul being a striking illustration of it, as the Lord said of him, "This man is an elect vessel to me (@Acts 9:15)". The Lord had selected him. The apostles had appointed the deacons, but Paul, or Saul, was not amongst them. He was in the hands of the enemy still; he says in writing to Timothy that he was an insolent overbearing man, but "mercy was shewn me ... for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal", @1 Timothy 1:16. So that I think we have good ground to be encouraged at this time in regard to what is current
{66}
among the saints here as to the enemy's work, and that something may be secured for us, to meet this long enduring trial of unionism, extending actually as far as I can understand for at least ten years; so that it is a question of the saints getting to God about it, and He will do something.
The references to Saul are striking, because first it says, "Saul was consenting to his being killed", and then the Spirit returns to him again in verse 3, "Saul ravaged the assembly, entering into the houses one after another, and dragging off both men and woman delivered them up to prison". So that the violence of the devil is seemingly aroused, and it is a question now of our being faithful and holding fast.
P.A.H. In spite of this terrible opposition, there is an increase in testimony.
J.T. That is what we see, and it is not in specially appointed vessels, but as it says in verse 4, "Those then that had been scattered went through the countries announcing the glad tidings of the word". That is to say, it is simply scattered persons; and then another deacon is taken up specially in the service of the gospel.
P.A.H. We are told in chapter 6 that "the word of God increased", @Acts 6:7 after the murmuring was met.
P.R.P. Have you any thought as to why the Lord allowed Saul to go so far before striking him down with light from heaven?
J.T. I suppose the Lord would strengthen the whole position of those engaged in the service. The facts relative to Saul are enlarged on in the next chapter, and I believe the presentation of the facts is to encourage us. It is said after Saul's conversion in chapter 9:31, "The assemblies then throughout the whole of Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified and walking in the fear of the Lord, and were increased through the comfort of
{67}
the Holy Spirit @Acts 9:31". The Lord came in, specially taking up Saul of Tarsus, and thus encouraging the saints generally, that the work should proceed, and that there should be comfort, and to stay the hand of the devil at this juncture -- as we get in the Old Testament, "the land had rest forty years", (@Judges 3:11) and so forth. Certain periods are characterised by rest.
J.M. Would Saul then be the chief instrument in the hand of the enemy at this juncture?
J.T. Well, the facts are thus presented; but then the Lord is showing that He is greater, showing what He can do for us.
J.A.A. Saul was a very religious man. How does that apply to our present situation?
J.T. It is a matter of public influences. As regards the position in the British Isles, in the House of Commons there are, it is said, a considerable number of so-called lay preachers, which is remarkable, as they are not the kind of people you might expect God to select for the government of the land; they are working people, but yet they have a religious character; but we cannot trust such evidence of religious zeal. Paul is a sample of a religious zealot; his zeal is notable. "As to zeal, persecuting the assembly", (@Philippians 3:6) which was a mere matter of zeal with nothing behind it of God at all, in spite of his religion.
E.N.J. Would it be right to say that Paul's exercises commenced as he witnessed the sufferings of Stephen? I thought we might see in this, that if we suffer there will be fruit.
J.T. I have no doubt the Lord intended to give signal evidence of His continuing care for the assembly. It had come to a crisis, and Saul was set for the destruction of it, and he intended to ravage and destroy it; as he says himself, he persecuted the assembly. So I think we should be encouraged that the Lord is looking at the matter, and perhaps something is going to come out of it, and it is a question
{68}
of the state we are in whether He can take us on and use us. Scattered persons are mentioned here, and we read of them later at Antioch and elsewhere (chapter 11:19); and that is the point to be before our minds, to see what God is doing. Then He takes Saul, a special instrument, actually out of the hands of the devil, and uses him as no other man was ever used in the service of God.
R.McC. God meets this impossible situation in a wonderful way.
J.T. That is what I have before me. The Lord loves to come in for us, and signalises certain circumstances by coming in manifestly by Himself, as it were, on our behalf. He says of Saul, "This man is an elect vessel to me (@Acts 9:15)". The Lord allowed Saul to go as far as Damascus; that is, altogether outside his proper sphere, Jerusalem, where he had been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and to come into the sphere of the gentiles, before He takes him up.
P.A.H. The assembly was precious to the Lord then, when He said to Saul, "Why persecutest thou me? (@Acts 9:4)" and it is just as precious to the Lord now.
J.T. The assembly was perhaps never more precious to the Lord than it is at the present moment. Not indeed that it was not precious at the beginning, but the peculiar revival of the truth, extending on to our own times, is an indication, I believe, of how precious the assembly is to Him, and how insistent He is in taking care of it and bringing it through to the end.
W.J.B. When difficulties arise, is there a tendency for us to resort to human reasoning to find an answer to the difficulty? I was thinking of the earlier part of Acts, where they cry to the Lord, "Behold their threatenings (@Acts 4:29)". Do we need to be preserved from human reasonings in finding solutions to difficulties?
J.T. I would say that. You refer to chapter 4. The threatenings were "in this city", the very city
{69}
they were in; that is, where we are now for instance. What is current ought to show what God can do for us in the midst of it. There are several references in the Scriptures, especially in Acts, to this city where the Lord was crucified, where the worst evil that was ever perpetrated was committed, it was Jerusalem. Jerusalem was the sphere of persecution against the people of God.
C.McC. Do these scattered persons show the right spirit by continuing to preach, even though under persecution? They are not deterred by it or cast down.
J.T. That is very good, and we should be encouraged by their example. So it says, "Those then that had been scattered went through the countries announcing the glad tidings of the word. And Philip, going down to a city of Samaria, preached the Christ to them; and the crowds with one accord gave heed to the things spoken by Philip, when they heard him and saw the signs which he wrought". We have to remember that Philip was a deacon appointed by the twelve, but now he is purchasing to himself "a good degree, and great boldness in the faith (@1 Timothy 3:13)". The apostles did not give him that, he purchased it to himself. So that it is a question of what is within us, as it is said of David, "David strengthened himself in Jehovah his God", (@1 Samuel 30:6). It was something in himself.
E.N.J. Are you referring to the fact that there was that which they could see in Philip?
J.T. Yes; there it was. He was not sent to preach the gospel. He was a deacon, but he purchased to himself a good degree and great boldness in the faith, showing what is within the range of any of us. Then we have another difficulty arising here, an that is in verse 9. "A certain man, by name Simon, had been before in the city, using magic arts, and astonishing the nation of Samaria, saying that
{70}
himself was some great one. To whom they had all given heed, from small to great, saying, This is the power of God which is called great. And they gave heed to him, because that for a long time he had astonished them by his magic arts". So that now we have another element to overcome at this point in this man who has magic arts, the work of the devil directly, and human pride attached to it.
J.S.P. Is this something that is more subtle than persecution?
J.T. Well, I think it is. It is a peculiar kind of opposition. Then another thing comes in at this point. There were many converts through Philip, but they did not receive the Holy Spirit. That is a sort of defect in the service, so in this connection Peter and John are sent down from Jerusalem. At that time Jerusalem was the centre of God's work, and the apostles were there; they had not been scattered, so they send Peter and John to meet the apparent defect of Philip, which might have upset Philip's work and turned him aside. In this we see the remarkable evidence of God's persistent continuance in carrying on His work against all efforts of the devil.
J.M. Is there a lack of completeness seen in Philip's work, so that what was needed was the coming in of the Holy Spirit as the seal of the work?
J.T. Well, God has certain sovereign rights, and we cannot assume that He must do so-and-so; we must wait on Him to do it. Sometimes it is said that a person receives the Holy Spirit because he believes, but it is not always so. In this case it was not so.
A.M. Do you think the defect was in Philip's preaching, or in those that heard?
J.T. I think it was the general position. God would assert Himself in the midst of all this great work, and show that He had His own sovereign rights, and they cannot be interfered with. That is
{71}
*to* say, things cannot be done or expected to be done automatically in the work of God. They must proceed from God; we have to learn that. However great the evident results may be, we must learn that God has His rights, and intervenes when He wishes.
A.M. I notice that when the apostles came down they prayed for them. Would that be bringing God into the situation?
J.T. It might be assumed that God was ignored in a sense in what these seven men were doing; they are very successful, but then God is saying, 'I have to say to this matter, I have certain rights', and we have to ask Him about it. Peter and John prayed for them.
P.A.H. So that really God seals the position by the bringing in of the Holy Spirit, and brings to light that which is spurious in Simon.
J.T. That is the idea, to bring the work of God on to its proper level, and this implies the sovereign activity of God, and that He must be waited on. We cannot say that things must be done, we may arrange preachings and so on, but we must see that God has His rights anyhow. We have to wait on Him. So they prayed. It says, "And the apostles who were in Jerusalem, having heard that Samaria had received the word of God, sent to them Peter and John; who, having come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit". It is *Samaria*, the whole province that is in mind, not simply one town. Peter and John put the matter in the hands of God, so that He might give the Holy Spirit. It might be said the Spirit had already come, which was true, but at the same time God is saying that He must give Him, and that we must look to God for Him. It is not an automatic matter, for it goes on to say, "for he was not yet fallen upon any of them, only they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus. Then they laid their hands upon them, and they
{72}
received the Holy Spirit". That is the position, so that the act of Peter and John is acknowledged, and God is acknowledged in it, and therefore the work proceeds. Then Simon's case is met, this magician who gave himself out that he was a great one. The case is met by Peter, who discerns and exposes Simon. We have to watch for an exposure of what is counterfeit. This man was not converted according to God, nor was he in fellowship according to God.
J.A.A. The enemy was saying, "This is the power of God which is called great", but God was to show that the power to go on with things stood in relation to the Holy Spirit.
J.T. The whole position is restored to its normal setting, which is very important, I should say, in this chapter.
A.M. Would this be an illustration of what Paul says to Timothy, "Lay hands quickly on no man"? @1 Timothy 5:22 Do we need to be alert as to how the enemy may get in in this way? Had Simon been received, what harm he might have done.
J.T. At the time of a so-called Welsh revival a great deal was made of a certain man who was used apparently, but it turned out to be counterfeit; not that there were no converts, but the work itself could not be said to be of God. The enemy took advantage of it, and took it out of its proportion.
E.N.J. Are the operations of the Holy Spirit one whole? I was wondering if the fact that the Holy Spirit did not come readily to these converts would show that God had the work in hand at Jerusalem, and other parts, and no isolated work was to flourish without being connected with what He already had in hand.
J.T. That is a good remark; so in chapter 10 we have Cornelius. He was a subject of the work of God before, and the Spirit of God came to him. He had a vision. He was owned by heaven itself, and Peter
{73}
was brought into it, and Peter began to preach to Cornelius. Quite a company was gathered to hear him in Cornelius¬ house, and then what happened was that the Holy Spirit Himself fell upon them that were hearing the word. The Holy Spirit Himself came upon them; there is no statement of their being converted directly. It was just a question of the hearing of the word that Peter was preaching, and while Peter was preaching, the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word.
A.M. Would there be a kind of reference, do you think, to the rise of the clerical element here in connection with Simon, and the danger of it that is always present?
J.T. Quite so.
A.M. I was thinking of the mercenary idea that seems to be uppermost in men's minds. Really we have to discern what lies behind these things. No doubt Peter sees it, and says, "Thy money go with thee to destruction".
J.T. Paul said he had a right to these things, for God had ordained that a preacher of the gospel should live of it; but Paul said he took nothing of them. We have that over against what we have here, showing it is necessary to maintain the right balance in the use of Scripture, and in the preaching.
A.T.G. Are we to learn something from the fact that the heart is mentioned: "Thy heart is not upright before God"?
J.T. Yes, I would say it is a question of new birth that is involved. John's ministry was not yet brought into the Scriptures, but it came in in due time. The Lord had reserved John. He said, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" (@John 21:22) That is what the Lord answered Peter, and John's ministry comes in, and it deals with new birth and with the inwards of a man, and so, "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God". (@John 3:3)
{74}
That is to say, we have to see that God has His own way; that it is not altogether merely what is said in preaching, but what God does sovereignly, and that is what you get in @John 3 and 4. @John 3:3 is "Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God". That is to say, no matter what preaching he listens to, or whatever gift there may be used to convert him, there has to be a sovereign work of God; and so here, Simon's heart was not changed. That is to say, the real work of God had not taken effect in him.
J.S.P. You would say Peter was faithful to him? He says, "Repent therefore of this thy wickedness", and it causes Simon to ask Peter to supplicate for him.
J.T. But then the solemn thing is, that we have no further record as to what happened; the matter is just left. So we see that we must bring God in in all these cases to get results for eternity, however much preaching there may be.
E.N.J. Should we be able to discern the good fish from those that are not good, and not be after numbers so much as quality?
J.T. Yes, that is Matthew. Matthew is brought into this whole position as well as John, and it is very interesting to discern how God brings in His servants and makes way for them for their ministry; but yet it is all a question of what God is and does.
P.R.P. Would you say that this is a sort of principle as to everything that is done by us, as to waiting for God's hand to be manifested in it?
J.T. Well, I think that is the thing that God is saying. He has His rights, and whatever machinery we may bring into it, however much preaching, we have to come back to this, that God must do the work, that He is the source of everything.
A.M. Would the expression "Having ... shod your feet with the preparation of the glad tidings
{75}
of peace", (@Ephesians 6:15) be in relation to divine Persons going before in the gospel?
J.T. Very good. Preparation, too, is another good word.
A.M. Philip went down apparently on his own exercises, which may be a good thing to do, but possibly his feet had not been sufficiently shod with a sense of real dependence on God. He must come in and seal the work.
J.T. I am sure that is very good, and I hope we will perhaps take it on a little too. This chapter contemplates that after the death of Stephen the word of God is used. First of all we have, "Those then that had been scattered went through the countries announcing the glad tidings of the word"; a thing to be noted, because the word is a question of God. It is God's word, not merely what He has said, but what He may still say, and therefore provision has to be made for the word, and we have throughout this chapter remarkable references to the use of Scripture in the service. The first reference is "the glad tidings of the word" (verse 4), and then we have in verse 12, "But when they believed Philip announcing the glad tidings concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptised, both men and women". And then the next one is in verse 14, "And the apostles who were in Jerusalem, having heard that Samaria had received the word of God" (notice the word of God) "sent to them Peter and John; who, having come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit". That is to say the preaching of the word is in mind, and that the gift of the Holy Spirit should come in after that; and so Peter and John are sent for that purpose. And then the next reference is in verse 25, "They therefore, having testified and spoken the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and announced the glad tidings to
{76}
many villages of the Samaritans". This time it is the word of the Lord, not the word of God, or the word, but "the word of the Lord". They returned to Jerusalem and announced the glad tidings. Not saying what glad tidings, but it was simply the glad tidings, and they announced it in many villages of the Samaritans. And then so as to make the thing clear, another reference is in verse 35, "And Philip, opening his mouth and beginning from that scripture, announced the glad tidings of Jesus to him". That is another term or title, as we may say, of the glad tidings, "the glad tidings of Jesus". Then we have finally in verse 40, "And Philip was found at Azotus, and passing through he announced the glad tidings to all the cities till he came to Caesarea".
I mention all that because it enters into the subject before us, the question of the continuance of the testimony, of the preaching in spite of all difficulties, and that God is asserting His rights in it as to His testimony, that He may take up a man like Philip and use him, and finally carry him away; it says he was found at Azotus. He was raptured, you might say, because he was so honoured in heaven. It says, "But when they came up out of the water the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip"; that is, he was raptured. It does not say where he was taken, but he was taken away, "and the eunuch saw him no longer, for he went on his way rejoicing. And Philip was found at Azotus", showing that God is honouring His servant at this juncture.
P.B.P. In saying all that, have you in mind that the enemy is particularly attacking the testimony of the glad tidings, and that what is before us in this city has that in mind? I mean the matter of unionism and associations. The enemy is really seeking to attack the testimony of the gospel.
J.T. And the answer on our side is to continue persistently with the truth of the gospel, with the
{77}
testimony. Keep at it! Keep at the truth, so that there may be results.
J.S.P. Linking ourselves up with the things of this world would put us in bondage, but having the light and truth before us would set us at liberty, would it not?
J.T. The chapter is a study for every one of us, whether in this city or any city, at the juncture we have reached in the ministry which has been given lately in these countries. The Spirit of God has helped us in a remarkable way; that is my own judgment about it; and the question now is whether the brethren will go on steadily with the truth, with the testimony. There is only one testimony. It cannot be linked up with any particular country, and God is going on with that testimony. In this chapter it is to be the gift of the Spirit. Even though the Spirit has been here for centuries, God gives Him to the believer. At the end of the chapter we come to the end of the testimony as to Philip; he is found at Azotus; he is raptured, God is honouring him. That is, God is saying that the Spirit of the Lord in the power of the rapture is going to take the assembly according to @1 Thessalonians 4.
E.N.J. Is the great thing in view in the preaching of the gospel, that there might be material secured for the assembly? I was thinking of Philip's converts. Where they had not received the Holy Spirit, they would hardly be ready to form part of the assembly until they did receive the Holy Spirit, and that is God's sovereign gift.
J.T. Philip is owned later as an evangelist: "Philip the evangelist", and he "had four virgin daughters who prophesied", (@Acts 21:9). It is simply to show the links in what God is doing that I refer to it.
E.N.J. There was great rejoicing in the city of Samaria over some who had received the forgiveness of their sins, but there is something further than that.
{78}
The great thing is that souls should be secured for the assembly.
C.McC. In the rapturing of Philip, does God show that though He comes in sovereignly, it is all His own work, that He is delighted with persons going on in the testimony and standing for things and being found in line with what He is doing?
J.T. Just so, and the great work now is to see to it that souls who profess to have light and to have received blessing should receive the Holy Spirit, that full room is made for the action of the Holy Spirit.
A.M. Do you think it had to be an angel that spoke to Philip? Would that be possibly a suggestion that he has not sufficiently honoured the Holy Spirit in his service? The Spirit takes him on later, but not at first.
J.T. I should not like to discredit anything Philip did. Whilst an angel directed him, that is simply to bring out the place that angelic service has in the testimony, that even in some cases angels are used to guide the servants. While angels are used in the ordinary affairs of this world in which we are found, yet they are also used in more exalted work than even perhaps directing armies and the like, which has often happened in our own times. The angels are at times used in more exalted work, and this is an instance of it, in that the angel is used to direct Philip where to go. I would say, I am looking to the Lord about my movements and service, and the Lord may direct me, and I hope He will, I am counting on Him. Here it is not the Spirit that directs Philip at first, so it says, "The angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, Rise up and go southward on the way which goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza: the same is desert". He is directing him away from Samaria to a desert place. And it says he rose up and went. He goes immediately, and
{79}
does what he is told; and then we hear of the Ethiopian who comes into the picture; and then it says in verse 29, "And the Spirit said to Philip, Approach and join this chariot. And Philip, running up, heard him reading the prophet Esaias". He was reading chapter 53. You were alluding to some defect in Philip, but I am just wondering if there is. Philip moved exactly as he was told by the angel, and then by the Spirit of God, and then he is finally raptured by the Spirit of the Lord, not by an angel. It seems to me that whatever we may think of Philip's preaching, he is honoured throughout until he is raptured. His house is evidently right too, for he had four daughters who prophesied.
A.M. Do you think he would really be becoming more spiritual?
J.T. I think that is the way to put it. He was progressing. I do not think there is any real hint of defect in his preaching, but he is advancing spiritually, normally I would say; so that the chapter is full of instruction for us as to the service of God; both as to the service itself and as to the work of the Holy Spirit, and the converts.
J.A.A. There is that which is desert. Does that indicate that there are no resources apart from God and the power of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes, and that the servant is tested by being sent to a desert when he had been preaching. He has plenty of opportunity to preach. We often hear of persons saying they do not get invitations to preach. Well, Philip is an example. He was not invited to preach, or even sent to preach, and yet he preached and was used of God; so it is a question of everyone taking up his work. If he has no work allotted to him, let him do something, whatever he finds to do, and do it with his might. That is what Philip did.
E.N.J. Would we as thus seeking to announce the glad tidings rely on the faithfulness of God?
{80}
We have an example of it here in the eunuch getting blessing, answering to the prayer of Solomon in @1 Kings 8:41 - 43, "as to the stranger also, who is not of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far country for thy name's sake; ... when he shall come and pray toward this house, hear thou in the heavens thy dwelling-place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for". God is working, and He is faithful, and we should be watching and seeking to be in line with what God is doing Himself. He was about to bless this man.
J.T. That is just it. Philip had found work in Samaria, and he had done it. That the Spirit was withheld is not much to say, because the same was true of others; the men at Ephesus did not even know that the Holy Spirit was come. So we are not to make so much of this passage, as if Philip was in any way defective, but rather to show that Philip was a servant; he had been appointed to deaconship, and now he is purchasing to himself a good degree. He is not asking to be invited, he is doing what he finds to do and doing it well. The point is that each of us is to do what his hand finds to do, and do it well; that is what Philip did.
A.M. Do you think we are often greatly tested in relation to personal evangelising? We have to do with our neighbours and so on, and would not that be a good field for us to work on, so to speak, more than expecting platform occasions and so on?
J.T. Well, exactly. Platform occasions, of course, give more distinction and honour may be, but the point is to be humble and take a low place, and do anything that comes in our way that may be profitable.
D.H.B. The result of Philip's preaching in Samaria was that there were those prepared for movement, the paralysed and lame were healed.
J.T. Quite so. That is what we see in chapter 3. The man who had been lame, walked and leaped;
{81}
that is, he was fit for fellowship. He remained with the apostles. He was like Jairus¬ daughter; she walked. She was twelve years old, indicating that at that time a person might be fit for fellowship.
R.McC. Why is it that baptism is mentioned several times in this chapter?
J.T. Well, I think baptism is what the passover was in Israel. It is a sign. It ought to be immersion, not simply sprinkling. The person should go down into the water; that comes out here, the fact of immersion, being completely covered by the water, and coming up out of it, so that it becomes a sign not only of death, but of resurrection. That is in the second chapter of Colossians. The sign of judaism, which is the passover, is not to be compared with the grandeur and greatness of the sign that is seen in Christianity in a man being baptised, going right down into the water and coming up again; the baptiser and the baptised going right down into the water.
A.M. It is a part of the gospel that Philip brought to him, and it enters into the preaching in that sense.
J.T. Just so. The man was reading @Isaiah 53; a beautiful testimony about the Lord Himself. Isaiah says, "When we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and left alone of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and like one from whom men hide their faces; -- despised, and we esteemed him not @Isaiah 53:2,3". Philip said to the eunuch, "Dost thou then know what thou art reading of? And he said, How should I then be able unless some one guide me? ... And Philip, opening his mouth and beginning from that scripture, announced the glad tidings of Jesus to him". Philip shows a good example to us in evangelising, to use whatever scripture is read; and then he baptised him. I think that is a glorious statement,
{82}
and shows how the service of God is carried on, and how we may be taken up to serve God; starting small and doing what we can, as the Lord says of the woman, "She hath done what she could (@Mark 14:8)".
J.M. Is it an intelligent following of the Lord on the part of the eunuch? He saw the Lord as one whose life was taken from the earth, who had nothing here, and he desired to be identified with Him.
J.T. It is a passage that is not easy to open up in doctrine, but it would open up much to us if we look into it carefully, and wait upon the Lord about it. What does His life being taken from the earth really mean? It is not a question of the Lord going to heaven. It says, "His life is taken from the earth".
J.M. I was wondering if the eunuch being baptised would indicate that he was a man who could intelligently follow this.
J.T. Quite so. God is gracious, and reached him on the way of the desert, and at the same time Philip has to go through that experience; undoubtedly he becomes a better servant after he has gone to the desert and met the eunuch and got on to his chariot. What an experience it was, and how agile Philip was! He ran and discerned what the man was reading. He was alert, a remarkable man and near to God in that peculiar way.
{83}
DIVINE ACTIVITIES IN SUPPORT OF THE TESTIMONY (6)
@Acts 9:1 - 31
J.T. The question arises as to the use of the word 'assemblies', whether it is really in this chapter, although it is said in verse 31, "The assemblies then throughout the whole of Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified and walking in the fear of the Lord, and were increased through the comfort of the Holy Spirit". The word 'assemblies' is questionable, as the footnote would show. This would mean that the idea of local assemblies has to be postponed to chapter 14. The assembly was viewed, if the note is correct, as a whole, that is in a metropolitan sense, until chapter 14, when we have the expression "each assembly", elders being chosen in each assembly. This may seem to be unimportant, but it is important, because it helps us as to the early formation of the assembly. I mention all this as perhaps some may not have noticed it, but it is worth noticing now in view of the instruction needed in the book of Acts and the formation of the assembly, for the idea of local assemblies is not properly reached until chapter 14:23, where we read, "And having chosen them elders in each assembly, having prayed with fastings, they committed them to the Lord @Acts 14:23".
E.N.J. Do you think that the assembly was already functioning in a locality, in Damascus, inasmuch as the Lord is able to say to Paul that he should go into the city and it would be told him what he must do?
J.T. There are other instances, too, no doubt, so that we might say the assembly was functioning in a local sense; but the note would indicate the
{84}
contrary, and the choosing of elders in each assembly, according to chapter 14, confirms it.
B.G.W. Would that word 'assembly' in chapter 9:31, if correct there, be confined to the regions mentioned?
J.T. We would have to generalise it, and regard it as viewed as a whole. The first reference to eldership and to local assemblies appears to be in chapter 14:23, whereas @1 Corinthians 1:1 says, "Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ, by God's will, and Sosthenes the brother, to the assembly of God which is in Corinth". There the saints gathered together in Corinth, although local, are called "the assembly of God"; "with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours @1 Corinthians 1:2". This is where we get the formal reference to assemblies, local assemblies. The chapter we have read does refer to the local idea, if we are to take the authorised version as it is, but the note to which I have referred in verse 31 says, "or assembly", that is to say "the assembly then throughout the whole of Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace". The note is a critical one, and I believe we are to consider it, so as to see how the truth developed.
P.A.H. Does that bring out the importance of what was committed to Paul? We need the truth as committed to him, so that the truth of the assembly should be developed in our localities.
J.T. That is what I would say. The saints had to wait until Paul was brought in for the thought of local assemblies to develop, and so you have the remarkable statement about "Paul and his company" in chapter 13 which brings out the place that Paul immediately had; "And having sailed from Paphos, Paul and his company came to Perga of Pamphylia @Acts 13:13". That is the first reference we have to any brother, even an apostle, having a company, and bears out what we have been saying as to the local assembly.
{85}
I hope the brethren will not think I am diverting them, but I think it is important we should all know the setting of these scriptures, and the place the assembly has in view of local formation.
E.N.J. What have you in mind as to elders?
J.T. Well; elders are never viewed in the singular. We never hear of an elder over one assembly. It is in the plural, and that would show that what is common in the denominations is not to be trusted; that is, a man assuming he has a flock and that he is the bishop of it, because *one* would mean that the elder is just a bishop in the sense of a clergyman, whereas he is only one of others. The local assemblies are to be ruled by elders. The governing is in their hands, and hence we have the instruction as to eldership in Paul's epistles to Titus and Timothy.
P.R.P. Is the appointment of the seven deacons earlier a special matter, I mean in relation to the metropolitan position?
J.T. That is the idea exactly. These seven were working together. They were not segregated into so many bishops of assemblies.
A.M. We have to give due place to the idea of choice or election even today. I was thinking that Saul is spoken of as an elect vessel. Does that not involve the idea of divine choice?
J.T. Yes, it does, but it is only said of one. Paul has that place, and only Paul. Not that there is not the idea of election, because there is. In the sixth chapter, as we had it, "Look out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves @Acts 6:3". That was the choice.
E.N.J. In a locality there would be those that would qualify to take up such a service, and the brethren would recognise the qualifications.
J.T. We need to recognise that there is such as that, that there is local government, as it were, and that the whole assembly is not governed from one
{86}
centre, such as Rome claims. Rome claims the metropolitan idea, which is false. The idea is local assemblies -- plural.
E.N.J. It is not only what Christendom is in danger of, but we have to watch the same principle in our midst, lest anyone come forward and rule over the city.
J.T. That is so, and the local assembly is in the place, and if anything arises the whole assembly has to be listened to, and so Matthew says, "If also he will not listen to the assembly @Matthew 18:17". The local assembly has a voice, and that is what Matthew deals with.
C.W. Would @1 Corinthians 14:29 help, "And let two or three prophets speak, and let the others judge"?
J.T. Very good. That is a question of what we call prophetic ministry. It is very important, because it gives room for the Spirit as the prophets may speak, two or three.
D.H.B. Would the understanding of eldership tend to more mutuality with us?
J.T. It does, of course, but there must be authority connected with the idea, and so we have in 1 Timothy, and in Titus, a description of an elder, and how he functions, and that authority goes with him. At the same time room should be made for the expression of local feeling in matters, so that the brethren may have liberty and not be wholly dominated by any group.
J.M. So in chapter 15:22 it says, "Then it seemed good to the apostles and to the elders, with the whole assembly, to send chosen men from among them with Paul and Barnabas to Antioch @Acts 15:22". I was thinking of what you said, elders are always in the plural, and the whole assembly is brought in as well.
J.T. Yes, but the local assemblies are not touched in chapter 15. What is in mind there is what was current at Jerusalem; it was a question of the
{87}
solution of a difficulty and the effects, so that the matter is not settled in the local assembly; it was settled in a metropolitan sense, that is, the whole assembly is in mind in the settlement. And that is why I felt free to bring that fact forward, because I think it would help us all in our consideration of the book of Acts, and the important matters that are current amongst us now.
P.R.P. Do you think in a city like this we are in danger of exerting undue influence over smaller meetings in the country?
J.T. There would be that danger unless the local position is fully owned. There would always be that danger of a central position governing a whole province, or even a whole country.
P.A.H. So that the very smallest meeting is to be moving in the light of Paul's ministry.
J.T. Just so, and therefore the decision reached in Brisbane will hold universally with us. We have to recognise that there is a local responsibility in Brisbane, and that Sydney cannot exert authority over it. It has its own place in relation to the Lord. It is responsible to Him.
C.T.McC. Is your thought in the coming in of Saul in his conversion, that these things are to be opened up for us, things potentially are there in the conversion of Saul?
J.T. The Lord had that in mind when He chose Saul. He needed Saul. "This man is an elect vessel to me". We see from Paul's epistles, and the book of the Acts, how true it is that everything converges on Paul's ministry; as to the final result we have to go to Paul. None of the twelve had such a place as he had in the Lord's mind.
P.A.H. He is really the one who appointed elders in every place, and he also sets forth the qualifications for elderhood.
J.T. Just so. It seems to me, that the very
{88}
things we are saying now ought to be noted, that we are in a local assembly now, and brethren in the other part of the hall ought to have just the same liberty as brothers on the platform. The Spirit of God, or the Lord Himself, intended that the metropolitan idea should obtain at the beginning, but when Paul came in, it was clear that Paul would be the former of assemblies, as we may see in the book of Ecclesiastes. The word preacher there, is 'former of assemblies', not simply a preacher, but one who forms assemblies. I am endeavouring to link up what has been said with the brethren in the body of the hall, so that the principle of the local assembly may be present and active.
C.T.McC. Do you connect the words, "light from heaven", with the local assembly? Paul was converted in that way. Do you think that light from heaven is available locally?
J.T. That is just the idea. The second chapter has something that bears on the idea of a voice from heaven. On the day of Pentecost there came suddenly a sound out of heaven, not light, but sound out of heaven, and then the light from heaven later, so that the idea is that everything comes out of heaven. At the same time there is that which is on earth, and that is our point tonight, what is on earth; that there is the local assembly, and the total of all would be the assembly, and that is what the Lord is going to translate. He is going to translate the whole o the assembly into heaven, not local assemblies.
P.A.H. The truth as ministered would have a universal bearing. The working out of it would be locally, and where there are any peculiar difficulties such as we are seeking to get help on at the present moment, the working out of the matter is local.
J.T. That is right. The working out of the matter must be local. Each assembly must work out things by itself. That is really what is meant by the first
{89}
and second letters to Corinth, as to working out the truth of the local assembly.
D.H.B. When the elders are appointed in chapter 14, it is said, "having chosen them elders in each assembly, having prayed with fastings @Acts 14:23". Is that where everyone comes into it?
J.T. Quite so. Fasting is denying what might hinder the work of the Spirit, denying ourselves things which may be right in themselves, but apt to clog the working of the Spirit; hence fasting is added to prayer.
A.M. Do you think the bringing in of Damascus here is significant? It seems to have great significance, and then also the brethren that were there.
J.T. Quite so. The Lord makes His own selection. He waits until Paul reaches gentile territory, because He is going to show the latitude He has to work out His thoughts, proceeding into gentile territory; He is not confining Himself to Jewish territory.
C.G.McC. Although the local assemblies have their own peculiar exercises, and must work them out for themselves, there is a sense, is there not, in which the whole assembly feels the pressure of things? The Lord said, "Why persecutest thou me?" -- referring to the pressure on the whole assembly.
J.T. And then, of course, the interdependence of the local assemblies is assured. Paul says, "Thus I ordain in all the assemblies" (@1 Corinthians 7:17); that is, similarity is to regulate all the assemblies universally; and they are to be governed by the same principles and ways. This would shut out denominationalism as in the Church of England, and the Presbyterian Church, because they do not represent the assembly. No national church can represent the assembly. The assembly is out of heaven. It will come out of heaven presently. When the time comes for the Lord to take it on, it is seen coming down from God out of heaven. In the meantime we see the
{90}
assembly in its local setting now. In the beginning of Revelation the Lord is seen first in the midst of the assemblies; the word is plural there.
P.R.P. Would you say that at the end of the book of Revelation, we have the pearls referred to as being the completed article, so to speak, from each place?
J.T. Very good. The preciousness of the thing, what the assembly is in that sense. How precious it is!
P.R.P. And then various stones, too, referred to as each produced in its own peculiar setting.
J.T. Very good. Such expressions as that direct us to the preciousness of the formation, to what the saints are, so that we should not have common thoughts about them. Each gate was one pearl for instance, showing how precious even the gates are.
E.N.J. What bearing would what you have brought before us have upon this matter of associations and the attack of the enemy on the assembly?
J.T. Well, I think it is well to have the whole matter before us, as it has been, but now the question is as to association. We have to see how Saul the persecutor was taken up by the Lord. These things that we are having to deal with imply persecution. Perhaps a brother or a sister is in a certain office, and he or she is not free to become a member of any trade association, and he is discharged, or she is discharged. Well, he or she is persecuted. That is what it means, and the persecution is absolutely wrong. There is no ground for the discharge, there is no righteous ground for it.
E.N.J. What occurred here in this ninth chapter when Paul was converted seems to frustrate the enemy's attack for the time being. "The assemblies then ... had peace".
J.T. Just so, and God may come in now in these serious matters that have been occupying the brethren
{91}
in these countries, and He may do something to baffle the enemy, to negate all he is endeavouring to do, and to give the saints rest in their employments. The Lord took notice of what Saul was doing, and He determined that He would undo what he was doing, but He would undo it in a gracious way. He would convert Saul, and He did. Let us then examine the character of the conversion, what it really was in Saul's case. We are told, "Saul rose up from the earth, and his eyes being opened he saw no one. But leading him by the hand they brought him into Damascus. And he was three days without seeing, and neither ate nor drank". Well, that was a remarkable thing. Did ever a man have such a conversion? I doubt it, such a conversion as is described here.
P.R.P. Referring back a little to what you were saying as to such persecution being entirely wrong, we have been a little inclined to take account of what has been said by the authorities and to bow to that, whilst recognising in a way that it was not right. Would you help us on that point?
J.T. Well, I think we are suffering the loss of a good conscience if we proceed on those lines. Paul says everything he did was with a good conscience. How can we preserve our consciences if we do not do what is right?
P.R.P. So that irrespective of who says it, the thing is right or wrong before God, and we have to view it only from that angle.
J.T. That is what I would say, exactly. The brethren have to be considered, and I am sure they are considered; brethren in other countries are considering what we have to go through down here; but at the same time there must be suffering. If we are to get the truth and work it out we must suffer. "Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not
{92}
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake", (@Philippians 1:29).
P.R.P. The Lord showed him how much he should suffer.
J.T. That is exactly the word. "I will shew him", He said.
C.T.McC. Do you view suffering as not just something that may come, but as something which, as a matter of principle, every Christian rightly has to go through?
J.T. That is what it says in Philippians. It is given to us "in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake" @Philippians 1:29; and so Paul says, "I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly", (@Colossians 1:24).
E.N.J. Paul may be regarded as the spoil of this great exercise, this great persecution which came upon the saints; the enemy was frustrated, but then there was spoil in the matter, and this wonderful vessel was secured.
J.T. What a spoil it was!
R.G.W. Do you regard Saul's conversion as an intervention?
J.T. Yes, that is the word. The Lord intervened to protect His people; they were as a tender plant, you might say, in the midst of a cruel world, and the Lord intervened to protect them, and take away the man that was persecuting them. When Saul said, "What shall I do, Lord?" the Lord said, "Rise up, and go to Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things which it is appointed thee to do". So that he has to learn from the humble saints of Damascus, and this is what each one has to do, learn from the saints.
A.M. It is remarkable how quickly Saul comes under the idea of the Lord's authority, is it not?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord waited till he got on to
{93}
Syrian territory, and then He tells him, so to speak. It says, "he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, Who art thou, Lord?" He at once calls Him Lord. When he left Jerusalem with letters from the high priest he would not call Him Lord, but would be respectful to the high priest.
W.J.B. Would this help us as to the character of preaching? Saul, we may say, was converted from heaven. The preaching should have a heavenly character about it, it comes from heaven.
J.T. So the next thing we get is, "And straightway there fell from his eyes as it were scales, and he saw, and rising up was baptised; and, having received food, got strength". "And straightway in the synagogues he preached Jesus that *he is* the Son of God. And all who heard were astonished and said, Is not this *he* who destroyed in Jerusalem those who called on this name, and here was come for this purpose, that he might bring them bound to the chief priests?" So that he immediately preached that He is the Son of God. We have no word that he was told to do that, but he did it. It says, "straightway in the synagogues he preached Jesus that *he* is the Son of God". Well that is the preaching. Is that what you have in mind?
W.J.B. Yes; I was thinking of the voice from heaven. What struck him down was the voice from heaven, and the gospel preaching as going out should have that character, as from heaven.
J.T. That is true, and of course he was not taken up to preach. His commission begins later. When he is taken up in chapter 13, he goes out with Barnabas, and there you get his preaching, the sort of thing they were preaching, he and Barnabas.
E.N.J. This would seem to indicate that what was in Damascus was the true work of God, inasmuch as he received food and got strength, and then he begins
{94}
to preach that Jesus is the Son of God, indicating that the disciples there were able to help this new convert.
J.T. They did not attempt to help him as to his preaching. It is a question of what he did. I am sure that the brother whom the Lord sent to serve Paul did not tell him to preach the Son of God. I am certain he did not do that.
A.T.G. Would it help us to see that this conflict revolves around the Person? The name is referred to several times. It is not a matter of how it affects us, but it is the name.
J.T. It is for Him, and so the Lord said He would show him. "This man is an elect vessel to me, to bear my name before both nations and kings and the sons of Israel: for *I* will shew to him how much he must suffer for my name". That is the position now: suffering for the name.
P.A.H. Then as facing persecution, is it not comforting and supporting to realise how the Lord is intimately with us, as He expressed to Paul, *"I* am Jesus, whom *thou* persecutest"? The Lord is with us in it.
J.T. Just so, but see how virulent the enemy was in this instrument of his, that is, Saul of Tarsus, and now how he completely turns round to be a follower of Jesus, and to make everything of the name of Jesus; as he says himself later, "that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, ... and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father (@Philippians 2:10,11)".
D.H.B. Is the preaching of the Son of God an evidence that the power of God is in expression now, Saul having been converted?
J.T. Just so, and that the testimony was taking new form, really beginning and taking on a new character, it was the preaching of the Son of God. Peter did not preach the Son of God in the second
{95}
chapter. It is now a question of the preaching of the Son of God, and so Paul says, explaining his position and commission, "God, who ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me (@Galatians 1:15,16)". That is not said of Peter. Peter confessed the Lord, as the Father had revealed to Peter, that Christ was the Son of the living God. Peter's confession was, "*Thou* art ... the Son of the living God" (@Matthew 16:16); but to Paul it is that God revealed His Son *in* him, not to him, that he might announce Him as glad tidings among the nations; so that the preaching had taken on a new character in Paul's ministry.
E.N.J. You are suggesting that this preaching of the Son of God is not what he secured from the brethren in Damascus, but something fresh the Lord had given him, and it would be the forerunner of much the Lord would give him?
J.T. So that he took on something of the spirit and character of Stephen and Philip, who acted of themselves in preaching. Philip went down to Samaria, and preached the Christ; he did not preach the Son of God, but preached the Christ.
A.M. Would there be something for the affections about that, some special touch of affection in relation to the Son of God?
J.T. I think that is right. "The Son of God", Paul says, "who loved me, and gave himself for me", (@Galatians 2:20). It is a beautiful touch as to the place the Lord should have with us.
A.M. I was thinking of the peculiar impression that Paul seems to have received of the person of Jesus, who He was, and he seems to impart that in all his gospel.
J.T. Yes, he says,"That I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations (@Galatians 1:16)".
P.A.H. Would that really bring us into victory according to John's epistle, "Who is he that gets
{96}
the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" (@1 John 5:5)?
J.T. How fully John was with Paul in his ministry. How John, Peter, and Paul were one really in what they preached, although Paul excelled and led in what was to be preached. He really began a new order of things in preaching and took on the whole thought.
J.M. The place of Paul's conversion was on the Damascus road. He says in Galatians that he did not confer with flesh and blood, nor went he up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before him. All this suggests the unique character of Paul's preaching.
J.T. Yes, and it is of supreme importance to suffer for the name. We ought to be stimulated.
R.G.W. I would like to ask if in the way the Lord dealt with Saul, the leader of the opposition, by converting him, we have a present moral application of @Psalm 2:4 "He that dwelleth in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision"?
J.T. Very good, and it is the Son of God there, because the Son is mentioned. That came up in the conflict we had fifteen or twenty years ago, and greatly helped us as to sonship in the book of Psalms. The section we have read says that Paul was to suffer. "But Saul increased the more in power, and confounded the Jews who dwelt in Damascus, proving that this is the Christ. Now when many days were fulfilled, the Jews consulted together to kill him". This shows the terrible nature of the opposition. "But their plot became known to Saul. And they watched also the gates both day and night, that they might kill him; but the disciples took him by night and let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket". Paul has this experience of being lowered in a basket, but he accepted it; and then it says, "And having arrived at Jerusalem he essayed to
{97}
join himself to the disciples, and all were afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple. But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and related to them how he had seen the Lord in the way". We get now the true character of Barnabas, who was surnamed by the apostles, Son of consolation. How he shines here! It says, "Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and related to them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus". So that Barnabas is taken on, and God is using him to bring out Paul, to bring him into the testimony. And so it goes on, "he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem, and speaking boldly in the name of the Lord. And he spoke and discussed with the Hellenists; but they sought to kill him", showing the murderous character of the opposition to Christ and His people. "And the brethren knowing it, brought him down to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus". And then the verse we have already commented on: "The assemblies then throughout the whole of Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified and walking in the fear of the Lord, and were increased through the comfort of the Holy Spirit" -- a wonderful finish to this great episode, the conversion of Saul and his being brought into the testimony, awaiting the full time of it which we get in his epistles.
J.A.A. The local assembly at Jerusalem took on all that was related to Paul, did they not? He was with them coming in and going out, and they would take on all the feelings of the sufferings that Paul had, the local assembly would become affected by that.
J.T. That is so, and then Barnabas was there, the son of consolation, to comfort the saints. We ought to look for that in our companies.
{98}
E.N.J. The Holy Spirit is mentioned here in this great work of comforting the brethren. The Lord spoke of Him in that way, another Comforter.
J.T. Yes, how John fits in with Paul's ministry in that sense, because in @John 14 the Lord speaks of another Comforter the Father would send, and we see how the idea of comfort is also worked out in Paul's ministry.
{99}
ADMINISTRATION
@Acts 10:1 - 21; @Acts 10:44 - 48
J.T. It is hoped that the principle of administration may come before us profitably at this time. It fits peculiarly into this chapter and the latter part of chapter 9, which presents Peter as passing through all quarters, indicating that he was alive to what the Spirit was doing in taking up Paul, and so the allusion to Aeneas is particularly in accord with the moment, because it was a time of liberty in service, and in all those who were serving. Aeneas had been a long time paralysed, and he had been lying for eight years upon a couch. Peter said to him, "Aeneas, Jesus, the Christ, heals thee: rise up, and make thy couch for thyself (@Acts 9:34)". That is to say the principle of local responsibility is herein set out, as if Peter discerned the time for it had come, not that Peter could have known everything, but the Spirit of God did. The time for the assertion of, and liberty for, local responsibility had come, and so Aeneas was to do things for himself, he was to make his bed for himself. So each of us is to bestir himself in view of what may be needful and current. Whatever he can do, let him do it; if he is to make his bed, let him do it, and do it for himself.
Then the other case in which Peter was active at the close of chapter 9 concerned Tabitha, a woman who had been distinguished as making garments for others. But she died, and much ado is made of her by the widows. It says, "She was full of good works and alms-deeds which she did. And it came to pass in those days that she grew sick and died; and, having washed her, they put her in the upper room, @Acts 9:36,37" and so forth. Then they sent for Peter, as if Peter was the man needed for the working out of things in view
{100}
of the new order of service that was inaugurated. So he was sent for. Then it says, "all the widows stood by him weeping and shewing him the body-coats and garments which Dorcas had made while she was with them. But Peter, putting them all out, and kneeling down, prayed @Acts 9:39,40". As if he would remove all that would interfere with God's service. Much was to be done, and laziness was not to be admitted at all; and so he put them all out, which is sometimes needed, otherwise we should be clogged. Then kneeling down, he prayed, showing that he is dependent on God. Then, "turning to the body, he said, Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes, and, seeing Peter, sat up. And having given her his hand, he raised her up, and having called the saints and the widows, presented her living @Acts 9:40,41". The saints are now included. So that on the one hand Aeneas is set up working, doing things for himself that should be done, not expecting others to do them, and then this sister is made alive. A new order of things would be set out in her too. Instead of making garments in the sense in which they were made earlier, she is presented living. That is to say, a living person. I thought it well to call attention to these facts as entering into chapter 10, preparing the way for it indeed. Chapter 10 is the great administrative act of Peter in opening the door to the gentiles, but all these facts spoken of just now are making way for it, in view of Paul having been brought in.
P.A.H. Do you think that there was preparation of local material seen in Aeneas and Dorcas?
J.T. That is the idea. Local material; that is to say we need material, and of a local character. Aeneas and this sister Tabitha represent that material, so that we may now proceed with the idea of a local company. What we said before enters into it because we are now to be ready to enter upon the gentile position, in which Paul and Barnabas are to operate;
{101}
in the meantime the great idea of administration is to be set out in one selected by the Lord, not yet Paul, but Peter; because when Peter made his confession in @Matthew 16, the Lord said to him, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona @Matthew 16:17". He is a blessed man; he has come in for this wonderful disclosure as to Jesus, that He is the Son of the living God, and the Lord acknowledges him as blessed, and says, *"Thou* art Peter". That is not simply that his name was Peter, but he was stone material, durable material, suitable material for the assembly, and in this connection the Lord says to him, "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven", @Matthew 16:19.
E.N.J. It is remarkable, is it not, to see the way the Lord is working with certain individuals, with a view to their blessing, and at the same time working with Peter and preparing him to take in the gentiles?
J.T. That is the idea; working in a preparatory way; and it may be that we are now where this sort of thing exists; that is, in this city. That things have to be done that are left undone, and perhaps the fact that they are not done is interfering with what God is endeavouring to work out amongst us.
J.McN. Is there some evidence of the work of the Spirit of God in preparing material able to take on impressions from Paul's ministry?
J.T. But to take on impressions from Peter first, and then Paul; because Peter at once, according to his second epistle, is with Paul; there is no rivalry at all; Peter is fully with Paul. He says, "Our beloved brother Paul (@2 Peter 3:15)". There was indeed friction earlier between Peter and Paul, but the Lord has come in and healed that. So now according to the
{102}
second epistle, there is thorough agreement between Paul and Peter, and that is the point that the Lord would stress amongst us -- that everything is in agreement; we are of one mind and moving together, understanding what there is for us positively, and understanding what there is against us negatively, so that it must be removed, and we must remove it together.
J.M. You made a remark as to the Lord wanting to do something in this city and we may be hindering; is that feature seen in Peter in putting them all out?
J.T. Well, that is the idea, he put these widows out. The saints are not mentioned at first. The widows apparently were in the way, because they were on natural, social lines, a sort of Dorcas Society, with just common social interests it may be.
J.M. The occupation of Dorcas would be on too low a level in that way.
J.T. Quite so. She is to be brought on to the level of life, because that is the point with God in all these things. As Caleb said, Jehovah had kept him alive for so many years, forty-five years. It is a question of life.
E.N.J. Would it appear that Dorcas had become a centre, seeing that these widows felt it so deeply that she had died? They were attached to her and her accomplishments.
J.T. Therefore they were driven out, because they were simply a mixed condition of things, just like the camp followers who followed Israel in the wilderness.
J.A.A. "And seeing Peter", it says, she "sat up @Acts 9:40". There was something to look at in Peter.
J.T. Yes. There was a similar thought in Peter's first service after his first great address. He and John went up to the temple at the hour of prayer, and they said, "Look on us". There is something to see, and that is the point now. There is something
{103}
to see, not a mere religious building or the like, or a Dorcas Society, but something of God to be noticed.
A.M. Is there something in the fact that the keys of the kingdom are entrusted to Peter? You referred to the idea of the kingdom. Would that bear on these initial matters with us, for instance?
J.T. Well, just so. Peter was now qualified to take on this great phase, because it is a question of administration, and Peter is to be the administrator for the admission of the gentiles, and he is showing he is qualified in these closing verses of chapter 9. Is that in your mind?
A.M. Well, I was just wondering whether Peter did not give us light in his own ministry as to certain principles of the kingdom, making way for Paul.
J.T. I think he does. He has the leading place pending Paul's introduction. "First ... Peter", it says in Matthew; and it is Matthew who mentions Peter obtaining from the Lord the keys of the kingdom, not the key of David, but the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
P.A.H. Had you thought to refer to angelic service in this chapter?
J.T. Well, that would be the next thing. It says, "A certain man in Caesarea, -- by name Cornelius, a centurion of the band called Italic, pious, and fearing God with all his house, both giving much alms to the people, and supplicating God continually, -- saw plainly in a vision, about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming unto him". So that angelic ministry has a great place. It seems to be particularly so in the introduction of the gentiles as in this chapter.
E.N.J. Is this work in connection with Cornelius something on the line of a work of extrication? He was apparently a very pious man, but he belonged to a band, did he not?
J.T. Well, he was a government man we might
{104}
say, a military officer, but at the same time he is a godly man, and that is the thing that is outstanding in him, because the angel speaks of it. "An angel of God coming unto him, and saying to him, Cornelius. But he, having fixed his eyes upon him, and become full of fear, said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Thy prayers and thine alms have gone up for a memorial before God". That is a very great matter, that a man should have a memorial, and he, so far as we know, was not a Christian. He had not professed the full truth of Christianity, and yet he has built up something in heaven.
E.N.J. Yet he is in view for blessing, and to be added to the assembly. Is that it?
J.T. But already he has a distinguished place; that is, he has a memorial before God, one of the most remarkable things said of any man.
J.McN. And then too, he prays at the ninth hour. He evidently is intelligent as to the hour of prayer.
J.T. Quite so, in keeping with the early activities of the Spirit through Peter and John.
P.A.H. I notice in verses 19 and 20, when the Spirit speaks to Peter, He says, "Behold, three men seek thee; but rise up, go down, and go with them, nothing doubting, because *I* have sent them". Is there some instruction in it? The angel really directs them, and speaks to Cornelius, but behind the speaking of the angel there is a divine Person, the Spirit, active in the matter.
J.T. That is very interesting, and we have already had something as to angelic ministry, and I believe it is important that we should all be clear about it. The Spirit of God is distinguished here and later in chapter 13, as acting of Himself. There have been inquiries as to this, and it may be the Lord would help us as to the position of the Spirit as being here. Although here as sent, yet He is a divine
{105}
Person and acts as of Himself, and independently as a divine Person. So that He says, "*I* have sent them".
P.A.H. So that angelic service would be always under the direction of a divine Person.
J.T. Quite so. But there is here the peculiar place that the Spirit has as asserting Himself. Verse 13 says, "there was a voice to him, Rise, Peter, slay and eat. And Peter said, In no wise, Lord; for I have never eaten anything common or unclean. And there was a voice again the second time to him, What God has cleansed, do not *thou* make common. And this took place thrice, and the vessel was straightway taken up into heaven. And as Peter doubted in himself what the vision which he had seen might mean, behold also the men who were sent by Cornelius, having sought out the house of Simon, stood at the gate, and having called some one, they inquired if Simon who was surnamed Peter was lodged there. But as Peter continued pondering over the vision, the Spirit said to him, Behold three men seek thee; but rise up, go down, and go with them, nothing doubting, because *I* have sent them". The "I" is emphatic. So it is a question in this remarkable passage, as well as in chapter 13, of the Spirit asserting His deity, and being in the position of speaking as a divine Person, ordering Peter and controlling all that he was doing. It is very important that all of us should be clear as to it, as to the Spirit having the place of a divine Person here below, and that He is here until the end of the dispensation according to @John 14. He is another Comforter, and remains with us until the end.
A.M. He is a divine Person. He is not incarnate, and He requires a means or a vessel suitable for Him, and Peter fits in at this time.
J.T. He is not incarnate as you say, but He takes on persons, of course, and angels too, He takes on vessels suitable for His service. We can only decide
{106}
by the context who might have been used, as in chapter 13, because the Spirit in speaking may have spoken by someone.
E.N.J. You are referring to the Spirit saying, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them", (@Acts 13:2)? It is one of the Scriptures that assure us of the sovereign actings of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. And that He may act as in the inspiration of Scripture, as in the writing of this book by Luke, because Luke is the instrument, but the Spirit used him. We have to understand that while the Spirit is here, He is not incarnate as Christ was; Christ alone of the divine Persons became incarnate, and He is the great Vessel of God for operating.
R.G.W. Is that in line with what is said of spiritual manifestations in @1 Corinthians 12:11? "But all these things operates the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each in particular according as he pleases".
J.T. Very good. So that the Spirit operates through the vessels; in fact the peculiar word there in @1 Corinthians 12:12 is "so also is the Christ". That is, "the Christ" there is not simply Christ personally, but includes the assembly. It is a question of the assembly as the vessel that the Spirit is using and has chosen to use. Do you think that?
R.G.W. I just thought of the words "dividing to each ... as he pleases", @1 Corinthians 12:11 as emphasising His sovereign action.
J.T. Quite so. I hope the brethren will be free to enlarge on this, because it has been beclouded a little.
P.R.P. Have you something in mind as to the Holy Spirit's service in relation to angels?
J.T. The facts are; that they are used in relation to the Spirit, and the Spirit serves in relation to them, and what is to be seen is that angelic service
{107}
is a leading thought with God. The service is mentioned in the book of Job very early.
J.S.P. Is that how the testimony is carried on today, by the Spirit using men?
J.T. Very good, and His own choice too, not anyone, not those who have acquired ability and power through university training. It is a question of whom the Spirit would have. He uses His own vessels. It is a question of being available to Him, and He will use us.
J.S.P. Peter was in prayer about the sixth hour. Would that be the way we would come into things and be serviceable?
J.T. That is good, discerning the hour. It has been alluded to before, the idea of prayer having such a place in God's economy. It is of prime importance that we should be present at the time arranged for prayer; according to @Luke 11 a certain one saw the Lord praying. He was praying in a certain place. That is another thing to notice; the word 'place'. A disciple said, "Lord, teach us to pray (@Luke 11:1)". He did not say, 'Teach me to pray', but "Teach us to pray". He wanted all the brethren, to get the benefit of the teaching.
P.R.P. Would you link this thought up with Aeneas as to the Spirit taking on persons?
J.T. Quite so, Aeneas would be ready if he was starting to make his bed for himself. Then the Spirit would take him on, because chapter 8 shows that the Spirit took on Philip after the angel had taken him on.
P.R.P. I was seeking to follow up what you were suggesting as to the importance of doing things ourselves. At present, divine Persons are operating through men in a special way.
J.T. It is a question therefore of persons being available to the Spirit, because He will take us on as we are available.
{108}
A.G. We need to be concerned that we perceive when the Spirit speaks to us. There was no doubt in Peter's mind when the Spirit spoke, and he is able to recount it later.
J.T. Just so. Then we get "quench not the Spirit (@1 Thessalonians 5:19)". We may quench Him by ineptitude, by unrighteousness.
J.McN. Is this a further step in Peter's education? There are instances of his being taught in relation to fishes, but here in the vessel like a sheet it is in relation to unclean creatures.
J.T. I would think that. He is not sure about it, hence the force of the word "nothing doubting". Be sure of what you are doing and then do it. This is evidently a new experience for Peter, and he needed it, because it was a question of gentiles, and Peter might call them unclean, whereas they were not, for God had cleansed them. The time for God's cleansing of the gentiles had come, and Peter might stand in the way; but God preserved him from that, because Peter did what he was told.
E.N.J. We need to be ready for God's sovereign movement in that way. He may take up most unlikely persons and use them, as the contents of this vessel would indicate.
J.T. So that we are to be ready for that, and make way for them; and we may thank God for the number of younger men He has raised up and is using.
C.McC. Would the fact that Peter was in a house by the sea, and also that the vessel was as a great sheet which had four corners, indicate that God had a great universal system in view?
J.T. That is the idea exactly. It had four corners, and was knit at the four corners. It was held together, it was not held loosely. The idea was something that was going up into heaven, and being carried up.
{109}
R.G.W. Although it does not say Peter was deliberately on the line of fasting, the fact that he was fasting seems to be used by the Spirit for further revelation or instruction. Is there some lead to us in that?
J.T. He was hungry and desired to eat, and God used that to bring the whole matter into its place. So that he went up to pray while the meal was being prepared, instead of misusing his time or whiling it away, and he is taken on, God honouring him, showing how godly he was. He goes up to pray, and becomes in an ecstasy. What you mean, maybe, is that the ecstasy was possible because he was fasting. I would agree with that.
A.M. Would it be right to say that in Cornelius also there seem to be certain preparatory features that are very important? For instance the men say of him that he is a righteous man, and he is able to say of himself, "I was praying in my house", and before that he said, "I had been fasting".
J.T. Cornelius was ready for what was opened up to him; and that would bring in the question of fasting, which is of prime importance; it came before us in Sydney in our committal to the Lord in prayer. It is noticeable that Esther only asked for fasting; she did not ask for prayer, and yet the result of the fasting was of great moment, as anyone would see who reads the book of Esther.
J.S.P. Do they run together? There was one whom the disciples could not heal, and when they took him to the Lord and raised the question as to why they could not heal him, the Lord said, "This kind does not go out but by prayer and fasting", (@Matthew 17:21).
J.T. We might well think for a moment of the idea of fasting, but there is not much time to deal with it now. I think we ought to proceed with the main thought in our chapter, and that is, administration.
{110}
Peter is actually administering here. He is sent for, and the Spirit of God says to him, "Go with them, nothing doubting". Then we are told that as Peter preached, "the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word". That is, Peter is administering the word, and the Holy Spirit takes the opportunity to seal those who were hearing, because it says, "the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word".
E.N.J. Would that suggest something more than just hearing with the ear? They were receiving the word, were they not?
J.T. Quite so. It is the word *logos* , I understand, meaning that what is in God's mind is being opened up to us. It may mean something to be opened up later, but at the moment it was being opened up to them. The "word of God" is the same idea, and here the word of God is being listened to. It is being ministered, but it is being attended to, and the Spirit of God honours those who were listening, by falling on them.
E.N.J. There must have been a moral foundation for the Holy Spirit to come upon them forthwith as He did.
J.A.A. Cornelius said to the angel, "What is it, Lord?" so he was prepared to take account of what was said to him.
J.T. He was a subject man already, God is not bringing in an ordinary gentile; one who might be there to listen and perhaps move away. The Spirit of God is bringing in a man like Cornelius. He is honouring that state of things in the man, and he is the man that is brought in to set out the idea of the gentiles being introduced into Christianity.
A.M. Is there not a suggestion there of lovableness in the action of the Holy Spirit? Has it not been compared with the Father falling on the neck of the son in @Luke 15?
{111}
J.T. It is the same word. As the father fell on the prodigal and covered him with kisses, that is the idea here; it is an energetic action of the Spirit upon the gentiles.
P.A.H. What is really involved in the thought of administration is seen in Peter here.
J.T. I do not know of anything more expressive of it, than the facts relating to Peter. If you go back to @Matthew 16, you will see what the Lord had in His mind. The Lord says to him, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is inn the heavens", @Matthew 16:17. I do not know of anything better as an example of what administration is than what is said to Peter here, that he is blessed as receiving the Father's revelation, and announcing that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. The Lord said to him, "And *I* also, I say unto thee that *thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly, and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it. And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest loose on the earth shall be loosed in the heavens", @Matthew 16:18,19.
P.A.H. Peter is really carrying into effect the commission the Lord committed to him.
J.T. He, of course, has to be fitted for it, and he is in the things that are mentioned. Verses 46,47 say, "Then Peter answered, Can any one forbid water that these should not be baptised, who have received the Holy Spirit as *we* also did? And he commanded them to be baptised in the name of the Lord". Well, there it is, the idea of administration actually brought about in Peter.
E.N.J. In @Matthew 16, binding and loosing are mentioned, but Peter is here fully occupied with the loosing.      
{112}
P.R.P. Is it important to take account of the special place the Holy Spirit has in all this, first of all in speaking to Peter, and then also as to falling upon these men? Peter waits till he gets this word from the Spirit, and then also in relation to the results, he moves when the Holy Spirit falls upon these men.
J.T. Yes, showing that the Spirit is acting with Peter.
E.N.J. Is verse 47 also instructive, inasmuch as Peter would have the brethren to move with him? "Can any one forbid water ... ?" He would have the brethren to move intelligently with him in the matter.
J.S.P. The truth of baptism had to come in in relation to the gentiles, had it not?
J.T. Yes, and Peter commands it too. We have to compare the baptismal formula in @Matthew 28 with this, and we will get instruction if we do, but here it is by itself. That is, Peter commands baptism.
A.M. Peter took certain men with him. This is such an important matter that the idea of witness enters into it.
J.T. It is appropriate that he should take so many because it was one of the most important occurrences, up till this time, the introduction of the gentiles.
A.M. He makes use of the six men later when he had to stand his ground against the elements of legality.
J.T. You get that in the next chapter. All these things are important, and especially in Peter's administration, because Matthew makes much of Peter. He says "First ... Peter", and so now Peter is fully honoured in what he is doing. He is called blessed, and he has the keys, and he knows what to say here. Cornelius would have worshipped Peter, which is a matter to note too. He fell down to worship him, and Peter says, "Rise up: *I* myself
{113}
also am a man @Acts 10:26". He went into the house with Cornelius, talking with him, so as to establish mutual feeling between the gentiles and the Jews, talking to one another. We do not hold aloof from one another. We are united closely and talk to one another. "They that feared the Lord spake often one to another", (@Malachi 3:16).
E.N.J. Would you say a word as to verse 48? He commanded them to be baptised in the name of the Lord. Is it that the act is done in the name of the Lord? You spoke of the baptismal formula at the end of Matthew; that would also be used, but whatsoever ye do in word or deed, all is to be done in the name of the Lord Jesus.
J.T. I think the formula of @Matthew 28 is the one to use. That is what I would regard as the full baptismal formula. We baptise to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, the full divine thought. The whole Godhead is brought into it; that is to say, Christianity is established as brought in under the Godhead; the full authority of the Godhead is brought to bear on us in our baptism.
E.N.J. It says, "baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit @Matthew 28:19". Now in our scripture it says, "He commanded them to be baptised in the name of the Lord". I wondered if that was attached to the act that we do, whatever we do being in the name of the Lord.
J.T. Well, I think baptising *to* is right, because it is what we are introduced into. *In* is a question of power. "In the name of the Lord" implies power in what has been done, but *to* indicates what we are introduced into, and I believe the baptismal formula in @Matthew 28 is the one properly to be used by us. Peter was an apostle, and could say "in the name", but it was simply a question of power.
J.S.P. Would it bring in the thought of authority here?
{114}
J.T. Well, it does, because he commands. We would not do that. We use the formula of @Matthew 28.
J.S.P. I was thinking "in the name of the Lord" would bring us under the authority of the Lord in that way.
J.T. Well, it does. But *in* there implies power. The thing is done in power.
A.M. The twelve men in @Acts 19 were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus.
J.T. Well, that would be the same as @Matthew 28. It is what you are introduced into.
A.M. It would be included in @Matthew 28?
J.T. It would. Our position is that we are introduced into Christianity or the assembly in the formula of @Matthew 28. Any one of the apostles¬ could command "in the name", but we do not do that. We are simple about it, and use the formulae of @Matthew 28, bringing in the whole of the Godhead, and establishing Christianity as in the name of the Godhead.
E.N.J. The apostle Paul brings in "the name of our Lord Jesus Christ" in @1 Corinthians 5:4. I was wondering whether we should act in that name.
J.T. The word there in @1 Corinthians 5:4,5 is: "to deliver, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ (ye and my spirit being gathered together, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ), him that has so wrought this: to deliver him, I say, being such, to Satan for destruction of the flesh". You can see how different that is from what we are dealing with. We are dealing now with what souls are brought into, whereas in the passage you read it is that one is excommunicated, delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh. It is a question of the power of our Lord Jesus Christ.
E.N.J. That is really what was in mind, that
{115}
there is power in the name, and it is used in relation to what we do.
J.T. Quite so. Then in the latter part of the chapter they are told to remove that wicked person from among themselves. That is, the saints have power to do that, and they are doing it in their own power, so to speak; whereas the first reference is t delivering to Satan in the name and with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ.
{116}
THE BEGINNING AND CLIMAX OF THE TESTIMONY
@Acts 1:1 - 15; @Acts 20:7 - 12
J.T. As we proceed with these scriptures, I believe we shall see that the first treats of the beginning of things just immediately before Pentecost, and the second, that is chapter 20, affords information as to the testimony of God as it reached its climax. Chapter 20 is a love chapter; it begins with love, and ends with love, and there is love at the middle. So that we are at the very zenith of the testimony in that sense. The first thing to be noted is that attention is called to the Lord. It is said, "I composed the first discourse, O Theophilus, concerning all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach, until that day in which, having by the Holy Spirit charged the apostles whom he had chosen, he was taken up; to whom also he presented himself living, after he had suffered". So that we have here the very beginning of things after the Lord had risen. Then in verse 4 we have something that should be compared carefully with chapter 20; that is the idea of assembling. The Lord assembled with the apostles. It says, "being assembled with them, commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to await the promise of the Father, which said he ye have heard of me". That is to say, after the thought of His presentation of Himself to them in life, He assembled with them; and what is to be observed is that the word "assembled" precedes the breaking of bread in chapter 20. But here the Lord is with them Himself; He assembled with them, but there is no breaking of bread, whereas in chapter 20 the writer says, "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread". The assembling in chapter 20 has
{117}
the breaking of bread, in view, but there was no breaking of bread while the Lord was on earth, even after He rose.
R.P. In that connection is it peculiarly linked with Paul's ministry?
J.T. It is in chapter 20, but not in chapter 1. There was no breaking of bread while the Lord was here; it is after He went to heaven; in fact, not only after He went to heaven, but not till the Spirit had come down is the idea of the breaking of bread mentioned. We have to go by what is written. In the second chapter we have the breaking of bread, it is mentioned twice, but only after the Lord went to heaven and the Spirit came down; and then it is mentioned again in chapter 20.
E.N.J. Would this be something to take account of as fundamental? That is to say, they were assembled, and the Lord, beginning to speak, commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem. We look to the Lord to say something to us as assembled.
J.T. The great thought to have before us is assembling, and we have to be taught to assemble. It is not simply that we have so many persons in a certain place at one time, and that they do something, but the idea of assembling is mentioned before anything is done. So we have to learn how to assemble.
A.M. Does that enter into the charge that was given, by the Holy Spirit, to the apostles? I was thinking of the Holy Spirit being necessary for us to understand the matter of assembling. It is not just a natural movement, it is a spiritual movement that is in mind, and we need this power if it is to be effective.
J.T. What we have here is not a question of the Spirit's teaching, but the Lord Himself being assembled with them, He commanded them not to depart
{118}
from Jerusalem; but it is the Lord Himself by example teaching them how to assemble.
A.M. Would not the apostles carry on the charge? Paul, for instance, brings out the idea of the charge.
J.T. He did; but it seems we might well keep to what is written here, so as to see how the Lord had the thought of assembling in His own mind. Of course, He charged the apostles, but then this thought as to assembling is additional. Being assembled with them He commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem.
L.P.M. Did this matter of learning to assemble enter into @1 Corinthians 11:18: "For first, when ye come together in assembly"?
J.T. Yes, it is alluded to there, and it was a right thing to do, but they were doing wrong things; which is another thing to be noticed.
L.P.M. The need of learning to assemble seems to be at the very outset of what you have in mind in regard to the Lord's supper. The first thing is how to assemble.
J.T. Showing that it is not simply that we have a ritual; we cannot just say we have that, yet there must be something of the kind, because everything has to be done in order. If we go by Luke, we have the word 'method'. Things had to be done methodically, but not in the sense of ritual, except following what the Lord did Himself. It is very instructive to follow the details of what the Lord did Himself in any given matter.
E.T. Is this, in @Acts 1, the right foundation in an educational way, and in @Acts 20, where we read, "we being assembled", we see that the lesson had been learned and taken on?
J.T. That is it. It had long been learned; the brethren had been doing this for a long time, and now in @Acts 20 the first day of the week comes and Paul has arrived; he too had to do with it.
{119}
R.G.W. Does Hebrews show that this thought of assembling is to be continued right through, "Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together" (@Hebrews 10:25)?
J.T. Just so. It is not simply coming together, but assembling in view of the breaking of bread.
E.N.J. Is there something required with each one of us in order that we might be able to assemble? I was thinking of our walk during the week, and as to whether we are disciples, and brethren one of another.
J.T. Well, it is a question as to whether the idea of *each other* is before us, because we are so apt to be governed severally by local matters, home matters, our own affairs, and neglect the idea of assembling, which refers to the Lord and His order of things, in view of the assembling and the breaking of bread. Perhaps we think less of each other than we should. We may despise the idea of *each other* , what the first day of the week begins with, what the Lord begins with on it, and then what we begin with. We might say we begin with the Lord, but it is not so. The Lord begins with the disciples, and He would have us, too, to begin with each other, because it is a question of love, and we are to be taught how to love, not simply to love one another, but loving each other in the assembly.
E.N.J. Aaron is called "the Levite", and in @Exodus 4 we are given the details as to the way in which God had been dealing with Moses separately, but when they come together there is an affinity, because of the work of God in each. It says that, when they met, Aaron kissed Moses.
J.T. Yes, it was a love matter. It is not only that Jehovah says to Moses, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?", @Exodus 4:14. That is something we have to notice, that the idea of levitical service begins with Aaron. He is called definitely "the Levite", not simply *a* Levite. He was characteristically that.
{120}
Jehovah says to Moses, "He goeth out to meet thee", @Exodus 4:14. As if God would put it into the heart of Moses to love Aaron, and He put it into the heart of Aaron to love Moses, because they were two leading servants, and it is most important that all the servants should love one another.
J.M. Does your thought as to assembling involve that we embrace one another in affection, and in the relationship that we are now brought into?
J.T. We not only greet one another in a formal way when we meet at the place of meeting, but there is really love, and we know each other's affairs. Then, of course, the Lord is coming in; He has promised to, and He will, and it is a question as to whom He is to come to. He is concerned about that, as to how we meet each other, and how He finds us. On the first day of the week, the whole day, as it were, He is on the alert for His people, because it is the day of meeting. It is the first day of the week according to @John 20, where it is mentioned twice.
J.McN. Is the power of the Spirit available in view of assembling? When the Lord left them in @Luke 24 He said they were to abide in Jerusalem until they were clothed with power from on high.
J.T. Just so. It is said in that chapter that they were in the temple praising and blessing God. That might be very good, but then the temple is not to continue as a meeting place. We have to learn to meet in the house instead of the temple, and that is what you get in @Acts 2. They met in the house, which is a matter to be observed.
E.T. I was going to ask if the liberty of sonship would be basic to this matter of assembling rightly, and what you mentioned as to the house would help in that regard?
J.T. I think it would. It is a question of how we regard each other. Gideon inquired, "What sort of men were they ... ?" and the answer was, "As thou
{121}
art, so were they; each one resembled the sons of a king", (@Judges 8:18). Well, they are dignified. We have to greet each other in the light of our dignity; the Lord would have that.
P.A.H. "Salute one another with a holy kiss", (@Romans 16:16) would suggest mutual respect and affection.
J.T. Just so, that saves us from corruption.
C.W. Would the passover help? The Lord said to go into the city and find a certain man, then the twelve gathered together, leading on to the breaking of bread.
J.T. Well there is order in that. But then, what they see, and what they meet, and who meets them, all enters into it. Then the climax is that the man of the house has a guest room, and the Lord asks for that room, as if He were concerned about the place of meeting, and that it has to be suitable. It is a guest room. That raises the whole question as to our meeting rooms. What kind of meeting rooms have we? Are they any kind of meeting rooms, and is there any thought as to what is suitable?
A.E.D. Would that raise the question of hired halls that may be used?
J.T. Yes, especially picture shows and theatres; things that are not suitable and are polluted in themselves. So it raises the whole question of meeting rooms and what is suitable for the brethren to meet in, and many other such things come into the mind, and the Lord had them in His mind when He sent the two disciples to prepare for the passover. It was a question of preparation.
E.T. At present there is a good deal of difficulty in places where the meetings are growing, and there is hiving off taking place. Building is difficult. Would you say something as to the suitability of a brother's house?
J.T. Quite good. We have scripture for that. It is mentioned in the last chapter of the first epistle
{122}
to the Corinthians, and is also mentioned in Philemon. "The assemblies of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla, with the assembly in their house, salute you much in the Lord", @1 Corinthians 16:19. "And to the sister Apphia and to Archippus our fellow-soldier, and to the assembly which is in thine house", @Philemon 2. So we have two mentions in which the assemblies were in houses; not subdivisions, but assemblies. There is no such word in Scripture as subdivision, it is assembly.
R.P. That helps in relation to the truth of the assembling together. We regard it as a whole, the assembly in a city. And the assembly universally is held in our minds and affections.
J.T. Quite so. It raises the whole matter of where we meet, and we have here in these two instances the idea of assembling in a brother's or sister's house, the idea of the meeting place identifying an assembly; it is called "the assembly in thine house (@Philemon 2)". See also @Romans 16:5. It may be a question now as to whether the word subdivision is literally right, because it is really not the idea as to the matter at all. Assembly is the word used in these two chapters.
P.A.H. It speaks of, "first, when ye come together in assembly", @1 Corinthians 11:18. That would be for the Lord's supper, would it not? So the word is "in assembly" there.
J.T. Then "the assembly" is used in @1 Corinthians 16 and in Philemon. So it is not in assembly, it is *the*  assembly, meaning that the saints who meet in a certain house or room are called the assembly.
Ques. You have helped us in regard to the assembly in a city, and we have used the word in a convenient way as to subdivisions. You have in mind that the character of each subdivision is the character of the assembly in the city expressed in that part of it?
{123}
J.T. That is the idea. Instead of the word 'subdivision', it is the word 'assembly', as if the Lord would dignify the place where the saints meet, because He comes to where they are. He came to where the disciples were. That is the point that He makes.
L.P.M. That does not disturb at all our activities in the light of the assembly in the city, and the administration and all that.
J.T. It does not at all; it is just a question of the use of a word, and whether the word is correct.
L.P.M. Your thought is that if difficulties seem insuperable as to getting a suitable public building, rather than remain in large numbers, if it can be arranged, the brethren would be better to meet in a brother's house?
J.T. Well, apparently, if you go by the two passages we have read.
L.P.M. I think that helps us.
J.T. I think what ought to help us all round is getting accurate terms. God begins with accuracy; that is to say, He told Adam to name the creatures, and He did not alter any name that Adam gave any creature, but just accepted it, and I believe the Lord has the same respect for us as to the names we use.
A.E.D. Is that the beauty of the thing in @Acts 20, that the same word is used as is used by the Lord, "the upper room where we were assembled"? Would you say something in that regard as to that expression, and the fact that Paul is referred to in @Acts 20 as being in the third story? I was thinking of this matter of where the Lord comes, and the need for all that attaches to the place being in accord with the Lord's presence, so that not only the building, but the way the saints sit, and how we conduct ourselves, bears on it.
J.T. I would go with all that.
L.P.M. The idea of elevation is clearly in mind.
{124}
It is not on a level with the street. It is not even the second, story; it is the third story, and the upper room.
J.T. Just so, the upper room is not on the level of the street, and it is not the temple. Sometimes we have positives to refute negatives, and it is said that the disciples were continually in the temple praising and blessing God, but they were to stop doing that; that was to come to an end, and the thought was that it was to be in the upper room, and that is where they are seen in @Acts 1.
A.E.D. Is it to bring out the uniqueness of what there is in this dispensation, and the way things have become degraded in Christendom? Are we to move away from the spirit of that in our minds and move in the light of what was at the beginning?
J.T. I think that is good, to get away from hackneyed terms that have the tinge of the world in them, and get back as nearly as possible to what was in the beginning, because that is the point, both as to the beginning of creation, and the beginning of the assembly that is mentioned specially; John's gospel, for instance.
E.N.J. So the Lord in speaking of the matter of divorce said, "But from the beginning it was not so", (@Matthew 19:8).
J.T. Just so. It had been brought in because of their hardness of heart; the Lord said, 'It was not so from the beginning'. Well, perhaps we may now return to the chapter, having said all this. I would be glad if the brethren will be ready to consider what has been said as to subdivisions and other such terms that are not exactly scriptural.
E.T. When a thing emerges in its true character, we are justified in naming it, but we have been diffident in using the word 'assembly' on account of the public breakdown.
J.T. Well, there is something in that; I am sure
{125}
we should consider that point, only it is just as well to deal now with what we began with, that is to say, the names that scripture authorises, and one of them is assembling, or assembly. Then the upper room, which is a scriptural name, and so in @Acts 20 we have, "We being assembled to break bread". That is to say the idea of the breaking of bread is preceded by the idea of assembling.
P.B.P. Would you say a word as to the distinction you have made as to loving one another individually and loving the brethren as assembled?
J.T. Well, I think that is something to think of. We meet each other as one person with another, but is that person an assembly person? Does he belong to the assembly? Is he characteristically an assembled person? Because in the book of Acts the persecution was in regard to the assembly and those who were of the assembly. Therefore it was a reproach to be of the assembly, whereas it is really an honour to belong to it.
F.R.G. Is your suggestion that we might speak of, say, the assembly at Milton? I was thinking in relation to letters of commendation in regard to brethren moving about.
J.T. Well, it is rather 'The saints assembling at so-and-so'. I think that is quite right, because the word 'saints' is a dignified word, and we assemble at a certain place. It is only a question of identifying the place where the saints are.
F.R.G. We have rather reserved the thought of assembly to the city, the saints breaking bread in the city of Brisbane, but you think that we should be at liberty to speak of the assembly in Milton or elsewhere?
J.T. I think the word 'saints' is what has been customary in letters of commendation, and, of course, letter of commendation is the very term used in the Scriptures, and the letter is couched in the terms of
{126}
Scripture, and signed by a certain one who is known. That is about all that is needed, I would think. If anything else be said, the word 'assembly' could be used, only in a modified way, because it is scriptural.
R.P. I think the thought of the subdivision has been mentioned to preserve the thought of the assembly being an entity in a city, but you are encouraging us to regard the assembly and the saints in their dignity.
J.T. Perhaps we are dwelling too long on these points, because we have very limited time. The word 'subdivision' certainly does not agree with the word 'assembly', or the meeting together of the saints either. We ought to keep the dignity attaching to the saints.
L.P.M. So that you have the thought of the character of this great entity in any place, the saints are in that character. Would that be right?
J.T. That was the idea in the letter to Philemon, and also in @1 Corinthians 16. It is just that the brethren might have a matter of the kind before us in a fluid sort of way, and not fix it as a permanent term or name, but to just give the idea that will preserve us from any worldly or human tinge, and keep us as nearly as possible to the terms that Scripture uses.
L.P.M. Is the assembling of the saints prior to the service of God like the tabernacle being set up before the service?
J.T. Very good; that would preserve the dignity, that it is not simply a negative thought. The word 'subdivision' is not right, because we do not divide the assembly; it is not our part to divide it. The idea is that it is a company of Christians, and that should be carried through. It is a company of saints meeting in a certain place, and we are commending someone to them in love. That is about all.
{127}
E.N.J. So we should think of our halls in the various parts of any city as the place where the saints are accustomed to break bread.
J.T. That is the idea, according to the word used as to Philippi, "where prayer was wont to be made (@Acts 16:13)". It was by a riverside.
W.L.W. One very important meeting is the care meeting. How do we get on about that designation? Does God honour that?
J.T. I think that is very good. The very word "care" is used in regard to an elder: "How shall he take care of the assembly of God?" It is a question of caring for the assembly.
L.P.M. It is really a meeting of those persons who exercise care, is it not?
J.T. The term 'care meeting' may be too hackneyed. It is the meeting for the care of the saints, to take care of the assembly of God. That is the term used, so that the dignity of the thing is preserved.
L.P.M. Do you wish to say something in regard to @Acts 20 as to the service, the saints being assembled?
J.T. Well, just to point out that at the first assembling, the Lord Himself was there, and there was no breaking of bread, showing that the breaking of bread is contingent on His being away, whereas in @Acts 20 the word is, "the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread". Now you see how the idea of the first day of the week is continued. It is found also in 1 Corinthians. So here, as they were assembled, Paul discourses to them, about to depart on the morrow. You see the dignity of all that. We have two words used. One would refer to a discourse, an address as we might say, and the other to a reading meeting, or to a conversational meeting. Two words are used in that chapter, and these are all very important matters in regard to dignity and spirituality. It is important to use right
{128}
spiritual terms in our conversations together, because the Scripture says, "they that feared the Lord spake often one to another", (@Malachi 3:16). They must have spoken something, and the point is, if we are applying it to assembly matters, the terms we use ought to be properly given. The names ought to be properly and spiritually given. Then to bring out the difference, @Acts 20 refers to the actual breaking of bread, as you might say, in the full thought of it as known amongst us today, known amongst them in the beginning after the Spirit came.
D.H.B. Is there a link with the first chapter, where they were told to wait until the Spirit came, so that in chapter 20 they are moving on spiritual ground?
J.T. That is to say the Spirit is there and the ministry is proceeding. Paul discourses. Two words are used as to current ministry. The first is a discourse and the second is a conversational matter, and we carry on these two things now, and we are entitled to do it and keep to it.
R.P. Has Paul's discourse a dispensational bearing, authoritative as governing the assembly's history here, and the truth is worked out in a conversational way amongst the brethren?
J.T. There must have been something that he would like to correct and enlarge upon, whereas the conversational word is used later, and it would mean what they might wish to say to one another in detail.
P.A.H. You were saying that the discourse has continued ever since, the same as the conversational setting. Paul discoursed at length, possibly having a great bearing on the service of God, and that has continued to our day?
J.T. You could not just say the thing itself has continued, but the principle of the discourse has continued in what we call an address. We have
{129}
ministry meetings, which are quite intelligible and useful too. These meetings have continued.
P.A.H. I was thinking particularly that the discourse of Paul would have a bearing on the order of the service of God. They needed much instruction.
J.T. It was Paul's discourse. The idea of discoursing has continued. We have the ministry meetings: "Let two or three prophets speak, and let the others judge (@1 Corinthians 14:29)". That is to say, we ought not to have more than three addresses in one ministry meeting.
A.E.D. Might I ask why the thought of eating is added; "having broken the bread, and eaten?"
J.T. I think to show that the full thought of the Lord's supper is carried through. It might be distorted in what is current today among the sects, but the proper thing is to break the bread. The Lord gave thanks and broke the bread, and then it was eaten. It was given to the disciples to eat. The full thought of the Lord's supper should be there. The eating should be there; it is a question of eating as well as breaking the bread.
R.P. "As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup (@1 Corinthians 11:26)".
J.T. Just so.
J.McN. It says in chapter 1, "he shewed himself". Is that peculiar to @Acts 1, or is it still true as we are gathered together?
J.T. Well, it might not be just in the same form, but I think it is the idea of @John 14:18, The Lord says, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". Undoubtedly when He would come, He would be seen. In the first passage we read (it is a strong word) "he presented himself". It is not simply that He was there, or near by, but He presented Himself. That is to say, He would have Himself seen or apprehended in a certain way; that was the point. He presented Himself living.
{130}
E.N.J. As assembled, that would be the supreme moment, when He presented Himself living.
J.T. Just so, that would be the supreme moment of the occasion. I do not think we get it later, it is only found there. But we do get later that He comes to us, and that is another word, and it is something we believe and expect every Lord's day. The Lord comes to us. It is a precious thing, too.
F.R.G. Would Eutychus represent one who was not really in the gain of being assembled together?
J.T. Just so. There were many lights in the upper chamber, which would allude to the persons who were there. There were about seven brethren there who accompanied Paul, and I suppose they would be the lights, each one would be a light. But then Eutychus was a young man, a boy in fact, and he was evidently looking out of the window. He was not occupied with what was current at all; he was not in the occasion really.
P.B.P. You were saying that the breaking of bread was not while the Lord was on earth. Have you something more to say as to that?
J.T. It is important to see that it is while He is absent, not while He is in heaven, although I would not deny that, but while He is absent; and while He is here too, in the sense of persecution, that He is to be remembered.
P.R.P. So that it is "until he come".
J.T. Just so. It is a question of showing His death. "Ye do shew the Lord's death till he come (@1 Corinthians 11:26)".
R.P. You spoke of the Supper as being a love matter. Would the first day of the week link on with the spiritual and inward, side particularly brought out in Paul's ministry?
J.T. We had that in our meeting this morning. It was a love matter, and we were greatly helped too, in the sense of the Lord being with us. The idea of
{131}
being taught preceded it; we are taught things so as to be rightly in the assembly.
A.M. Certain features of lovableness displayed in the assembly are attractive to the Lord. I was wondering if this feature of youthfulness was not a spiritual suggestion, and a valuable one such as we see in the testimony today. The assembly should be youthful; at the very end she will not be old and worn out.
J.T. You mean the word 'youthful' as applied to Eutychus?
A.M. I was wondering if Paul saw the value of it, and so the boy was restored. "And they brought away the boy alive, and were no little comforted".
J.T. Well, it was a love matter. He enfolded him in his arms, a recovery matter. He was not in accord with the occasion. He needed to be recovered to a proper attitude, which is very important. That is why I mentioned the love matter. Eutychus could hardly be considered as representing love. He was youthful, but he was careless. But there is the possibility of his being recovered and brought back. "They brought away the boy alive". They did not leave him to himself.
W.L.W. "We being assembled". Would that be characteristically? Mention has been made of loving one another in assembly.
J.T. Well, "we being assembled" is not necessarily love, because love might be there irregularly. The word "assembled" has to be taken account of by itself. It is something to be acquired, knowing how to assemble, because the word "assembly" is taken from that, and it is the noun that governs the position of the testimony; that is, the assembly; it is included in the thought of the ministry.
W.L.W. Eutychus was out of accord; one was wondering about those who only present themselves
{132}
on the occasion, of the breaking of bread and at no other meeting.
J.T. The question is whether they do present themselves as we have it in chapter 1. It is not simply that they are there. He wants to be known in a certain attitude.
J.S.P. You were stressing the point of being together. I suppose we hardly have that in Eutychus. He was one who had another outlook, and needed the embrace of Paul. Is that right?
J.T. Quite so, and as I was saying, the proper word for 'together' is assembling.
E.N.J. We are looking for more help as to the remark as to those who only attend the morning meeting, and are not seen through the week. You have said it is a question as to whether they really assemble.
J.T. But they do not. I would just say that because the word 'prepare' should be there too. The Lord spoke of preparing, and we read of the word 'prepare' being applied to persons too (see @Luke 1:17). So that if we come to the breaking of bread only on the first day of the week, and are not there on the other occasions of coming together, what can we say about that? We are just careless.
P.A.H. The assembling on the first day of the week would involve that there are other assembly matters to follow in the week. The week is complete in itself.
L.P.M. So that it says they were seven days at Troas before this took place. Paul and the others were there together.
J.T. Yes, and they were there as representative of Paul's ministry; that is to say, of the work that had been brought about by him. It is said in verse 4, "And there accompanied him as far as Asia, Sopater son of Pyrrhus, a Berean; and of Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius and Timotheus
{133}
of Derbe, and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus @Acts 20:4". Evidently they were representatives of Paul's work; that is to say, the very best work that was available. They were all there; it was a remarkable occasion, and this young man Eutychus was not there in spirit at all. He was at the window opening, and fell down. But there was power to restore him, which is a great matter. Paul was ready for that, too, as well as to minister.
J.McN. Is that not attractive? John speaks mouth to mouth, or face to face, but Paul embraces.
F.B.G. Does @1 Chronicles 11:1 help in regard to assembling? It says, "All Israel assembled themselves to David to Hebron saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh".
J.T. Very good, I am glad you brought that up, because it is a beautiful setting there. "Thy bone and thy flesh", showing that they recognise David, typically Christ. How beautifully it fits in with what we are saying!
R.P. In @Acts 20 the saints were able to move forward to what was specifically in mind. "We being assembled to break bread". That is what was in mind.
J.T. Just so. That was in mind in comparing the two passages, because comparisons are of great value in the interpretation of Scripture, and the use of Scripture in ministry. The two scriptures could be usefully and profitably compared. @Acts 20 refers to the real situation as to the ministry and continuance of the service of God at that time. It was at the height of Paul's ministry. The work was going on; Paul's services were going on, and the evidences of his testimony and work were with him; they accompanied him.
A.E.D. They no doubt had part in the discourse and helped forward what Paul would bring out.
J.T. Well, I do not know if they did, because it
{134}
was Paul's action. It was a discourse of Paul; it was not a Bible reading. We noticed there was a conversational matter at the end of the chapter, but the discourse was wholly Paul's.
A.E.D. I meant in the long speaking. They would have part in it, and they would he a model for us.
J.T. I am sure they had a good time, even although it was very late towards daybreak, showing how in the early days the brethren were ready to sacrifice to be there.
{135}
CAST OUT
@John 9:1 - 12,35 - 41
J.T. What is in mind is to call attention to being cast out. The thought is to connect what @John 9 teaches with the first epistle of Peter, in order to enlarge on the subject: "Because it is contained in the scripture: Behold, I lay in Zion a corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believes on him shall not be put to shame. To you therefore who believe is the preciousness; but to the disobedient, the stone which the builders cast away as worthless, this is become head of the corner", @1 Peter 2:6,7. It is thought that the record of this man in @John 9 will help us to see how the principle of casting away is applied by the people of this world, and how the castaway comes in for blessing, as it is said in the verses read, "Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and having found him, he said to him, Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God? He answered and said, And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him? And Jesus said to him, Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he. And he said, I believe, Lord: and he did him homage" (verses 35 - 38). So that these passages will doubtless help us to see how Christianity applies in those who have faith, and how it leads to their being cast out; and then the contrast, the truth is seen in the Lord announcing His sonship, and that the cast out one comes to know the Son of God.
A.M. Does the night that the Lord referred to in verse 4 refer to the night of His rejection?
J.T. "The night is coming, when no one can work. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world. Having said these things, he spat on
{136}
the ground and made mud of the spittle, and put the mud, as ointment, on his eyes. And he said to him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, which is interpreted, Sent. He went therefore and washed, and came seeing".
A.M. Does the Lord's public rejection continue right through the long night of His absence? Had He that in mind?
J.T. I am sure that is the truth, and it fits in with John's ministry.
P.A.H. They really cast the Lord out according to the close of the previous chapter: "They took up therefore stones that they might cast them at him; but Jesus hid himself and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and thus passed on", @John 8:59.
J.T. So that there was a murderous attitude in the Jews, and that murderous attitude is expressed in the stones which they took up to cast at Him. This chapter, however, is of the same character, though somewhat less wicked or violent, but the same principle is expressed in both chapters.
R.P. This chapter throws into relief the works of God.
J.T. Just so, and that is not a question of sins. The disciples were occupied with what might be governmental. Was the man's being blind governmental? The Lord would show that it was not a question of governmental action, but of the works of God. The man was blind apparently from birth. We are apt to attribute governmental action when it does not really exist. God is entitled to act sovereignly at any time, not necessarily in government. What is to be observed is the way the truth works out in the believer; that is, how it works out and culminates in exposing the state of man, that it is such that he would cast the believer out. The point
{137}
for us to see is how a particular truth, as applied in a case of this kind, culminates from man's side, in the believer being cast out, and on the other side, in the Son of God being attested and believed on.
E.N.J. So that the last verses of @John 20 would be in line with what you are saying: "Many other signs therefore also Jesus did before his disciples, which are not written in this book; but these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name", @John 20:30 - 31.
J.T. It is good to bring that up, because it brings out the whole point in John's ministry: the Son of God and the consequence of believing on Him. The Lord had taken on sonship, because He was born into manhood; sonship attached to Him. The word was, "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him (@John 1:18)". Sonship attached to Him as born here as man. He had been born into this world. "The Word became flesh", (@John 1:14) meaning that the thing had been taken on; sonship had been taken on.
C.P. What distinction would you make between the titles "Son of God" and "the Son"?
J.T. Well, the title "the Son" is more a formal title. The "Son of God" is more what He has taken on as a pattern, because believers are sons too. God is bringing many sons to glory; Christ is the pattern of them all. "The Son" is a title distinct to Himself. We could not apply it to anybody else. "The Son", which is a title used of the Lord, would mean that He is the only one who can take it.
R.P. The great truth of His Person was brought out in chapter 8:58: "I am". He has come into manhood, the place to which sonship applies.
J.T. Yes. Sonship applied to Him in manhood; it did not apply to Him before He became Man. Some have said it was an eternal thought, but it is
{138}
not. It *is* eternal in the sense that it never ceases, but it is not eternal in the sense that it never began.
C.P. Would you view sonship in relation to the counsel and purpose of God?
J.T. Quite so. It is a title taken by the second Person, as we say, in the Godhead; so that we have it applied in @Psalm 2, "Kiss the Son"; that is the term. It means that He is officially set up as Son, and therefore all come to Him. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand", (@John 3:85).
P.A.H. As the works of God are manifested in this man, it really reaches a climax when he is cast out. That is the issue as far as the religious world is concerned. There is no room there for the works of God. It is different from @Hebrews 13, where it is a question of *going* forth to Him without the camp, bearing His reproach; here it is a question of being cast out.
J.T. Yes, and how the truth works out in a person who is a believer. The Lord puts it to him, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" and the man says, "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?" That is to say he is ready to believe, it is only a question of the light coming to him, and the Lord furnishes it, saying, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he".
P.R.P. We understand that all that is of God, beginning with new birth, will not in any way fit into this world system.
J.T. No, indeed it will not; that is quite true. There is no room in this world system for the truth, beginning with the new birth; and the necessity for the new birth is to show that the world was reprobate. "The whole world lies in the wicked one", (@1 John 5:19) it says. So that it is well for us to face facts, and as we sit down together on the first day of the week, the Lord's supper enters into this matter. The works of
{139}
God come up here at once, and the Lord intended that they should; and the fact that is brought out here intimates how the truth is worked out in the person who believes, how it is worked out in circumstances of extreme hostility as expressed in the words "they cast him out".
P.A.H. Will you make it a little clearer as to the Lord's supper entering into this? Is it the setting of the Supper in a scene of hostility that you have in mind?
J.T. Yes; we often speak of the whole world lying in the wicked one, and the passage in the book of Revelation referring to the cities of this world, and certain truth comes out. It is said, "Where also their Lord was crucified", and that they are "spiritually Sodom and Egypt", @Revelation 11:8. That is to say, we break bread here in Brisbane, but do we allow ourselves to think that the street outside is dominated by the fact that our Lord was crucified in it? Do we accept it, that in the cities of the world we have hostility to Christ, that our Lord was crucified in them?
J.McN. It is only in the measure in which we are cast out from the system of things around that we are able to take on the truth of sonship. It was only after the man had been cast out that the Lord spoke to him as to believing on the Son of God. Is it equally applicable to us?
J.T. Just so. On the one hand we are outcasts, we have to accept that, and do well to accept it. The Lord is cast out as worthless, but on the other hand He is made Head of the corner, and Peter says "To you therefore who believe is the preciousness (@1 Peter 2:7)". Preciousness is attached to Him in that sense.
R.P. A new world comes into view, a new order of things connected with the Son of God.
J.T. That is the wonderful thing that attaches
{140}
to our position. "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" (@1 John 5:5). Overcoming the world is the point.
W.B. Those who came to David in the stronghold of Adullam answer to this, do they not?
J.T. Well, quite so. He became captain of those that came to the stronghold. What they became was derived in principle from David. He was the victorious one, and their victory would be derived from him, as now our victory is in Christ, the Son of God.
J.M. It says in verse 22, "the Jews had already agreed that if any one confessed him to be the Christ, he should be excommunicated from the synagogue @John 9:22". Would that give us the atmosphere which surrounds us as partaking of the Supper?
J.T. Very good, that is what I mentioned, because where the Lord was crucified was spiritually Sodom and Egypt, and we have to face that as on His side, and therefore rejection applies to us, because they cast Him out.
R.P. Confessing Him as the Christ would overthrow what is of man, and the Son of God really brings in what is for God.
J.T. John's epistle works that out: "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith", @1 John 5:4. So that we need not wonder that we have difficulties from trade unionism and the like, because it is where Christ was crucified. That is the very thing that works out in His rejection and crucifixion.
J.M. Would this blindness be indicative of the whole condition of the leaders at that moment?
J.T. Just so. There is something said in the last verse which speaks of that: "If ye were blind ye would not have sin; but now ye say, We see, your sin remains". They professed to see, and therefore their sin remained. They professed to see and
{141}
rejected the Son of God and the devoted followers of the Lord Jesus. It is the apostasy applied to the Jews, and the same thing will be seen in Christendom. The apostasy has already set in, according to 2 Thessalonians, but it has not been completed or perfected.
R.P. They were sinning against light, whereas we see progressive movement in this man in John.
J.T. That just comes to the point we should deal with specifically, and that is what he said to his neighbours in the way of confession, and then what he said to the Jews. To the neighbours he said, "It is I". And they said, "How have thine eyes been opened? He answered and said, A man called Jesus made mud and anointed mine eyes, and said to me, Go to Siloam and wash: and having gone and washed, I saw". Then they bring him to the Pharisees, and "the Pharisees therefore also again asked him how he received his sight. And he said to them, He put mud upon mine eyes, and I washed, and I see @John 9:15". That is to say, what he said to the neighbours was, "A man called Jesus made mud and anointed mine eyes, and ... I saw". He puts it in the past tense. But to the Pharisees it is the present tense: "I washed, and I see". He is an avowed follower of Christ, and what has happened is in the present tense. His eyes are opened.
A.M. Is the opening of eyes needed not only to see the Lord who He is, but where He is? I was thinking we need to see Him as He is, as the Son of God, and where He is, the position He has taken up. Is that involved in it? There is a position with which He links on here in this scene, not so much where He is in heaven, but a position where He is to be found here.
J.T. Well, I think we would be glad if you would enlarge on that, because it leads up to something very important.
{142}
A.M. I was thinking of the end of Hebrews: "Therefore let us go forth to him" -- that is the Person -- "without the camp" -- that is the position where He can be found @Hebrews 13:13.
J.T. Quite so. There is a positive side of the position, for the Son of God means that He is risen from the dead. He is also "declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead", (@Romans 1:4). And that is more than being cast out. We have to get the positive side of the truth.
P.A.H. The positive side is seen in the latter part we read in our chapter where the man is really attached to Christ as the Son of God. He finds a new centre, a new world in the Son of God.
J.T. So that chapter 10 is the enlarging of chapter 9, and then chapters 11 and 12 are further enlargements. That is to say it is a question of the resurrection. It is not simply that Lazarus was raised to where he had been, but Christ is raised; He is raised out of the condition in which He was. He is dead and raised out of that condition and @John 11 and 12 would develop that for us. @John 20, of course, is the full thought of sonship, and we are associated with Christ in that sonship.
A.M. Though Mary Magdalene was attached to the Lord personally, she had not the light of the new position until the Lord gave her the message for His own, His brethren.
J.T. Quite so; she took Him to be the gardener, but Peter and John believed. They saw and believed; that is to say they entered into the sepulchre and saw where the Lord lay, where His head and His feet had been, and the answer to all that is that He is now risen. He is with the Father.
A.M. How far would Martha's confession go? She says. "I believe that thou art the Christ, the
{143}
Son of God, who should come into the world", (@John 11:27).
J.T. She went far, but she ought to have been able to say more than that. Chapters 11 and 12 bring out the truth of Christ's Person; that He must rise from the dead.
J.M. He had already said to her, "I am the resurrection and the life". (@John 11:25) Had she not taken it in?
J.T. In a way she did. She went off and told her sister. In that she did well, but if we listen to Luke we would not make much of what Martha confessed. We have to come to John to get anything in regard to Martha. She was very slow in taking on the truth, she is in company with Nicodemus and others, whereas Mary took it on, according to Luke, immediately. She sat and was listening to the word of Christ. There are many who are like Martha; they take things on in measure, but they do not take on the final thought, and get to the full result. If we did not have John we should not know whether Martha was even a believer.
R.P. The man in @John 9 is characteristically a believer. He said "I see".
J.T. That is the point we want to come to. We see how the thing worked out in a person who is truly a believer, how the truth worked out in his soul, leading to his being rejected by the Jews, but glorified as it were by Christ. He believes in the Son of God. "They bring him who was before blind to the Pharisees. Now it was sabbath when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes. The Pharisees therefore also again asked him how he received his sight. And he said to them, He put mud upon mine eyes, and I washed, and I see. Some of the Pharisees therefore said. This man is not of God, for he does not keep the sabbath. Others said, How can a sinful man perform such signs? And there was a division among them. They say therefore again to the blind
{144}
man, What dost thou say of him, that he has opened thine eyes? And he said, He is a prophet. The Jews therefore did not believe concerning him that he was blind and had received sight, until they had called the parents of him that had received sight. And they asked them saying, This is your son, of whom ye say that he was born blind: how then does he now see? His parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind; but how he now sees we do not know, or who has opened his eyes we do not know. *He* is of age: ask *him, he* will speak concerning himself. His parents said these things because they feared the Jews, for the Jews had already agreed that if any one confessed him to be the Christ, he should be excommunicated from the synagogue. On this account his parents said, He is of age: ask *him*" (@John 9:13 - 23). We can see how the man is progressing, and how he is becoming victorious in his soul by receiving the light. Then in verses 24 - 29 we shall see how the man came fully into the truth: "They called therefore a second time the man who had been blind, and said to him, Give glory to God: we know that this man is sinful. He answered therefore, If he is sinful I know not. One thing I know, that, being blind before, now I see. And they said to him again, What did he do to thee? how opened he thine eyes? He answered them, I told you already and ye did not hear: why do ye desire to hear again? do ye also wish to become his disciples? They railed at him, and said, Thou art his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses. We know that God spoke to Moses; but as to this man, we know not whence he is (@John 9:24 - 29)". He is thoroughly militant now, and on the side of the truth, and able to state it. So it is an example for all of us to come into the truth, and come into the truth of the Son of God. "The man answered and said to them, Now in this is a wonderful thing, that *ye* do not know whence
{145}
he is, and he has opened mine eyes. But we know that God does not hear sinners; but if any one be God-fearing and do his will, him he hears. Since time was, it has not been heard that any one opened the eyes of one born blind. If this man were not of God he would be able to do nothing. They answered and said to him, Thou hast been wholly born in sins, and thou teachest us? And they cast him out" (@John 9:30 - 34). He is thoroughly triumphant in contending for the truth as it came to him. And then he meets opposition, and so the remaining verses, 35 to the end, tell us how he came into sonship. He came into the light of Christ as Son, the knowledge of Christ's sonship, and then his own sonship.
P.R.P. Linking this thought on with the Supper, is it as we go through the scene of opposition here that God is able to work in our souls, and that that provides substance for the occasion of the Lord's coming to us?
J.T. I would think that fully. The Lord comes to us in His own private way, but then how do we come into things? We are bound to come into opposition if we take a stand for the truth as this man did. Christ comes to us privately, but we come to the assembly. We come into the truth of the fellowship, and into the assembly and the privileges of it; we come into contact with opposition at once, and we may as well face that because it is just what we are dealing with in these chapters we have been going over.
P.R.P. The point I was seeking help on was as to the matter of formation generally; we are developed in the scene of opposition.
J.T. Quite so, formation must take place if we are to be militant, and make us such as can stand; we go through with things, we are victorious; that comes out in John's epistle. The passage quoted from the end of @John 20, speaks of the many things
{146}
that were done by the Lord that are not written in this book, "but these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name @John 20:31". That is what is in mind in this wonderful book of John's gospel. So that chapter 20 is not only the resurrection of Christ, it is His ascension. The point was as to Mary Magdalene's message, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend", not that 'I am risen', but that "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my Good and your God", @John 20:17 It is a question of the ascension. Not 'I have ascended'; the Lord did not say that, but "I ascend", as if it were a present action.
R.P. That would enter peculiarly into the service of God, would it not?
J.T. That is just the point on the first day of the week. According to Ephesians, we are raised up together, and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus (@Ephesians 2:6).
P.A.H. This understanding then of the Son of God seems to be reserved for the cast out ones.
J.T. That is just what I thought we would come to this afternoon. We might say the Lord knew that he was cast out, but then the Lord takes the ground of hearing, and acting on what He hears. That is the point in verse 35: "Jesus heard that they had cast him out", as if the Lord is saying, 'I know all that happens amongst the brethren, and I am with them'. That is the very thing He is saying to everyone in this city at the present time. The Lord knows what we are going through, but He says, 'I am with you, and you are going to be victorious!' We shall be victorious in suffering.
C.T.McC. Is His being with the rejected ones, in the power of resurrection?
J.T. Very good; being with Christ. That is our position, we are with Him, we are publicly with Him.
{147}
He comes to us secretly now; when He comes for us presently, He will come openly; although one would be somewhat concerned that the whole truth should be told as to the Lord's coming for us; still, He comes for us publicly in a sense, and we are raised publicly in a sense. The dead in Christ rise first. There is a real resurrection of those who are dead in Christ, but we who are alive and remain shall be changed. All these things are going to be verities, and we are to be living in hope of them, because hope is the great thing to set before our hearts: "Hope does not make ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us", (@Romans 5:5). So that our position is invulnerable if we go through with the truth as we see it here in @John 9.
J.A.A. @Romans 8:17 speaks of "Christ's joint heirs". Paul speaks of sonship before that, and then he speaks of us being "Christ's joint heirs; if indeed we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him @Romans 8:17". Suffering comes in here, and we come into the light of sonship.
J.T. Quite so. The resurrection is to be applied to our bodies. "Awaiting adoption, that is the redemption of our body (@Romans 8:23)" is the full thought of salvation.
E.N.J. This man, when he had made a clear confession as far as his light would take him at the time, was cast out. Would it be right to say that the Lord is watching for such instances, and is ready to come to us with disclosures?
J.T. That is a good way to put things, and especially in view of what we are going through in the present current exercises in this city. The Lord knows all about it. This chapter ought to encourage us, that He is standing by us, and He will see us through to the end; that is what the chapter means.
P.R.P. Would you link this thought with Daniel?
{148}
The three men in the fire, and one walking with them like unto the Son of God.
J.T. Very good. These three devoted men are mentioned about thirteen times in the chapter, showing how much heaven thought of them; and heaven is now looking on what we are going through in this city.
W.B. You have spoken of personality in the saints. Would this man in @John 9 become a personality through these exercises?
J.T. That is what he is. He is one of the personalities in John's gospel, and John loves personalities. The Lord Himself uses the expression, *"I* Jesus", and John says, "I John". God is looking for us to develop, in personality, what heaven recognises and honours.
E.N.J. If we make a definite stand for the Lord in relation to present difficulties, it may involve some opposition from unconverted relatives in the world, as seen in the parents here; they were not willing to identify themselves with what was taking place.
J.T. Our relatives are pretty sure to be against us if we are spiritual. John's gospel brings that out. He says, "Ye, go up to this feast. I go not up to this feast, for *my* time is not yet fulfilled @John 7:8". So we would wait the Lord's time.
R.G.W. If we are prepared to accept the principle of rejection, the Lord having had it first, the completion of the scripture in Peter is for our encouragement. Though cast away of men, He is made head of the corner by God. Does that imply there is another system in which He will be Head?
J.T. That is why I read that passage in Peter. It might help if we read it again. "Behold, I lay in Zion a corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believes on him shall not be put to shame. To you therefore who believe is the preciousness; but to the disobedient, the stone which the builders cast away
{149}
as worthless, this is become head of the corner, and a stone of stumbling and rock of offence", @1 Peter 2:6 - 8. I think the brethren will all see that these passages, @John 9 and @1 Peter 2, speak for themselves as to where we are, and what encouragement there is, that we may stand fast in what is true, and stand to right principles, and the Lord will not forsake us. He will be with us and favour us, so that we will not lose anything. We may feel that we are losing physical things, but we will gain spiritually, I am certain of it.
J.S.P. What we get here in verse 6 would be fundamental, would it not, for our souls? "Because it is contained in the scripture: Behold, I lay in Zion a corner stone, elect, precious ... To you therefore who believe is the preciousness @1 Peter 2:6,7".
J.T. How wonderful that is! To those who believe is the preciousness.
A.M. Would it apply, not only to the Son of God personally, but to the glorious system?
J.T. I would say that. The idea of the system should be always brought in, because that is the point of everything in the epistles, the system that God has set up, with Christ as the Head of it, and the Holy Spirit down here maintaining it in power.
J.A.A. So that there is the setting forth of "the excellencies of him who has called you out of darkness to his wonderful light", (@1 Peter 2:9).
J.T. These thoughts of Peter's are very striking, and when we come to the second epistle, we will find that one thing leads on to another; so the whole structure is built up in Peter's second epistle, so that we are stabilised in coming to the system.
J.S.P. So that if any of us come into rejection, we have the truth of this in our own souls, and it would encourage us.
J.T. Then it is not only that the Person of Christ may be rejected, but there is the preciousness. That
{150}
is what He is characteristically, what is worked out by the Spirit in us, the preciousness. "To you therefore who believe is the preciousness (@1 Peter 2:7)".
E.N.J. Peter takes account of sovereignty in our section: "Behold, I lay in Zion a corner stone, @1 Peter 2:6" that would be sovereign mercy.
J.T. So that the corner stone is not simply something built on the principle of a square, but round the corner; the corner is perfected, and whatever pressure may come, there is power to support it. That is the idea of a corner.
{151}
THE LORD'S SUPPER (1)
@1 Corinthians 11:17 - 34
J.T. The subject of the Lord's supper is taken up at this time according to what it means as the inauguration or beginning of the service of God. It is Paul's account of the Lord's supper, of its inauguration. The worship of God did not begin with Christianity; it was inaugurated in the Old Testament; it has come down to us, in that way, and although the Lord's supper is mentioned in the synoptic gospels and in the Acts and elsewhere, yet it is formally introduced in this chapter as the beginning of the service of God, the beginning of it. Thus brethren rightly have it on the first day of the week, for the book of Acts tells us that that was the custom in the early days, after Pentecost, that they came together on the first day of the week to break bread. The three synoptic gospels contain it, John does not; and what is seen in Matthew, Mark, and Luke is that the twelve were with the Lord when He inaugurated the Supper. The facts indicate that the twelve were formally there to be the Lord's witnesses. Matthew, Mark, and Luke mention it so that there can be no question as to testimony as to it.
Much was said and written about it at the time of the Reformation, which somewhat beclouded it, especially Luther's ministry; but since that time the truth of it has been opened up in a very peculiar and full way; and it is clear that the Lord intended that it should be established in the presence of His own witnesses, His chosen witnesses. So the synoptic gospels afford testimony from the apostles and others who wrote the account of the Lord's ministry. It is thought, therefore, that at this time we should look into it from these points of view. And of course, one
{152}
is hopeful that the brethren will speak freely as to it, because it has become, I might say, a burning question among the saints for many years, almost from the time of the revival, but particularly during the past twenty-five years.
P.A.H. Has Paul the final word as to this matter from the Lord?
J.T. Yes; that is just what I had in mind, that we might see that it is his word. We know from his letters, besides this one, that he was the minister of the assembly peculiarly; and of course, the ministry of the assembly involves the Lord's supper, not only because of its own value, but because of its importance as giving a lead to the service of God, and opening up the whole thought of the service of God.
R.P. Would Paul link on with what is historical, and give added new features in regard to the assembly position?
J.T. Well, I think so; we should not establish the facts properly from the synoptic gospels, or even from the Acts. They are established in these particular letters of Paul's, the first and second epistles to Corinth; and nothing can be more important than that the saints now should understand that Paul is the minister of the assembly. Colossians especially deals with it, the brethren will remember. It is stated in the first chapter of that epistle "Now, I rejoice in sufferings for you, and I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly; of which *I* became minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given me towards you to complete the word of God, the mystery which has been hidden from ages and from generations, but has now been made manifest to his saints", @Colossians 1:24 - 26.
It is just to bring out the testimony of Paul in its varied features as to this great matter, the service of God, and that this service is in the assembly, which
{153}
is the vessel in which God is operating. So in chapter 12 of the Corinthian epistle it says "so also is the Christ", that is to say "the Christ", truly the saints, as the vessel of testimony. Paul says, "Now, I rejoice in sufferings for you, and I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly; of which *I* became minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given me towards you to complete the word of God, the mystery which has been hidden from ages and from generations, but has now been made manifest to his saints; to whom God would make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations, which is Christ in you the hope of glory: whom *we* announce, admonishing every man, and teaching every man, in all wisdom, to the end that we may present every man perfect in Christ (@Colossians 1:24 - 28)". These verses fully confirm what has been said as to the ministry of Paul being conclusive and final in all matters, but particularly in matters relative to the assembly.
P.A.H. When you speak of the inauguration of the service of God at the Supper, is it through that means that the Lord secures His place in the midst of His own, and then the service proceeds? Is that the thought?
J.T. I would say that is just the point, His own place in the midst; and that is what He promises to us in John, because we get from John what was intended to run down the whole dispensation. Hence we have the great fact of the Spirit coming, in @John 14:18, and then He says, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you", meaning that the Lord did not intend to leave them to their own resources, but that the Spirit having come. He also would come to them. I believe that is what enters into the present time, and the peculiar way the ministry has come forward in regard to the Lord's supper. The Lord
{154}
comes to us, and the synoptic gospels deal with the general facts of the Lord's ministry, but Paul deals with what is special as relating to the assembly. So that the service of God comes down to us from the Old Testament, but it comes down to us through the twelve apostles. So those who were converted through Peter's ministry persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, and in the breaking of bread and in prayers. That is the general fact as to the twelve.
Then with the incoming of Paul, we have these special epistles, opening up the truth as to the assembly, bringing forward himself as the minister of it, so that we have things firmly in our hands in that way. It seems to me that the brethren should be thoroughly alive to the present time, because the imminence of the Lord's coming is apparent, and the Lord would have the truth of His supper entered into fully, so that we might be fit to take on the great service that is for us in the millennium according to @Ephesians 2, in which it is said that the assembly is a habitation of God in Spirit, and increases to a holy temple in the Lord; that is, the means by which God will disclose His mind and the order of His service in the millennial day.
E.N.J. Does what you have referred to in relation to the saints persevering in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, and the breaking of bread and prayers, help us to see that we cannot be negligent about the Supper, but things are to be taken up in an orderly way? It is in disorder elsewhere.
J.T. That is just the thing, that the idea of three thousand converts in the second chapter was to show what God could bring about, the Spirit having come; and then to show that the result was characterised by the perseverance of the converts in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, meaning that the apostles were the Lord's own authorised or chosen
{155}
witnesses to the dispensation, to what He was going to set out in the dispensation; and hence we have the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, but not only that, the breaking of bread and prayers, as if the service of God is formally spoken of, and that it is now in the hands of the twelve. But later it is clear that it was enlarged on, and Paul was brought in as a special witness and servant of the dispensation.
E.N.J. So that it would be particularly painful to the apostle Paul when he heard of the disorder in Corinth.
J.T. Just so; it is very good to bring that up, because there is so much disorder now, and especially on this point. There has hardly been anything more controversial than the Lord's supper, especially during the time of the Reformation, and ever since too. Christendom is divided up into a hundred fragments, it may be, and the Lord's supper is partaken of by nearly all, but hardly any have the truth of it. I believe the Lord has reserved it for those who are subject to Him and recognise the Spirit, to open up through them the truth as to it, and He is constantly opening up fresh thoughts as to it.
R.P. You mentioned that the matter was greatly beclouded at the time of Luther. Does the public body still hold to the matter as set out in the time of Luther? Does not Paul's ministry help us as to the Supper, and what follows upon the Supper being taken, in our moving from what is provisional to what is eternal?
J.T. I would say, not only what the reformers had, but also what Rome has. We cannot ignore what Rome has, because Rome is the continuation publicly of the original assembly so called; not that it uses the word 'assembly'. It chooses to use the word 'church', and it is externally the representative of it, but its doom is clearly announced; because of the great responsibility it has taken on, its doom is
{156}
asserted and sure to come. God may be using it to check other things, in what He is doing, but at the same time He is reserving His rights to deal with it in the most thorough way, as the book of Revelation tells us. Nothing is more drastic than the judgments that are intended to be poured out on that system.
E.N.J. Do you feel that we should continually give thanks to God that the light of the Supper, and the meaning the Lord had in it, has been recovered to us, and particularly that it introduces the service of God?
J.T. I think it is remarkable that the Lord's day afternoons almost universally are more or less devoted to the understanding of the Lord's supper, especially if brethren are moving about in the service as especially equipped for it. We find that they often take the opportunity to seek to open up the truth of the Lord's supper.
W.J.B. In view of that, should we not have our minds ready for any adjustment that the Lord may bring before us?
J.T. I think that is right, because you hear of questions all the time about the Lord's supper, and perhaps it would be hard to get all to agree about everything; and the same is true negatively as to this subject which has been engaging us as to trade unions, that not all of those who are nominally in fellowship will agree on the full thought, and will agree to take action, to take an attitude up before God as to the truth relative to it, and I believe it is a great source of weakness amongst the saints. There should be unity as to the truth of the Lord's supper, and then as to the truth of this awful thing that is current, that is to say, trade unionism.
D.H.B. Do you think it is essential for us to judge this matter that the apostle draws attention to first of all, as to the divided state of things amongst the saints at Corinth, before we can proceed with the Supper?
{157}
J.T. And especially because this very subject is taken, up in the first chapter. I am alluding to the great damage done by the want of unity amongst the brethren now. In the first chapter of the epistle we are reading, almost immediately after the introductory remarks of the apostle, which are properly objective truth, the tenth verse begins immediately with a word of exhortation by the apostle: "Now I exhort you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say the same thing, and that there be not among you divisions; but that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion. For it has been shewn to me concerning you, my brethren, by those of the house of Chloe, that there are strifes among you. But I speak of this, that each of you says, *I* am of Paul, and *I* of Apollos, and *I* of Cephas, and *I* of Christ. Is the Christ divided? Has Paul been crucified for you? or have ye been baptised unto the name of Paul?" @1 Corinthians 1:10 - 13. Then in this chapter that has been read we have again an allusion to dissension: "I hear there exist divisions among you, and I partly give credit to it. For there must also be sects among you, that the approved may become manifest among you". Not merely divisions, but sects, which is a serious matter. The apostle would bring out into the open the persons who are approved, which implies they are approved in heaven, and that is the point with us, that we should be approved of God, and that we should thus be united in the truth.
R.P. That is really a basic thought in the assembly, is it not, that we are there intelligently, and know why we are there?
J.T. And that we are all of one mind. That is, if Christianity is anything at all, it must be permeated by love. Love is the great thing according to chapter 13 of this book. One could do anything, give his body to be burned, and yet be nothing because he
{158}
has no love; so it is the greatest feature amongst us.
R.P. Would not the Supper really promote that? There is the apostles¬ doctrine and teaching, which is basic to fellowship, and then what flows out of the privilege side.
J.T. Just so. But then this matter of love: "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", the Lord said (@John 13:35). That is the point of testimony that the Lord makes, and we cannot get on in the truth unless there is love amongst us, and the obligation recognised to be of one mind.
E.N.J. Would the exercise you have placed before us lately, as to being occupied with the love side of things on the first day of the week, be conducive to our being built up in love? We do not want to be occupied all the time with warfare.
J.T. Just so. "Love one another". That is the testimony of John, especially in his epistle, and also in his gospel, as the Lord Himself says, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves (@John 13:35)". That is amongst yourselves as saints.
Ques. Did it require that the apostle set things in order at Corinth so that love might work out its way properly?
J.T. Well, it is a fact, and chapter 13 is devoted almost entirely to the subject of love.
G.W.A. Would that feature be seen also in the first verse of our chapter as following the close of the tenth chapter, "Be my imitators, even as *I* also am of Christ"? @1 Corinthians 11:1
J.T. Quite so. Peter did not say that, nor did John. Paul only uses these words, showing what a place he had in the Lord's mind as representative of the whole principle and spirit of Christianity. Paul is our leader.
{159}
R.P. "Yet shew I unto you a way of more surpassing excellence", (@1 Corinthians 12:31).
J.T. Quite so, not simply what he was teaching, but showing; it is shown to us.
C.G.McC. In relation to loving one another, I was thinking of the Lord's own words: "This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you", (@John 15:12). The Lord has set the example: "As I have loved you".
R.P. The Supper is supremely a love matter. There may be a formal coming together for the Supper, yet Paul has to write over it, "This is not to eat the Lord's supper".
J.T. That is so, he writes a negative over it. We began with verse 17 because it had evidently the first place in his mind, not merely that they were Christians, and had believed the gospel, but the truth of their place in partaking of the Lord's supper, taking their place in the inaugural side of the truth in the service of God. That is a question of the service of God, and the order of it, and what is essential to it, namely love; and if that be not there, and conduct suitable to it, it is not the Lord's supper. That is what the apostle means. They were ostensibly there to eat the Lord's supper, but it was not really so, because of their conduct in the assembly.
W.L.W. Is that why the apostle in commencing, says, "In prescribing to you on this which I now enter on, I do not praise"? What comes to us as to the order of the Lord's supper, and the service of God, is by prescription, by commandment.
J.T. Quite so, and the things here prescribed and written to them were the commandment of the Lord, not merely the commandments, but one commandment, as if the whole thing is put under the one heading of being a commandment, making it more and more authoritative.
P.R.P. I would like to ask a little more as to
{160}
love in its working out. There is the matter of love to the brethren, and there is love to the Lord. Would you distinguish between these two aspects?
J.T. Love to the brethren, and love to the Lord? In a certain way the brethren are more of a test to us than the Lord Himself. When we sit down to partake of the Lord's supper, the first thought is the brethren. This may be questioned in many minds, but I am certain it is so. The Lord is saying to us in effect, 'What do you think of each other? Do not speak to Me of what you think of Me; what do you think of each other?' Because in truth everyone of us ought to have a judgment about everyone. Not that we are critical of each other, but it is due to the Lord that we should have a right judgment; as David said to Abigail, "Blessed be thy discernment", @1 Samuel 25:33 as if the Lord would say, 'I want you to be discerning of each other'; not to be critical exactly, but to know and understand each other.
E.N.J. Would the necessary constitution for the partaking of the Lord's supper be built up in that way, that we get on together in our exercises during the week as disciples of the Lord, and as brethren one of another?
J.T. Just so. In any company of the saints in any town, when we sit down together, leaving our houses and sitting down together to partake of the Lord's supper, the first thing normally and rightly would be "each other". Whether we are a dozen, or fifty, or one hundred, do we really love each other? because the Lord is saying to us, 'I am coming to you, but I am not coming to a divided company; I am coming for My own pleasure and My own joy'; because the point was the joy that was set before Him. That joy ought to enter into the assembly service. The Lord is active from early morning every Lord's day. He is active as it says in @Psalm 19:5, "He rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race". And the
{161}
race, of course, would have in mind (if you apply it to the assembly) that He should reach the assembly. And whom does He reach? Is it a company who love one another, that He can admire as having love amongst themselves? I believe that is really what tests our whole position.
G.W.A. Is that why the challenge is raised in verse 22, "Or do ye despise the assembly of God ... ?"
J.T. Quite so, showing it is not merely a place of meeting, where the brethren meet, but where the saints are, as in @John 20, "where the disciples were". There is no question of a room or a building, but where they are, and what the Lord finds if He comes to us.
Ques. In our houses we would hold the assembly as a very elevated thought. "Have ye not then houses for eating and drinking?" Would that not test us as to how we regard the saints in our homes?
J.T. Of course, house room is difficult just now. There is a great scarcity of houses in all countries. At the same time the Lord is saying to us here, "Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in?" That does not mean that every married couple has a house, but it implies that there should be a house for every family. And then the test here is as to how we carry on in the assembly, whether we behave properly. Take the children of the saints coming to the place of meeting, old and young, and those perhaps who are not breaking bread, what does the Lord's eye meet in coming in among us? Can He approve of everything? Hence the word here is "Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in?"and so forth. So that He is writing over the whole matter of this first part of the chapter, 'This is not to eat the Lord's supper, because your conduct is unsuitable'.
{162}
E.N.J. I was wondering if they were making too much of eating, and if there is a danger of our making too much of any feature of the Supper. We should be balanced and intelligent.
J.M. Would what you have drawn attention to in chapter 12 be important, "So also is the Christ"? @1 Corinthians 12:12 Christ characteristically in the saints.
J.T. That is the point. It is a remarkable passage, because as you say it is Christ characteristically: "So also is the Christ", meaning that the Spirit of God is applying the thought of "the Christ" to the saints, to the assembly as the anointed vessel.
J.M. So that we cannot overlook even the weakest, and there is to be no disunity in the body.
J.T. That is the idea, so we value one another and love one another; that is the point. Then we have here another thing which we have already touched on, the matter of sects, sectarianism. That is to say, those who think to come, as you might say, in an ecclesiastical sense, not in a business sense, not as business people, but in an ecclesiastical sense. They have an ecclesiastical distinction of their own; they have what belongs to the assembly, and yet they are keeping to themselves, and making divisions.
J.M. Schools of opinion?
J.T. Just so. I think you can see the point I am trying to make -- that we may be together in an ecclesiastical sense, having importance in our own minds in that sense, not because we are well educated people, or even having social distinction, but because we have an ecclesiastical character, and on that ground are important to each other. That is exactly what they were doing, and it was displacing love. Anything of that kind which makes us important in each other's eyes, whatever it be, tends to sectarianism, to divide us, and shut out love.
C.W.A. "Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body (@1 Corinthians 10:17)". Is that the divine thought?
J.T. Quite so. We are expressing it in our
{163}
partaking of the loaf and of the cup, and there is to be no effort to make ourselves distinctive.
J.S.P. Do we get the great example of love in the Lord? @Hebrews 12:2 says, "Who ... endured the cross, despising the shame". He sets aside everything for the joy that was set before Him.
J.T. How touching it is, and I believe He had the assembly in mind. Although the full thought of His joy may be in that passage, it certainly involved the joy He has now as He comes into the assembly.
J.S.P. I was thinking of our side of it. We take it on. Would it mark us characteristically?
J.T. Well, that is what we are endeavouring to say to each other now, that we might help and instruct each other as to the reality of Christianity, the dispensation we are in; and so the thing to be noted in this section is the place the word "body" has. In this chapter it is said, *"I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood". That is to say, the Lord's own body, His personal body is in mind here, and He says, It is for you. It is intended to be very touching. The Lord says, It is for you, therefore it is a question now of how we regard the Lord's own body. And then in chapter 10, we have another word about the body, that is to say, the apostle says, "I speak as to intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say @1 Corinthians 10:15". That is what I was endeavouring to say a moment ago. We have a judgment of everything; we are not to be critical of each other, but have a judgment of each one, a true judgment; so, "do *ye* judge what I say. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood
{164}
of the Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion, of the body of the Christ? Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body @1 Corinthians 10:15 - 17". The word "body" here in chapter 10 refers to ourselves, that is to the saints, whereas the word in chapter 11 refers to Christ's body. It is a question of the holy feelings that are intended to affect us as to the Lord's own body, as having been into death; and it comes before us in the Supper, in the bread and in the cup.
R.P. Would you say that is peculiarly for the saints in this dispensation -- "My body, which is for you"?
J.T. Well, that is what I was thinking. It is for you. How do I take that? How do I understand it? I can more readily understand, perhaps, the saints as called the body, but how do I understand the Lord's body for me? "This is my body, which is for you". When the Lord says "for you", He means for ourselves, for the saints. What a portion we have in His body!
J.A.A. This is the body in which He suffered as on earth, is it?
J.T. I think so.. The body that Mary anointed He says, "She has beforehand anointed my body for the burial", (@Mark 14:8).
R.P. Do *we* think of Him being in that body historically, or in the body that He is in now?
J.T. The latter. The body in which He was historically has been placed in the grave, and we speak now in a holy sense, a reverential sense, of the Lord, but His body has become changed. He is the same Person, and you might say it is the same body, but it is not just the same, because it is His body of glory; we have to understand what that means, and His body of glory is not His body in which He died. Paul says, "His body of glory (@Philippians 3:21)". We are to be conformed to His body of glory.
{165}
P.A.H. And in calling the Lord to mind, we are thinking of Him as He is.
J.T. That is right, but we are brought in too. I think that He is considering us in speaking to Paul, which, of course, peculiarly enters into what we are saying. In speaking to Paul the Lord said, "Why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4) It is the Lord now risen that is there. At the same time He is to be understood in the place of suffering, that He is suffering in His saints, not in His own body, but in His saints¬ bodies.
Ques. And is the Lord thinking of us in love as He would come to us, the saints perhaps in the suffering position, He is speaking to us there?
J.T. I think so; that is just the way we should take it on, because it would call Him to mind; surely in that spirit and sense we do that, not as He is glorified. He is not actually suffering as in glory, but He is as identified with His saints, and in His saints He is suffering; and hence when He asks to be remembered, to be recalled and borne in mind, I would say it is that He is going through the scene of sufferings with us; He is actually in it, in the sense that He comes to us.
C.T.McC. "The night in which he was delivered up" is tonight for the saints?
J.T. That is a good way to put it. So the Lord says to Paul, "Why dost thou persecute me?" (@Acts 9:4) Literally Paul might say, 'I have never seen You, Lord, I am not persecuting You', but the Lord would say, 'You are doing it in My saints'.
Rem. The Supper is really in that setting. But then there is a new and spiritual interest that Paul has in mind, the body of Christ.
J.T. I would say that fully, so we may ask, 'What do they think about Christ?'People express what they think about Christ in their treatment of the saints. That is the way to look at things. The
{166}
Lord comes into a suffering position as identified with us. He is not here corporeally, He is in heaven, but He comes to us; we have to understand that spiritually.
E.N.J. "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me", (@Matthew 25:40). Is that in principle the same?
J.T. Very good.
Rem. You spoke on another occasion of the matter of appropriation, in drawing attention to chapter 10. Is it your thought that we appropriate one another first, and then we appropriate the matter of the Lord's body for us?
J.T. I think that is how it comes out. We value each other, for instance. If you take the types of the clean and unclean animals, it is a question of how we regard each other, how we appropriate each other. The saints are clean, and so are fit to be appropriated. The word 'eating' is just appropriation. That is what is meant in the type. Eating is just appropriation of the thing.
Rem. One feels that we cannot get that matter too clearly. Coming up from our houses we are appropriating one another with a view to the Lord coming in.
J.T. So that the Lord comes into an approved company that He can take account of with pleasure; we are not irksome to each other. I believe the Lord would keep on at that amongst us, so that we might be fit for translation, because translation is the great thing in mind, and the Lord intends that we should be fit for it, and we can only be fit for it actually as we appropriate what we are to each other, as He does. Our appropriation of each other should synchronise with His.
C.P. I was thinking that as we assemble together in the truth of being the body, when the Lord comes
{167}
we have already been instructed in relation to the truth.
J.T. A very good suggestion. And the Lord is stressing upon us the value of His own to Him, but at the same time to each other. He is not going to have things unequal but wants things balanced, and the balance is as between His appropriation of ourselves, and our appropriation of each other. It is a perfect balance, that is what the Lord is aiming at; so we go up to Him where He is and as He is, as John says, "When he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is", @1 John 3:2.
{168}
THE LORD'S SUPPER (2)
@2 Corinthians 3:1 - 18
J.T. The eleventh chapter of the first epistle to Corinth was read last Lord's day, but we were unable to enlarge on the subject then. We think it better to go on to the second letter now to pursue our subject, that is, the Lord's supper, because the second letter is more substantial, more complete, so that it is thought we shall be able to open up the subject a little more fully. What has been remarked is of the very first importance as to the subject, because the first letter is almost entirely corrective. The second letter affords more substance and spiritual enlargement, as I hope we shall see as we proceed. The apostle had experienced much suffering and persecution before the second letter was written. He had come nigh to death, he said, but God had effected deliverance for him, and so he is now free to touch on the very fundamentals of the first epistle. The first epistle to the Corinthians is one of the most important in the whole New Testament in view of the service of God, because it is devoted in the main to that subject, but the apostle in the first epistle has almost immediately to reprove them, to enter on a course of reproof. And it may be that we all need reproof as to the principles governing the Lord's supper. The Lord's supper is celebrated nominally in perhaps a hundred ways among the sects, so-called, so that it is all the more important that we should look into it carefully, and see what the bearing of it is as seen in the second letter.
P.R.P. What did you have in mind in referring to the sufferings of the apostle?
J.T. Well, they are alluded to in the first chapter of this epistle. He said, "We do not wish you to be
{169}
ignorant, brethren, as to our tribulation which happened to us in Asia, that we were excessively pressed beyond our power, so as to despair even of living. But we ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not have our trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead; who has delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver; in whom we confide that he will also yet deliver" (@2 Corinthians 1:8 - 10). That is what is alluded to, so that undoubtedly the apostle needed the discipline involved; not that it is seemly for us to speak of his being disciplined, but undoubtedly God foresaw the need of opening up the subject of the Lord's supper more fully, and He allowed His servant to go through this discipline, so as to be competent inwardly to take the thing up as he does in these chapters.
P.R.P. Is there a suggestion in this that to enter into Christianity substantially requires suffering?
J.T. Well, it seems so. "Unto you it is given", we are told in @Philippians 1:29, "not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake". Paul speaks of filling up that which was behind of the sufferings of Christ in his flesh for His body's sake. And there are many similar passages from which we see that sufferings are essential to our being competent (even the apostles being competent) to deal with the greatness of the truth in its fulness.
E.N.J. So that verses 5 and 6 of our chapter would have that in view, "not that we are competent of ourselves to think anything as of ourselves, but our competency is of God; who has also made us competent, as ministers of the new covenant; not of letter, but of spirit", and so on.
J.T. Well, that just bears out what has been said, that sufferings are needed for us if we are to enter fully into the truth, and if we are to open it up to one another.
{170}
P.A.H. So that as to ourselves, it is needful for us to understand something of suffering to really appreciate the Supper. That is, the Supper is taken in suffering conditions.
J.T. That is why it has been thought well of late to call attention to the fact that the calling of the Lord to mind as indicated in the first letter, is not simply that He is absent from this world, but that He is actually in spirit, at least in mind and in thought, in the place of suffering; because I think at times it has been thought that the calling of the Lord to mind is just that He is away, He has gone into heaven. But I do not think that the Lord really, as it were, needs to be sympathised with, if I may use that word, but rather that He is actually here in spirit. I use the word 'in spirit' so as to make clear that the Lord is in heaven literally, but He is here in spirit, that is, with His people. When the time of calling Him to mind arrives on the first day of the week, there is opportunity to be reminded that He too Himself is still in the place of suffering; and that is illustrated in the fact that when the apostle Paul was converted, the Lord said to him, "Why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4) Now the Lord is in heaven literally, but He speaks of Himself as in the place of suffering, and that Paul was causing the suffering. The Lord was not literally persecuted by Paul at that time, but He was in spirit with the brethren in their sufferings. Paul at that time, or immediately before it, was the outstanding instrument of the devil to persecute the saints, dragging men and women before tribunals, and so forth, as we learn in @Acts 9. So that the Lord in spirit is in the sufferings when He asks us to call Him to mind.
C.G.McC. So that "Why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4) is a present thought?
J.T. Quite so.
R.C.McC. Calling Him to mind is not historical
{171}
is it, but rather the activity amongst the saints as moving together in love?
J.T. Quite so. So that when we come to partake of the Lord's supper, whether it is in a city, a town, or even a village, we have to bear in mind that that village is essentially, if not openly, opposed to Christ. The idea of sufferings is alluded to in the book of Revelation, "Where also their Lord was crucified", @Revelation 11:8. That refers to the cities of this world. So that it would be an entire mistake to assume that the Lord is in honour in this world.
E.N.J. Is the suggestion in @Matthew 26 that they sang a hymn and went out to the mount of Olives, a connection between the public setting of the Supper and the commencement of the service of God?
J.T. Well, that requires a little more opening up. We should all understand what is in mind on your part.
E.N.J. I am thinking of the hostile state of things that we have been speaking about, in any village or city where the Lord's supper may be partaken of, but as we do come together in that way, have we not then the holy privilege of entering into the service of God in a united way? There is the going out, and going up to the mount of Olives. Physically we do not move from the room, but it is a spiritual upward movement to a higher side of things.
J.T. Yes, that is very good to have before us, that we do not move from the room, there is no such thought; but there is such a thought as the saints being spiritual, and even going to the extent of ecstasy, although one would hesitate to say that it could be proved that there is such experience now; but at the beginning there was, and we are entitled to treat of the dispensation as a whole, and if anything happened at the beginning, or the middle, it belonged to the dispensation, and so may be treated thus. Hence, to illustrate, in the beginning of the
{172}
dispensation as seen in Acts, the Lord appeared to His own in a corporeal sense; He was here for forty days before He went to heaven, after He rose; and in the book of Acts He is regarded, and in the first epistle to the Corinthians too, as appearing in a corporeal sense to His own. Therefore it is quite intelligible and right to say that He is to be apprehended in a corporeal sense, even although it might only be at the beginning, and not even in the times of the Reformation, nor even now, but yet the fact remains that the Lord appeared to His own in a corporeal sense. I think that is of importance to keep in mind, that the dispensation has to be taken account of in the whole matter; even if the corporeal thought be eliminated now, at any rate He appears spiritually as @John 14 would teach. He said, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you @John 14:18". So that He comes to us at least in a spiritual sense, and is to be apprehended thus.
P.A.H. And are we able to look upon the glory of the Lord? That is, we are not looking upon His sufferings, but His glory, and that would help in the transference in our spirits and minds from the scene of suffering to that which is beyond it.
J.T. Exactly, and surely it is in keeping with the dispensation, and God is entitled, so to speak, to bring it before us, that the Lord Jesus, although He is actually and literally in heaven, yet as a divine Person, can come and go as He pleases. For instance He comes for us: "The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first", (@1 Thessalonians 4:16). That is the Lord's own action. It is not the Spirit's action, it is His own action, and we cannot say that He is sent to do it. It implies that He is at all times at liberty to have access to His brethren, to the assembly.
R.P. Is the public aspect of the Supper associated
{173}
with the thought of the Lord's coming? It is "till he come", whereas the inward and spiritual side opens the way now for a spiritual manifestation of Christ to His own. And is not that dependent upon the truth brought out by Paul? He did not know Christ here on earth. It is purely from heaven, is it not?
J.T. He said, "Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?" (@1 Corinthians 9:1). He saw Him. We know historically that he did at different places; and the Lord is asserting in all that, that He has rights, and that we must not question them. So in coming back to our chapter, that is to stress the substantiality of it, and what is in the second letter, particularly what is stressed in the third chapter we have read, because it leads up to the thought of our being changed, that we are capable of being changed. Even the Lord Himself takes the ground of capability of being changed. What I am saying may be just an open question in the minds of many that are listening to it, and therefore one would be thankful if the brethren would say what they think, because it is very important we should have these things before us now as we are drawing near to the end, and the Lord is about to come, and we should be ready for His coming.
P.A.H. Does a change in the Lord as in relation to the service of God imply a change in us correspondingly?
J.T. Well, when I say a change in the Lord, I mean He is at liberty to appear in another form, as Mark says, "He appeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and went into the country", @Mark 16:12. And then John tells us that the Lord is seen in judicial garb, as mentioned in the first chapter of the book of Revelation. The assembly is mentioned before He is mentioned. That is to say the assembly is seen, and the Lord in the midst of it.
{174}
So that it is a question of the Lord having the right to appear according to what He wishes, and that the assembly should be free too, that the Lord should be free to call attention to the assembly, even before He is seen there.
J.A.A. When it says, "*Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men", is that what is substantially in the Corinthian saints now that is capable of change?
J.T. I think what the apostle means is that the Corinthians were his letter, and that it was known and read of all men. That is to say, Paul implies that he spoke constantly about the Corinthians, and that they were his letter, because he could speak of them so freely. He was full of the thought of the Corinthian saints. It was a great work, one of his greatest. The Lord spoke to him, "Fear not, ... *I* am with thee, ... I have much people in this city (@Acts 18:10)". And I believe Paul valued the Corinthian epistle, because the Lord had much people there, and it afforded him an opportunity to bring out the various thoughts of the assembly in speaking and writing to them.
R.P. So he makes much of his ministry in the second epistle, in relation to the saints who will take on the ministry.
J.T. Yes, he makes much of them. That is the reason why he begins speaking of them. He says, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of compassions, and God of all encouragement; who encourages us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to encourage those who are in any tribulation whatever, through the encouragement with which we ourselves are encouraged of God", @2 Corinthians 1: 3,4. Then he speaks about the yea and the amen of God's promises being in the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who had been preached by him and those with him. Then in the second
{175}
chapter he says, "Thanks be to God, who always leads us in triumph in the Christ, and makes manifest the odour of his knowledge through us in every place. For we are a sweet odour of Christ to God, in the saved and in those that perish: to the one an odour from death unto death, but to the others an odour from life unto life" (@2 Corinthians 2:14 - 16). That is what I was thinking of. That the odour was in Paul, but then he links them up with him, and speaks approvingly of them in the later chapters. One is hardly able to go into the details, there is not time, but I think it is important to have these things before us, in order that we may have the Lord's supper rightly before us, and see how the second letter opens up the thing substantially, so that we should now have it substantially as we partake of it.
W.J.B. Does the reference to "looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face", indicate the fact that the truth is opened to us so that we are at home in His presence?
J.T. I was thinking we would come to that, because it is really the crux of the whole matter, this third chapter. That is what he finishes with: "But *we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". That is to say the Lord is here as a Spirit, the Lord is called a Spirit, and He is transforming us in that capacity. It is a question of the Lord's authority and power in bringing about the transformation, so as to have the truth of the Lord's supper substantially amongst us.
J.M. Is this to stimulate our hearts so as to enable us to move forward in all that which is so transcending? The ministry of condemnation was introduced with glory, but this ministry subsists in glory.
{176}
J.T. Yes, the first ministration, of glory, of course, is alluded to in the book of Exodus, but the apostle is showing here that the real thing is now what he had. It was a question of the Holy Spirit, and the Lord Himself is viewed as a Spirit. He is called "the Lord the Spirit", and He does the transforming. It has often been referred to as a metamorphosis, a real transformation, a change in the state of the saints through this ministry.
J.McN. Is it the idea of our being transformed as we behold the Lord in His movement from glory to glory in the service?
J.T. That is right; that is what I understand, and that is the reason why I have endeavoured to bring out that it is a real matter, it is a real change that comes about in the saints.
P.A.H. Would Mary illustrate this, in that she turned round? The Lord was indicating an ascending line, and a change in Him in a sense is reflected in Mary, she turned right round. There was a change in her.
J.T. Very good. When He called her "Mary".
C.G.McC. Would you help us with regard to the first few words in that verse: "*We* all"? What is covered by that?
J.T. That is to say the application of the truth here is universal. Although he is speaking directly to the Corinthians, the application of the truth is universal, and it ought to work out in our first days, that is, the beginning of every week, as the Lord's supper is celebrated; it is a question of whether we are ready for the change.
W.J.B. The veil being upon our hearts would hinder us entering into these things. "When Moses is read", it says, "the veil lies upon their heart". We need that veil to be removed to come into the light of things.
J.T. That is, we need to come into 1 Corinthians
{177}
instead of remaining in Exodus. We have to learn to be in the anti-typical part of Scripture, to deal with Scripture anti-typically, and so pass on from Exodus, or whatever it be that is involved, to the actual thing which the apostle Paul is ministering.
E.N.J. This expression in verse 18, "are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory", there is no limit to that?
J.T. That is what I would say. There is no limit from glory to glory; therefore we begin with the Lord's supper. We come together, we leave our houses and come together; and the first thought in our minds would be to get into touch with one another, because we need to be changed, and if we are to be changed, to be ready for the change, that is, changeable. The Lord Himself takes that ground, and so the thought is that we are to learn to be capable of change, because we shall be, when He comes for us; and now the thing is to learn to be capable of change in a moral sense, and thus fit for the assembly, and the assembly service.
R.P. That is what we see in Stephen. There was a change with him.
J.T. Very good; I am sure it is intended for that. I was thinking of the two men that are mentioned, Stephen and Philip. How ready they were, after their appointment to the deaconship, for greater things, for purchasing to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith! They were ready for that.
R.P. Do we see in Paul things worked out in a substantial way? The thing was found in expression in himself.
J.T. He evidently made much of the Corinthians. He would say, 'I would like you to understand the wonderful work that is going on in Corinth'. One is sometimes mindful to say the same thing as to the wonderful work going on here in Australia. Not that
{178}
one would occupy the saints with themselves, but it is right to take account of what God is doing. We will presently be saying, "What hath God wrought!" But what is He doing? What is the character of His work? There is a wonderful work here, only the enemy is endeavouring to spoil it, but the Lord is endeavouring to help us to overcome by suffering.
R.P. Your suggestion is that Paul felt death was rolled in on him. He said, "We ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not have our trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead; who has delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver", (@2 Corinthians 1: 9,10).
J.T. Just so, and that we might be able to encourage those who are in any tribulation whatever. He had gone through things, and he would be able to encourage any here in suffering.
A.M. Is the reference to the Spirit quickening important? Do we perhaps overlook His service, and not make room for it sufficiently? I am inquiring as to how all of us might move into this more intelligently, and make room for the service of the Spirit in this quickening way, which obviously involves a change, does it not?
J.T. It does. So if we look at the chapter again we shall see. Verse 5, "Our competency is of God; who has also made us competent, as ministers of the new covenant; not of letter, but of spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit quickens". You mean that? The quickening power of the Spirit is current all the time in order to complete the assembly.
R.G.W. Whilst there is a special opportunity for this on the Lord's day, is this a matter that goes on continually as we come into the condition of soul for it?
J.T. Well, I would think so, but the first day of the week is so important. The idea of time, too, comes up now at this point. We have the idea of
{179}
time. God Himself made time, and He made it for Himself, and was content to stop at seven. He made the first day, the second day, and so forth, up to the seventh. Then we have later the idea of weeks, and the idea of weeks introduces the thought of the assembly. I believe the assembly is worked out in weeks. As regards Israel it was more the new moons, or the months; whereas now the thought is weeks, and hence the first day of the week is of prime importance. Then the second day of the week is the prayer meeting, and so forth. We can easily see how the Spirit of God is working on the principle of time, and affording us time, because we need it. We cannot always be working with our hands, we need rest, and we need to take our sabbaths, and so the idea of sabbath keeping is very largely seen in the history of Israel. More than one-fourth of their time was devoted to sabbath keeping, and that, in the spiritual sense, is so needful now; that we might be able to enter into assembly service, and rise up to the thought of Ephesian change, being raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus. That is the thing that should be always before us, the idea of going from glory to glory, and rising all the time.
J.M. So would you say that this chapter is to draw attention to the greatness of the present moment, that everything that went before is now exceeded, and we are touching that which is marked by surpassing glory?
J.T. Exactly. It is not a question of time only, but a question of persons, of course. We have Moses, and David, and the prophets, in the Old Testament; but as regards persons we have come to the greatest time, the Lord Himself, of course, being unique and outside of it all, but as to persons, it is a time of great persons; and Paul was pre-eminently characteristic in this sense, there was none like him.
{180}
J.M. Has it in view the thought of persons being changed from glory to glory?
J.T. That is the idea. You get it in Paul, and you get it in John, and of the Lord Himself it is said that He was transfigured, and His countenance changed. Peter went up to the house-top to pray, and an ecstasy came upon him. Well, these things are written to us to show what the dispensation involves, so that we might have some little thought of it.
C.G.McC. The Lord says to the woman, "The Father seeks such as his worshippers", (@John 4:23). Is that the thought?
J.T. That is it. Of course, worship itself does not need change, it is an attitude. But what we are talking about, the actual change that is possible even with the saints, and that the Lord Himself comes into actual change, is of great importance to have in our minds. And so as to Peter, according to the Acts he went up to pray. That is what he went to do, but an ecstasy came upon him as he prayed. Well, why should that be? Is it not to show us the greatness of the dispensation?
P.A.H. Referring to the thought of change as bearing on the service of God, there is a certain glory connected with the apprehension of what we are as kindred to Christ, and what the assembly is in relation to Christ, and then as to sonship. All that involves the taking on of change.
J.T. Some day it is going to be real. We talk about the Lord's coming, and it is going to be real some day, it must not always be a thing in the future. There must be some expectation of it actually happening.
B.G.W. When you speak of Paul in regard to change, are you referring to his going to the third heaven?
J.T. There is an illustration of it. He said 'I do not know whether I was in the body or out of the
{181}
body'. That is a remarkable thing. Then he adds, "God knows". Well, putting all these things together, the question is whether we are real in our expectations as to the Lord's coming, and are ready to be changed at any moment, and whether we are aiming at the change in the service of God that is open to us on every first day of the week.
P.A.H. Our experiences on the Lord's day morning would be in view of preparing us for the actual change.
J.T. I think that is the idea. The Lord is saying, 'I am making you ready'. We have that principle in the very opening of the subject of the Lord's supper. Peter and John were to go and make things ready.
R.C.McC. So in the practical side of it, should we be ready at any particular meeting to move together, that we might be ready to be changed together with our brethren?
J.T. Therefore, it is a question of the whole of the saints on earth; that is the full thought that belongs to our position, and that we are all going together. We are all going up together, and that is sure to come. It is not to be merely talked of for ever and ever, but it is sure to come, and the Lord is aiming at our being ready for it.
E.N.J. In connection with this matter of being ready for change, I would suggest that in Abigail there was no hesitancy. She did not in any way hesitate when David sent for her and communed with her to take her to be his wife.
J.T. She was ready. That is very good, and so was Rebecca; she said, "I will go".
W.L.W. Do upper room conditions afford opportunity for the experience of change? "Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord", (@John 20:20). Is that what we have substantially here, "The Lord is the Spirit", and "*we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed
{182}
according to the same image from glory to glory"? There is liberty. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". The saints are in liberty from that moment onwards.
J.T. Very good. One wonders as to how much we are taking in of what we are talking about. The Lord's promise is a certainty, and it is going to happen. We are not going to be talking about it for ever and ever. The thing is to happen, and the Lord means that we are to expect it to happen, and be ready for it.
R.P. <blockquote>'E'en now we taste the love, <br> And know the mighty power, <br> By which we'll rise to realms above <br> When waiting time is o'er'. (`225:4)</blockquote>
J.T. Very good. Paul is the example of all these things, as Moses was the example God used to make everything ready in view of His service. Everything was made ready, according to Exodus. When the time came everything was ready, and even Moses himself was not equal to the thing that was in the mind of God (@Exodus 40:35).
J.M. So the apostle says in verse 12, "Having therefore such hope, we use much boldness". Would that connect with the apostle so boldly and in liberty saying, "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face", and would we get in principle there the transformation?
J.T. It is in the present tense. "*We* all" is emphatic. It is a universal thought. Of course, we may say he is speaking to the Corinthians, but by extension it is a universal thought. "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". It says we are transformed.
R.P. Will you help us with regard to the remark,
{183}
"The Lord the Spirit"? Is the Lord functioning in that capacity?
J.T. That is just what I mean. The Lord is here seen as the Spirit. He is in authority, He is not giving that up, but He is seen as a Spirit, showing how divine Persons can act freely and quickly according to Their pleasure.
R.G.W. It says, "Looking on the glory of the Lord"; not on the Lord, but on the glory of the Lord. What does that convey to us?
J.T. It is a question, I would think, of the Lord in this capacity; what glory He has in dealing with His people, how He can transform them. It is a question of what He is capable of in His love for His people, to change them at once from glory to glory.
R.P. Paul makes a point that his ministry was the result of being in living touch with Christ in glory and taking on glory.
J.T. Quite so.
W.L.W. Were Moses and Aaron and the seventy elders, in type prepared for change when they went up to the mountain and saw God? Change takes place, and it says, "they saw God, and ate and drank", (@Exodus 24:11). They were in accord with the position. They saw the God of Israel.
J.T. Quite so; that is to say they remained as men and saw God. The whole position was glorious, but they retained their human position and state. They were not changed so far as I see, but they saw the God of Israel.
C.G.McC. Would you help us as to the words "according to the same image"?
J.T. I think it means that we are all made alike. I suppose that is the way it will be in the glory. Christ will be the firstborn among many brethren.
E.N.J. I suppose there is but one pattern before God, and that is Christ. All must be conformed to that same image.
{184}
J.T. That is what I was endeavouring to say about Moses. He had the pattern, not patterns. What is to be effected is one idea, and so here it is all one idea. It is a question of sameness. We are all transformed into the same image, but it is from glory to glory. It is incessant.
C.G.McC. Being transformed into the same image involves the thought of countenance. I was thinking of the Song of Songs, where the Lord says, "Let me see thy countenance (@Song of Songs 2:14)". Would He see a change in countenance?
J.T. Very good. You get it in the second book of Psalms, the health of God's countenance; that is to say God's countenance implies health to us, and then our countenance, the health of my countenance (@Psalm 42:5,11). Health is the idea there, and here is a similar thought, that is to say, it is freshness, so that we do not need to be stale or old-looking. We retain our freshness at all times.
P.R.P. Does all this begin with the acceptance of the wilderness position?
J.T. You mean the acceptance of the wilderness position is implied in the letters to the Corinthians?
P.R.P. I was thinking of what was referred to earlier as to the Lord taking account of the sufferings of His people. Is it as we accept that position that the Lord can take us on?
J.T. Quite. We accept the wilderness, but He is intimating to us that we are going to the land. And so He says He has spied out the land for us (@Ezekiel 20:6). Moses saw it at a distance, and then they were going there; hence, as they go across the Jordan, they have the old corn of the land; that is to say, it is reached in fulness because the land had yielded the year before. There was plenty.
{185}
PRACTICAL CHRISTIANITY
@2 Corinthians 4:1 - 18
J.T. In these general meetings 1 Corinthians usually opens up to us the truth of the Lord's supper, which issues in the service of God generally, and very often practical Christianity is ignored. That is to say, Christianity that involves everyday life, family life, business life, sickness and death, all of which are of great import in Christianity; so it occurred to me that we needed help in the truth of the preaching of the gospel, involving everyday life. The subject in hand is not finished at the end of @2 Corinthians 3, we should come on to chapter 4, because it is a question of the gospel, and what immediately flows out of the gospel testimony as to our lives. Paul says, "Therefore, having this ministry"; that is to say, the ministry of the gospel, "as we have had mercy shewn us, we faint not. But we have rejected the hidden things of shame, not walking in deceit, nor falsifying the word of God, but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every conscience of men before God. But if also our gospel is veiled, it is veiled in those that are lost; in whom the god of this world has blinded the thoughts of the unbelieving, so that the radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God, should not shine forth for them", @2 Corinthians 4:1 - 4. After the third chapter, which is usually taken up as entering into the Lord's supper, we have this passage in the fourth, which alludes directly to the gospel.
P.A.H. Would you say then, that the effect of the glory is seen in our walk here, as commending the gospel practically?
J.T. Just so, in our walk; and then if it be our sickness or our death even (we are led on to the
{186}
thought of these very solemn, facts), are we ready for them?
E.N.J. The previous chapter we have already referred to may help here. "But our competency is of God; who has also made us competent, as ministers of the new covenant", @2 Corinthians 3:5,6 and so on.
J.T. The thought of the new covenant is found in the first epistle in connection with the Lord's supper, and usually it is treated as the outcome of the Lord's supper, because we usually regard the new covenant as entering into the emblems involved in the Lord's supper, whereas here in chapter 4, the gospel is immediately in mind.
L.P.M. Has the reference to "earthen vessels" some important relation, to the section? "We have this treasure in earthen vessels".
J.T. Meaning vessels that are breakable, or fragile, of which we are all painfully aware, or should be. The thought does not really belong to the Lord's supper; it belongs to ordinary life, although the gospel is involved too. The truth we are dealing with will lead us into chapter 5, which refers to our manifestation before the judgment-seat of Christ.
P.R.P. Have you in mind that substance for the service of God is gained in our wilderness pathway here?
J.T. Well, it is. It is linked up with it, only that we are so prone to be diverted to the matters that treat of the service of God only, whereas other things are in mind too, that involve our sickness and our death, our departure to be with Christ. The question raised is whether these great facts are sufficiently in mind.
J.M. Do you mean that everything in our lives here is to be made subservient to the shining of this light which God has put in earthen vessels?
J.T. Yes. The reference being to @Genesis 1 where God caused the light to shine, the allusion is
{187}
to what God brought in. He *commanded* that light should shine. It is a question of just what is needed in the sense of light.
A.M. In Gideon's time the vessels had to be broken for the light to shine.
J.T. It is alluded to directly here.
A.M. Does that bear upon the death of the believer, the great end of God's ways in that way?
J.T. It bears on the facts that are dealt with in Gideon's time, how the reduction of those that were engaged in the service was made from thirty-two thousand to three hundred -- a most important matter. The allusion here is to that. The vessels were breakable, they were fragile, but the point is the light was in them.
A.M. I was wondering about the reference that "death works in us", as if Paul would sympathise with Gideon in that sense.
J.T. Just so. "But life in you"; that is, life in the Corinthians; but in order to reach that, death had to be wrought out in Paul. It would be similar to the experience of Gideon in dealing with the Midianites. It was a question of dealing with the enemy, and how the enemy should be met.
L.P.M. "That the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh". Is that in mind?
J.T. That is the idea. What is mortal, what is liable to death. It is not a question of what is capable of resurrection, but what is liable to death. Mortal means liable to death.
E.N.J. Gideon was able to say to them, "As I do, so shall ye do (@Judges 7:17)". Would that indicate that the Lord is supreme? Gideon, I take it, is a type of the Lord, but He is supreme in this matter of suffering for the sake of the gospel.
J.T. Just so. But He is supreme in the matter of death in regard to the saints, too, who are all liable to death, which is a most solemn thing. We
{188}
know that some may not die; that those of us who are alive and remain will not die; at the same time, generally speaking, we are all liable to death.
A.M. Is the acceptance of death a great moral feature in relation to the service of God? I was thinking of "Who shall deliver me out of this body of death? I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law", (@Romans 7:24,25). Does that underlie the exercise the apostle reaches here?
J.T. Quite so, "but with the flesh sin's law (@Romans 7:25)". And that leads up to the Spirit. Eighteen times or so the Spirit is mentioned in the eighth chapter of Romans. It is a question of the Spirit, but then there are these facts that are mentioned in this passage, and every one of us, old and young, has to do with them. Are we ready for them? Not only ready for the service of God -- they will work out in the service of God -- but are we ready for these things that are mentioned here?
P.A.H. Would you say a little more as to the bearing of these things on the gospel?
J.T. It is a question of the things themselves, the actual things that each of us has to deal with, that is to say, we are subject to death, and we have mortal bodies. We have bodies that are liable to death. They may not die, but they are liable to death, and the liability has to be faced.
J.M. So the apostle was not hindered in any manner by the things that are seen, but looked on to eternal things.
J.T. That is right, and the chapter ends with the most glorious hope. At the same time the actual facts that I mentioned are not ignored or hidden; there is the actual possibility of death at any moment.
L.P.M. Reference to day by day seems to limit it to a condition that is liable to be interrupted. Verse 16 reads. "Wherefore we faint not: but if
{189}
indeed, our outward man is consumed, yet the inward is renewed day by day". Does that suggest the temporary conditions in which we are found, all liable to interruption?
J.T. That is right; temporary, and so in chapter 5 we are in tabernacle conditions, which is also a temporary idea. I hope the brethren will get at the truth as to the working out of the gospel in every person's life and existence down here, and how the uncertainty of everything ought to affect us and make us real and serious, and fearful too, because the idea of fearfulness is involved in all this.
R.G.W. Do you include the gospel in the term "the service of God"?
J.T. Yes, but then what about death? What about your child that might die, or the person who is very old and may die at any moment? Is there readiness for all these things? I think these are very practical things that ought to enter into our minds and make us real as to them.
C.E.J. Is that what is meant in the verse, "nor falsifying the word of God, but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every conscience of men before God"?
J.T. Just so; everyday life, every conscience of men.
J.McN. Is the idea that the life of Christ should shine out in our everyday history, even as we are in the sense of acceptance in Christ before God?
J.T. Yes, the light should shine, but then see all the eventualities that are to be faced in all the members of the family, and in all the brethren in the meeting, and so forth, which God has prepared for in the gospel. Are we utilising what He has prepared, so that we are ready at any time, as the word is, "Be ye also ready" (@Matthew 24:44)?
L.P.M. So that the reference to the dying of Jesus seems to spread a lustre over all these matters.
{190}
J.T. Yes, and then, "Death works in us, but life in you". That is to say, one brother is ready to accept death in order that all the others should be living. It is a practical matter. If we are sick (it may not be sick unto death, but it may be), what effect has it?
C.P. And all these temporary afflictions work out in us an eternal weight of glory.
J.T. Well, that is what it says, but they are called light afflictions. Verse 17 says, "For our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen are for a time, but those that are not seen eternal". Now, am I affected by all that? Am I living in the light of eternity, or am I living only in the light of time?
A.E.D. By the use of the word "always", Paul shows how constantly the thing was there with him. "Always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body; for we who live are always delivered unto death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh".
J.T. Yes, I am glad you brought that in. The first mention of a subject like this helps us and carries us through to the end, because there is an end in chapter 4. There is an end in chapter 3, and there will be an end in chapter 5 if the Lord spares us to come to it.
C.E.J. Would Paul and Silas in the prison at Philippi illustrate what is in your mind?
J.T. Yes, it shows they were equal to carrying on the service of God at any time under the most trying circumstances, so that in prayer they sang praises to God. They were not mournful because of prison conditions, they were ready for the greatest things, the service of God.
J.M. Would verses 8 to 11 bring before us the
{191}
range of things which would militate against us here, but in spite of all, the light is to continue shining out from us?
J.T. Yes, the light is to continue shining out, because God called the light Day, not indeed that there was not to be darkness, because there is, but the light is the principal thought. "God called the light Day", (@Genesis 1:5).
A.M. Are verses 8 to 11 the expression of this great thought of the surpassing power of God working out in the believer's life here?
J.T. Quite so. "Every way afflicted, but not straitened; seeing no apparent issue, but our way not entirely shut up; persecuted, but not abandoned; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus", and the end in view is, "that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body". That is to say, it is not merely life, but the life of Jesus, which I suppose would be what marked Him down here. All that is worked out in these things; it is worked out in spite of these things that are liable to happen, and we are able to go on and manifest the life of Jesus.
F.R.G. What is involved for us in always bearing about in the body the putting to death of Jesus?
J.T. I think when the Lord went down from the mount of transfiguration, He had that in mind. He was going down to die, deliberately going down to die, showing that He is expecting a thing. It is the putting to death of Jesus. He knew it would happen, and warned the disciples of it.
L.P.M. Are we in everyday life to take on this outlook and habit that we are to bear about in the body the dying of Jesus?
J.T. That is the idea, I am sure. If we think of what the Lord did, though He did not avoid anything, He did hide Himself at times. He did not throw
{192}
Himself into the way of danger, but still He would take it if the testimony required that He should.
E.N.J. There is the principle of one dying for the people. Should that be with us each individually day by day?
J.T. Just so: like Esther. Mordecai put it on her, and reminded her that she may have come into prominence for that very purpose, to go in to the king, and she took her life in her hand. That was the same principle.
D.H.B. Have you in mind that these thoughts would lighten the sufferings which we are called upon to face in an individual way?
J.T. I think so; they would make them light and bearable. We ought not to magnify them unduly so as to scare people. We are to treat them according to what they really are in the mind of God as possible happenings; so the Lord says, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give to thee the crown of life", (@Revelation 2:10). The Lord would encourage the brethren in Smyrna to accept death. It was the time of great persecutions, at least ten, in the early days of the assembly, and the Lord urged them to accept death. He said, "Fear not those who kill the body and after this have no more that they can do", (@Luke 12:4). That is how the Lord met all, and encouraged the saints to meet it; and I think there is a reason for us to learn to do that now, because of so many things pressing in upon us by the world, the industrial world, and the social world. Anything of that kind is liable to happen, and the Lord may order it or allow it, so that it is a question of being ready, and the gospel encourages us to be ready, and gives us the means of being ready.
C.G.McC. Are we to be ready to pass through these experiences so that the surpassingness of the power may be of God, but manifested to us, and in us?
{193}
J.T. Quite so, and to make us independent of human resource, and superior to death, superior to the most terrible sufferings even if they come. The point in that verse is that we have this treasure in earthen vessels; that is to say, we have the truth; without making any pretension, the saints have it in principle, and they have it in earthen vessels; that is to say, in breakable, fragile vessels, and we know they are fragile, and that they are liable to death, but the excellency of the power is to be brought out through that; that is the way it works.
A.E.D. Is there a need of resoluteness on this line? The Lord steadfastly set His face to go to Jerusalem.
J.T. Just so.
E.N.J. You have referred to ten days; have you in mind, "Fear nothing of what thou art about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about to cast of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give to thee the crown of life", (@Revelation 2:10)?
J.T. The Lord is very definite about it. The ten days were the ten persecutions that are well known in the history of the assembly, and the Lord is telling the brethren about it, so that they should be ready, and ready in the sense of being faithful, even unto death. A very good word for us at the present time in this city.
P.R.P. Are you thinking of Stephen in this regard?
J.T. Well, he was the first martyr spoken of in Christianity. Paul calls him the Lord's martyr. So that he has that honour of being the first who died for the truth in our times, because it is our dispensation.
D.H.B. Is it important to get hold of the fact that he died for the truth?
J.T. That is it, and died most unfairly; but he put himself into the matter, because he loved the
{194}
truth. He was not taken on to be anything else than a deacon, which was a very modified service, but he went further, and purchased to himself a good degree, and great boldness in the faith. He had boldness, and died in that boldness as a martyr. "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit", (@Acts 7:59) he says.
E.N.J. These persecutions that are allowed to come upon us are not intended to hinder the testimony in any way, but that it might shine more brightly in the preaching of the gospel.
J.T. That is so, because God causes the light to shine, and He is ready for it. If we are ready, He will use us; He needs instruments, and Stephen was the instrument at that time, and now it may be any one of us, and it is for that that we are to be ready.
P.R.P. It says, "They were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he spoke", (@Acts 6:10).
J.T. So that he was an excellent divine choice at the time. The enemy was utterly defeated in a man like Stephen coming to the front.
J.McN. In chapter 3 the apostle speaks of the surpassingness of the glory; in chapter 4 it is the surpassingness of the power; is that to enable us to allow the surpassingness of the glory in chapter 3 to shine out in our lives here?
J.T. Yes, and then chapter 4, that the surpassingness of the power may be of God, that whatever gospel there may be, it is attributable to God.
L.P.M. So that the stress, in contrast to that, is on the earthen vessel; the power is of God, but the vessel is earthen. "We have this treasure in earthen vessels".
J.T. The word "earthen" would mean it is breakable. It is not stone, or metal, or iron, it is earthen, and the word would allude to what we are as in our present condition.
R.G.W. Does this indicate that we are not to
{195}
hold the light just for ourselves, it is to shine forth?
J.T. Just so, and that it might be attributed to God -- that God is honoured in it.
C.E.J. Would you say a word as to verse 13? "*We* also believe, therefore also we speak".
J.T. "And having the same spirit of faith, according to what is written, I have believed, therefore have I spoken"; so that it would be a question of what we say. We are ready to speak if necessary; there is good cause for it. Many times we speak just for the sake of speaking, but there is good cause for it here. The apostle says, "I have believed, therefore have I spoken". That was the ground he took himself. Why am I speaking? Because I believe, not because I can give a good address or a good gospel, but it is a question of faith. Am I speaking on the principle of faith? I can hardly speak of anything more important, especially in these meetings.
C.W. Would James¬ epistle encourage one in that, that he is able to save a soul from death and cover a multitude of sins?
J.T. Showing that we can save each other from death at times. He saves his brother, and covers a multitude of sins, which is a very important thing. Because there is too much sin exposed, and the more we can cover according to God, the better. Covering sin according to God is what is effected through redemption.
A.M. Why does it say, "having the same spirit"?
J.T. Well, it would be an allusion to the quotation from @Psalm 116, and Paul says he has the same spirit as the psalmist.
A.M. I wondered if he links himself up with the saints and what they are going through, in that sense.
J.T. Well, he is speaking about what he is quoting, that he has the same spirit of faith as in the quotation; and so he shows how the truth stood which he was
{196}
working Out in what he was saying, "*We* also believe, therefore also we speak".
A.M. The verse quoted is, "I believed, therefore have I spoken. As for me, I was greatly afflicted", and so on. It is the same affliction, is it not?
J.T. I was just going to remark on that. It is a quotation from @Psalm 116, showing how we can use scripture in the ministry. We get examples from Paul and others how to use it.
R.C.McC. Is the Lord the great example for us? I was thinking of @Isaiah 53:11: "By his knowledge shall my righteous servant instruct many in righteousness". Is that practical knowledge entered into by the Lord?
J.T. I would think so; showing how our knowledge is treated, and what use it can be turned to.
R.C.McC. By that knowledge here the Lord turns many to righteousness. Is that your thought in the gospel?
J.T. Just so, how knowledge can be used. If it turns many to righteousness, certainly it is used well.
P.B.P. Do you think this matter of faith is important as having to say to men? You have indicated something on that line as to the matter of the gospel, that is, we speak what we believe. We do not really speak what others have told us, but what we have entered into ourselves.
J.T. Very good. It is what we believe. It is a question of faith. As the Lord says, "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" (@Matthew 14:31).
A.E.D. Does it shine out in Paul's word to Agrippa, and the way he availed himself of that opportunity before the authorities when he was permitted to speak for himself, and then he goes on and the light is shining in all its brilliancy?
J.T. Quite so, and how many he turned to righteousness! Another illustration is the man in @John 9:21 His parents say, "*He* is of age: ask *him* ,
{197}
*he* will speak concerning himself". That is a good word, too.
L.P.M. At the end the Lord stood with Paul, and all the nations heard. He is going on this line to the very end. At his first defence no one stood with him, but the Lord stood with him.
J.T. And the Lord stood with the man in @John 9. He heard they had cast him out and found him and says to him, "Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God? @John 9:35" The "Thou" is emphasised, as if to say, the Lord is very interested in the man. And he says, "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him? @John 9:36" as if to say, 'I am perfectly ready to believe on Him, if I only knew Him'. "And Jesus said to him, Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he. And he said, I believe, Lord: and he did him homage" @John 9:37,38. That is the great end in the speaking.
E.N.J. Would it be appropriate to ask here for a little help as to verse 17, in connection with "in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory"? The positive side is brought in there.
J.T. It is a most remarkable passage. "Wherefore we faint not"; that is another thing. He mentions it twice in the chapter, the idea of fainting. Gideon was faint yet pursuing, and so Paul pursued. So here, "For our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory". Marvellous sentence! That is to say, God turns the affliction to account for us in an eternal weight of glory. It would be hard to get a sentence so full of weight and encouragement as this. "Works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory".
E.N.J. The weight of glory would be something different from what might be seen outwardly. It is there in a solid way.
J.T. Quite so. It could hardly be avoirdupois weight; it is what is weighty in a moral sense.
{198}
R.G. Does it help us in getting a right valuation of things that are temporal in contrast to what is eternal?
J.T. Just so. Here we are not thinking of what is temporal, or what passes away; it is eternal in its character and weight. We often use the expression, 'It does not weigh with me', but the point here is that what we are enduring weighs in eternity to our credit.
P.B.P. Would the realisation that what we are contending for is something of an eternal character, be a great encouragement to us to go through?
J.T. And the affliction is not only momentary, but it is light; but the result is weighty and will be to our credit eternally.
P.A.H. Really working out to a weight of eternal consequence.
A.M. Do we need therefore to have this quality of faith like Abraham's, and then faith as to resurrection, the power of God to raise the dead? Does that enter into this?
J.T. Just so. It eventuates in resurrection.
A.M. It says in verse 14, "knowing that he who has raised the Lord Jesus shall raise us also with Jesus, and shall present us with you".
J.T. It is a question of faith, and what faith eventuates in; that is righteousness. But we have more here. In @Genesis 15:6 it says, Abraham "believed Jehovah; and he reckoned it to him as righteousness". But what we get here eventuates in resurrection, not simply righteousness, but resurrection.
{199}
FACING DEATH
@2 Corinthians 5:1 - 21
J.T. The brethren will be aware that what is in mind in chapter 5 at the outset, is the actual article of death; that is, the dissolution of the body; and in view of what we have had this afternoon, no doubt the brethren will recognise the importance of facing this matter, although we have the promise of the Lord that He is coming for us, and encouragement to us to love His appearing, not His coming, but His appearing. Yet as we have remarked today already, we are all liable to death; those of us who are alive now are liable to death, and therefore it is clear that the Lord would have us in readiness, as it is said, "Be ye also ready (@Matthew 24:44)". No doubt we have observed the suggestion in several places in these epistles, of the apostle having been written to for information, and therefore we are encouraged to ask for information if it be available. So here he indicates his readiness to extend information when needed. So he says, "We know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens"; the allusion being to the believer's body, and the possibility of it being destroyed, and hence our wisdom to be ready for such an emergency, such a solemn event, for it is certain that we shall either be changed into conformity to Christ's body of glory, or we shall die first, and therefore shall have to be raised.
J.M. Is the body here regarded as being a hindrance? "In this we groan".
J.T. Just so; it is a hindrance, but intended doubtless to be discipline to us, which we do not always wish but undoubtedly the condition of our bodies becomes a discipline to us.
{200}
J.M. I was thinking of, 'If it be destroyed'. Is that from God's side?
J.T. Yes, in that sense. It is a rough thought, but a very solemn one. I suppose more properly the word "dissolved" might cover it, but the word 'destroyed' is rather strong and intended to be that.
E.N.J. Would you say a word as to "we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens"? What is the force of "not made with hands"?
J.T. Well, it would come from heaven, but not, as it were, let down visibly, but as we are formed spiritually, we shall be formed physically. We are formed spiritually already, as having the Holy Spirit, but this allusion would be to being formed bodily.
L.P.M. So that the word, "Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God", means spiritual formation now? He has given to us the earnest of the Spirit.
J.T. Yes, the formation now is spiritual: "He that has wrought us for this very thing is God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit". That is, He has wrought us, or formed us, with a view to our bodily formation.
E.N.J. Do I understand that spiritual formation is one thing, and the house in which it will be housed eternally, another?
J.T. Well, it is not very wise to undertake to differentiate or distinguish between the two, because the formation that we receive as we are converted, as we are born anew, and as we come into redemption, is final. That is the preparation that God has made for us. The actual body is the house. It is spoken of in @Romans 8; the word "adoption" is applied to the redemption of our bodies, and we are said to await it.
A.E.D. Is it in contrast to the previous chapter, in which there is disparity between the earthen vessel
{201}
and what is in it? Whereas what is clothed and the clothing here are in accord.
J.T. Well, they will be in resurrection, because what is alluded to here is resurrection -- "clothed upon". In the meantime all that is left is the identity of the believer, and the formation that attaches to it. It is what is intended or included in the idea of new birth, and all that enters into the thought of redemption, which would be the salvation of our souls, as Peter teaches. In @Romans 8 we have the idea of the redemption or salvation of our bodies as well. The word salvation covers the body, as is seen in @Philippians 3:20,21, so that we can speak rightly of body salvation as well as soul salvation, and what is involved here is body salvation, clothing with a house which is from heaven.
J.A.A. What is the force of the body that we shall receive being out of heaven?
J.T. Well, it is what we get when the Lord comes for us. We are looking for that redemption, and being clothed from heaven. John's epistle says, "If it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is @1 John 3:2". Not as He was, but as He is. And that is what is alluded to in Philippians, we shall be like Him; we shall be clothed with a body like His body of glory; that is the final thought as to salvation. Christ's body of glory is to be the pattern of ours, not what He was here during the forty days, but what He is now.
L.P.M. So that the temporary conditions alluded to in chapter 4 are giving way to a permanent condition of things, are they?
J.T. The temporary condition is what we are here in testimony; that is really what is meant.
L.P.M. So that the allusion in the Revelation to the witnesses prophesying so many days and the allusion here in chapter 4 to "day by day", are connected with the sphere of testimony?
{202}
J.T. Just so. We are in the sphere of testimony here in the body. If we are disembodied we are not in testimony, although with the Lord. I am sure that is important for everybody to see, that it is in our bodies we are in testimony, even in a temporary sense for the moment, and we are left here to be in testimony.
E.T. Is this word 'knowing' important for us to get hold of, that we might be in testimony in buoyancy, not unduly weighed down by sicknesses and so on? In verse 1, "For we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed"; in verse 6, "Therefore we are always confident, and know that while present in the body we are absent from the Lord".
J.T. I suppose the apostle would allude to what he had taught them in chapter 15 of the first epistle, which teaches doctrinally what is in mind here. It is a long chapter, but it tells us that we are sown in weakness, we are raised in power, we are sown a natural body and raised a spiritual body. That is what is alluded to here, that we know. That knowledge is acquired in the first epistle; and therefore we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, that is, if we are going to die, we have a building from God, eternal in the heavens. We are accepting that. If dissolution takes place now, we are hoping for another body, a house; the word "house" referring to our bodies, whether they are dissolved, that is, "our earthly tabernacle house", or whether they are risen, as Christ is, that is, "our house which is from heaven". There is much allusion in Paul's epistles to what he had taught earlier, and these chapters are of this peculiar kind. He had already said much to them, and he is basing this second epistle on what he had said.
F.R.G. What is the point in verse 4, "While yet we do not wish to be unclothed, but clothed"?
{203}
Is it in mind that we would look forward to the Lord's return for us?
J.T. That is right; we do not wish to die, in other words. That is what is in mind, although elsewhere he says it would be better, but he is looking for the resurrection and the glory of Christ coming in. So that this chapter and chapter 4 are intended to greatly encourage our hearts, and it is important for every brother and sister, old and young here, to take it in, so as to be ready for any of these things happening.
A.E.D. In both the first epistle and this chapter Paul uses the words "swallowed up". Would you say something as to that?
J.T. Well, they are strong words, as if, instead of being dead and buried, that is, put into the grave, you are swallowed up by life. "That what is mortal may be swallowed up by life". I would like to hear your further thought about it, for it is a time for all of us to say what we think.
A.E.D. Well, I think we all noticed your comment somewhere, as to the expression about somebody 'passing away'. This is foreign to that.
J.T. I think it is. I never like the expression 'passing away', as meaning somebody has died. Paul says, "To depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better (@Philippians 1:23)". That is a beautiful expression. In this chapter we have the expression "pleased rather to be absent from the body and present with the Lord".
W.J.B. Has the apostle Peter a balanced outlook in relation to this when he says, "I account it right, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance, knowing that the putting off of my tabernacle is speedily to take place, as also our Lord Jesus Christ has manifested to me", @2 Peter 1:13,14?
J.T. Peter had the exceptional advantage of being told that he should actually die, or rather be
{204}
martyred. The Lord had told him that. He does not tell us all; we have to wait and count on Him as to it. But that is what Peter alluded to, actual death, dissolution. He tells us the Lord had showed him that.
P.R.P. Would you mind saying a word as to verse 9. "Wherefore also we are zealous, whether present or absent, to be agreeable to him"?
J.T. It is remarkable that he says that. We will have to go back for that to verse 6. "Therefore we are always confident, and know that while present in the body we are absent from the Lord". The word "present" there refers to our bodies; that is, as we are now sitting here in this hall, every one of us. We are present in the body and absent from the Lord. He is in heaven, and we are here, but then he says, "for we walk by faith, not by sight". We have already had that thought, and it is a question of faith matters, not physical matters, we are dealing with. So it goes on to say, "we are confident, I say, and pleased rather to be absent from the body and present with the Lord". That is to say, if the Lord is pleased to take any one of us, we are pleased too, we are ready for it. We are ready to be with Him. The Lord said to the thief, "To-day shall thou be with me in paradise (@Luke 23:43)". Speaking reverently, the thief and the Lord would both be in disembodied condition, but there is no such condition as to Christ now. He is raised and glorified.
P.R.P. Does it require a suitable body of glory to be fully agreeable to Him?
J.T. I would think that. The apostle proceeds to the full thought of being agreeable to Him in that condition. From other passages we would assume that we shall be creatively agreeable to Him. Everything will be according to new creation, so that we are bound to be suitable to Him.
{205}
P.R.P. The great test is to be agreeable to Him at the present moment.
J.T. That would be the great thought Paul has in mind, that we shall be agreeable to Him while we are down here.
J.McN. Is Paul in the practical enjoyment of this when he says, *"I* am already being poured out, and the time of my release is come. I have combated the good combat, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith", (@2 Timothy 4:6,7)?
J.T. That is what he alludes to. He alludes to dying, to being martyred. No doubt he had that in mind, and it was a pleasure to him; he was not afraid of it, it was a joy to him.
L.P.M. So as you brought before us this afternoon, the necessary balance to the service of God is that this side of things is to be taken account of and maintained.
J.T. Very good.
L.P.M. I thought it would sober us to face the facts we have alluded to, that dissolution awaits us all if the Lord tarries, and an account of our doings in the body will be required by Him of us.
J.T. So that we ought to be ready at any minute: It may be that some will be together at the breaking of bread, or together as we are now; whereas some will not be together, so that we should always be ready.
E.N.J. Has the apostle particularly before him the positive side here? "Wherefore also we are zealous, whether present or absent, to be agreeable to him. For we must all be manifested before the judgment-seat of the Christ, that each may receive the things done in the body, according to those he has done, whether it be good or evil".
J.T. Quite. And what should take place in the interim, that is to say, there is to be an examination of what has been done in the body. We are to appear
{206}
before the judgment-seat of Christ. It is a very real and searching thing, because transactions have to take place; that is to say, the whole history of the person has to come up before God and the Lord. The whole person has to be manifested before the judgment-seat of Christ.
E.N.J. I was wondering if to be agreeable to Him now would be the same thing as the good to be received.
J.T. I suppose the apostle running on to the full thought desires to bring it home to us now, the idea of agreeableness to Christ now; because the creational side will be perfect anyhow. We will be raised in glory; so there will be no question of our not being agreeable to Him then.
L.P.M. Would you say these things "good or evil" apply in a particular way to our place in the testimony, how we deport ourselves and serve the Lord?
J.T. And the whole history of the man and woman, all that is done in the body. That is what makes it so solemn; our whole history will come into review.
A.M. Does not Paul bring out this side of things in connection with the Supper in @1 Corinthians 11? Following what he says as to the Supper, he speaks of how we comport ourselves in relation to that great occasion. The idea of judgment comes into it.
J.T. Very good. "So that whosoever shall eat the bread, or drink the cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty in respect of the body and of the blood of the Lord. But let a man prove himself, and thus eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For the eater and drinker eats and drinks judgment to himself, not distinguishing the body. On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep. But if we judged ourselves, so were we not judged. But being judged, we are
{207}
disciplined of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world", @1 Corinthians 11:27 - 32. How plain that is, and the death of how many is attributable to just that very thing: the way we conduct ourselves, not merely in the world outside, but in the assembly. Because in that chapter it is a question of what happens within. The passage begins at verse 17 and runs on to the end of the chapter.
L.P.M. So that this reference in @2 Corinthians 5 has this matter particularly in mind; our place in the assembly in practical matters, our relations with the saints in all these matters. This passage links with the other passage.
J.T. Therefore @1 Corinthians 11 is so solemn as to the partaking of the Lord's supper, because it is a question of how we view the Lord's supper, and what we are doing in partaking of it. So that we are carefully told to tarry one for another, showing that we are to be respectful and considerate of each other in coming into the meeting.
A.E.D. There is rather a strong word there, "Do ye despise the assembly of God ... ?"
J.T. Yes, one often thinks of that. They ate together, and they had coteries among themselves, special friendships, and had their own seasons together, and they were despising the assembly in all that, hence the apostle says, "Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in?" (@1 Corinthians 11:22) So if we have special social affairs, let it be in our houses, not when we come together in assembly.
F.R.G. Would you tell us how far the matter of judgment goes at the judgment-seat of Christ? We would understand that sin has been finally dealt with before that. Just what is involved at the judgment-seat of Christ, and what is the effect and the end of the judgment there?
J.T. I think if we are accustomed to the way the
{208}
Lord deals with us now in our souls, we shall determine somewhat what is to happen when we appear before the judgment-seat of Christ. He sometimes has to be very stern with us now, and handles us sometimes perhaps severely, and we ought to learn from these facts as to what is likely to be when we appear before Him at His judgment. It is a question of His judgment-seat. It is a judicial matter, not a gracious one. So that we learn how we are to behave before Him now, if we are to understand that time when we appear before His judgment-seat. We are then, of course, clear of everything as to the past, but at the same time all these things done in the body will have to come under review. It is all most serious, because it may happen any time to us. All has to come out. We perhaps hardly ever think of this, but the Lord thinks of it, and He is awaiting the time of manifestation.
A.M. Does the idea of knowing the terror of the Lord, imply the going over things with the Lord in this life?
J.T. I should think knowing the terror of the Lord would refer to His present dealings with us. I should not think the word terror would enter into that time. I do not think the Spirit of God would mean that here. 'Knowing' is the same word as we had in the first verse. We ought to know something of the terror of the Lord when we were unconverted. We know what the Lord is to an unconverted person.
E.N.J. So the early verses of @1 Corinthians 10 would help us as to those who were baptised to Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and whose carcases fell in the wilderness.
J.T. Just so.
R.T. Would you say that the judgment-seat of Christ is somewhat like the first four chapters of the book of Deuteronomy, where Moses goes over the whole history of the children of Israel, neither praising
{209}
nor blaming them, but rather recounting exactly what happened?
J.T. That would be a good inquiry. Those are gracious chapters; they are not like Exodus, and Leviticus, and Numbers. They are Moses¬ own words, Moses¬ own thoughts, Moses¬ own judgments, so that we are having to do with our Moses. He is a gracious Moses, but at the same time He will not fail to recount what is being done that is evil, but with grace. The book of Deuteronomy has to be understood from that point of view. It is a gracious book, because Moses at that time was almost at the end of his life, and is gracious. He was about to be changed himself. He was buried we know, but at the same time, we have to think of the end of his history, and that is, that he appears in the glory with Christ.
F.R.G. Would it be right to connect suffering at all with the judgment-seat of Christ?
J.T. No, I do not think so; that is all over. It is a question of receiving the things done in the body.
J.S.P. Can we anticipate the judgment-seat of Christ now and have our matters settled?
J.T. Well, to a point. What has been read from @1 Corinthians 11 is a point to notice, because we are warned there as to not discerning the body, that we do not know how to discern things at the Lord's supper. It is a real challenge to us as to having to do with the Lord in view of His judgment-seat in the future.
L.P.M. Is all this in view of his ministry later as to reconciliation, and the truth of new creation, that he is preparing the ground in them for it?
J.T. We are coming to the end. We spoke of the end of chapter 4, and of chapter 3, and now we are about to come to the end of chapter 5, and of course, it is a gracious part. In verses 13 - 17 the apostle says,
{210}
"For whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God; or are sober, it is for you. For the love of the Christ constrains us, having judged this: that one died for all, then all have died; and he died for all, that they who live should no longer live to themselves, but to him who died for them and has been raised. So that *we* henceforth know no one according to flesh; but if even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer. So if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold all things have become new". So that when we come to the end of this chapter, we come to new creation, old things passed away and all things become new. We have a grand subject to finish up with in the ending of chapter 5.
E.T. Is the "we" in verse 16 apostolic or general to all the saints? It is emphatic.
J.T. It is the "we" of intelligence or conscience, I would think, in Paul, but very often meaning what is general. So that when the apostle says, "*We* henceforth know no one according to flesh; but if even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer. So if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things have passed away", he is describing a spiritual man, and spirituality in the saints. It may fit anyone who is spiritual.
E.T. I was inquiring that we might get benefit from the reading, and if we are not able to put ourselves alongside him, we might be helped of the Lord to do so.
J.T. That is so. There is such a thing as 'we' of generality, that Paul includes himself with those who are spiritual.
A.M. Would that refer for instance to verse 14, "For the love of the Christ constrains us, having judged this: that one died for all, then all have died". Would he include others with himself as
{211}
having come to a definite judgment under the leverage of the love of Christ?
J.T. That is the same thought exactly.
P.B. Would you say something about verse 13? "Whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God". Can we align ourselves with the apostle in that?
J.T. I think that would be very special, because it is a question of being beside yourself, outside of your ordinary reckonings, as it were, like Peter being in an ecstasy. That is the idea of it, therefore he would not include everybody there; it is very special. He speaks of himself in that way. "Whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God; or are sober, it is for you". He contrasts what he was in God's presence and in the presence of the Corinthians. I was very special; I do not know that we know very much about it now.
A.E.D. Is that more fully developed in reference to the man in Christ later? Is he beside himself there (@2 Corinthians 12:3)?
J.T. That is more special than any. There never was anybody like that, so far as I know. He is the only one spoken of in that sense. What he speaks of in the chapter we have before us is probably experienced by others, but in chapter 12 he says, "Whether in the body or out of the body I know not, God knows (@2 Corinthians 12:3)". That is, nobody knew the state Paul was in at that time except God. Even the apostle himself did not know the state he was in. The things we are speaking of now are extraordinary things, and we do well to think of them, and look into them, and seek the Lord's mind as to them, because it is for us to be in them.
C.E.J. Is the note to "God" in verse 13 profitable in regard to the scripture before us? It says, 'Or for God;' that is, ... for God's glory. But the sense is, I think, 'If he lost the blessed calculations of love which was his path towards men, it was to be
{212}
out of himself with God, and for God;' a blessed alternative. His ecstasy was not excitement or folly, but if out of himself it was with God; if sober, it was the calculation of love for their good.
J.T. It is a question of what you are before the brethren, and then what you are before God, and whether you have known ecstasy; I would say hardly anybody knows about ecstasy now. We might as well accept that we do not, but they did in the early days. Peter did, and Paul refers to it here, and no doubt he was often beside himself for God.
R.G.W. Would the emblems on the table remind us that we know Christ after the flesh no longer, but in His present condition? The thought before us is not of Him when He was here; we shall never know Him in those conditions, but we are to know Him as He is now.
J.T. Quite so; we are entitled to think of Him as He is now, and it is a question of spiritual power to lay hold of it. As we look at the emblems of the Lord's death, that is, His body and His blood, are we able to think of what He is and where He is now in heaven? The emblems in themselves would hardly suggest where He is now.
R.G.W. They would remind us that the condition in which He was was terminated.
J.T. Well, the emblems are of a dead Christ literally. I mean the blood is separated from the body. I would like the brethren to say what they think about that.
R.G.W. I thought the viewing of the emblems would remind us on each occasion of this fact that the life of Jesus as He was here in flesh is forever past.
J.T. Quite.
L.P.M. Would the actual allusion in chapter 5 refer to some who had known Him after the flesh? It says, "If even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer". Is
{213}
that because they had known Him in that condition?
J.T. The truth is that we cannot know Him in that condition; He is not in it and never will be again.
L.P.M. But at the time the apostle wrote, certain were aware of the past, and is the apostle transferring such to this new position?
J.T. Quite so. He will never be in that condition again. He is leading up here to new creation, a new state of things we can come to, but it will only be literally as we are changed as He is.
P.R.P. Is the apostle here seeking to show us that to have part in Christianity vitally we have to come to the end of the first order of man?
J.T. Well, he is meaning that, but he is meaning more than that, because the word is, "For whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God; or are sober, it is for you. For the love of the Christ constrains us, having judged this: that one died for all, then all have died". That is, we are all proved to have been dead in a moral sense by the fact that Christ has died. And then it goes on, "And he died for all, that they who live should no longer live to themselves, but to him who died for them and has been raised". That is the point. "So that *we* henceforth know no one according to flesh; but if even we have known" (note it is 'if even we have known'; the word is objective knowledge -- known objectively) "Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer". The truth is we cannot know Him thus any longer, because He is not in that condition. "So if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation". This is the great deduction, there is new creation. "The old things have passed away; behold all things have become new: and all things are of the God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and given to us the ministry of that reconciliation: how that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself,
{214}
not reckoning to them their offences; and putting in us the word of that reconciliation". What is clearly in mind there is that it is possible to know something about Christ as He is now; but what He was, as to His actual state, He never will be again. It is what He is now, as John says, "we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is @1 John 3:2". And if anybody knew Christ after the flesh, that did not mean that it was applicable then, because He was not in flesh any more.
P.A.H. It also says, "So that *we* henceforth know no one according to flesh". That would be in contrast too. "So if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation".
J.T. Therefore all he says about others is that there is no possibility now of their knowing Christ according to flesh; even if they had thus known Him, there is no possibility of knowing Him thus now, and therefore the conclusion reached is, "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation". It is not 'he is a new creature', but "there is a new creation". There is such a thing as that, and that is the whole point, and we can have part in that.
J.A.A. Is that a present thing for us now?
J.T. Well, it is. It is a question of spiritual power and discernment to be able to lay hold of the thought that you can be with Christ as He is now.
J.A.A. Does the earnest of the Spirit in the end of verse 5 give us that?
J.T. "Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit". That is the power by which we enter these matters.
L.P.M. "Behold all things have become new". So that there is a new system of things existing called new creation.
J.T. Just so. I believe it is the great thing the apostle had in his mind at this point, so we have
{215}
come to a full stop in this subject of new creation, where all things have become new. A wonderful thing too, that persons like ourselves can know something about it.
W.B. I would like to ask if all things having become new could be connected with @Revelation 21:5, "Behold, I make all things new".
J.T. Very good. @Revelation 21 has all that in mind, because the assembly comes down from God out of heaven prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. The whole thing is new.
W.B. He that overcomes shall inherit these things. That is what the apostle is seeking to bring before the saints.
L.P.M. This is a very strong expression is it not? "Behold all things have become new: and all things are of the God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ".
J.T. I would say that is the full stop for us now at this season. We might well linger on it, and take it home with us, and see what part we have in it.
A.E.D. Does it involve the whole system of things, and the work of God in us in that character now?
J.T. It does. That is all in mind, because what we can enter into now is a question of spiritual power. The Holy Spirit is given to us as here in verse 5, "He that has wrought us for this very thing is God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit". The earnest of the Spirit is the power for all these things.
A.M. That is from another point of view. Is the ministry also now the ministry of reconciliation given to Paul, and then later the word of that reconciliation?
J.T. Showing the many things he had given to him, even the ministry of reconciliation and the ministry of the assembly, as if the Lord were making
{216}
a speciality of Paul and putting everything into his hands.
J.S.P. Does that involve everything being new? The preaching of the gospel is in relation to everything that is new. We have a new heaven and a new earth all coming in in that way.
J.T. Well, that has not come yet. What is preached now is what Christ is now, and what we are now; so that we are the vessels of the ministry for the moment, at least some of us, and it is a question of what is going on now, and the conditions in which we are. Chapter 4 helps us in that.
F.R.G. Does reconciliation come in here, because the personality is going through into this new condition?
J.T. You mean our persons. Quite so, we are going through. We are not there yet, but we are looking for it.
{217}
PAUL'S MILITANT MINISTRY
@2 Corinthians 11:31 - 33; @2 Corinthians 12:1 - 10
J.T. We have been dwelling considerably on this epistle as the brethren know, and the thought now is to look at this closing chapter and compare it with what we have had already. From chapter 10 on to the end, we find that the apostle by the Spirit turns to a militant attitude, and we may see as we proceed, why, in passing through much and developing the truth, he changes to a militant attitude, combating evidently something to which the close of the epistle alludes. It had not come out in the earlier stages of the epistle, but as we look into these closing chapters, we shall see that they are militant. The apostle had much to contend for in the truth with the Corinthians, and much, too, to reprove them for.
Chapter 10 begins the militant side of the epistle, and it runs on to the end. The verses read from chapters 11 and 12, it will be observed, begin with a reference to lying. It says, "The God and Father of the Lord Jesus knows -- he who is blessed for ever -- that I do not lie". In saying that himself, he has in mind to say like things about others, and in fact the whole section of this epistle that we have in mind is combating deception; deception either in the saints or in the enemies of the apostle he stresses that he did not lie, he was truthful in all that he said and wrote.
L.P.M. The reference at the beginning of chapter 11 is "As the serpent deceived Eve by his craft @2 Corinthians 11:3". Is that what is working against the ministry in all this section?
J.T. Showing how early the enemy had begun to work, and how it extended on down to Paul's ministry. It is a question of discerning how ministry may turn
{218}
to this phase of the truth for the sake of the protection of it, exposing the evil, and exposing lying.
P.R.P. Are you linking together the militant idea and the idea of deceptiveness?
J.T. Yes, they run together. The militant thought is necessitated by the presence of deception and lying.
P.A.H. In chapter 11 the apostle speaks of false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ. That is the sort of thing the apostle is meeting.
J.T. So he says, "I am jealous as to you with a jealousy which is of God; for I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ. But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent deceived Eve by his craft, so your thoughts should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ @2 Corinthians 11:2,3". He had the whole of the saints at Corinth in mind, when he said he had espoused them to one Man, to present them as a chaste virgin to Christ. That is to say, brothers and sisters alike were included in the reference, showing how the feminine side predominates, or is the main thought in the assembly; Christ being the masculine and the saints themselves the feminine. But there was exposure to evil in all this, because he says, "Lest ... your thoughts should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ. For if indeed he that comes preaches another Jesus, whom we have not preached, or ye get a different Spirit, which ye have not got, or a different glad tidings, which ye have not received, ye might well bear with it @2 Corinthians 11:3,4". The allusion would be to the opposers of the truth taking on what the apostle was saying, which is often to be seen in ministry. Things are taken on because they are said by others, and therefore have weight, but nevertheless there are deceitful allusions, under-currents of evil to baffle the minds of the saints.
{219}
J.A.A. The Lord commends those at Ephesus in the Revelation. He says to them, "Thou hast tried them who say that themselves are apostles and are not, and hast found them liars @Revelation 2:2". They are commended for the militant attitude in trying those and finding them to be liars.
J.T. Quite so. So that very often specious developments of evil are covered by well-known truths, by the ministry of well-known accredited persons, all to work out something that is not the truth; it may be to set up a rival ministry. It is usually covered over so as not to be exposed, and therefore the apostle here alludes to these different things such as "If indeed he that comes preaches another Jesus, whom we have not preached, or ye get a different Spirit, which ye have not got, or a different glad tidings, which ye have not received, ye might well bear with it @2 Corinthians 11:4". But they did not pretend to have anything special. At the same time they had in their minds something hidden deep to bring out as a rival thing. That is what I conceive is to be discerned at the present time with all that has been current in this country, and which the Lord has greatly exposed, and delivered the saints from; but what is needed is to be confirmed in what He has wrought.
C.P. Would the principle of that be seen in those who said *"I* am of Paul, and *I* of Apollos, and *I* of Cephas, and *I* of Christ" (@1 Corinthians 1:12)?
J.T. That is the same sort of thing. Something is hidden, but it is cleverly covered over until the opportune time for developing it.
L.P.M. So that the attack is on the thought of one Man, and a chaste virgin for the one Man.
J.T. And the one Man is Christ; whereas there is usually some other man, a rival man, and perhaps deeply laid thoughts about something to develop in regard to some other man. What is needed is clarity
{220}
of mind, and decided or definite adherence to the truth at all costs.
J.M. So when the apostle says "I lie not", is it countering the whole range of the enemy's activities from Eden right down to this moment?
J.T. Well, you might say that. What he says about the devil's work against Eve would indicate that. He just brings out that specific point as to Eve, because it is a question of the assembly and one Man, and he says "I have espoused you unto one man, ... to Christ". We must adhere to the one Man and to the feminine side in the assembly.
J.McN. Is the enemy seen at his worst on the line of imitation? He began early to imitate.
J.T. Just so.
P.B.P. Alongside of this imitation, is there an attack on those who are standing for the truth? I was thinking of what the apostle says here, "I lie not". He was showing that he was going on with what was right.
J.T. He is asserting that he is truthful in what he is saying himself, but he says a great deal at the same time of the untruthfulness and deception of others. So that there is a need, according to what the apostle says here, to be guarded. All of the brethren need this at the moment, and to be held firmly to the truth, and stand for it.
C.T.McC. Do you suggest that in order that the truth might be preserved, the saints as a whole must be militant in character and not acquiesce in evil? There is a danger of acquiescing in evil.
J.T. I am sure that is right. The whole position is affected, and the apostle turns to those we are speaking of as he touches the tenth chapter, because there was something hidden to be dealt with, but they were ministers of Satan that had been doing it.
P.A.H. He speaks so definitely in chapter 11:12, "But what I do, I will also do, that I may cut off the
{221}
opportunity of those wishing for an opportunity, that wherein they boast they may be found even as we @2 Corinthians 11:12".
J.T. Taking the opportunity away from them and refusing to allow them an advantage.
L.P.M. Does this all involve suffering taken on? The apostle speaks of the tremendous range of sufferings he had gone through. I suppose the only way the position can be met is to be prepared to suffer in standing for the truth.
J.T. That is what is seen in these chapters. He tells us about what he had suffered. You marvel at what he had suffered, and how he could suffer so much. The Lord had said *"I* will shew to him how much he must suffer for my name (@Acts 9:16)". So here he says, "But what I do, I will also do, that I may cut off the opportunity of those wishing for an opportunity, that wherein they boast they may be found even as we. For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ. And it is not wonderful, for Satan himself transforms himself into an angel of light. It is no great thing therefore if his ministers also transform themselves as ministers of righteousness @2 Corinthians 11:12 - 15". So we can see how the enemy will work to gain a point, but all the time have something hidden that in due time he will bring to light.
W.J.B. As to the matter of lying, it is not just untruthfulness in statements, but there is such a thing as a spirit of lying, an element of lying among us if we allow it.
J.T. As the devil attempted with Eve, "Yea, hath God said", (@Genesis 3:1) he said to her, as if to say God had not said it, and it was to deny what God had said.
W.L.J. Should they have had a real judgment as to what the apostle had raised with the Corinthians earlier?
J.T. Well, I would say that there is a definite line of truth in the second letter; it is a second letter,
{222}
and it is to bring out what is omitted in the first letter. Second letters are always to amplify first letters. It is a question of enlarging on the truth, and this had been proceeded with right up to the end of chapter 5, as we have had already. Then we have much else up to chapter 9, especially about the collection, but in chapter 10 the apostle refers immediately to certain things in himself: "I myself, Paul, entreat you by the meekness and gentleness of the Christ, who, as to appearance, when present am mean among you, but absent am bold towards you; but I beseech that present I may not be bold with the confidence with which I think to be daring towards some who think of us as walking according to flesh @2 Corinthians 10:1,2". That is where the apostle clearly shows he is attacking something.
E.N.J. The attack is particularly against the beloved apostle, and he himself is the vessel of the testimony at the time, and the brethren would be following what the apostle was bringing out, and now the enemy is opposing that by means of certain who are prepared to serve him.
J.T. What had been built up in the early chapters, as we have had in the last two or three weeks, is the line of truth that was needed, because it is intended to develop the service of God, to work it out in a practical sense; and then the apostle alludes to himself and to certain things that were there, and then he alludes to what is wrong in others. He says, "I beseech that present I may not be bold with the confidence with which I think to be daring towards some who think of us as walking according to flesh @2 Corinthians 10:2". There were those who assumed that Paul was walking according to flesh. "For walking in flesh we do not war according to flesh. For the arms of our warfare are not fleshly, but powerful according to God to the overthrow of strongholds; overthrowing reasonings and every high thing that lifts itself up against the
{223}
knowledge of God, and leading captive every thought into the obedience of the Christ @2 Corinthians 10:3 - 5". So the conflict is established, and is pursued right through to the end of this epistle.
L.P.M. Are there two positive things that he is making room for in the ministry here? The fact of new creation in chapter 5, and a man in Christ in chapter 12, and the whole attack is encircling such matters.
J.T. That is pretty much what I would say, but then he also takes advantage of the opportunity to speak of the great experience he had above. "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows;) such a one caught up to the third heaven". So that now he is dealing with visions and revelations, but he brings these things in to meet the attack that is being made against the truth. He is asserting that he is not lying in what he is saying, which is a most important thing in our ministry, that we do not turn aside to lying.
E.N.J. Would this give a heavenly character to his ministry, and lift it immediately above those who were operating with an ulterior motive in their hearts?
J.T. Just so.
D.H.B. Did Ananias and Sapphira have in mind an imitation of what Barnabas had done?
J.T. That came in early, of course.
L.P.M. Why does Paul refer to fourteen years ago in this relation?
J.T. It was a secret matter, I would think. God gave him the advantage of a visit to the heavenly places, and he did not make much of it; he did not parade it, but kept it secret for all these years, but he is now bringing it out; the time had come to use it to advantage.
P.R.P. Would you be free to develop this thought
{224}
of warfare in the tenth chapter to which you have already referred? "The arms of our warfare are not fleshly @2 Corinthians 10:4".
J.T. "Powerful according to God to the overthrow of strongholds", @2 Corinthians 10:4 which might be party spirit, brethren bound by special friendships; "overthrowing reasonings and every high thing that lifts itself up against the knowledge of God, and leading captive every thought into the obedience of the Christ; and having in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled @2 Corinthians 10:5,6". That is to show that the Corinthians themselves were not generally clear in matters, and Paul would not proceed until he had them all right, because he doubtless feared that division might arise through these wicked men, so he is waiting on the Corinthians. "Having in readiness to avenge all disobedience" @2 Corinthians 10:6 (whatever it might have been), when their obedience had been fulfilled. He would wait on them. It is a great thing to wait on the brethren, because the enemy is always ready to use companionships or special friendships, if the truth is to be attacked.
P.R.P. It says, "having in readiness to avenge all disobedience @2 Corinthians 10:6". How does that work out in each individual, do you think?
J.T. Well, he referred to vengeance earlier: "but what vengeance". That is, the idea of vengeance entered into the judgment of the wicked man, the incestuous person, so Paul had in readiness to avenge all disobedience in whoever it might be; but he would wait on the Lord's people in Corinth until they were ready. The point is now, if there is anything exposed as evil, let us see to it that we follow the exposure, and do not fall under the power of the evil; refuse companionships and special friendships.
L.P.M. Solomon's couch is protected by swordsmen
{225}
that are expert in war, in case of alarm in the nights. The swordsmen are there in the presence of the most restful conditions. Would you say that, while we live here, the attitude of militancy must be maintained to protect the truth?
J.T. Yes, we must be good soldiers of Jesus Christ, even in attack and defence of the truth, because of the dangers, combinations, and special friendships. When an attack comes to light, be sure to stand by the truth that is brought into evidence, otherwise there may be a return to the thing that was intended to baffle the saints.
L.P.M. You mean persons may resume the friendships they had before the position was exposed?
J.T. Yes, if the friendships have not really been judged, they may be resumed, and the same things will recur. This is undoubtedly what was active at Corinth, because there are two epistles, and Paul was gravely concerned about the Corinthians. Evidently it was because he desired to develop the thought of the service of God in connection with the assembly at Corinth, and the enemy was set against that. That is what these epistles mean. The position has to be defended, and there must be the refusal of special friendships, otherwise we shall fall back into what we have been delivered from.
E.N.J. It appears that the apostle would wait for his epistles and what they contained to be consolidated in the saints, that some at least might be on good ground before dealing with these cases.
J.T. That was the idea exactly; the two epistles combined were intended to consolidate the truth in the saints at Corinth, so that the service of God should be set up there.
J.A.A. Would there not be power to deal with the matters, if the saints were all one in relation to these things?
J.T. That is it. The danger is that we are not all
{226}
one in these matters that have been before us these few weeks. At the same time God is working, and the brethren are being delivered, and helped and strengthened against what is evil, and strengthened in the sense of what is good; but the thing is to go forward, so that the enemy will be utterly defeated and there will be no recurrence of what we have been delivered from.
P.R.P. So that if this matter is still working in persons it has to be pursued, and if we see it in a brother we would seek to help him.
J.T. Quite so, because that is where the evil will be, in some brother or brothers who have special friendships.
J.McN. Is there a good example in Paul in @Acts 19? By asserting the truth he really defeated the trade union of the silversmiths.
J.T. Very good. We learn everything from the great servants at the beginning. The Lord taught them, so that it could be said of the early disciples that they continued steadfastly in the apostles¬ teaching and fellowship, in breaking of bread and prayers. They were fitted for that purpose, to lead the saints; and they did lead them; so here the truth was developed in the second epistle and the service of God was proceeding.
L.P.M. Would you say a word as to the matter of a man in Christ, consciously known by Paul? "I [consciously] know a man in Christ". What relation has that to the Corinthian epistles?
J.T. It is a turn in what he is talking about. He has been saying very strong things in chapter 11. He says, "For ye bear if any one bring you into bondage, if any one devour you, if any one get your money, if any one exalt himself, if any one beat you on the face. I speak as to dishonour, as though *we* had been weak; but wherein any one is daring (I speak in folly,) *I* also am daring. Are they Hebrews?
{227}
*I* also @2 Corinthians 11:20 - 22". It seems that these opponents of Paul were all these things; they were like him and had great resemblance to him, and they were taking advantage of that; and now he is exposing all this, and in exposing it he has to go into his whole history, and tells us what he went through; and what a history it is!
J.M. Would it be right to say that in chapters 10 and 11, he meets them on their own level? They had been boasting, and he says in chapter 12, it is not profitable for him to boast; he has to go on to a higher level now.
J.T. He says, "I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago"; he does not say 'I am the man', but he knows him. And then he says that he does not know whether he was in the body or out of it, but he could say God knew; therefore he has to rest in that. It is a question of what God knows.
E.N.J. Does he set his most humiliating experience of being lowered by the wall against this most exalted experience of being caught up to the third heaven?
J.T. Just so. The record that we have from him is to be taken account of. As he says, "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows;) such a one caught up to the third heaven". He was caught up into paradise; and to the third heaven, but it was paradise, which is a joyous place, and heard unspeakable things which it is not allowed to man to utter. "Of such a one I will boast, but of myself I will not boast, unless in my weaknesses". So now we are in the presence of one who is an example for us in humility. And he is ready to accept a thorn for the flesh. The thorn was intended to weaken Paul as in the flesh, and he besought the Lord three times that it might be
{228}
removed, but the Lord did not remove it. He said, "My grace suffices thee; for my power is perfected in weakness". And Paul says, "Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me". That is the lesson for us.
P.A.H. It says here, "Of such a one I will boast, but of myself I will not boast, unless in my weaknesses". I was wondering if that expression was over against the boasting referred to by some in chapter 11, who were boasting according to flesh. Now he has something to boast in "such a one". Do you think that is a contrast?
J.T. I suppose so. There was given to him a thorn for the flesh, and he tells us why, "That I might not be exalted by the exceeding greatness of the revelations". There was given to him a thorn for the flesh, a minister of Satan that he might buffet him that he might not be exalted. "For this I thrice besought the Lord that it might depart from me. And he said to me, My grace suffices thee; for my power is perfected in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me. Wherefore I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in necessities, in persecutions, in straits, for Christ". So we learn from Paul here how to accept discipline. It is intended to help us. We get an example in him as to how to get on despite such a serious situation, because something has happened to him that must have been very painful, and the devil would take advantage of Paul's great exaltation. The thorn is for the flesh, so that Paul might be brought down, lest he might be exalted above measure.
C.P. Is that why he could say I am less than the least of all saints?
J.T. Yes.
{229}
C.G.McC. Would you say a little more as to what it is to boast in weaknesses?
J.T. Well, what do we know about these things? We would not undertake to explain such exalted experiences as Paul had, but clearly it is for us to learn to accept the things that humble us, to glory in the things that humble us. "I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me". That is to say, he had learned his lesson, and was submissive to what the Lord proposed to him. The things he had gone through were extraordinary, you might say unbelievable, but they were to be believed; what he said was the truth. You marvel at it indeed, but it was not at the end of his ministry, for what he records here is likely at the middle of his service.
L.P.M. Had he Titus with him in this outlook? He says of him, "Have we not walked in the same spirit? have we not in the same steps? @2 Corinthians 12:18" Titus had taken on a little of this in his own way, had he not, and been loyal to the truth, and what had come out in the apostle, and was standing by it?
J.T. So there were others moving in the same direction, such as Titus and Timotheus; but you marvel at what the apostle himself goes through as tabulated here, but you glory in it too, that he was able to tell these things, and they were really true.
R.G.W. The apostle speaks here of being caught up, and the saints in Thessalonica are referred to as being caught up, and the man child in Revelation was caught up. Would you help us a little as to that?
J.T. And Philip was caught away. "The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip (@Acts 8:39)". It is really rapture, you might say. That is what we are to look for presently when the Lord will come to rapture us, and this incident that is mentioned ought to give us
{230}
the idea of what the rapture will be, that is to say, we are to be caught away. Caught up really is the word here; caught away would refer to Philip, and he was found at Azotus; showing what experiences the early saints had. The rapture is something we often speak of, and it is a very good term too. Paul had a full experience of it in being caught up to the third heaven, but he did not know whether he was in the body or out of the body; it is very remarkable that Paul himself did not know this.
E.N.J. It would give the apostle an advantage over all his enemies, this heavenly experience. To be caught up to the third heaven was a marvellous experience.
J.T. That is a good way to put it, and you feel that the Lord would do that for His servants, not to exalt them, but to humble them. He knows just how much we can stand. He knew what Paul could stand, and we see here how much he did stand. We marvel at the things he records in these chapters; it says, "I have become a fool; *ye* have compelled me; for *I* ought to have been commended by you; for I have been nothing behind those who were in surpassing degree apostles, if also I am nothing @2 Corinthians 12:11". He tells us the things he had actually gone through, they are mentioned in chapter 11.
J.McN. It was the state of the Corinthians which brought out this experience of Paul, which had been kept a secret for this long period of years?
J.T. Quite so. It shows how he could keep such a secret, not to bring it forward to extol himself. He had kept it for fourteen years, but now the time comes when it could be made good use of, and he makes use of it.
L.P.M. Was it to help the Corinthians who were true to successfully combat this attack upon them?
{231}
J.T. I would think so; these great things were true of him, and he now uses them to advantage.
L.P.M. Would you say that the ministry the Lord is giving us in these times, if taken on readily, will enable us to combat successfully any attack upon the truth?
J.T. I think so. There has been an attack on it and the enemy will keep on the attack and keep on the combinations that support it. That danger is ever with us unless we judge ourselves as to it, and judge ourselves as to the danger of partisan feeling.
W.L.W. Speaking of the rapture, is Enoch a sample man in that way? He walked in a difficult day, and he had the testimony that he pleased God.
J.T. Quite so. He was the seventh from Adam, meaning that he had gone through things experimentally. Seven would be an allusion to what he had gone through in the way of discipline and teaching. It is a question of history. Enoch is an historic figure, and he pleased God, and he had the testimony that he pleased God. That is the great point if we are really in the ministry and serving effectively, to please God.
L.P.M. Referring again to this matter of the ministry, the way in which the apostle brings out the truth that relates to a man in Christ seems to be emerging in view of the needs that were then a Corinth, so that I suppose at any time in the ministry, if we are diligent and careful, there is something from the Lord that will enable us to meet the situation on hand.
J.T. I think so. God has His resources, and it is the glory of God to conceal a matter. Things are often concealed until the proper time to bring them out. It was so in Paul's case, and it is often so in others. "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; but the glory of kings is to search out a thing (@Proverbs 25:2)".
{232}
L.P.M. So what has come out of late years has been the peculiar place of the assembly as the woman, the complement to the man. Is that not the distinctive feature that the Lord has drawn attention to in the ministry in a general way?
J.T. Quite so, and that there is neither male nor female. The truth is that the idea of the masculine is in Christ, and the feminine is in the assembly. That has come to light and it is for the brethren to understand what that means. So here he says, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ @2 Corinthians 11:2". All the Corinthians, brothers and sisters alike, were viewed as feminine. So that the question is whether the brethren are getting at the truth of the assembly in that sense.
D.H.B. You refer to the point of special friendships. Is it good to see that the apostle in finishing most of his epistles makes such remarks as, "Greet all the brethren with a holy kiss", (@1 Thessalonians 5:26) bringing all the brethren into it?
J.T. It is a holy kiss, a very important thing to keep before us. The father in the prodigal's case kissed him caressingly.
E.N.J. Would it be right to say that we need to keep Christ and the truth before us in a supreme way, rather than persons?
J.T. Exactly. So that the principle of these epistles would show how the apostle built them up, and when the time arrived he would turn to the militant side. Having kept what had happened in Corinth in the background, he had in readiness to avenge all disobedience when their obedience was fulfilled. Now the time has come for this, that is to say, to avenge disobedience.
E.N.J. No doubt these men that were causing the trouble would be attractive, and possibly able and gifted persons.
{233}
J.T. I am sure they would be. The enemy would take up men that would suit his purpose. And when God comes in for us and exposes things, then the thing is to follow the exposure, and to walk in the light as God is in the light. If there is an exposure God is in it, and it is for us to follow that: thus we will be kept from the evil, so that it will not overtake us.
{234}
THE LORD'S SUPPER
@Acts 2:42,46; @Acts 20:7 - 12; @1 Corinthians 11:17 - 25
J.T. It is important to keep in mind other well-known scriptures, mainly in the gospels, which could be read, for they are evidently put down in the record in view of the general truth of the Lord's supper being wide-spread and continuing until the end of the dispensation. It is thought that @Acts 2 furnishes the early understanding of the Lord's supper without detail, and what is to be noted is, that it is said that the breaking of bread was in the house, as if it were never intended to be in the temple, never intended to be linked on with judaism as such. @Acts 20 furnishes information as to how the early disciples, that is, those in Paul's day, in fact late in his day, regarded the Lord's supper and the principles governing it in those days. It would seem as though the Lord's supper was not understood in Troas, and possibly not understood generally, so that Paul spoke at length as to it before the breaking of bread actually took place. It will be understood that it was a matter of meeting conditions; there was ignorance of the truth. We would, therefore, not imitate the method of speaking at length in the celebration of the Lord's supper, because the writer says, "we being assembled to break bread", as if that were the primary thought. There is no suggestion that it was arranged that Paul should speak at length, but, evidently, he knew what was needed.
H.D.T. Was it under Paul's ministry that the truth of the assembly was fully developed, and is that why the breaking of bread is detached from the house under his ministry and put in the assembly?
J.T. I suppose that is right. Paul had the ministry of the assembly, as we are told by himself,
{235}
and, of course, the Lord's supper comes under that ministry. But that was not so at the beginning, because evidently the twelve carried on in some measure of understanding; it is said they "persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers", @Acts 2:42.
H.D.T. Were you emphasising the house, as over against the temple? The temple was the sphere of testimony, but the breaking of bread was never at any time celebrated there.
J.T. The Lord evidently intended the truth to be carried on in the temple in the general sense, so we are told that after the Lord went up, the disciples "returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God", (@Luke 24:52,53). The praising and blessing continued, but it is certainly notable that the breaking of bread was never celebrated there, according to the facts given.
G.H.McK. In @Acts 20 the breaking of bread was evidently on the first day of the week, but in @Acts 2 it refers to it being every day. Is that right?
J.T. That is probably so. @Acts 2:46 says, "And every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord, and breaking bread in the house they received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart". I think in the early days of the revival there was something of that, but according to this chapter, it gave way to the first day of the week.
H.D.T. Does that not show that the truth does not always come out at once? We have to be prepared for fresh developments.
J.T. That was in mind for this time; the truth did not come out immediately, in fact many years elapsed before it all came out, and as we know, the Lord intended to make Paul a special vessel, an elect vessel.
G.H.G. The breaking of bread in the house would
{236}
be more of a tentative matter in carrying over. Would you help us practically as to the breaking of bread today in a house, if a hall is not available?
J.T. It is quite in order. Houses were used in several instances in the early days, but they would be regarded, I suppose, as loaned for the purpose.
Rem. The gatherings in them would not be regarded as part of the household establishment, but as the assembly there generally.
J.T. "Have ye not then houses for eating", (@1 Corinthians 11:22). They are carefully separated from the Lord's supper, but there are several instances in which the households of the saints were used, and, of course, it is so now, too.
A.M. You stressed elsewhere the Lord taking the place of house-father as being part of Luke's ministry. Had you this in mind at all in being carried through into our day, not just a transitional state of things?
J.T. It would seem as if it were so. The Lord's supper was not celebrated at Emmaus; the Lord laid down household ideas. There must have been some thought in His mind of His own household. We have been looking elsewhere at certain scriptures which indicate that the Lord carried down the household idea from the Old Testament. In @Isaiah 8:18, it is said that "I and the children that Jehovah hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel". The idea of the Lord having children in that sense has to be understood. It is recorded in John several times, and elsewhere, so that we have to distinguish between His children and the children of God. For instance in @John 21:5 the Lord says to the disciples who had gone fishing, "Children, have ye anything to eat?" as if He exercised household authority over them. Others too, I suppose from the standpoint of moral authority, such as John the evangelist and Paul, spoke of the saints as their children.
G.P.P. Would the thought of children link with
{237}
the wilderness setting in which we partake of the Supper, and the care we need?
J.T. That is what has been thought. It opens the door for young people, helping them to come out of Christian households to obtain their places in the assembly. We are now looking at the great thought of the Lord's supper as to its development up to Paul's time, up to the full position of the dispensation as so set out, and it helps us to deal with error, which is very prevalent as to the Lord's supper, especially among the sects, and even others who have separated, called brethren. Hence the Lord has greatly helped us in recent years as to the principles governing the Lord's supper, and it is thought it may be helpful here today.
H.D.T. Why do you think there is such absence of reference to the breaking of bread in the details given of Paul's ministry in the various places? Assemblies were set up, and elders chosen, and various places to which epistles were written are given in a fair amount of detail. Why was the breaking of bread left almost to the end of the historical side?
J.T. Of course, it is found in @Acts 2, as we said, and as regards 1 Corinthians, it was comparatively early in Paul's ministry. The chronological reference would be in @Acts 18; he was not even yet imprisoned, as far as I know. We cannot just give the chronological dates of the records in Matthew, Mark and Luke, but I would say they are very much earlier than John. The Lord intended that the gospel records would carry with them the truth as to His supper.
J.N.G. Would you say something as to @Acts 2:42, "the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers", the order in which that is put?
J.T. You have noticed that the word is "persevered
{238}
in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers". I suppose the thought is to *assert* the authority of the apostles at that early date. There is no reference to Moses as might have been expected; the apostles take the lead in the Lord's mind, evidently they were all included. So that they must have moved together in those days. It is very important that their authority should be asserted. The Jews would take advantage of their illiteracy, making little of them, but the Lord puts them in front as to teaching, "the teaching and fellowship of the apostles". The word "fellowship", of course, means that they were brought on to the same thing; they moved in the truth together. According to the first epistle of John, their fellowship was regarded as distinctive; it was not an ordinary allusion to fellowship, I would think; "the teaching and fellowship of the apostles". @1 John 1:3 says, "and our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ".
C.P.P. Is the same idea of authority continued in the apostle Paul in speaking of what he prescribed in @1 Corinthians 11:17, "in prescribing to you"? Is that the word for us?
J.T. It is a formal reference to his method of laying things down, as in the word at Thessalonica, "opening and laying down", (@Acts 17:3); it would seem as though Paul had certain ways. For instance, he made a sign in one case with his hand (@Acts 13:16); and then he also indicates that in all his epistles his signature was there, as though the Lord would give him a distinction above others. Then in @Acts 13:13 it speaks of "Paul and his company", as though the Lord was allowing him certain latitude as being such a distinguished servant, and as having so many portfolios, you might call it, because he had so many services given to him. You wonder at the Lord having it that way, but it shows how He
{239}
distinguishes a brother, a minister, having confidence in him.
H.D.T. That authority seems almost to extend to the way in which he sent Timothy here and Titus there. Would that show that there was not only teaching, but authority recognised by those whom he called fellow workmen?
J.T. Very good. It has often been noticed that they were delegates; that is really what they were, and they had the same authority as he had to appoint. The Lord evidently saw the need for that to establish authority.
P.L. You have on another occasion emphasised this word 'discourse' in @Acts 20. Is it to enforce the thought of authority?
J.T. There are two words as you know; one, 'discourse' and the other 'speaking'. It would seem that the idea of a discourse is more what in our own times came in with the revival; there was much discourse then, and even papers written for instruction, whereas now it is almost invariably that we have Bible readings, and notes taken, and the notes are printed. The discourse was carried on quite lengthily according to @Acts 20, and later they broke bread, and then they had conversation, as though the apostle had in mind that the conversation would give full opportunity to open up the details as to the truth.
A.M. Would that carry through perhaps to our day in @2 Timothy 2:2, where Paul says, "the things thou hast heard of me in the presence of many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men"? Paul's words are carried on authoritatively to our day.
J.T. To succeeding generations, as has often been remarked.
H.D.T. Would the many witnesses, which have been quoted, be a safeguard against inaccurate reports?
{240}
J.T. I should think so. Matthew stresses the two or three witnesses, as also 2 Corinthians. If there is a question, there ought to be authoritative witnesses.
J.Psn. Does that matter come in in regard to the Lord's supper, in that the Lord, when inaugurating it, had the twelve with Him; and have you in mind that their teaching should be borne in mind by us, Paul giving the filling out of it in his discourse?
J.T. Yes, and it is notable that in the synoptic gospels, you always have the reference to the fact that the twelve were with the Lord. When His Supper was inaugurated, the twelve were with Him. It looks as though He intended to have them as His authoritative witnesses. Luke says the twelve apostles were with Him; just the word "twelve" is used in Matthew and Mark, but Luke says the "twelve apostles", as though their authority is to be recognised as meeting every difficulty about the Lord's supper. We know from history that difficulties were great, especially at the time of the Reformation and the well-known Martin Luther. But the truth is accredited unquestionably in Matthew, Mark and Luke, the Lord foreseeing that the effort to bring forward wrong thoughts must be met by authority. In more recent times, many of us know there have been many difficulties raised, extending back to nearly fifty years ago, difficulties as to the Lord's supper, and it took many a year to assert what was true about it, and perhaps we have not reached the end yet as to difficulties, but the hope is that there might be some help today.
W.H.W. Does this matter of authority come before us again in what the apostle says in @1 Corinthians 11:23, "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you"? Does this indicate the heavenly setting from whence he received authority from the Lord?
{241}
J.T. You could hardly get a more conclusive addition, to what is said in Luke than when Paul has this special word from the Lord, "that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread", @1 Corinthians 11:23.
H.D.T. Would the recognition of the authoritative side give greater scope for the affectionate side? Paul says, *"I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you", but he immediately speaks of "the Lord Jesus @1 Corinthians 11:23". Would that be authority making way for affection?
J.T. There is always a note of affection in the words "Lord Jesus". This was especially so when the apostle met with the elders from Ephesus.
J.Psn. In suggesting @Acts 2, is there anything in mind as to the position in which we are found in the breaking of bread? Is it a wilderness setting in a testimonial position?
J.T. That is good. Some years ago, it was asserted that the breaking of bread was in the land; a well-known assertion, and many held to it. But the Lord has made it clear; in fact J.N.D.¬s own note said that the breaking of bread is in the wilderness, and that helped us at that time.
H.D.T. Did not that matter bring to the notice of the saints the importance of seeing the way the truth is set out in order in the Scriptures, for did you not say at that time that the details of the Supper were given in an epistle that viewed the saints, not in the land, but in the wilderness? Did that not call attention to an important principle?
J.T. I think it did. I remember it being mentioned just in that way, because John does not speak of it at all; whereas if it was to be in the land, you would have expected John to have mentioned it.
W.H.W. In @Acts 20, is the authority seen in the discourse linked up in some way with the apostle coming down and the boy being restored to life?
{242}
Is life in the maintenance of the Supper, dependent upon authority being there?
J.T. He said, "his life is in him", (@Acts 20:10), as though the apostle had discernment, even more than Elijah had. Paul said, "his life is in him"; possibly an allusion to what is common among the sects, for whilst there is much disregard for the truth, yet life is there; by discernment we find out it is there, and hence our wisdom is to be patient.
Ques. What is the bearing of prayers in @Acts 2:42?
J.T. We know that the disciple asked the Lord to teach them to pray, according to @Luke 11:1, and the Lord did so immediately. Prayer is outstanding as a feature of our dispensation, as indeed it was in the earlier dispensation.
H.D.T. As the truth developed towards Europe, the great emphasis was on prayer at Philippi. Would that stress the need for the saints apprehending the importance of the prayer meetings on Monday evenings?
J.T. That is very good. The women resorted there, and it was where prayer was *wont* to be made. In the prison, it says Paul and Silas, "in praying, were praising God" (@Acts 16:25); that is, they began in prayer, and then they praised God. So prayer is a fundamental practice among the brethren.
R.M.Y. At what point in the teaching does the Supper link on with the service of God, as we know it?
J.T. Does not the setting of Acts in itself indicate how the teaching is to be linked on with the Lord's supper? Matthew would say, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them", @Matthew 18:20. But as to the exact scripture, save @Acts 2, I do not know that one can say very much, but there can be no doubt that the fact that it is mentioned so early as @Acts 2:42,
{243}
would, indicate that the breaking of bread would be resorted to early. They broke bread in the house, which is peculiar, as though, as yet, they had not regulated themselves by the first day of the week; it would look as if they were apt to have recourse to the breaking bread as a special thing to hold them together. In the beginning, in the early part of the revival, I believe the brethren had the same thought. I believe when the Bible was revised in France, that they had the breaking of bread, but it is a question of information.
A.M. In @Acts 2, the thought of the service of God, as it says "praising God", seems somewhat separated from the Lord's supper, but it would have in mind, would it not, that that was definitely the service of God there?
J.T. Quite so. It is said, "every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord, and breaking bread in the house, they received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the people; and the Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved", @Acts 2:46,47.
H.D.T. Does that not show that the Supper, as we have it now, is part of the service of God in its testimonial setting? Would you think that the reference to the breaking of bread in @Acts 20:7, so quickly followed by the mention of Ephesus, in verses 17 to 35, would show that if we follow Paul, we do not stay at the testimonial setting; there is something that develops out of it in relation to his other epistles?
J.T. And then this allusion to the adding, "having favour with all the people; and the Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved", @Acts 2:47. Is there not a suggestion that the breaking of bread would be linked on with that? Certainly it is now. It has become a way with us, and I am sure it is
{244}
approved of by the Lord, too, that the fellowship is linked up with the breaking of bread. @1 Corinthians 10:16, which we did not read, speaks about the fellowship, and the Lord's supper is brought into it, the fellowship of the cup, "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion" or 'fellowship' "of the blood of the Christ?" That is just to bring out the place the fellowship has as binding us together in everyday life, but the breaking of bread, the cup being mentioned first, is a symbol of the fellowship generally, so that the Lord's supper is clearly used as introductory for persons coming into fellowship. We say that such and such an one is breaking bread today or next Lord's day, and I believe it is right, it is in keeping with @1 Corinthians 10:16. The facts are used to preserve incomers from idolatry and from judaism; the word fellowship or communion implies protection, for young people too, that they are committed to something. They are committed to their brethren, not only to the Lord, but committed to their brethren every day of the week. So that the question may be raised as to the fellowship if anything is disregarded by any one of us, the fellowship is the bond; we are bound. We are violating it if we are disregarding the truth.
R.R.T. Is it the thought that this term in verse 42, "breaking of bread", includes the whole service; that is, both the bread and the cup?
J.T. I think so. "The breaking of bread" is a formula for the whole Supper.
G.H.G. Would the teaching of the twelve, particularly in the Acts, have a bearing on the truth of the Supper, as far as they knew it at that point?
J.T. I think so, as far as they knew. It is quite clear that they did not know very much, but they knew enough for the Lord to approve what they were doing.
H.D.T. Is there a certain emphasis in Paul's
{245}
ministry of the local setting in which the Supper is taken, and thus Troas represented that?
J.T. It would seem so. The Spirit of God stresses that, and I suppose particularly to show that Paul was concerned about having the truth. Then the seven brothers there, who accompanied him, were evidently to be witnesses. Their local positions are mentioned, as though they represented his work. All this as to facts is important. Difficulties arise, and we are short of facts that are needed to verify certain occurrences; hence the importance of going over the ground as it is here, according to what we read today.
J.Psn. Would you say that we need to take up the Lord's supper in simplicity? Are we not encouraged in what we have recorded in @Acts 20 that after Paul discoursed, he went down and they brought the boy away and broke bread immediately, the young being brought into it as the matter is taken up in simplicity in the testimonial position?
J.T. I think so. He is called a boy, showing that he was developing. There was something in that boy that had been neglected evidently, but he is now called a boy, as though he was developing in age.
H.D.T. Is it important that Paul goes up again; he resumed his own proper level? Would spirituality show itself in the way it can adapt itself to the circumstance, but rise to its own level immediately afterwards?
J.T. "And there were many lights in the upper room where we were assembled. And a certain youth, by name Eutychus" (Eutychus is called a youth first), "sitting at the window-opening, overpowered by deep sleep, while Paul discoursed very much at length, having been overpowered by the sleep, fell from the third story down to the bottom, and was taken up dead. But Paul descending fell upon him, and enfolding him in his arms, said, Be not troubled, for his life is in him. And having
{246}
gone up" (what you refer to, meaning that the level begun is maintained), "and having broken the bread, and eaten, and having long spoken until daybreak, so he went away. And they brought away the boy alive, and were no little comforted", (@Acts 20:8 - 12). So we have this vivid picture of love being active, even though things were not just right.
E.A.K. Would you say a word as to the upper room in @Acts 20 as linking on with @Acts 1, and the omission of any reference in @Acts 2?
J.T. I suppose the upper room is to link on with what is in the gospels. You are struck with the detail the Lord gives to Peter and John, as to how they are to find the upper room, how they are to proceed to locate everything that the Lord has in His mind, and I think the thought is to maintain the authority of the gospels as entering into that fact, linking on with @Acts 1. So that there is a clear indication that the records in the gospels were authentic as indicative of the dispensation, and how it was inaugurated. In @Acts 1, the personnel are there, the actual names of the apostles are given, as though the Lord would have it to be so. They were *staying* there, it says; it would seem that it was a kind of rendezvous for them, they could come and go, I suppose, in holy liberty with one another. Then there is the place that the women had; to bring out the actual facts of the early days, that women had such a place in the position; the Lord's own mother was there, she had a peculiar place, because the Lord had given her over to John the evangelist; He called John her son, and He called her John's mother, so that John brought her into his own home. All that is to bring out the simplicity of the early days, and how love operated, which is a great matter.
H.D.T. Love was operating in Paul when he enfolded this boy in his arms.
{247}
J.T. You can understand how the parents would never forget what a man of love Paul was.
W.C.B. It would appear from @Acts 20 that Paul broke the bread. Does gift enter into the actual breaking of the bread, and giving thanks for the emblems, today? We have in Scripture only two that I know of who broke the bread, the Lord and Paul. Would it involve anything special in the one who broke the bread and gave thanks?
J.T. "And having gone up, and having broken the bread, and eaten, and having long spoken until daybreak, so he went away" (verse 11). I think that would be right that Paul did it, but then the Lord did it in Emmaus. But as to ourselves now, I doubt very much if anything is to be made of the one who breaks the bread.
H.D.T. Anyone who was free to serve the saints would be empowered of the Lord in affection to do the thing in a comely way. Does he not serve the brethren, not the Lord exactly, but he does what the saints have come together to do, on their behalf, in a certain sense?
J.T. In coming together, we meet one another first, the Lord is not there really. It is in the breaking of bread He is made known; it is very likely that it is there that He reveals Himself to us, but it is a prime matter that we meet the brethren, the Lord looks for that, He looks for right relations between the brethren before He comes in.
C.P.P. Would that be involved in the thought of assembling, "we being assembled"?
J.T. Just so. It is, "we being assembled", a mutual thought.
H.D.T. Indeed, that is said twice, "we being assembled to break bread" (verse 7), and in the upper room "where we were assembled" (verse 8). Does that not emphasise it?
C.H.G. In that connection, in what way are the
{248}
saints to be particularly regarded? Is it as brethren one of another?
J.T. That is right; as to their attitude and conduct, all are viewed as one. It is a remarkable thing that Matthew quotes the Lord as saying, "Drink ye all of it" (@Matthew 26:27). In Mark it says, "they all drank out of it" (@Mark 14:23). That helps as to discipline, the *all* must be brought in.
T.R.Y. What place in the Supper has the Holy Spirit?
J.T. He is there all the time, I would think. The Lord says He is with you always, "he abides with you, and shall be in you", (@John 14:17). He is here now, and I believe that He may be traced into the households of the brethren; the children of the saints are holy, according to what Paul says, and the Spirit would promote that and give the children to understand that they are of personal account to the Holy Spirit, because He is ready to seal them as believers.
J.N.G. Does the reference to Paul's departure on the morrow indicate a certain note of urgency in taking in the teaching relative to the Supper?
J.T. Quite so. The thing ought to be done at once if we are proceeding, though we are to tarry for one another as it says in @1 Corinthians 11:33. But at the same time, there ought to be order, and time should not be wasted.
H.D.T. Would you allow a suggestion that since it is said that Paul was "about to depart on the morrow" (@Acts 20:7), and "so he went away" (verse 11), we have some warrant for what we understand now, that the Supper, whilst set in a local setting and taken there, has something further in view in its development?
J.T. What is the further thing?
H.D.T. I was thinking of the service of God, as we are privileged to have part in it now. I wondered if Paul going to Miletus and calling over the elders
{249}
of Ephesus, and the mention of "all the counsel of God" (@Acts 20:27), would show that whilst the Supper was specific in itself, it had in the Lord's mind, something more in view in regard to assembly service.
J.T. It is introductory to the whole service, so it should not be taken by itself. In the Church of England, they keep part of the so-called Supper for administering to the sick ones, which is all just a perversion of the truth. The Supper is part of the service of God, and that is the object in mind in the way it is mentioned in @1 Corinthians 10, and then running into chapter 11, making way for headship. The truth is there, and it is only a question now of time to enter upon it. So there is to be the preparation for change, if we are to partake of the Lord's supper, for it is from glory to glory, and there is the necessity for readiness for any change that is required in the services, because they run right on to the thought of the Father and to the thought of God. Changes are necessary, and the point is whether we are ready for any such change. John, the prophet, says, "I became in the Spirit" (@Revelation 1:10); that is change.
G.H.G. Does the Supper move every holy and spiritual impulse in the saints in response to Christ, to the Father and to God?
J.T. It is introductory. The Lord has the full place there, it is *His* supper, it is not the Father's supper. But then there are other glories, "from glory to glory", (@2 Corinthians 3:18) and other glories will link on with other divine Persons, with God and the Father, and even a way for the Spirit has to be made.
G.H.G. Is God Himself the great ultimate, in that way, in the service?
J.T. "That God may be all in all" (@1 Corinthians 15:28); not 'all *and* in all', but "all in all", that is to say, God is in us.
W.H.W. Do you think in @Acts 20 the change is
{250}
seen in the boy? When he is taken up alive, they proceed with the Supper.
J.T. I have no doubt. The word "boy" is not to be overlooked. Eutychus is called a youth first, but I think the word "boy" means a little less development in him than the word "youth". The word "youth" is used for priesthood in @Exodus 24, but the word "boy" is a development, you might say, from childhood.
C.D. In connection with the boy, Paul says his life is in him, and there is a footnote to the word "life", 'or soul'. Does that suggest the ability to respond in affection to Paul's embrace?
J.T. I suppose so. The word "soul" is a very important one; Elijah made much of it, he cried to Jehovah and said,"Jehovah, my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again!" (@1 Kings 17:21), and it did return to him. Unless we have souls, we shall be wanting. The thought of the soul would imply feelings.
H.D.T. It says of Paul at Lystra, Iconium and Antioch, that he was "establishing the souls of the disciples", (@Acts 14:22). Would he always remember that the saints were capable of taking on those feelings?
J.T. Quite so. We often say there is want of soul, that persons are soulless. It is really a question of right feelings.
R.H.G. Why is the additional thought of eating brought in in @Acts 20:11? "Having broken the bread, and eaten".
J.T. It shows that the bread is to be eaten, it is a meal really. It is a spiritual thought, but it is actually a meal, but it is not to be treated on the level of an ordinary meal, for the apostle says, "Have ye not then houses for eating and drinking?"@1 Corinthians 11:22. So that whilst the Lord's supper is a literal meal, yet it is peculiarly spiritual, and introduces what is initial in regard to the service of God. In Matthew
{251}
it says, "as they were eating" @Matthew 26:26; that is to say, before the Lord's supper was introduced, they were already eating the passover, which is a very important matter. @1 Corinthians 5:7,8 says, "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed; so that let us celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth". It is a question of eating, and that raises the whole question of what should be eaten and what should not be eaten, as we have in the typical books in connection with the use of persons or creatures; it is a question of cleanness. The saints as the one body in @1 Corinthians 10 enter into the idea of the eating, that is how we appropriate one another.
H.D.T. May I ask a question in regard to Paul going away? If we follow Paul, do we, so to speak, arrive at Ephesus? Is it noteworthy that his prayer in @Ephesians 3:19, "that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God" is immediately preceded by "and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge"? Would affection, in that sense, lead to what we speak of as the great ultimate in the service of God?
J.T. There is no doubt that @Ephesians 3 has a wide bearing in that sense.
J.S. Would you say a little more as to eating, appropriating one another?
J.T. It is just a question of appropriation, appropriation of the brethren. Why should we not? It will be so in heaven. Our enjoyment will be largely a question of the brethren:
<blockquote>'Nor what is next Thy heart <br>Can we forget; <br>Thy saints, O Lord, with Thee <br>In glory met'. (`160:8) </blockquote>
That is to say, we meet the brethren there.
B.B.T. Would eating give spiritual constitution
{252}
and strength for what follows? It says, "having eaten", and then you get the speaking. I was wondering if the eating would help us as to what follows in service Godward.
J.T. I think so, the appropriation of the saints to a point. We have to be careful, but there is no doubt about it that the saints have to be appropriated, for whom have we but the saints?
Ques. Would it necessitate a right state involving assimilation?
J.T. Just so. I think the typical allusions to the clean and unclean animals help us as to that, they are just types of persons, and so we enjoy each other. Why do we visit each other? why do we seek each other's company? and above all why do we sit down together at the Lord's supper?
J.S. We really cannot do without one another. That is the sense, is it?
J.T. Just so. We cannot do without each other in eternity, and we certainly are not supposed to be without each other now.
A.H.S. Is it suggested in @1 Corinthians 10:17, "Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf"?
J.T. That is it; "we, being many, are one loaf, one body". The "we" refers to the body.
R.H.G. Would appropriating one another preserve us from the snare into which the Corinthians fell, each one eating his own supper before others?
J.T. Quite so. There they were selfish, they were formed into coteries of partisans, they were partisan. @1 Corinthians 11:19 says, "For there must also be sects among you, that the approved may become manifest among you". There were sects and that broke up the Lord's supper. Paul said, "When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper" (@1 Corinthians 11:20), because they were eating their own supper.
{253}
F.R.H. Would appropriating one another prepare us for change? I was thinking of John in Revelation speaking of himself as "your brother and fellow-partaker" (@Revelation 1:9), and then it says, "I became in the Spirit @Revelation 1:10".
J.T. I think so. He was ready, too, for the vision; he says, "and I heard behind me a great voice @Revelation 1:10".
G.H.G. Is it to be understood that the word in @1 Corinthians 11:24, "This is my body", refers to the Lord exclusively, or does it in some way include the saints?
J.T. I would say that the allusion, "not distinguishing the body" (@1 Corinthians 11:29), would be the Lord's own body. @1 Corinthians 10:17 says, "Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf". That is to say, they are partakers of the loaf; the saints are viewed as the body, it is not the Lord's personal body, it is the saints as His body, as He said to Paul, "Why dost thou persecute me?" (@Acts 9:4); the "me" were the saints.
C.P.P. In verse 24, is "this do" a matter of giving thanks and breaking, rather than eating?
J.T. I think so. "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me", @1 Corinthians 11:23,24.
J.N.G. Is the memorial, therefore, connected with what the Lord Jesus did?
J.T. I think so, for it says elsewhere, "after the Lord had given thanks". The giving of thanks is in mind here, "in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks". That "giving thanks" is the same as blessing it. Then it says, "broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you". The "for you" would mean it was for
{254}
their appropriation. "This do in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup"; the "like manner"refers to giving thanks.
H.D.T. Would it be right to say that the fellowship side of the Supper stands directly in relation to the testimonial position, whereas the memorial side makes way for what is not observed in the testimonial setting, that is, the nearness of Christ and His love?
J.T. Yes. "This is my body, which is for you". What are you going to do with it? How do you regard it? Luke, of course, gives another word, "given", but I think it is well to take Paul as final, and I suppose it would mean how you appropriate it.
G.H.G. What is to be understood in the act of the breaking of bread?
J.T. It is just what He did, and it is given as the title for the whole memorial, it is called "the breaking of bread". "He was made known to them in the breaking of bread" (@Luke 24:35), so the thing has a meaning, and the meaning is in the breaking. It is not that we take a piece of it and eat it; it is the Lord's action that is in mind. The loaf broken, in one sense, is an allusion to the Lord's death.
G.H.G. That is what I was really inquiring about, as to what special significance there is in that, as relating to the Lord's death.
J.T. It is a question of what He did, the familiarity of it. How touching it is that He has come down to all these details in leaving it with us as His supper! These details enter into it, and we are obliged, if we are faithful, to follow them out, just to do what He did.
H.D.T. I recall that J.N.D. wrote in one of his letters that the breaking of bread is absolutely necessary as a figure. It would preclude our thinking that we break when we partake, would it not? We partake of a broken loaf.
{255}
J.T. Quite so. The loaf is broken, by the brother who gives thanks for it, as the Lord did here, "having given thanks broke it" (@1 Corinthians 11:24); it is part of the service.
E.K. At what time would the Lord vouchsafe His presence to us?
J.T. I would think when we call Him to mind; it says in the footnote to @1 Corinthians 11:24 that the word "remembrance" means 'calling to mind'. It is not simply a remembrance, but an act of mind, that you call Him into it, as it were, showing the place the mind has in the memorial. He is valuing the place He has in your mind, and I think His coming in would synchronise with that. That is to say, He comes in; your mind is open for Him. The word 'mind' is of very great importance on this point, it is not the affections, but the mind.
A.H.S. We call Him to mind as living.
J.T. We do, we call *Himself* to mind.
{256}
THE FIRST DAY OF THE WEEK
@John 20:19; @Exodus 12:1 - 4; @Exodus 13:4
J.T. It will be observed that the suggestion, is to begin with "the first day of the week". As to time, for the service of God, the idea of the month is more prevalent in the Old Testament. We read in @Exodus 12:2, "This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you", and in @Exodus 13:4, "Ye come out today, in the month Abib". What is to be called attention to, particularly in these verses, is that the month alluded to in the beginning of chapter 12 is regulated by heaven, that is to say, by the moon; whereas in chapter 13, whilst it is the same month, the name is different; it is the month Abib, which alludes to *the month the corn ripens* . Whilst the idea of the moon, or the heavens, has to do with the origin of the month, the reference in chapter 13 has to do with the earth; that is to say, the ripening of corn, which is more the subjective side. The thought is to show that whilst the Lord acts sovereignly in these matters, He also acts in relation to what is in us, what is developed in us by the Spirit. Thus time, especially in the Lord's service and the service of God, has to take into account what is to be developed in the saints, what progress they are making; as if what God is doing in relation to time is based on what He is doing Himself in the saints, as well as in the heavens. Then another thing is the matter of eating governing the service. "If the household be too small for a lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls; each according to the measure of his eating shall ye count for the lamb", @Exodus 12:4. Thus the passover will be regulated by the capacity in the families to eat. So that it is not wholly an objective
{257}
thought, nor is it even the death of Christ viewed objectively, but the capacity to eat, to appropriate. Then another thing entering into all this, is the idea of the word "assembly", and the word 'congregation'. The word "assembly" in @Exodus 12:3, is said to mean 'the congregation looked at as a moral whole, a corporate person before God'. As I understand the word "assembly" there, it implies, not that every responsible person is in mind, but a sufficient number to be representative as a moral whole, even although some are not present. On the other hand, the word 'congregation' alludes to every one present. 'Congregation is the actual subsisting congregation composed of all its members',(see footnote to @Exodus 12:6). What has been remarked is important as to assembly services, and especially discipline. I think that we need to pay more attention to accuracy in quoting or reading Scripture than has been common amongst the brethren, because one believes, without assuming to criticise or to judge, that things are taken too loosely. According to @Leviticus 4, where responsibilities are attached to distinguished persons, such as the high priest, and then the assembly itself, or whether it be the prince or even the ordinary people, inadvertent things can be adjusted or recalled. Other scriptures, such as in the epistle to the Hebrews, regard sin as unforgivable, and the sinner as unrestorable. I refer to all this because I believe it is important to bear in mind that when we come to critical things, such as doctrine or discipline, we need to pay more attention to the actual letter of Scripture. It might, of course, be said that the letter kills, which is true, but it is not always the truth in that sense; it has to be read with intelligence. "By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned", (@Matthew 12:37). There it is a question of literality.
J.E. Referring to @John 20 as to the Lord coming in, is the thought there that the movement is a
{258}
sovereign one on the Lord's part, and yet not independent of state amongst the persons represented? Is the corn really beginning to ripen in the case of the persons?
J.T. Very good. What happened as recorded in @John 20:19 was, as you say, dependent on the state of the brethren, because the actual gathering was the result of their obedience to the message. The Lord had sent a message to the disciples, and it was taken to them by Mary. The message was, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God. Mary of Magdala comes bringing word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her", @John 20:17,18. The message was accurately delivered, and obeyed, and now the Lord comes. "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week, and the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you". He did not come to an empty room and wait there for them to come, He came to where they were. The main thing is where they were, not the place of meeting, but "where the disciples were". So all these matters are important, especially what we have been remarking now as to starting new meetings, whether we are governed by city boundaries or whether we are just governed by where disciples are. This passage indicates that the Lord came where the disciples *were* , "the doors shut where the disciples were".
A.H.S. What was in your mind in relation to city boundaries?
J.T. We should be regulated by where the disciples *are* , where they may reside, rather than city boundaries. For instance, if one resides at a distance from the meeting room, and it may be he could reach another meeting room in another part more conveniently,
{259}
then the thing would be to do that. It is a matter of how far he has to travel. I have found in certain places the importance of a city is stressed, rather than a country place, and that it was proposed to alter the meeting place to the city or town nearby, although no saints lived in the city. That, of course, was not right, because where the saints are is the place to which the Lord will come.
G.H.G. Does the suggestion of where the saints are suggest where the Lord places His name, what is under His hand and eye?
J.T. His name would be placed on them. The word in @Exodus 20:24 is, "in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee". That might be said to be a question of mere locality, but clearly the general idea is where the saints are.
A.H.S. The Lord found great pleasure in this gathering in @John 20.
J.T. It must have been peculiarly so, because He had just risen from the dead; it was the first gathering, as far as we know.
C.P.P. What would be the significance of it being the *evening* of that day?
J.T. Whether the evening began the day in @John 20 is a question; they may have become accustomed to Roman methods. Now we are regulated by the powers that be in these matters, we recognise that they are ordained of God; whatever time they set the day, we accept that.
C.H.G. Would you be free to say a word about the distinctiveness of the first day of the week in relation to Christianity? It is a new day entirely, quite apart from what is old and effete in the Jewish system.
J.T. The synoptic gospels refer to the "day after sabbath", or similar expressions, but in John especially, and also in Acts, it is just "the first day
{260}
of the week". Christianity recognises these facts as to days and years; we recognise the day as regulated by the sun and the moon, and then, of course, other arbitrary causes, but John clearly indicates that the present idea of "the first day of the week" is what is according to God at the beginning. It is mentioned twice in @John 20, and indeed alluded to again in verse 26 in regard of Thomas; "eight days after" has the same idea in mind, only there it is a dispensational allusion. In @Acts 20 the same idea is in mind when the disciples came together to break bread on the first day of the week.
H.D.T. Would you think that the reference to the "day after sabbath" was in consideration of God's earthly people while He was still waiting upon them, whereas, when the clean break really came, the first day of the week came into its own distinctiveness?
J.T. That is what I was thinking of at the beginning, that John has that in mind. Perhaps we might put into it in John, the spiritual side, the power side, in the bursting of the corn.
C.P.P. It says "on that day", @John 20:19. Is that what flows out of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus? Was that the beginning *of that* day as bearing on our dispensation?
J.T. Quite so.
J.N.G. Do the Lord's own movements on the first day of the week give it its distinctive character?
J.T. Well, I think the Father raising Him from the dead enters into it too, which would be the movements of the Father, but the Lord's own movements in general would be the governing thought.
C.H.G. Can "the first day" be distinguished from "the Lord's day"? Is there a difference in thought?
J.T. Yes; the expression, "The Lord's day", has come into Christianity more. The allusion is
{261}
to what is dominical; that is, the Lord's authority exercised over it. But "the first day of the week" I believe might be connected with the beginning of the growth alluded to in @Exodus 13, in the month Abib, the bursting or sprouting of corn.
J.M. Is there a link in the two scriptures in Exodus between the heavens and the earth? I wondered if you had that in mind; you referred to what was sovereign, and then what is here on the earth, the bursting forth of the corn.
J.T. I think so; the bursting forth of the corn would imply the presence of the Spirit on earth; so in that sense the Spirit has come to earth; the Lord is in heaven. So also if it be a question of the moon (see footnote to @Exodus 12:2), it would be the assembly viewed as a subjective thought. That is to say, the heavens and the earth move together; the subjective idea being in relation to the Spirit, the objective being in relation to Christ in heaven. I consider that the relation between the objective and the subjective is a prime thought which we should have before us, the objective being properly Christ in heaven: "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear", (@Acts 2:33).
P.L. "And by the precious fruits of the sun, And by the precious things put forth by the months", (@Deuteronomy 33:14).
J.T. Just so.
H.D.T. Is there a figurative reference in @Hosea 2:21,22, "I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear the corn, and the new wine, and the oil"? Is there a correspondence between what is in heaven, and the productivity of the earth in answer to that?
J.T. I thought that.
H.D.T. It seems to stand there in relation to the
{262}
matter of affection, because betrothal is mentioned. I wondered whether that linked on with what we have in John; the ardent affection of Mary really laying the basis for all this fresh development among the brethren.
J.T. I would say that fully. She is a remarkable example of the early divine movements, one out of whom seven demons had gone. I suppose the fact that they had gone out would allude to power that was within, corresponding with what we are saying as to the subjective side. It is a question of the power within, so the work of God is not simply the result of light, but the power is within, that is, the Spirit. Hence Paul's inquiry, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" (@Acts 19:2). And they did not know that He was yet come. The subjective side was not there in that sense, although something had preceded what we read of, but the Holy Spirit had not been received by them. It was not simply that the apostle asked them if they were sealed, but whether they had *received* the Holy Spirit, and received Him when He could be received, that is, since they believed.
H.D.T. Do you mean that the receiving is their side of the matter?
J.T. That is just what I think.
J.Psn. Is that seen in Rebecca, as the servant speaks to her and presents that which is objectively seen in relation to Christ? Rebecca is prepared to go with the man; she, as it were, moves with him now, subjectively.
J.T. Quite so.
A.M. In writing to the Ephesians, Paul said, "having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is in you @Ephesians 1:15". Does that involve a certain state in them by the Spirit, corresponding possibly to what is in @John 20?
J.T. Yes; it also says in that chapter, "in whom
{263}
*ye* also have trusted, having heard the word of the truth, the glad tidings of your salvation; in whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise @Ephesians 1:13". That is to say that they were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise.
H.D.T. Are you making a distinction between that as being the divine side, and the reception being their side?
J.T. I think the sealing is final. They were sealed. The idea of sealing is that you are owned, there is ownership. There is a reference in @2 Corinthians 1:21,22: "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". That is a full thought as to the presence of the Holy Spirit and His operations down here; the anointing, the sealing and the earnest of the Spirit.
J.N.G. Does the thought of power inwardly work out in the ability of the saints to call the Lord to mind in the Supper, and then the power for forgetfulness too? In @Psalm 45:10 the daughter is to "forget thine own people and thy father's house".
J.T. Yes. So that her beauty is to be desired, the Spirit would be the power of that.
G.H.G. How are we to understand the reference by John in @Revelation 1:10: "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day", in relation to this service that is in mind?
J.T. Well, it would be what we have sometimes spoken of as the power of change, it applies to us and applies to divine Persons too. John says, "I became in the Spirit @Revelation 1:10". The word "became" would refer to an inward act. So it is said of the Lord, that "the Word became flesh";(@John 1:14) that is, it is the power of change. John indicates the power of change on the first day of the week, which is important as to the point we are on now. We leave our houses in
{264}
ordinary circumstances, and the change will come, but it has not yet come, because we are occupied with our houses or our business affairs, but then when we turn our minds to the Lord's things and the things of God, if we are in the Spirit a change is sure to come about.
H.D.T. Would @2 Corinthians 3:18 illustrate this, "transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit"? Are both the objective and subjective thoughts there?
J.T. Yes. It is said earlier that "the Lord is the Spirit (@2 Corinthians 3:17)".
J.M. Are the shut doors and the fear of the Jews to be recognised in any way today?
J.T. Surely. There is a case in Jamaica where the saints have been harassed for years by a violent man, whereas if there was power and skill to close the doors, they would be delivered from the harassment. It is quite in order, according to @John 20, to close doors under those circumstances.
Rem. "Joseph", it says, "cried, Cause every man to go out", (@Genesis 45:1).
J.T. Just so. Then in @Acts 9, Peter put all the widows out. The Lord Himself in raising Jairus¬ daughter put certain ones out.
H.D.T. In @2 Kings 4:4 the woman was to shut the door upon herself and upon her sons to get the gain of the Spirit. Do you think that if we learn to do that individually, we shall be able to do it more collectively, according to @John 20?
J.T. That is what I think. The meeting place in @John 20 may have been small or large, but the word 'doors' is in the plural; there must have been more than one. Probably it alludes to the hearts of the saints; that is to say, we shut out all that would interfere with the Lord's presence in our hearts.
A.M. So that the idea of peace that the Lord
{265}
brings in would, really be on the line of change from this state, would it not, referring to what has to be excluded? Peace is to take possession. Is that right?
J.T. Yes; "Jesus ... says to them, Peace he to you", @John 20:19. He says it twice over; "Peace he to you". By comparison with @Luke 24 we can see that the position there differs. Whether it actually differed or whether John is just abstract and Luke is actual we do not know, but anyone who compares the two chapters will see that there is a great difference; in @Luke 24 the brethren were perturbed. "He himself", it says, "stood in their midst" @Luke 24:36. It does not say He come, whereas in John it says, "Jesus came and stood in the midst", which is very important too. We have to make way for things that we cannot be sure about actually, make way for what God can do.
C.H.G. Is @John 20, in that way, a pattern of what the Lord does in assembly movements today, coming and standing in the midst? If the conditions are there, and suitable to Him, may we expect His movements thus amongst the saints?
J.T. Yes, but it is abstract. If we were in heaven, it would not need to be abstract, because it would be just actual, but in view of our mixed conditions here below, it is difficult to say that everything is just right.
H.D.T. Do we learn from Luke that the Lord in grace would serve according to the local conditions that may require His service?
J.T. Yes. These local conditions may be adjusted by Him, because they were, according to @Luke 24.
J.M. The closed doors do not hinder the movements of the Lord, but rather they facilitate them, do they not?
J.T. Quite so. Evidently it is an abstract position. The Lord was pleased with what was there. He said twice, "Peace be to you".
{266}
J.M. When you referred to time relating to the service of God, did you have in mind to allude to the various phases of the service?
J.T. In general, it was to seek to get the relation between time and the service of God, and I think we are getting at it a little so far.
H.D.T. Have you in mind what you have called the provisional period? When we arrive at eternity, there will be no advancement in the truth, there will be no growth, but, in the provisional period, is it that the truth comes to us as we are able to bear it?
J.T. That is the idea exactly. We are now in the provisional time in which things are accomplished in view of eternity. We are in the working time now, the doing time, the growing time. I am not at all discouraged as to what we have had so far, I think we are getting at the truth that is in mind; that is, the relation between time and the service of God. One need not say much to show that there is a very great relation because of the different times mentioned, such as the first day of the week, and then the months in Exodus.
H.D.T. Have you in view the development of power in our souls to graduate from the time scene where we break bread, into the eternal setting where God is served in the assembly?
J.T. Well, that is where the idea of change comes about.
H.D.T. That involves the subjective side, does it not?
J.T. Just so. It came about in John himself, first in @Revelation 1:10 and then in verse 17 when he became as dead. But then it came about in the Lord too, because John sees the Lord in peculiar habiliments which He was not accustomed to wear. Then Mark, too, says He was seen in another form, showing that with the Lord there was a mysterious ability to change.
{267}
H.D.T. So that you would have us with our minds ready for touches *from*  the Lord, without being too set? For whilst we recognise the order of the service, there is a certain flexibility about the Lord's movements, is there not?
J.T. Quite so. There is flexibility. I believe the word applies to us in a general way, that Christianity is flexible. To illustrate that, we are told in @Matthew 12, that the Lord went through the cornfields on the sabbath, but then it says that the disciples did the same, but they plucked the ears of the corn. The Lord did not do that, but they did it, showing that He leaves things open to us. He did not say to them, You should not pluck the ears of corn, because He intended them to do it, that is what He had in mind. Therefore He does not question things. If He intends us to do things, He leaves us to do them. For instance, He says, "Give *ye* them to eat (@Luke 9:13)". That is for them to do, and they did it; that was the idea. So again in @John 20:22,23, it says, "he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit: whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them"; He leaves it open as to what is in mind. That is the idea of Christianity, there is latitude; the Lord gives latitude, so as to bring out the nature of His work.
P.L. Which bears on the spontaneity of life.
J.T. Just so, that is a good thought. How spontaneous life is! God is a *living* God.
H.D.T. So you would expect us to gain in liberty in our souls as we keep in the company of Christ. It speaks of David and those that were with him.
J.T. Yes, indeed.
J.N.G. Could you help us as to the point in the Supper at which the service of God begins?
J.T. Well, I would say from the time we sit down together, in assembly; there is a state involved in that, in the attitude we are in, that we are not just
{268}
as we were when we left our homes. The state of attitude must be in mind, a proper attitude. Then any movement that anyone makes as to the Lord or as to the brethren, has to be taken account of, but the actual service from the divine side begins, I would say, when the Lord comes in.
J.M. Is it a sphere of liberty in which there is trustworthiness seen and a recognition of the time, so that we know what is suitable? @Romans 13:11 gives the idea of "knowing the time".
J.T. Yes, we know what is suitable. If a time is fixed, it ought to be adhered to, although the apostle says, "tarry one for another", @1 Corinthians 11:33. That is, I suppose, the idea of patient waiting upon one another, but if there is a time fixed for the meeting, it ought to be observed.
H.D.T. Would you say that the Lord's supper, whilst His peculiar matter, is set in relation to the service of God in a place publicly? I was wondering whether our brother had in mind what we speak of as our approach to the Father peculiarly, which would not be the early part, but would wait until after the Lord had come in and received from us what was His own peculiar portion.
J.T. I go with that fully. There are three conditions in mind. The brethren come and sit down together, and in Luke it says that the Lord "placed himself at table" @Luke 22:14. The word "placed" alludes to attitude as to ourselves, and "at table" is the literal condition there when the Supper was inaugurated, but He "placed" Himself. Another thing that synchronises with that is, "when the hour was come, he placed himself at table, and the twelve apostles with him (@Luke 22:14)". I would say functioning begins there, but He does not sit down with us in the inauguration of His Supper, because the Supper came in after the passover had been celebrated. The passover came in first, and then the inauguration of the
{269}
Lord's supper was by itself. "Having taken a loaf", it says, @Luke 22:19. He did not eat that, He ate the passover, but He did not eat His own Supper, it was a memorial for them. But I think He gives us some idea as to attitude when He *placed* Himself, and "when the hour was come". These are important matters as to the actual coming together of the saints for the service of God.
J.E. Do you think we ought to set a greater value on the time that is available to us? We have perhaps an hour and a half, and within the scope of that, there are certain things that are to be done, and perhaps undue time is taken in the doing of them.
J.T. Well, there is a good deal in that, because time is very precious. One has often thought that it is one of the most precious things we have to deal with, one of the scarcest things we have, because there is so much on hand now, and therefore we should make the most of the time that is allotted for the Lord's supper and for the service of God generally. "Redeeming the time" would be an allusion to that.
P.L. Is it to be noted that the one who is king in Jerusalem (Solomon), which might bring in perhaps, "the kingdom of the Son of his love" in @Colossians 1:13, and is master of assemblies, is so precise in regard to time, in its varied phases? (see @Ecclesiastes 3:1 - 8).
J.T. Very good. Master of assemblies is a term that refers to the book of Ecclesiastes. It is really a former, or a caller together, of assemblies.
P.L. There is a time for everything, is there not? There is "a time to love", and so on.
J.T. Yes.
H.D.T. You have referred to Luke; do we get an impression that we should expect something specific? There seems to be a converging on the time the hour the time of the feast drew near and
{270}
the day came; then "when the hour was come", (@Luke 22:14) it was the hour of love that you referred to. Do you think it would help us to be a little more specific and a little less general?
J.T. Very good.
P.L. The power to condense, would you say, in spiritual feeling and utterance? I was thinking how what is so complete and infinite in character is condensed in this wonderful message of the Lord to Mary.
J.T. Quite.
J.M. Quality enters into it, does it not? It is not the quantity, but quality and substance as knowing the time.
J.T. Yes. I believe that is seen in the place David has in the book of Revelation. Although it is a prophetic book, and a judgment book, yet there is time in it to bring out quality. The Lord speaks of Himself as "the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star", @Revelation 22:16. That is understood by the bride. Of course, the Spirit would understand it, but the bride understands it. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come @Revelation 22:17". I believe it is an allusion to quality in the service of God. The bride as being the assembly is so near to Deity, near to divine Persons, that she and the Spirit say the same thing, "the Spirit and the bride say, Come @Revelation 22:17".
H.D.T. And only one word, and yet it is the culmination of the most precious service we have received.
J.T. Yes. It might be divided up, too, as to actual time, the coming of the Lord *for* us, and the coming of the Lord *to* us, and the coming of the Lord *with* us. These are all references to different times.
H.D.T. Do you mean that as the subjective work proceeds we are capable of saying "Come" in relation to all those three things?
J.T. Quite so. It must be very pleasing to the Lord when it is said.
{271}
ABSTRACT TRUTH
@1 Corinthians 3:1 - 23
J.T. It may be wondered at by some that the Corinthians are viewed as the temple of God in this chapter, since the writer begins by saying, *"I* , brethren, have not been able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly; as to babes in Christ. I have given you milk to drink, not meat, for ye have not yet been able, nor indeed are ye yet able; for ye are yet carnal". However, the explanation may be, and is, indeed, that the apostle is presenting the truth in an abstract sense in these early chapters, that he is giving credit to the Corinthians, as he says in chapter 1, "I thank my God always about you, in respect of the grace of God given to you in Christ Jesus; that in everything ye have been enriched in him, in all word of doctrine, and all knowledge, (according as the testimony of the Christ has been confirmed in you,) so that ye come short in no gift, awaiting the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall also confirm you to the end, unimpeachable in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord" @1 Corinthians 1:4 - 9.
The apostle is thus viewing them as we may say, in an abstract way, because the body of the epistle treats them as if they were in a very low state, with much evil amongst them. Hence the abstract view gives leverage to persons thus regarded to speak of things as God does. Thus, whilst the apostle says in verse 1 that they were fleshly, yet he says in verse 16, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" This, of course, is the basis of the presentation of the truth as we have it; that is to say, the saints are viewed abstractly because they have the Spirit, they are
{272}
assumed to have the Spirit. In order to rightly understand and profit by this scripture therefore, it is well to keep in mind the abstract side, how God is pleased to hold back certain things in order to give leverage to us in speaking of them, and even to give the writer latitude to rebuke, to reprove the saints, if necessary, for anything that is wrong in the assembly.
H.D.T. Is that in keeping with the way in which Paul opens, "to the assembly of God which is in Corinth"? @1 Corinthians 1:2 He credits them with having assembly status throughout, does he not?
J.T. Just so.
H.D.T. By extension, does that work out to us at the present time, for whilst we could not claim to be the assembly of God, we move in the light of it, and the whole of the epistle is available to us on that ground?
J.T. I think that is all important. One hopes that the brethren will all be free to speak according to what may be in their minds in the way of difficulty as to the apparent inconsistency of what has been alluded to.
C.P.P. In the expression "babes in Christ" do the words "in Christ" suggest that the Corinthians are clothed with thoughts according to God, and given a status?
J.T. Yes. The word "babes", of course, indicates a very feeble state of mind and thought. *"I* ... have not been able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly; as to babes in Christ". The idea of fleshly is therefore treated as the babe state, a state of babehood, which would not be the normal condition of a person who had intelligence in the matter on hand.
H.D.T. Is it something we may be expected to grow out of?
{273}
J.T. Well, of course, a babe is a babe. The Lord speaks in @John 16:21 of "joy that a man has been born into the world". He refers to a babe, of course, but still the idea of a man is there, the potentiality of the position is manhood, and that is the idea I am sure, and we ought all to take hold of it and therefore speak as men. It is said later, "quit yourselves like men", (@1 Corinthians 16:13).
S.S. Would it be right to say that sovereignly they were brought into relationship, but practically they had not progressed?
J.T. Well, they had not. Of course they were very young, we ought to remember that, they were relatively young Christians and God had acted sovereignly in making them what they were. There were a good many of them according to @Acts 18. The Lord said to Paul, "Fear not ... . I have much people in this city" @Acts 18:9,10. The Lord had that in His own mind, and knew their state, the characteristic features of the people of Corinth. In view of all this, the wisdom of the brethren as we are now here tonight, is to take the ground of being persons with minds, and not babes, for indeed it is said in chapter 2, "*we* have the mind of Christ", @1 Corinthians 2:16 meaning the faculty of thinking, so that we are entitled, as the Lord would encourage us, to speak out as men, as those who are responsible. According to chapter 3 and chapter 1 the real difficulty evidently was the matter of division amongst them. So it goes on to say in chapter 3, "For whereas there are among you emulation and strife, are ye not carnal, and walk according to man? For when one says, *I* am of Paul, and another, *I* of Apollos, are ye not men? Who then is Apollos, and who Paul? Ministering servants, through whom ye have believed, and as the Lord has given to each. *I* have planted; Apollos watered; but God has given the increase. So that neither the planter is anything, nor the waterer; but
{274}
God the giver of the increase. But the planter and the waterer are one; but each shall receive his own reward according to his own labour" (verses 3 - 8). Therefore, obviously our wisdom is now to proceed according to the minds we have, the intelligence; we have, and treat of the truths as they are presented to us here, and learn from them, in the light of being the temple of God, no less than that. We do not formally assume to be that, as they could here, because a great deal of change has come about in the assembly since this epistle was written, but nevertheless the Spirit of God is here and the truth of the first verse of the epistle is that those addressed were "the assembly of God which is in Corinth @1 Corinthians 1:2". That is the ground to take, that we belong to the assembly in this great city, not that we assume to be it, as they could, but still we belong to it, and the Spirit of God is with us as He was then.
J.N.G. Would the statement in @Acts 18, that Paul was among them for eighteen months teaching the word of God, connect with this chapter?
J.T. Yes, quite so. That certainly ought to have great weight in what we are reading now, and challenge us, too, as to whether we are learning as we have opportunity. They had opportunity, Paul having been there so long.
E.A.K. Would you say a word as to why God is introduced into this chapter in such a significant way, "God the giver of the increase", and "we are God's fellow-workmen: ye are God's husbandry, God's building"?
J.T. Quite so, and therefore God is in mind. It is God's assembly, nothing less than that, the assembly of God; and the end of chapter 3 says, "all are yours; and *ye* are Christ's, and Christ is God's". That is to say, we are viewed in a mediatorial position from God down to Christ and to the saints, so that we are in a most favourable position with great
{275}
opportunity to learn. Then there is the thought of ownership, too, everything is ours. According to this passage everything belongs to the saints, and then as we read, "*ye* are Christ's, and Christ is God's", so that the ownership is brought up to God and then comes down from God to Christ, and to us.
Ques. Would a party spirit shut God out, so that we do not get the gain of things?
J.T. Quite so; a party spirit is the most dangerous and damaging thing that can exist amongst the saints.
L.G.L. Does Paul give evidence of reaching manhood in a spiritual way in that he was not prepared to take a place that was not really his? He refused to accept the place the Corinthians would give him, but moved in relation to what was of God, and in that sense, he gives evidence of having reached manhood.
J.T. Quite so. That is to say, he was lowly, and took the same ground as Apollos. Paul was a much greater man, longer in the truth and more gifted and more experienced than Apollos, but still he was lowly enough to associate Apollos with himself. Apollos had not long been a Christian, but he was a gifted man, and mighty in the Scriptures, and the apostle Paul was ready to associate him with himself. Paul planted and Apollos watered, but the apostle brings God in, as has just been remarked, and the mind of the saints is therefore fixed upon God, as it should be; everything comes from God; God gives the increase.
G.H.McK. Is it right to recognise the instruments that God uses in connection with His service?
J.T. Yes, even although they may be young and less experienced than others of us here. It is a question of the ability they may have. Apparently Apollos had much ability, even when he was brought into the truth. We learn of him coming into the truth largely through Aquila and Priscilla.
{276}
R.M.Y. Is the temple here a local thought?
J.T. Quite so.
R.M.Y. Could you distinguish between that and the universal thought of Ephesians?
J.T. That is very good, and we should have that brought before us, because there are the two thoughts; that in this epistle is local, that is to say, the idea of the temple of God may be attached to the brethren here in Melbourne at any time, or even smaller cities than Melbourne, if there are saints there. So that as coming together for the reading of the Scriptures we have liberty, because we may regard ourselves as of the temple of God, which is a very important matter, what we call a temple matter. But what has to be said too, in order to clarify the position, is that the word 'temple' here is a word that is properly applied to the saints of God of this dispensation, not as the temple at Jerusalem was regarded (that was a mere building by man, and so, too, the idea of temple in the Greek world was man's idea) but in this epistle it is taken up by God as applying to the local company of the saints at Corinth. God is pleased to regard the saints at Corinth as His temple, because the Spirit of God is among them. Now in the book of Revelation the word 'temple' is also used, but not in this sense, but in that in which it was used in the Old Testament, and that is important to bear in mind. The word 'temple' here in Corinthians refers to the saints viewed collectively in any locality, whereas in @Ephesians 2:21 we have it viewed as growing, "groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord". It is not viewed as growing in Corinthians; the saints are viewed as babes, however. In Ephesians it is another view, but it is a universal view, as has been referred to, so that we have to keep these two thoughts in mind. We are now dealing with the temple of God in a locality, such as Corinth.
{277}
H.D.T. Would it be right to say that the temple according to @Ephesians 2 is yet a future thought, whereas this is a positively present one?
J.T. Well, @Ephesians 2 is a future thought in its completeness, I would say.
H.D.T. That is what I meant.
J.T. But it is growing, you know; the word 'child' might be used, or 'children', as an idea of growth, but the thing is there in that sense even in Ephesus.
R.M.Y. How far does the temple thought enter into our subdivisional readings?
J.T. I think it would enter into any of them so long as we hold ourselves in relation to the whole at any time. That is what I understand, because God is graciously ready to help us and thus allows us to use such terms.
W.H.W. Is the word which we have at the end of the previous chapter, "But *we* have the mind of Christ", @1 Corinthians 2:16 a basic thought that must be ever present in our minds if we are to get the gain of the temple?
J.T. Well, the word 'temple' really alludes to the mind, not exactly the heart. It is a question of our minds, the ability in our minds that God has given to us, but this verse to which you allude refers to the Corinthians, that "*we* have the mind of Christ @1 Corinthians 2:16". That is, God is pleased so to regard it, and therefore we have ability to take on the idea of temple. I believe what we are dealing with in this chapter, that is, the idea of the temple of God, is the fact that we have the mind of Christ. Persons in the world may also use their minds as we do, only that we use them in a holy way, "*we* have the mind of Christ (@1 Corinthians 2:16)". It is not simply that we have a mind like Christ, but we have the mind of Christ, the same kind of faculty of thought that He has. It is wonderful that this should be said.
A.M. Would the reference to wisdom in this epistle
{278}
bear on this idea of how we think? For instance, "of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom, from God" (@1 Corinthians 1:30).
J.T. It is the same thought, it is a question of wisdom.
A.M. I was also thinking of Paul's reference to himself here as a wise architect.
J.T. It is a question of the wisdom that he had as a spiritual architect, so to say, building up the assembly; that is really what is meant.
P.L. So in @Proverbs 14:1, "The wisdom of women buildeth their house"?
J.T. That is the same idea.
H.D.T. Is there any specific reason why he speaks of the two ideas of husbandry and building, before coming to the temple? Is there any leading thought in those two similes?
J.T. It is a question of occupation; it says again in @Proverbs 24:27, "Put thy field in order, and afterwards build thy house". That is, look after the ground, that which yields food and the like, and then build thy house; the two thoughts are brought together here.
G.H.McK. Would husbandry give the idea of God's care for us individually first?
J.T. Just so; the king himself is dependent upon the field (@Ecclesiastes 5:9), and the idea is that God has given us the field. The field is alluded to in the third day of the creation mentioned in @Genesis 1, that is to say, the soil. The trees and the shrubs and all else that men require for sustenance are suggested in the ground, but then building comes in later. Noah built the ark; it was not for a house, but still it was a place to live in for the moment. That is the idea; first look after the field, for all are dependent on it (we all will have to admit that, we are all dependent on the field), and therefore husbandry is so important. Then, secondly, there is the thought of building, and
{279}
God takes it up, and so throughout this chapter we have the thought of building.
G.H.McK. Does building involve what is collective?
J.T. It does. Now we come down to husbandry, and the apostle says, "For we are God's fellow-workmen; ye are God's husbandry, God's building", both thoughts are linked there. "According to the grace of God which has been given to me, as a wise architect, I have laid the foundation, but another builds upon it" (verses 9,10). So that building is the main thought here and the foundation was laid by him. As a wise architect, he laid the foundation, meaning that the whole structure was in his mind, so that the foundation should carry the whole structure.
G.H.G. What is the foundation that Paul laid?
J.T. That is a question we will have to take up now, because we have to compare what is said here with what is said in @Matthew 16:18, when the Lord says to Peter, *"Thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly". Peter was the kind of material that should be used, but then the kind of material is also Christ in some sense, because it is Christ. Christ is the Foundation as in @Matthew 16, only that here it would be more as Paul presented Him in his ministry. Christ is the Builder according to @Matthew 16; here Paul is the builder.
R.M.Y. Does the foundation refer to what he laid in every place, or more particularly to what he laid at Corinth?
J.T. I would say what he laid at Corinth, the kind of work he would lay there; he would take account of the Corinthians, too, in doing so. If we run through the chapter perhaps we will be helped in that respect. "We are God's fellow-workmen; ye are God's husbandry, God's building. According to the grace of God which has been given to me, as a
{280}
wise architect, I have laid the foundation, but another builds upon it". So that we have to examine Paul's way in ministry, and especially now what we know of at Corinth as to what foundation he did lay.
G.P.P. Does it link up with his word in chapter 2:2, "I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ"? @1 Corinthians 2:2
J.T. Very good; that was the kind of thing he did. He did not wish to build on anything in Corinth but what would be Jesus Christ, that is, the Man, Christ Jesus. He wanted that kind of material.
H.D.T. Was that in keeping with his being "a called apostle of Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 1:1)?
J.T. Quite so.
H.D.T. Would the sense of his commission guide him in all his outlook as he dealt with the saints?
J.T. I think that is the way to get at it; go back to Paul and see how he was converted, and how he began to work. If we bear that in mind and look at the facts given in @Acts 9 then we shall arrive at what he is dealing with, what we have here, and how he presented the truth in any given place, but especially at Corinth in view of the fact that he spent eighteen months in the city and the Lord had told him that He had much people there.
A.M. Would the reference to the building materials, gold, silver, precious stones, bear on what Paul would have left behind in that sense, the impressions of Christ to develop among them?
J.T. I think so; the things that he mentions are not burnable, not indeed that they are not literally burnable, but the idea is that they are not wood, hay and stubble, that sort of thing that could be burned up. What he laid was precious stones.
P.L. Not bulky quantity but intrinsic quality.
J.T. Quite so.
H.D.T. Is that why he says, "the fire shall try the work of each what it is" (verse 13)?
{281}
J.T. Yes; you can see what the wood, hay and stubble would be, how they would easily make a blaze, whereas compared with that relatively, the gold, silver and precious stones would be durable.
J.N.G. What is the day that is referred to, "for the day shall declare it" (verse 13)?
J.T. That would synchronise with the day of God or the day of Christ when all is brought into judgment. Whether it be our work or whether it be ourselves, all is tested. Here it is pointed out that the man may be saved himself and his work may be burned up.
P.L. Do you think that from time to time in assembly crises, things come up for appraisement and survey in an anticipative way?
J.T. I think that is very practical; we often see that. Things are brought to an issue, the brethren having to look into things solemnly and soberly before God and thus they are made apparent so that we may judge of what they are, whether the work is durable or whether it is just a lot of bulk without value.
E.A.K. Would you say a word as to "revealed in fire", in verse 13? It seems a remarkable expression.
J.T. It is judgment of God applied. There is a saving here, "so as through the fire", so to speak. With Peter there is the thought of saving souls by water; both things are true. This is a most serious matter because it is a question of persons who are recognised as leaders in the work of God. It says, "if any one build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones", these things are recognisable as relatively durable, but then wood, grass, straw, are not durable, they are things that will surely give way when the test comes, and so it goes on, "the work of each shall be made manifest", and then it says, "for the day shall declare it". That will run
{282}
on to the judgment of God, which is referred to later in the second epistle, "we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ" @2 Corinthians 5:10. As has just been remarked, crises come up amongst the brethren and we are all concerned about it. We have to look into it. What is the quality? What are we dealing with? What evil may be in the situation? The test comes and there may be a need for judicial dealing with some. That is the serious matter that is alluded to here; "the day" might be, in that way, brought forward to any time in a crisis.
W.H.W. In connection with that, do you think that when the apostle speaks of himself as a wise architect there is the suggestion to the Corinthian saints to use wisdom?
J.T. Surely; and indeed it is always evident that we must be wise. We are dealing with the most precious things the universe has, the things of God, and it is always essential to be wise in dealing with them, not to be trifling, because God is watching all the time, and tests will surely come if things are wrong with us.
J.N.G. Whilst matters come up which attach to individuals in the way of evil and have to be dealt with in the assembly, can we attach the thought of sin to the assembly?
J.T. In the public sense, yes, because we have to view the assembly in two ways, that is to say, as in this epistle, and then as in the epistle to the Ephesians. The latter deals with the assembly in its bearing Godward; He has "raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus" (@Ephesians 2:6). Our relation eternally is in mind there, but here it is our relation responsibly, according to the epistle to the Romans, "that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit" (@Romans 8:4). There is possibility of sin
{283}
amongst us, viewed in that light, and so here in the opening verses it says, "Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ, by God's will, and Sosthenes the brother, to the assembly of God which is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints, with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours @1 Corinthians 1:1,2". This is the address to the Corinthian assembly, and in chapter 1 we have this evil of party spirit and feeling, and so throughout these early chapters, particularly in chapter 1, and now in this chapter as we have had it before us, the apostle calls them fleshly. In chapter 5 there is a man amongst them who had his father's wife, he was sinning worse than the gentiles; the possibility of that occurring had to be taken into account, that is in the public local assembly.
W.H.W. So that in the public setting we have the abstract view to help us for the working out of things, but in Ephesians we have the heavenly pattern, "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God" @Ephesians 4:13.
J.T. Very good.
E.W. Does @2 Timothy 2:20 apply today? "In a great house there are not only gold and silver vessels, but also wooden and earthen". Has that an application today?
J.T. Quite so; hence, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity" (@2 Timothy 2:19), whereas at Corinth the thought was to put such away. "Remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves",@1 Corinthians 5:13.
W.H.W. In what way does the thought of reward in chapter 3 work out in this connection?
J.T. It says in verse 14, "If the work of an one which he has built upon the foundation shall abide, he shall receive a reward", that is to say, that at the judgment seat of Christ the man is dealt with
{284}
according to the works he has done in the body, whether good or bad, so that if they are good they will receive a reward. If, however, a man's work is such that it is consumed, but he himself is actually a Christian he is saved, "but so as through the fire", that is, he is barely saved, but he is saved nevertheless, showing how grace works in these cases.
G.P.P. Is it a normal activity for all the saints to be engaged in this building, or is it a matter of gift?
J.T. I think all the saints are involved; it is said in Ephesians "to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ" @Ephesians 4:7. That is to say, we all may have part in one way or another in the building; God graciously accredits this to us. But then there is what is called specific gift. This is, of course, a more particular thing here, that is to say, a man may have gift from God to build, to work in the assembly as a builder, and the point is that he builds on the foundation.
L.G.L. There seems to be descending order in relation to the matter of building, first God's building, and then the apostle as the wise architect, and then others are building, but does @1 Corinthians 3:10, "let each see how he builds upon it", indicate that there would be help for those engaged in the work to understand the character of the building? Does it suggest that spiritual intelligence would be available for every activity and that it would be within the range of each as you have suggested?
J.T. Quite so. This epistle bears that out as to the way the thing is spread abroad among the saints, so the word in @1 Corinthians 10:15, is, "I speak as to intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say". That is in mind according to what has just been remarked, that the saints as a whole may be regarded as having part in this great matter and they are to see to it that they are intelligent in what they are
{285}
doing, and not acting blindly; they know what they are doing. The book of Proverbs greatly helps, if we refer to it, how wisdom comes into all this. Hence the importance of reading the Scriptures and keeping them before us in all these matters; and sisters have part in them because of so many things they can do that bear on the building; so each is to have understanding in what he is doing; "do *ye* judge what I say", (@1 Corinthians 10:15) the apostle says, each one having a judgment. One has often said oneself that he has a judgment about everyone he knows; it is not that you are critical exactly, or overbearing, but God would, as it were, look to you to have a judgment about things, and He is ready to help you to have a right judgment. So this construction is going on: 'View the vast building, see it rise; The work how great! the plan how wise!' So let each lend a hand. The epistles to Timothy show how sisters may have part, even in the work of building.
C.P.P. Does the thought of edifying the assembly come in on this line as in @1 Corinthians 14?
J.T. That is the idea, only there it is a question of gift, if you have a word to give and opportunity offers (all may prophesy one by one, the apostle says); well then, take advantage of it, and have in mind that there may be edification; the point is edification, "love edifies", (@1 Corinthians 8:1).
H.D.T. Would Paul's reference to himself as being an architect mean that those who build have the plan in mind, which would save promiscuous additions?
J.T. That is what is meant, I am sure, and, of course, here it is alluded to just as any architectural work would need an architect. The plan is laid out on paper, as we say, and then the workers go by that plan, it enters into every part of the building.
H.D.T. Do you think we might pray that the saints
{286}
generally, ourselves, may get some conception of God's plan in regard, of the assembly?
J.T. I do indeed. I am greatly encouraged with what I see among the brethren in these parts, and everywhere one goes. The brethren are awakening to what God's mind is; His mind is entering into our meetings, these large meetings where brethren have to travel great distances; God is concerned about that, our work is not in vain, "knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord", (@1 Corinthians 15:58). We are to know what we are doing, and do it well.
Ques. Is it that the building may be largely a matter of the way we go in and out amongst the saints? I was thinking of David, and how it says that in his affliction he prepared much material for the building of the house.
J.T. He did indeed. It is therefore important that we should get to one another's houses. These meetings which we have afford much opportunity, and it is so universally where they are held, that the brethren's houses are usually opened to the visitors, and it is a very important thing that they should be open, and that the visitors may know how to use them aright and be comely in them. We get to know the quality of the brethren by going to their houses; we cannot know each other very much as we see each other in a meeting like this. It is when we go in and out amongst each other that we get to know our qualities, and that is the material the apostle is dealing with. We have in this epistle much said about sisters, much restriction put upon them as to headship, as to silence, but still there is enough to show how they are regarded, that they are part of the system into which we are brought and they have their work to do, and the young people too, we might say; all are brought under the surveillance of God and heaven as to what we are and what we
{287}
are doing. God is doing a great work, and He wants us to be in it, not only be in it in view of eternity, but in it now as working in it, as building it up.
G.P.P. Would the household of Stephanas be in it as devoted to the saints?
J.T. Very good, and many sisters whom we might mention.
J.N.G. The house of Chloe?
J.T. Very good. People who are watching, people who look and see what is happening.
G.J.N. Aquila and Priscilla invited Apollos to their house.
J.T. That seems to be the case; I would think that Priscilla had as much to do with it as her husband; it would look as if they invited him to *their* house, they "took him to them", (@Acts 18:26) it says. It is doubtful that they would have gone into much in the meeting room, so they took him to them and that would give them more opportunity to find out what he was, and he would find out what they were, too, because it is a question of the brethren being together, mingling together so as to know each other.
A.M. The feature of holiness is not limited therefore just to the meetings, convocations like this; is it not to enter into the very tissue of our walk and ways here?
J.T. Quite so. The matter of holiness is most important, the relations between us should be in holiness, as Paul enjoined Timothy, "with all purity", but even going to the length of holiness, "without which no one shall see the Lord", it says in @Hebrews 12:14.
W.H.W. Is the thought then that the temple of God and the Spirit of God dwelling in us are to govern us at all times?
J.T. That is what I would think, and if we look at the world it is going on with the same sort of things, in an unholy way, but as we are holding
{288}
ourselves free of all that, to be for God, His building proceeds; love builds up.
A.G.L. Would the word in @Ephesians 4:29 apply in a household way, "Let no corrupt word go out of your mouth, but if there be any good one for needful edification, that it may give grace to those that hear it"?
J.T. Very good. The absence of corruption is in that, it so easily slips into our domestic relations.
J.N.G. Would you say a word as to @1 Corinthians 3:17, "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy", as over against our responsibility to deal with evil?
J.T. It is remarkable that it should come in here so strongly, "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy". The words "destroy" and "corrupt" are the same, I understand, showing that the bearing of these things that are evil in the households are apt to destroy the temple of God. That is, what we have here tonight is apt to be damaged and ruined unless we are holy in our houses and sober in our manners with each other.
R.M.Y. Would you say a word as to the things that are ours, "all things"?
J.T. Well, how much there is in it from the divine side as to the liberality with which God regards us -- "all things are yours" (verse 21). The whole scene is really God's, and He is saying that it is all to be ours literally. It may not be ours now, but it all is to be ours, we are heirs with Christ; whatever He is heir to, we are, and indeed we are heirs of God, that is to say His whole creation is within our range, we are heirs to it, and it is a question now of how we use it.
R.B.T. Would the conception of that give us material for the building?
J.T. I think so, but we keep in mind that we are limited, we cannot take our fling as others do. Young
{289}
people cannot go out into the cricket and football fields as others do. I am not meaning just that young boys cannot do this or that in that sense, but only that we cannot do what others do, because we are under restriction because we are God's, and we have to bear in mind that what God is we must be, we must have Himself before us as to what we are doing. Christ is ours and Christ is God's too. It is a remarkable thing that all centres in God, not the Father, but God; that is the point at Corinth, it is "the assembly of God".
Rem. So that it is ownership in that sense?
J.T. Quite so, because we are heirs of God, joint-heirs with Christ, all belongs to us. It is a question of how we use it. The air we are breathing now is God's and Christ's too, and we are using it rightly, we are using it in a holy way. The water we use, and the food we use and the clothing we wear, all are God's; so we give thanks for it. We do not thank men for what we get as though they originated things; we thank God for our food; it is a very great matter too, and God is pleased. Very few do thank Him for their food, but true Christians do.
H.D.T. "The God who affords us all things richly for our enjoyment",@1 Timothy 6:17.
J.T. Very good, "richly", the liberality of God, because He owns everything.
E.A.K. "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof", (@Psalm 24:1). Would that preserve us in piety from a wrongful use of it?
J.T. Quite so, and it must please God to see in a city like this (I do not pretend to know how many brethren there are in it) that every one of us gives thanks to God, whether we are at work, publicly in restaurants, or at home. It all glorifies God in these very things we are dealing with.
A.M. Is not the initial idea of the temple seen in regard to the believer's body in this very connection
{290}
as at the end of @1 Corinthians 6, "Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have of God; and ye are not your own? for ye have been bought with a price: glorify now then God in your body" @1 Corinthians 6:19,20?
J.T. That works out against what is so very evil, as that very chapter speaks of. It is a question of the believer's body; it is holy, it is the temple of the Holy Spirit, a remarkable thing that that is the basis on which the evil of that chapter is judged, that we are indwelt by the Holy Spirit.
{291}
THE UPPER ROOM
@Matthew 26:17 - 19; @Mark 14:12 - 16; @Luke 22:7 - 13; @Acts 1:10 - 14
J.T. It is hoped, that what may come before us at this time may lead to a better understanding amongst us of the introduction of Christianity, especially as centring in the Lord's supper. Mark and Luke have the subject of the upper room, and give it considerable prominence, as we have no doubt noticed. The Acts further makes it prominent (Luke writing the Acts), having in mind that the position of the disciples at the beginning, before the Holy Spirit came down, was in the upper room, showing that it was not connected with the temple, and that the bearing of it was upward, which indeed is the truth as to Christianity from the very outset to the present time. Then it is thought that it would be profitable to notice that Matthew does not mention the upper room; what he says instead is, "The Teacher says, My time is near, I will keep the passover in thy house with my disciples" (chapter 26:18). The Lord did not bring forward the thought of His ascension in Matthew, thus making way for His continual presence here amongst the saints in the assembly; whereas Mark and Luke, with the Acts, would indicate that, whilst not belittling what Matthew presents, there is access to heaven. So, although John does not mention the upper room, he does say, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you" @John 14:18; but Matthew, as has been remarked, would suggest that the Lord remains here, as indeed Matthew says, quoting Him, "lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world" @Matthew 28:20; and again, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there
{292}
am I in the midst of them" @Matthew 18:20. So His continual presence is assured to us in Matthew to support us, whereas the other gospels make way for comings to us from heaven, according to the Lord's pleasure.
A.H.S. In @Matthew 26:18 the footnote calls attention to the fact that the keeping is in the present tense, 'I keep the passover in thy house with my disciples'.
J.T. Yes, quite so. The immediateness of it is stressed, and then the continuance with them, the Lord's continuance with us.
J.N.G. Does Matthew give us the thought of the public position in view of the presence of evil?
J.T. That is what I would say. The public position is in view, as has been said, as characterising Matthew in view of the presence of evil.
C.P.P. Do the Lord's words as to "my disciples" indicate our position in relation to the truth, and the public position?
J.T. The Lord is not doing anything without us, so to speak. The word is, "Go into the city unto such a one, and say to him. The Teacher says, My time is near, I will keep the passover in thy house with my disciples", (@Matthew 26:18); that is to say, the Lord would intimate in the gospels, that He is not doing anything without us, not that He is not doing anything, only that He is stressing that He would have *us* . In each case in the synoptic gospels He came with the twelve, as if they must be there, and now the Lord would not come into a hall like this by Himself. If it is a question of coming to earth, or having to do anything administratively, all is in the light of the assembly; He is doing it with us. There will be other movements, of course, presently, for God "has set a day in which he is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed" (@Acts 17:31); but now it is a
{293}
question, of the assembly. What He is doing, He is doing in relation to the assembly.
R.M.Y. Would you say a little more as to the distinction between His permanent presence as in Matthew, and the visits from heaven that you spoke of in the other scriptures?
J.T. I would say that His position in general is here, because His disciples are here, and so according to John He came to where the disciples were. That is the outlook with Him now, but at the same time He is in heaven. Mark says He has gone into heaven, He is at the right hand of God, and that He is working with the disciples, with us, but He is in heaven. He has gone into heaven, we are told elsewhere, angels and authorities and powers being made subject to Him. So that the Lord is thus asserting His liberty to do as He pleases, as it were; He is not under control in that sense. What He sees His Father do, He does, but He is not under control by any power on earth or in heaven. He is in complete liberty.
W.H.G. Do we need to apprehend, in regard of our local setting, that the Lord has a right in every locality to have things done His way?
J.T. That is what I would say. It is a question of what His will is, hence we look for guidance from Him. He is with us according to Matthew, but even if He be in heaven, He is with us, so we can be assured in our prayers, whatever happens, that the Lord is near. We have to distinguish between Him being *near* , and being just *with* us. We are assured that He is not at a distance from us, He is always near.
J.E. Has there not been an effort on the part of the enemy to divorce the position of Christ in heaven from the position of the saints here? The Lord will not tolerate any separation in this sense, will He? "I am with you alway" (@Matthew 28:20) is the word.
{294}
J.T. Yes, the fact of the assembly being His body is a confirmation of that. According to @Ephesians 1:23 the assembly is His body, so that it is inseparable from Him; it cannot be divorced from Him.
J.W.H. Does '*the Teacher*', which is stressed here, bear on the authority of His word to us as coming under it?
J.T. Just so, "The Teacher says". So in @John 1 those who followed John the baptist left him and followed Jesus, and Jesus saw them following and He asked them about their following, and they say, 'Teacher, where abidest thou?' He is a Teacher. At the end of John's gospel Mary Magdalene calls Him "Rabboni", meaning that He is her Teacher. She represents those who are characteristically disciples of Jesus. We do not recognise any other teacher. Of course, there are the schools needed for ordinary education, but as regards what is moral and spiritual we think of Him, we learn everything from Christ.
E.A.K. Would there be an allusion here in the responsible setting, to the great thought of teaching that has marked the dispensation in relation to the Lord's supper, as you are speaking of it now?
J.T. I would say that. No subject has had more attention, perhaps from the outset, but particularly of recent times, than the Lord's supper, and particularly because it is the beginning, the initial feature of the service of God, which is very little understood. But the Lord is giving us to understand that His supper is initial as to the service of God, and from the time of the introduction of the Supper in the service until the end of it, it is from glory to glory, and hence the need of accurate teaching. So in Paul's ministry he separated the disciples in Ephesus, reasoning in the school of Tyrannus, meaning that there was to be authoritative teaching, insistent
{295}
teaching. That, I believe, is what the Lord is bringing before us; the need of teaching.
J.E. Did Paul himself personally get an impression as to authoritative teaching when the Lord said to him, "enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do", (@Acts 9:6)? Was the element of teaching there in the house of Damascus?
J.T. Quite so. "It shall be told thee"; it would not be optional. It is often thought to be optional, that we can come to hear ministry, or remain away, as we please, but it is not optional from the Lord's standpoint. It is absolutely necessary that we should attend to teaching, that we should be taught. "Enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do"; (@Acts 9:6) it was imperative.
L.G.L. In @Matthew 26:19 it says that "the disciples did as Jesus had directed them". Would that be an important point in the matter of learning quickly?
J.T. Well, it *is* the point. The epistle to the Romans would indicate that obedience should be the first thought with us, the "obedience of faith among all the nations", @Romans 1:5. So here the disciples did as Jesus had directed them, and so Paul, too, in @1 Corinthians 11:2, praises them that they had kept the directions. Things are not optional in Christianity, they are imperative. The divine mind is imperative to be looked into; so Berean features should be first with us; that is to say, looking into the Scriptures to see that whatever is said in ministry is right, whether these things are so.
G.P.P. Would you say that Matthew sets us up in a moral position rightly in view of the upward movement that you referred to in Mark and Luke and the Acts?
J.T. I think so. "Lo, I am with you alway", @Matthew 28:20. So when the time for the Lord's supper comes, we come together; but at the beginning
{296}
it does not appear that they were regulated by one day in the week, or whether they broke bread every day; they may have; but under Paul's administration clearly the first day of the week was the day for the breaking of bread. So that there is a time for it. @Luke 22:14, says, "when the hour was come"; whatever hour is fixed, we are there, we are not late; we are ready for what we have come to do.
A.C.S.P. Have you in mind that the consciousness of the Lord being here "all the days" would elevate all our thoughts in regard to Christianity and what is proper to it?
J.T. Very good. He is here; we have already remarked on the suggestion that we get, "The Lord is near", (@Philippians 4:5). That would mean that for any special help needed He is available, He is nearby, He can be called upon. The fact that He is here, as Matthew presents Him, makes us superior to everything. Even if it be that we are attacked or persecuted, we go through it, because Philippians says, "unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake" @Philippians 1:29. Moreover, it is said in Revelation in connection with the assembly at Smyrna, that they were to be killed. The Lord said they should be persecuted ten days, but then He said, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give to thee the crown of life @Revelation 2:10". There would be persecution unto death, but still the Lord was there; that is the point, that the Lord is near or present with us.
E.A.K. Would the three Hebrew children in the fiery furnace, and the appearance of the fourth being like a Son of God, be in keeping with what you are saying?
J.T. Very good. Those three persecuted ones are mentioned thirteen times in @Daniel 3, and Nebuchadnezzar looks and sees a fourth who he says is "like
{297}
a son of God", @Daniel 3:25 showing that the Lord was there in the suffering.
J.E. There is also the Lord's word to Paul, "Why dost thou persecute me?" (@Acts 9:4).
J.T. Quite. The persecution was there, and it was persecution in the saints; that is to say, the Lord speaks of Himself as persecuted, but He was persecuted in the saints. Literally He was in heaven beyond the range of persecution, but the saints are not, they are here, and that is where the persecution proceeds.
J.D. Paul also could say, "the Lord stood with Me (@2 Timothy 4:17)".
J.T. Just so, "and gave me power, that through me the proclamation might be fully made", (@2 Timothy 4:17). That is what we can count on. We are not to forget, in sufferings, that the preaching must go on. Of course, the service of God likewise must go on, but the preaching must go on.
A.G.L. Is it in that character that we come together to break bread, as suffering here?
J.T. The position is, that where we have the breaking of bread, in any city or town or village in the world, that city is "called spiritually Sodom an Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified", (@Revelation 11:8). That is a very solemn thing, that although we may not experience persecution all the time, underneath that is the attitude. So we may expect sufferings: "unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake", (@Philippians 1:29).
R.H.G. Could you distinguish for us between the Lord being with us, and the Spirit being with us?
J.T. The Spirit is with us always, formally so; He remains with us. The Lord is with us in spirit; as Matthew would put it, He is with us always; yet He is not corporeally with us, for He has gone into heaven and He remains there, as Peter says, "whom
{298}
heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things", (@Acts 3:21). That is a fact; at the same time He is with us in spirit, and, in the early days at any rate, He came occasionally to the saints corporeally according to the epistle to the Corinthians and @Acts 1.
R.M.Y. Is it in mind that the Supper particularly provides Him with an opportunity for special visits?
J.T. I would say that is the truth; the wording as to the Lord's supper mentioned by Paul in @1 Corinthians 11 indicates that. He says, "the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me" (or 'for the calling of me to mind'), @1 Corinthians 11:23, 24. The inference is clear enough that when that happens the Lord would be there; that is, our minds are ready for Him. The Lord's supper is a peculiar memorial He has left to affect us. Our minds are the first point in the memorial; it is 'for the calling of me to mind', and when our minds are free it is quite to be expected, I would say, that the Lord would come in; the memorial is to make our minds free for Him to come in.
Ques. Would the eating of the passover help in relation to our minds?
J.T. Not in the sense in which we have it in @Matthew 26, which was literal, but in the sense in which we have it in @1 Corinthians 5:7,8, "our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed; so that let us celebrate the feast", meaning we are ready for Him, so we renounce all other associations.
C.H.G. The thought of preparation that enters into these three gospels would not quite apply to us as together, but before we are together to break bread?
J.T. Quite so. It is not now the passover literally,
{299}
*it* is the Lord's supper for which, we come together; and so it is, as we said before, that Luke in writing @Acts 20 says, "we being assembled to break bread". Then we are told that Paul discoursed, and the bread was not broken for a considerable time; the discourse was prolonged, and when Eutychus fell, Paul went down and enfolded him in his arms and said, "his life is in him", (@Acts 20:10). Then they had the breaking of bread, and Paul, having long spoken till daybreak, went away. And they brought away the boy alive, and were no little comforted.
A.M. Would it be right to say that the passover emphasises the *work* of Christ, whereas the Supper emphasises *Himself*?
J.T. Quite so. The only thing there is, that it is a dead Christ that is before us; as we have often remarked, the blood is separate from the body, so that His actual death is there, but then *He* is there, it is He who is to be remembered, not the event of His death, but Himself.
G.P.P. Does that thought of a dead Christ make room for what is historical at the beginning?
J.T. It does. It remains a solemn fact throughout the whole period of Christianity, and what is to be recalled is Christ who died. "This is my body, which is for you", @1 Corinthians 11:24. That does not refer to the mystical body of Christ, the assembly, but refers to His own body which is for us, whatever use we may make of it, however we may appropriate it. There it is; it is for us in all that it would suggest to us.
J.M. How far would you speak of that in relation to the Supper?
J.T. I would speak of it for our souls to appropriate. @John 6:55 quotes the Lord saying, "for my flesh is truly food and my blood is truly drink". The idea is to appropriate it. Whether it be the bread or the cup, they are both for appropriation, and the appropriation of them tends to spirituality.
{300}
J.M. Does this scripture suggest assembly material which has been secured, which is trustworthy, and is capable of taking on what is connected with the upper room in the next two gospels?
J.T. Quite so. So that all that enters into these incidents is intended to dignify the introduction of Christianity and the continual participation in the Lord's supper. All *that* is signified in the facts that are given in Mark and Luke, and in Matthew too, in the sense that He is with us; but in Mark and Luke there is the additional thought of the upper room which is not in Matthew. The upper room would point to the upward trend of the service of God beginning with the Lord's supper. We have to learn to go up, hence Ephesians speaks of us being seated in the heavenlies, which is a matter to be taken in, to be appropriated in the service of God.
A.H.S. Is that why the pitcher of water is introduced in @Mark 14, as guiding the disciples to the man, the Lord also saying, "my guest-chamber"?
J.T. Quite so. "Go into the city", He says in Mark. The disciples inquired as to the passover, as also in Matthew, but the facts in @Mark 14 are, that they are told to go into the city, "and a man shall meet you carrying a pitcher of water"; not that they will meet him, but he will meet them, and where he enters in, they are to say to the goodman of the house, "The Teacher says, Where is my guest-chamber where I may eat the passover with my disciples? and *he* will shew you a large upper room furnished ready". It is said in Luke as in Mark, "a large upper room furnished", meaning that there is a suggestion of room for Christianity, for those who are Christians, for those who partake of the Lord's supper; we are not cramped or limited.
J.M. Would you say a word as to why in Matthew and Mark the inquiry comes from the disciples in relation to the preparation, "Where wilt thou"?
{301}
J.T. I think it would show that they were interested. Luke says that the Lord sent Peter and John without reference to inquiry from them. The disciples were not indifferent, they were interested as to *Him*, where the preparations were to be made that *He* should eat the passover.
Ques. Would the upper room suggest that we have elevation before us at the outset?
J.T. That is what I thought. You get it in the Acts, and you get it in Mark and Luke; as regards John we have already alluded to the fact that Mary Magdalene received the message from the Lord, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", (@John 20:17). The idea of the ascension, too, was there in John.
R.M.Y. Does the fact that there are two emblems help in this matter of elevation? Does the cup take us further or higher than the loaf?
J.T. It does, I would think. It is where we get the memorial that the true meaning of both emblems is seen. Both emblems are mentioned in regard of the memorial, and I suppose it would be to strengthen the idea of testimony, that there is a dual thought. At Emmaus there was only the breaking of bread. Of course, there it was only in a believer's house, and there is no mention of the cup. In @1 Corinthians 11:25 the memorial is mentioned in relation to the cup as it is in relation to the bread.
D.J.M. Would you say a word as to the room *being furnished*?
J.T. God is helping the brethren in obtaining suitable rooms in which to meet publicly, to preach the gospel, and the like; but, even if there be not general comfort for people, there is the thought of furnishing, it might be extended to the idea of moral furnishing, moral conditions, not only physical conditions. The brother comes and lays the table, that is the physical side for which we give thanks to
{302}
God, too, but then the moral conditions must be of greater consequence, so the furnishings would imply those, I would say.
J.E. Would Mark imply that the teaching Matthew gives us concerning the Supper should now take shape in *persons* , so that you have a man, an earthen vessel, who is evidently carrying the truth, and then the furnishings in the house?
J.T. Just so, and it is an earthen vessel, which would allude to humanity; it is a question of humanity according to God.
D.J.M. Would "rejoicing and seeing your order" (@Colossians 2:5), bear on the furnishings?
J.T. I would think so. It is a very beautiful passage, "rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ(@Colossians 2:5)". It is a glorious thing for heaven to look down at, the order that is proper in the service of God and the steadfastness that marked it at Colosse.
A.G.L. Do you think that the furnishings were lacking in the upper room at Troas, and Paul had to furnish them in his long discourse?
J.T. Well, that is a question. I do not know that we can be sure as to what was lacking. There was something lacking in Eutychus anyway; he was sitting at the window-opening, as young people are often diverted in their minds and become defiled. But beyond that I should not like to say much, because it was said that there were *many lights* in the *upper chamber* . The idea of the "upper chamber" was carried on into the customs of the disciples after the Lord had gone into heaven.
G.B.S. Does the thought of *the mind* come into the upper room? Is the mind regulated in the upper room, and then there is power to move upward?
J.T. Just so. It is said in @1 Corinthians 2:16 that "we have the mind of Christ" that is the
{303}
thinking faculty, meaning that we are able to think as He does, and, of course, that brings us together in the one body. It is in the one body we have the thought of the mind. The saints have minds, and eventually they are of one mind. @Philippians 2:2 would show that we *think* the same thing, as well as *say* the same thing, so that our minds are of one accord.
A.E.D. Does the reference to the word 'large' suggest that, whilst we may be actively engaged with one particular phase, we have the full scope of divine thoughts always before us?
J.T. Just so. The psalmist says, "He brought me forth into a large place", @Psalm 18:19. It is the largeness of the place morally, and we surely experience it as we come together in assembly, not simply in numbers but in the state of the saints. We have liberty of soul as we sit down together and proceed in the service of God, and, of course, generally; because, whilst 1 Corinthians and 2 Corinthians deal with the local assembly, yet Romans and the other epistles do not specifically deal with the local assembly, but with the general thought of the service of God in Christianity, and therefore if we look into Romans we are thinking of the general thought of God in the Lord's supper and all else that relates to His service.
P.L. Would you say that this elevation is suggested in the house which Solomon built for Jehovah? "The lowest floor was five cubits broad, and the middle one was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad", (@1 Kings 6:6). Does that bear on the upward trend?
J.T. That is very good. The upward trend, therefore, affords needed accommodation, we are not limited above. The fact is we increase in liberty as we go higher, and so Paul said he had been taken up to the third heaven and he did not indicate that there was any limitation there.
{304}
P.L. "They go from strength to strength; each one will appear before God in Zion", (@Psalm 84:7).
J.T. Just so.
C.P.P. Does that help us to move from a local position into what is general, as touching a spiritual realm including all the saints?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. We begin with brothers and sisters, and children it may be, although of course the children may not be in the truth, but if they are children and in the truth we begin there; but then we gradually advance upward, and the further we go the more liberty we have and hence we reach God, and what can be greater than God? It is infinitude. "That God may be all in all", (@1 Corinthians 15:28). That is to say, everyone is filled with God; that is really the idea of the service of God, "that God may be all in all (@1 Corinthians 15:28)".
Ques. Is that what the Lord had in mind when He said, "In my Father's house there are many abodes", (@John 14:2)?
J.T. Very good. That is an excellent passage to govern what we are saying. The higher we go, the greater the increase.
W.C.B. Should a word from the Scriptures help us in the upward movements?
J.T. I think so. I often find it so for myself; one takes liberty to seek to give a word to the brethren at the breaking of bread, and as a rule I find liberty, and no doubt others do too. The Lord gives a touch to us as the word is ministered, and it is very appropriate that there should be that.
J.M. So that a word given on such an occasion would help the saints forward from where they are, would you say?
J.T. Very good. That is exactly what I was endeavouring to say. We are brought into a large place, but then it is an upper place, it is above; it is a heavenly place really; seated in the heavenlies,
{305}
according to Ephesians; that is not future simply, it is the present time, anticipative of the future.
B.M.Y. Do you consider any phase of the service more appropriate for the word than another?
J.T. I usually find liberty immediately after the breaking of bread. It should not be limited at all, because we may have a word in regard of the Father, and in regard of God Himself, but as a rule I think it is needed more in the early stage of the service.
E.E.T. Is there liberty to refer to what is enjoyed anticipatively in the service of God, or is it rather the present conscious enjoyment of the Father? Can we refer to what is anticipative in the Father's house? For instance `83:1 -
<blockquote>'O the wondrous joy of dwelling <br>In the Father's house above!' </blockquote>
That is not addressed to a divine Person, it is referring anticipatively to something.
J.T. Quite so. It is a question of the Spirit, because we have to come to this, that everything lies in the Spirit in a subjective sense. Of course, there is "Christ in you" (@Colossians 1:27), too, but it is by the Spirit that all is effected subjectively. That is the great fact of Christianity; it is the day of the Spirit, so that we get heavenly thoughts. Although the Spirit is down here continuously, yet He is the Spirit, He is God Himself really, so we cannot limit Him. We may rise by the power of the Spirit to heavenly places; the Spirit effects this in us. He is the Spirit of sonship, and therefore would promote feelings of affection toward God and toward one another, but specially toward God.
A.G.L. Would you say something as to hymns not addressed to divine Persons, yet engaging us with the divine realm?
J.T. J.N.D.¬s hymns abound with references to the divine realm.
{306}
J.N.G. Is that part of the way we take on the "glory to glory"?
J.T. Quite so. That is the great thing to have in mind, because we have the expression, "the Lord of glory" (@1 Corinthians 2:8), and "the Father of glory" (@Ephesians 1:17), and "the God of glory", (@Acts 7:2). We have a great realm in those thoughts of glory. Hence the need of being ready for glory, for that is the idea, it is from one glory to another.
E.A.K. Would you say a word as to what you have alluded to, from time to time, as to the presence of the Spirit with us in the service of God, and our dependence upon the Holy Spirit throughout the entire service?
J.T. It is a simple fact that we are dependent on the Holy Spirit. At the very beginning of the meeting when we sit down together, we are dependent upon the Spirit to be in a right attitude, and a right attitude of mind; and there are other phases as we proceed, the saints viewed as brethren; we are the Lord's brethren, we are not simply brethren as such, but Christ's brethren, and we are pervaded by the Spirit in that sense, the spirit proper to brethren. Then the Spirit of adoption refers to the Father, so we are dependent upon Him throughout the service, and as a matter of fact, dependent upon Him all the time, because we are to walk in the Spirit, "If we live by the Spirit, let us walk also by the Spirit", (@Galatians 5:25).
J.M. Is there any allusion to the Spirit in the pitcher of water?
J.T. I suppose so, as a matter of refreshment, but it may also be a matter of cleansing, so it is a question of how water may be used. The Lord washed the disciples¬ feet, we know, and it is just possible that that service happened after these events of which we have been speaking. So if it is a question of cleansing,
{307}
the water is for that; but then water is also for refreshment, we may speak of living water.
R.H.G. Is there an allusion to the Spirit in the passage in @Acts 1? They returned from the mount of Olives to the upper room.
J.T. Yes, there is. The Spirit had not yet come, but the brethren were there, they were not yet indwelt by the Spirit, of course, but at the same time they were born anew, and not only so, but they had been formed by the Lord's own teaching. He had taught them, and what He taught was spirit and life. At the same time, the Spirit had not come, but they were instructed as to what to do, and they knew what to do, and so they went to the upper room instead of going to the temple. In @Luke 24:53 it is said that they returned from Bethany, "and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God", but it does not say that in @Acts 1. So that it shows that @Acts 1 has in mind Christianity, as it was intended to be here on earth as a testimony, and so they went to the upper room. Instead of going to the temple, they went to the upper room; and we are told who were there, the very names of the apostles are given, and that there were several women as well, and the Lord's mother was there, showing that it was in principle the formation of the public assembly.
J.M. Would you say it is very important that we should be ready for this change of outlook? It is not now the temple, but the upper room, which is characteristic of Christianity.
J.T. Quite so, the change of outlook.
{308}
THE ASSEMBLY VIEWED AS THE BRIDE
@Revelation 19:1 - 10; @Revelation 21:9 - 27
J.T. It is thought that a fitting close to the series of meetings we have had recently would be to consider the assembly from the standpoint of the bride of Christ, and especially in the light of the nearness of the coming of the Lord, which is prominent in this book. It may be remarked that in order to get immediate profit, it is needful to dismiss from our minds the imagery that enters into the book of Revelation, the symbolic character of the whole book, to seek to get at what is really meant. There is a premium in connection with the reading of the book in the first chapter, and although individual reading is of prime importance, yet collective readings, or what we might call class readings, are the most resultful; that is, the Spirit of God has scope in them and furnishes what we may need at any moment. Whatever is needed at the moment in a locality would be in the mind of the Spirit, especially when it is what we may call a city occasion, and the Spirit would take us on, and use what is present in the sense of gift, and in the sense of experience, and in the sense of interest generally, so that we may all profit.
What is in mind, in addition to what has been said, is that the ground is cleared in chapter 19 for the introduction of the assembly as the bride. She is seen earlier in the book, from the very outset, especially in chapter 1, where she is seen before the Lord Himself is seen. The seven golden lamps are seen, and then He is seen in the midst of them. That is the present time, the present actual position of the assembly in responsibility. But then as we remarked, the way was to be cleared for the assembly, not in the sense of responsibility, but in the sense of
{309}
the bride; so these scriptures have been suggested. The clearing process has in mind the entire destruction, everlasting destruction, of the imitation or false assembly who never claims widowhood or being bereft of protection; she sits a queen and is no widow and has no sorrow, and in these chapters, up to the end of chapter 18, God shows how He can deal with her; He has judged her, and He has judged our judgment upon her too, that is to say, the judgment of the saints, so that we are with Him in the judgment. Then chapter 19 is a summary, leading up to the end of the whole matter, the end of the book of Revelation; and the assembly is presented to us in verse 6, "I heard as a voice of a great crowd, and as a voice of many waters, and as a voice of strong thunders, saying, Hallelujah, for the Lord our God the Almighty has taken to himself kingly power. Let us rejoice and exult, and give him glory; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready".
Now it is thought that our first consideration should be to think of the idea of the wife, and of her making herself ready, and then in the second scripture read, @Revelation 21, to see her coming down from God out of heaven. The point to be before us first is how she makes herself ready, and whether it has not a direct reference to the present time, that it is the time of getting ready. Here we are told that "his wife has made herself ready". The last chapter of Proverbs presents her as taking care of His interests, and it is so here; the Lord's interests are being cared for in the idea of the wife. But then it is said, "the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready", meaning that she has taken account of herself in regard of what is needed for the great moment. In chapter 21, she is seen as a bride *adorned* for her husband, but here she is not viewed as already adorned, she has made herself ready, she
{310}
is in the character of the wife. Then there are certain things granted to her, which point to the present time, "And it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure; for the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints", that is to say, they are of herself.
A.H.S. Do you mean that the righteousnesses are coming into evidence now, or do you mean that it is given to her *now* to be clothed in fine linen?
J.T. It is what she has herself, because, viewed from the standpoint of the assembly, the saints are it. Therefore, she has her own resources in that sense, but she is granted to use them, they are fit for use on such a wonderful occasion. They are the righteousnesses of the saints. They are not imputed righteousnesses, but actually accomplished righteousnesses. They are now regarded as fine linen, clean and bright.
G.P.P. Would those righteousnesses be really all that she had taken on of the interests of Christ in caring for them?
J.T. I would say that in general, although whatever they are in detail, they are righteousnesses of the saints, and how essential it is that we should bring them forward. In order now to apply the thing immediately, they refer to ourselves, because we need not speak of them objectively as of others than ourselves; we are the saints. When I say *we* , I mean those who have the Holy Spirit. The righteousnesses of all such are included here in the clothing, the fine linen, "It was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure", and then it adds, "for the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints". Whilst they are viewed as clothing for her now, yet they are of essential value to God in testimony, in view of the wickedness that is current abroad in the world.
A.M. The reference is not to imputed righteousness,
{311}
but to what we speak of as practical righteousness.
J.T. That is what I understand.
A.M. It says in @2 Timothy 2:22, "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace".
J.T. And then in the epistle to the Romans, the great thought is righteousness, and so when we come to chapter 8, it is said "that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit @Romans 8:4". It is not without significance that the great system called the great harlot is no less than the Romish system, the Romish church; not that we are here to bring up names, but we have to deal with the truth, and the epistle to the Romans deals with what was at Rome in the early days after the truth of the assembly was introduced. The truth as carried to Rome, and the great epistle to the Romans contains the truth that was delivered to the saints at that time. It is, therefore, very suggestive that the righteousnesses of the saints should be worked out in our minds from that great epistle which was written to Rome, and yet Rome is in mind in what is said in the body of the book of Revelation up to the end of chapter 18. Many of us perhaps are not aware that we are actually dealing with the system that is all around us, not only the system called the church of Rome, but all religious systems that derive their character and principles from her, for she has daughters.
E.A.K. Would what you are saying bring out that "If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great the darkness!" (@Matthew 6:23)?
J.T. Just so. It is a very apt comment, "how great the darkness!" There is hardly any darkness that can be spoken of as greater than this system, and so there are the judgments meted out to her in chapters 18 and 19.
{312}
A.C.S.P. Is the contrast seen in what is said of the woman of worth that "she doeth him good, and not evil, all the days of her life" (@Proverbs 31:12)?
J.T. Very good. And what is to be added to that is that Solomon, who is the writer of the Proverbs, says in Ecclesiastes that he has found one man among a thousand, but a woman he has not found; therefore, the last chapter of Proverbs is an ideal; that is how we have to take it. The woman is presented as an ideal by the Spirit of God, "Her husband is known in the gates"; (@Proverbs 31:23) the very opposite to this system of which we have been speaking.
J.M. Is it interesting that @Proverbs 31 begins with a man who is a king, and finishes with the woman of worth?
J.T. Just so. The late chapters of Proverbs all lead up to that, especially the man who is spoken of as not knowing anything, but he knew best of all. How interesting that we should have a woman described in this chapter, one said to be a "woman of worth". Who can find her? The paragraph is written in acrostic form so as to bring out the truth.
J.M. Would the paragraph in question suggest something of the scope of these righteousnesses?
J.T. Very good. They are selected by the Spirit of God. They are His own description of a woman of worth, but the query is, who can find her? But she is to be found, and she is found in the book of Revelation in various settings.
D.J.M. "She seeketh wool and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands", (@Proverbs 31:13). Is that how she makes herself ready?
J.T. Quite so. "Worketh willingly with her hands", not just like Tabitha, the woman who made garments, reported in the book of the Acts. This woman makes better garments than Tabitha. What applies to the bride is the question of righteousness; and it is in the plural. It is "the righteousnesses of
{313}
the saints", without saying whether they attach to men or women or children.
J.N.G. Would that connect with what is said of the Thessalonians by Paul, "remembering unceasingly your work of faith, and labour of love, and enduring constancy of hope", @1 Thessalonians 1:3?
J.T. Quite so. You might say all the epistles work out the righteousnesses of the saints, but they are to be worked out as over against the awful thing in this book that is called the harlot, which is entirely destroyed; the smoke of it goes up for ever and ever, and then the ground is cleared for the assembly to be seen first as the wife, and then in the clothing. But in chapter 21, she is seen coming down out of heaven, first as a bride, "the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband @Revelation 21:2". In verse 1 and what follows, she is seen in that way up to the end of verse 8. But then from the beginning of verse 9, she is seen in her millennial functions and glories, which is the next thing to be considered. Firstly, there is the thought of what is current now in the preparation, but secondly what comes down from God out of heaven; that is to say, she is seen in her heavenly character.
J.M. Would you say a word as to why she is called the *Lamb's* wife?
J.T. Well, it is a term that I would say suggests suffering; it is not the idea of a ram, it is more passive. At the same time, the power for war is there; although in the second part of chapter 19, the warfare is by Him as King of kings, and "his name is called The Word of God @Revelation 19:13". I think the Lamb suggests passiveness, littleness and humility, for He suffers, and she is His wife. It would suggest that she is His wife in suffering; suffering is the order of the day in her sojourn on earth.
C.D. Would @Psalm 45 correspond with this where
{314}
we have him riding in kingly power because of truth and meekness and righteousness? Is the thought of the Lamb suggested there, and then later on, the woman brought to Him, clothing of wrought gold being mentioned, and so on?
J.T. Quite so. It is the full thought. There are daughters in that psalm, but the full thought is the king and a woman, the king and the queen, the full thought of God. We have a similar thought in Nehemiah where the queen was also there. In Nehemiah's request for help, in view of the state of Jerusalem, the queen was also sitting by, she was modifying; she is a modifying thought as to the king. The idea of what is modifying is always included in the thought of the woman in Scripture.
A.E.D. Is the element of preparation somewhat seen in Esther, and the righteousness of the saints in Mordecai?
J.T. I would say that. Remarkable instrumentality in the days of Israel's rejection, because there was the question of God hiding His face from the house of Jacob, and yet what God can do in such circumstances! So Esther comes into view. Mordecai, however, is the king in principle, and he was speaking peace to all his seed, so that he and Esther really become the controllers and influencers of the empire at the time, showing what can be done in a day of small things.
C.H.G. Is the thought of the assembly as the bride a future thought, or has it a present bearing upon the assembly as here now?
J.T. Well, it is a question of how light affects us. Even the light of the coming glories of the assembly is intended to affect us now. But what is said in chapter 19, I am sure, is a direct reference to the present time, the time of getting ready for the presentation, for the marriage.
D.J.M. Is it a time of refinement? It is not the
{315}
raw material here, but the fine linen bright and pure.
J.T. Just so. Bright and pure, a beautiful sheen on it, which linen only can furnish.
R.H.G. When does the marriage actually take place?
J.T. I am not prepared to say. "The marriage of the Lamb is come". As to when the thing actually takes place, I suppose, is left for the choice of the Lord. We are learning to have part in it in the assembly services, I would think, on the first day of the week. There is very little said really of what is called the eternal state of things, just enough to give us inklings of it as though we are to get our minds and hearts fitted for it, and be ready for it when it comes, because "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God", (@1 Corinthians 2:9,10). It is a question of our searching, searching the depths of things, finding them out.
W.G.B. As we take on the thought of the bride, would it help us in our administrative activities in the assembly?
J.T. That is the intent of it, I would say, to stimulate us. This is what we are going to be, but in truth we *are* these things, these things are so. What the Holy Spirit is effecting now, must correspond with what is in heaven; it is a question, therefore, of what is current now. The full result will be seen in due time, but it is going on, and the Spirit is working day and night in it, and He is bringing us into it. So @Proverbs 31 is to show the energy and resourcefulness of this feminine person in her employment in view of her husband.
Ques. Does she answer the question in chapter 30,
{316}
"What is his name, and what is his son's name? @Proverbs 30:4"
J.T. Quite so. That matter has often been debated, and has brought results, too. Indeed the closing chapters of Proverbs are leading up to this result; hence the importance of Colossians, where we read of the Son of the Father's love; it is worked out in Proverbs.
J.M. Would the wife more particularly apply to the present moment, and is it a militant idea?
J.T. Well, just so. That is what I was saying, it is the present time, whereas chapter 21:1 - 8 brings in the future, that is the eternal state of things, and then verse 9 begins with the millennial state of things in which she is to shine.
J.M. Would the bride link with the side of affection, something that is known in secret?
J.T. Well, she is a bride, of course, when she comes down in the beginning of chapter 21, she is not seen simply in secret but she is prepared as a bride adorned for her husband, for his eye.
J.M. I meant secret in the way that there is an understanding between the bride and the one who is her husband.
J.T. Well, just so.
C.H.G. In the response that the Lord secures from the assembly in the service of God, is she viewed as the wife?
J.T. The wife is a question of confidence. The word *confidante* is the best word to use as to wifely estate. She is his confidante, that is to say, absolute confidence is the principle of the relations between Christ and the assembly.
P.L. Would it work out in relation to Rebecca gracing Sarah's tent in the light of union with Isaac?
J.T. Well, yes. The question is as to how long she stayed there, how long Sarah's tent was in evidence,
{317}
because it was Sarah's tent at the outset, but how long was Rebecca satisfied with Sarah's tent? I mean, if we apply the thing in detail, because that is really the way to get at it, to visualise what is really meant, what understanding do we get as to it by the Spirit of God? It is said, "The Lord will give thee understanding in all things" (@2 Timothy 2:7), so that we know the antitype of things, which is greater than the type. It says that Isaac loved Rebecca and brought her into his mother's tent, but how long did that thought remain, how long will she be content with Sarah's tent? I am not sure that I got your full thought, but I shall be glad to hear what you have to say.
P.L. It was just the thought that she is his confidante in trustworthiness, in the consciousness of her union with him.
J.T. Just so, what is the outcome? There is much in @Genesis 24 as to Rebecca and Isaac, but then when we come down to the antitype, that is to say, Christ and the assembly, we must get into a wider sphere than Sarah's tent. So the epistles to the Colossians and Ephesians must be understood. Then see what the bearing of all is in the book of Revelation, because we are still in Revelation, a book of figures and symbols. We do not have the actual facts at all, but it is a question of what is figurative and symbolic. But we must get into the facts of the thing, and the book of Revelation gives us hints as we draw near to the end of it, as to what is in mind; hence the Lord says at the end, after we have so much in type and figure, *"I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star", @Revelation 22:16 and then the Spirit says 'Come' to Him, and the bride says 'Come' to Him. So that we might say we have reached the consummation. It is a question of the Spirit of God Himself and the bride, the bride, of course, being the assembly, what she is capable of,
{318}
what intelligence she has, and all this is current now for us to go in for.
A.E.D. Does the matter of being *shown* enter a good deal into this?
J.T. Just so, only that for us, it is the Spirit of God that shows.
A.J.D. Is your thought that there is a widening out in our minds into an eternal setting, not limited to time, rather than what Sarah's tent represents? I wondered whether the eternal thought is not making way more in our minds than it used to.
J.T. And we have to wait. It is a question of waiting, seeing what will be disclosed when the time comes. The Spirit of God will open things up to us, but the translation to heaven is not by the Spirit; the translation to heaven is by the Lord Himself, and it is a question of what will be disclosed to us when all this has happened.
R.M.Y. Do you feel that there is room for it now in the service of God as we speak of it, a response as the bride?
J.T. There is, and it is well to take account of the character of the meetings that are being arranged for the help of the brethren in recent times. There are large numbers, of course, but they are not too large for God, or for the Spirit; we do get numbers in the book of Acts, but the Spirit of God does not continue to give us numbers, but the thoughts come at the end of the dispensation in large numbers coming together. Then the next thing is whether we are learning, and whether we are adding the element of holiness in our gatherings, and prepared for what is open to us, and for what the Spirit is doing and saying to us to prepare us, because it is a question of the preparation of the assembly.
E.A.K. Referring to the Spirit and the bride saying "Come", do you mean to indicate that at the
{319}
close of the dispensation, the Spirit comes into His own distinctive place as a divine Person?
J.T. Just so. And the Spirit says "Come". He is the only Person who could adequately say the word "Come", but then the bride is able to say "Come", but it is in unison with the Spirit; "the Spirit and the bride say, Come (@Revelation 22:17)". So that she is aided, I would say, by the power of the Spirit, but still the Spirit is viewed as by Himself, and she is viewed by herself. In regard of the bride, of course, it is creature condition; we cannot say she can ever be beyond a creature; the assembly is never more than a creature, but the Spirit is more, the Spirit is God; nevertheless, they say the same thing. We may say that it is due to Christ that there should be response to Himself as to the idea of His coming.
E.A.K. Is that properly the consummation of the distinctive ministry of the apostle Paul, and does that indicate that Rebecca in Sarah's tent was provisional?
J.T. Quite so. That provisional state was only of short duration literally, and if we apply it to the assembly, we shall see that the gentiles came into the position almost immediately. Paul said, "Lo, we turn to the Gentiles", (@Acts 13:46) that is not Sarah's tent. It is among the gentiles that the real material for the assembly is taken on.
J.M. Would you say that the time of preparation is *now*?
J.T. I think it is, and it shows how intent we should be, when the Lord is opening up things for us, that each of these general meetings, whether here or elsewhere, should be attended in a holy way, and not merely for enjoyment, but for learning, for preparation.
R.R.T. Is the thought that what is being wrought out now in the bride will come out later in the millennium in display? Is that why he says, "Come
{320}
here, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife", and then we get much as to the features of display during the millennium?
J.T. That is what I thought. Our second point now is just that, beginning with verse 9, running on to the end, and the Spirit would help us. Of course, there is no time now to open up all this, it would take three-day meetings to do so, but it is a question as to the administrative numbers that enter into the chapter. There are more administrative numbers in these few verses than you get anywhere else in Scripture, as far as I know.
E.W. What would correspond with being "set ... on a great and high mountain"? In chapter 17 in connection with the harlot, it is a desert.
J.T. "And he carried me away in the Spirit, and set me on a great and high mountain, and shewed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God", @Revelation 21:10. It would be to remind us, I suppose, of the Lord's own position in the gospels when He was transfigured. Now the Spirit of God is taking John, and giving him a view. Then in @Revelation 17:3 we have a contrast, "And he carried me away in spirit to a desert; and I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet beast", and so forth. That is Rome, the false church. There are no springs of God in the desert, but chapter 21 is, "He carried me away in the Spirit, and set me on a great and high mountain", not a desert. A desert would allude to the utter barrenness of the whole system that is indicated in the harlot, the utter scarcity of anything that is of God, whereas here it is where things can be seen, it is a question of altitude. It says, first of all, "having the glory of God", that is to say, the assembly *has* it, the assembly in its millennial relation *has* the glory of God, and it is like a precious stone, a crystal jasper stone, having twelve gates, and so forth. Then verse 15,
{321}
"And he that spoke with me had a golden, reed as a measure", and all these scriptures running on to the end of the book are descriptive of this wonderful system of things called the heavenly city. The bride, the Lamb's wife, in the early part of the chapter is said to be the holy city, new Jerusalem, but now it is the holy city in relation to the millennial day in which God will bring out what He can do with man as he is, and woman as she is.
J.N.G. Does the numeral twelve bring in the administrative thought in love?
J.T. That is the point of it, it is a question of what is administered in love, and then the solidity, the substantial character of the city described by a cube. That is substantial, it is not mere show as with the tinsel of this world, it is substantial in all these qualities.
J.W.H. Does what is seen in @Ephesians 3 in relation to the measurements there have a bearing upon this in the light of what is eternal?
J.T. Well, I think in the main the measurements are finite when we come to the assembly, we cannot get outside of what is finite; whereas if we come to Christ, if we are dealing with the Lord Jesus, "the root and offspring of David", (@Revelation 22:16) that is infinite. The assembly can never be more than finite, and all these measurements are finite measurements, and so in @Ephesians 3:18,19, "that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height", that is finite, but then "and to know the love of the Christ", that is infinite, and be "filled even to all the fulness of God", that is further infinitude. So that in relation to the assembly, or ourselves as of it, we are never more than what is finite.
J.M. Is this the final result of what is seen in the upper room that we had before us yesterday? Is
{322}
there a link between the great and high mountain and the upper room?
J.T. I would say that. There is much to inquire into on those lines. We may put into the upper room the numeral 'three'. Paul speaks of "the third heaven", hut when we come to Christ, He has gone beyond all heavens, that is infinitude, even the third heaven is not infinite.
E.A.K. Does what you are saying necessitate the mediatorial service of Christ eternally?
J.T. Quite so.
A.J.W. Do we have to understand these things to go up into the high mountain?
J.T. I think the allusion would he to the Lord in the gospels as transfigured. He was transfigured before them; that is, it is a question of what the brethren could see, it is for them.
P.L. So that heavenly vision enters into all administration, does it?
J.T. The first vision we get, as far as I know, is Abraham's in @Genesis 15; it is a vision, but it is the word of God allied with a vision, and so in Revelation, where there is so much that is vision, the Lord comes out eventually as The Word of God, His name is called The Word of God. It is the mind of God in Him, not in the wife, but in Him, "The Word of God @Revelation 19:13". Therefore, the gospel of John instructs us as to who the Person is, the Word of God. The Word of God is God Himself.
C.H.G. It says here of the assembly, "having the glory of God". Would you be free to enlarge upon that a little?
J.T. There is not much time now, but what you say is of the utmost interest. It is a question of the Spirit. You get the thought of glory worked out in the second letter to the Corinthians, "from glory to glory", @2 Corinthians 3:18 it is by the Lord the Spirit. It stands related to the Lord's supper and all that enters into that,
{323}
leading up to the service of God as it is now constituted, showing how glory enters into it; "from glory to glory". Therefore, we have the Father as "the Father of glory", (@Ephesians 1:17) and God is "the God of glory", (@Acts 7:2) and the Spirit is "the Spirit of glory", (@1 Peter 4:14) and Christ is "the Lord of glory (@1 Corinthians 2:8)". So that we have what these wonderful titles involve in order to open up glory to us, and all in the assembly, because what is in the assembly is greater really than the assembly itself. I mean to say that the Spirit of God is in the assembly, and we may even say the Spirit of God is in any believer according to Corinthians. Our bodies are called the "temple of the Holy Spirit @1 Corinthians 6:19". How marvellous it is! But it is a question of how the thing is used, and how we conduct ourselves in regard of it, so that the Spirit of God can dwell in us.
{324}
OCCUPATION WITH WHAT IS GOOD
@Philippians 4:8,9
I have read these verses because they are in Philippians. I might get some verses like them elsewhere, but they are read because they are in the epistle to the Philippians, and also because of what they contain in themselves; that is, what is positive. There is very much of other than positive features in the world. When I speak of 'positive', I refer to what is conveyed in these verses, positive in the sense of what is substantially good, and which is thus to occupy us, so that we might be positive in the assertion of what is good. Philippians is especially in mind as the epistle which arose from the work of God through Paul in Macedonia. It will be recalled that as Paul was at Troas, a word came to him in a vision, a man of Macedonia speaking to him, saying, "Come over into Macedonia, and help us"; (@Acts 16:9) and the apostle gathered assuredly, it says, that the Lord had called them to preach in Macedonia, and he arrived at Philippi which was the chief city in that area. He refers to it as a colony -- a well-known word, although now somewhat giving way to dominion, to what is more distinguished and dignified politically. The apostle arrived, and I need not remind all of the history of the sufferings he endured, and those sufferings signified what was to be done in the place, in the city. It was to be a day of great prosperity spiritually, beginning with the women who went out to the riverside and had prayer. Prayer characterised the work there in a peculiar way, but then a certain woman came into view before the sufferings, and before the result of the sufferings, namely Lydia, "whose heart the Lord opened", and not only opened, but opened "to attend to the things spoken by Paul", (@Acts 16:14). So there was a peculiar
{325}
beginning at Philippi, and it was the beginning really of the work that we now share in, we here in the far west and the south. One is encouraged to call attention to this because of another word in the Scriptures, or record of the Lord's words, namely the south, the Queen of the south. We are in the south; you will pardon me making geographical references, but the Spirit of God uses geography, and we are now in a peculiarly honoured place; not that I wish to say anything in any way to stimulate national feeling, but it is certainly right to encourage the brethren in what is right, in what God is doing in relation to *them* .
Returning to Paul's work in Philippi, it is to say a word about the epistles; there is only one epistle to Philippi, one to Colosse, one to Ephesus, but there are two to Corinth, and these two epistles may be profitably compared with the epistle to the Philippians, because Philippians especially records that they had fellowship with the apostle from the first day until the day on which he wrote to them; that is, there was continuance with them in the work, not only in the knowledge of God, but in the gospel; they were thoroughly with the apostle in what he was doing in his evangelical services. So he was free to say many things about them that we often quote to one another, among which are the verses I have read to encourage us to be occupied with what is positively good, and to steady us in that occupation. There are many currents which are affecting us, affecting the saints, which we may regard as political currents, and we have to be guarded and fortified against them. The fortification I have in mind is in these verses, but I also refer to the general character of the epistle, and how it encourages the brethren to what is good. So I refer to a verse or two I have in mind with this in view. The apostle says, "Constantly in my every supplication, making the supplication
{326}
for you all with joy, because of your fellowship with the gospel, from the first day until now; having confidence of this very thing, that he who has begun in you a good work will complete it unto Jesus Christ's day: as it is righteous for me to think this as to you all, because ye have *me* in your hearts, and that both in my bonds and in the defence and confirmation of the glad tidings ye are all participators in my grace. For God is my witness how I long after you all in the bowels of Christ Jesus. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in full knowledge and all intelligence, that ye may judge of and approve the things that are more excellent, in order that ye may be pure and without offence for Christ's day, being complete as regards the fruit of righteousness, which is by Jesus Christ, to God's glory and praise" @Philippians 1:4 - 11.
I read that because it is a characteristic passage in Philippians, an encouraging passage for the saints there, and it has a striking application to what is in mind at the present time, and especially as to what has happened today. We have just heard of a sister who has today departed to be with Christ, and another sister who was buried today. This epistle speaks of Paul's exercises about departing to be with Christ, and it is a matter that every one of us would, I am sure, have in his mind, more or less; it certainly is in my mind because it is so imminent in persons of one's age, and when such occurrences as two sisters having departed to be with Christ are mentioned, we are not without feeling. The name of one of them has been long known in this city, and her family, too, is honoured in this city, so I thought it would be quite in order to call attention to the great apostle Paul's own exercises. He was not at all concerned with any fear of death, he spoke of it as something to be desired; he said elsewhere, "I do not deprecate dying" (@Acts 25:11); he had no fear
{327}
as to *it* . At the same time, he had wholesome exercises regarding it, and so it is recorded in this chapter. Paul says, "having the desire for departure and being with Christ, for it is very much better", @Philippians 1:23 and I thought it was a suitable passage to refer to, so that we might all be sobered by these things, because they are not accidental, whatever may be concerned in them. Something has happened to sober us, but it may be to cause joy, too, if we refer to their lives, and certainly if they are really Christians, their lot is far better tonight than it was at the beginning of the week.
I mention this so that we might have it before us, and consider the epistle in the many things that are well known to us, being often quoted in our Bible readings and thought of in our private readings. Amongst these are such wonderful passages as refer to the Lord's own incarnation; His *mind* , the mind of Christ, is spoken of, "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made himself of no reputation" @Philippians 2:5 - 7. This epistle, and what I am saying tonight, has in mind to keep us lowly, because it is our salvation, it is a protection for us to keep lowly in the sense of the lowliness of the mind of Christ. I refer to it because it is such an outstanding passage in this epistle. I am not speaking of it in itself, I refer to the verses read, but I think it right to call attention to what is read with regard to the departing to be with Christ of two of our number in this city, and it is intended to sober us.
There are other passages in Paul's epistles which allude to our being conformed to the image of Christ, which is a matter that requires the most diligent looking into on the part of all of us. We often think of what we are to be like, and of what our condition will be in the resurrection. John says, "it doth
{328}
not yet appear what we shall be @1 John 3:2". We know what we are, but what we shall be does not yet appear, but a passage in Philippians helps us. We are to be conformed to the image of Christ, the image of God's Son; that would mean that we are to be like Him, not as He was here on earth exactly, that cannot be; He was alone in His service here, His life was taken from the earth, there was never another like Him, there will never be another like Him exactly, He was by Himself. It is well to think of these things, that He was alone, but He is not alone now -- 'No longer now alone', as we sometimes sing, He is to have companions, and we are all to be amongst them. It is a question of what we are to be like, and John says, "it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is" @1 John 3:2; that is not as He was in the days of His flesh before His death, nor even what He was in the forty days after His resurrection. We have to think of something more, and the word 'more' applies to us, to the family to which we belong - there is none like it, it is superior to all other families. What I am saying has the intent of stirring up our minds and affections as to what *we are* , what we our very selves are, and it is that we are to be like Christ. We shall be like Him, conformed to the image of God's Son. We have references to the gospels as to what we are to be like; the Lord Himself says that those who have part in the resurrection shall be "equal to angels". That is something to think of, to stir up our minds and affections as to what we are coming into; but then what attaches to all that is the thought of "that world" or 'that age', that is, the coming age, and the resurrection; in that world, and the resurrection, we shall be as angels. Other things can be said about that, but I am quoting from the Lord's own words, which are in the three
{329}
synoptic gospels, that we shall be "equal to angels", we shall be "sons of God, being sons of the resurrection (@Luke 20:36)".
It is very remarkable that it is said of us that we are "sons of the resurrection", the word "sons" being a figurative word in that sense, because the resurrection does not beget sons; sons of the resurrection is a result of Christ's resurrection. We shall be as angels; you might say we are greater than angels, and that is true, and amongst the things in my mind is this greatness as attaching to our very selves, that is that we are the very first family in the whole universe. Every family in the heavens and on the earth is named by the Father, but we are the first family; the evidence of that might easily be shown in the fact that the Lord Jesus says, "I am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come", (@Revelation 22:16,17). The bride is alongside the Spirit, she is nearest to the Deity, as one has often said, and what a great thing it is to think over, that we belong to the family that is nearest to God, for it is said, that the Spirit *and* the bride say, "Come", to the Lord Jesus. They act together, they say the same thing. You see, therefore, how great our position is, and not only that, but *we* are great, we are the objects of it, we are in mind, as has been said. The fact of it being said by the Spirit of God should affect us and should lead to a walk that is in keeping with it. In Ephesians it is said that there are good works ordained by God beforehand for us to walk in; they have been here, and they are here now, but the question is whether we are walking in them now. I thought I might freely bring this before us, so that we may be affected by the greatness of the things into which we are brought, and amongst these are what we shall be according to this epistle. This is to be taken in as a positive thing applicable to us,
{330}
to our own very selves on this very day, and it has in mind to make us heavenly, for we *are* that, but it is a question of being the thing that we are, in character; that is, being characterised by the Spirit of God, by the things that refer to us.
I proceed to say a word as to these verses, because they are very practical and come home to us; I might say they are homely thoughts, calculated to affect us, and they begin thus, "Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest", (that word "honest" has the force of what is noble), "whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things". There are no bad things mentioned at all. The newspapers contain what is corruptive, that which is vicious, and we have to be on our guard as to the use of these papers, although we cannot be in the world as not knowing what is current in it. The Scriptures afford much instruction and much information as to what is current in the world, and they afford, too, what God has in mind in the way of judgment, one of the most solemn things one can mention. In the book of Revelation it says, "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to shew to his bondmen what must shortly take place; and he signified it, sending by his angel, to his bondman John, who testified the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, all things that he saw" @Revelation 1:1,2. That is something that came in late, in the period of the unfolding of the testimony of the Scriptures. This Revelation came in late, it came in from God to the Lord Jesus, it was a revelation, an apocalypse, an unfolding, an unveiling of things that were to come. "Write therefore what thou hast seen, and the things that are, and the things that are about to be after these (@Revelation 1:19)". John has to write
{331}
according to this order in the book of Revelation; the Lord directed him what to write, and the order in which the subjects should be written; and, of course, what was written was to be read according to the order in which it was written. So it is well to follow that order, and if we do, we shall get much instruction, because we all need this instruction as to what is coming on the world; awful woes are coming on the world.
I only refer to this by way of contrast with the verses I read, as in them there is not a single woe mentioned, not a single evil report; what is mentioned is all good, and it is calculated to strengthen and purify our hearts and minds, so that we may be stabilised in the midst of the evil that is current abroad. The evil in the book of Revelation is only recorded to sober us, and to bring us into accord with the mind of God at the present time, in order that we may have a clear outlook as to what is coming, because there is nothing coming to stimulate hope in the sense of prosperity in this world. God is not on those lines at the present time, not indeed that He does not prosper people, nor that the saints are not to prosper too, for God prospers us, but that is not to make us anything in the world, God is not on those lines. He has written the book of Revelation to sober us, to solemnise us, so that we may be brought into accord with Him as to the judgments that are impending, and they are awful. You say, That is hardly in keeping with what you began with. I am just speaking of things as they come to me, and I see that the brethren do well to look at things in the face. There are terrible things coming, but on the other hand, there are promises, and these are among the good things about which I have read. The greatest promise in the sense of which I have been speaking, is what the Lord gives to Philadelphia, *"I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which
{332}
is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth", (@Revelation 3:10). Therefore, we have to be on our guard, lest we be earth-dwellers, and be concerned about our houses and furniture and cars and all sorts of things; we are not to be occupied with them, but to learn to be heavenly, to be *positively* heavenly, because of what we *are* , not only what we shall come into, but what we *are* already, not naturally, but what we are as Christians; and so the word is, "What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23:23) If we speak thus, it is not a question of admiring ourselves because of the work of God, but of seeing what the work of God is. God is to be glorified in His work, and if He is, we have to be occupied with the good things, the things that are above -- "Have your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth", (@Colossians 3:2). It is a question of the mind, and we can control our minds. God has given us minds, but our minds are not to control us, we are to control our minds. So Paul says, *"I myself* with the mind serve God's law", (@Romans 7:25). It is a determination in his mind, *"I myself*".
So it is in this way that we come into what is positively good, dear brethren, and these verses I read begin with, "Finally, brethren ..." The apostle had already said something like this in chapter 3 -- "Finally, my brethren", and after saying a good deal more, he says again, "Finally, brethren". He comes out with a last "finally", as though he has arrived at the finish of his treatise."Whatsoever things are true", they have to be thought of first: "whatsoever things are honest"; that is, something that deserves respect. We are apt to be unduly democratic. I know full well what characterises the natural minds of some, and the Spirit of God would take us out of the natural, that is like the hyssop upon the wall. It is a question of progressing in what is noble and
{333}
dignified, not in any human sense, but there is what is to be respected; the powers that be, the governors of the world, the governors of this country, are to be respected; not that we would set our minds on them, but it is well to have a respect for what is of God. Even if it be someone who is not really converted, if he is in a *position* that represents God, he is to be respected. This is a wholesome thing, so the first thing mentioned is what is "true", and then what is "honest". Then what is "just" is another thing that has to be well thought of, on which we have to set our minds. Then after that, it says, "whatsoever things are pure", this is one of the most important words of which I can speak in this way. The impurity in the public press, to which I have already referred, very much tends to corrupt our minds, especially in youth. Therefore, these things are set before us by the apostle Paul to dignify us, to purify us, to make us righteous. In another sense, the first thing to be followed is righteousness (@1 Timothy 6:11). The apostle Paul knows where to put words, where to use them and where they should be. As I was saying, the Lord speaks of the order of the book of Revelation, and the words are given, the titles are given where they should be, and they should be read in that order. Wherever we look up anything in the Scriptures, especially in Paul's epistles, see what he says, and then see what it means, why it is said, and then why it is said in the order in which it appears.
Here it is a question of things that are dignifying, purifying and ennobling. That is what these words are meant for, so I mention them accordingly. The passage goes on further, "whatsoever things are of good report"; these are not the reports given by the public press (I am not now seeking to occupy you too much in that sense), but what is of good report is what is reliably reported. We may hear things and
{334}
pass them round as facts, whereas they may not be facts; they may be only reports and may not be true, they may not be accredited, and if they are not accredited, we must not be occupied with them. What we are to be occupied with in this sense is things that are true, and things that are dignified or noble, and then "whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely". The mind and affections are thus kept right and not corrupted by man's ways or by his thoughts, because as soon as we get into the channel of man's thoughts, our own minds are almost certain to be corrupted. Hence the need for protection from all that, and what saves us from it is occupation with what is good, what is holy, what is righteous. John, the writer of the Revelation, says, "he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still" @Revelation 22:11. That would mean (and it is remarkable that it appears in the book of Revelation) that if you are occupied with these things of which I am speaking, which tend to promote holiness, righteousness, goodness, loveliness and virtue, then the thing is to *continue* . In the same passage in Revelation, it says, "he which is filthy, let him be filthy still @Revelation 22:11". You say. That is remarkable! Why should the Spirit of God say it? But He does. How solemn it is that God is saying that we have arrived at a time of apostasy, and the people are apostate in the sense of being unholy and filthy. Well, let it be. God is going to let things go. Presently He is going to take us away altogether, and the whole system will be given over to the judgment of God. It is most solemn that God should say by His Spirit, "he which is filthy, let him be filthy still", but "he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy [or sanctified] still", @Revelation 22:11 as if God would keep everything as it is, and let it go on and bear fruit, but let what is wicked stay, too.
{335}
It is as though God is saying, The time is very short and I am going to deal with the filthy, but I am also going to deal with those that are sanctified; I am going to take them *up* . Glorious thought! We are going to be translated, our bodies are to be changed according to Christ's body. You see how near we are to the end, and how serious we must be as to these things. Let us, therefore, pay attention to what is good, and let it be absorbing, let it occupy us, let it be powerful enough to divert from what is evil, what is impure, what is bad. The Lord is soon coming, and everything is going to be changed, and if there is filthiness, if there is unrighteousness, if there is wickedness, there it stands, and God will find it there, and He will judge it there, and judge it unsparingly. The book of Revelation tells us what the judgments are to be, and they are terrible.
But then there is that wonderful promise for us tonight in the Lord's word, *"I* also will keep thee (@Revelation 3:10)". It is not plural, it is singular. He is thinking of the saints; they are the body of Christ. In the Lord's letter to Philadelphia, He says many things to her, He says, I am going to tell everyone that I love You -- "they ... shall know that *I* have loved thee", (@Revelation 3:9) and added to that He says, *"I* also will keep thee", (@Revelation 3:10) that is, ourselves, for we belong to the body of Christ, His spouse. The book of Revelation treats of the spouse of Christ, the bride of Christ. It is to Him that "the Spirit and the bride say, Come (@Revelation 22:17)". That is what He is speaking about and the Lord is glorying in it. He speaks of His bride with the supremest pleasure, I am certain, and she responds to Him in the last chapter -- "the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that hears say, Come" (because any report or any word like that is sure to spread). "And let him that is athirst come; he that will, let him take the water of life freely (@Revelation 22:17)". So that the promise to Philadelphia is a supreme matter for us,
{336}
it is something on which we can count, to be taken out of all this woe which is imminent, because it *is* imminent; the whole system is being corrupted, and God is just preserving us for a little while. He says, *"I* also will keep thee from" not 'I will take thee out of it', but "keep thee from the hour of temptation (@Revelation 3:10)". The reference is not to our translation, although it may synchronise with it, but the way it is put is that it is a question of *keeping* , and it involves our own power to keep ourselves. The Holy Spirit in us enables us to keep ourselves. "Praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God", (@Jude 20,21). Well, that is how things are at the present moment, and it is a question of occupation with what is good, according to these verses.
Then the final verses are, "if there be any virtue". That word refers to the power in us to say 'No' if it is bad, and to say 'Yes' if it is good. The word "virtue" implies power. You have power to refuse what is evil, and power to accept what is good, and treasure it, and what is good is outlined here in these words, and amongst them is this, "if there be any virtue" (as though the thought is that there is not much, but if there be any) and, "if there be any praise", as though these things are rather small in the thought, still they are there. There *is* virtue, and there *is* praise, and that is what these words would promote in us; that is to say, virtue so that we are ready for praise, and then the praise itself that we may have part in the service of God. One of the greatest things that can be enlarged on, is that we have part in the service of God. That is not what is in heaven, it is what is here on earth, but kept here in the power of the Holy Spirit. The service of God is going on every week, in spite of the evil that is current abroad in the world. We are holding on to what is good, and in virtue of that, we are able to take part in the service of God as the time for it comes, and the
{337}
time for it is the first day of the week, at the beginning of the time in the week, because God has the weeks in His mind. It is a question of weeks in this dispensation, it is not months but weeks, and the first day of the week is the great day in the mind of heaven into which the Lord's supper enters, and in that, all these things I have been saying have their part.
{338}
RULE
@2 Samuel 23:1 - 4
The last words of David, dear brethren, cannot fail to be of interest to all of us, and what is in mind in reading this part of the chapter is *kingship* , not that I wish to speak of kingship as such, but because it applies peculiarly to David. What we shall come to is rule, which indeed David speaks of here, "The ruler among men", @2 Samuel 23:3. What was in mind was mutual feeling between the ruler and the ruled, and, as applying to our David, the Lord Jesus, He said that He was among them as One who served (@Luke 22:27). What is in mind now is the thought of rule, not among the nations, but among the brethren. The only way we can get rule now according to God is among the brethren. So it is thought that these words of David may help us to apply rule among the brethren.
You might say no one is more suitable, either morally or actually, to deal with this matter of rule than David; although there is a higher than he, of course. David is a type of the Lord Jesus, yet not simply a type, there is a substance in David which is often to be observed in the Old Testament saints, prophets or poets. So as I said, David is entitled to a voice; in fact, what he says implies this -- "the last words of David: David the son of Jesse saith", @2 Samuel 23:1. You will all recall, too, how there were his last prayers, and they become quite interesting; they relate to Solomon, they relate to Christ, of course. If we selected the last words of the speakers in the Old Testament, we would have a book of great value, if it could be put together and used. But when we come to divine writing or speaking, they imply infinitude; we cannot apply that to David, but we can to Christ; if all His works were "written one by one" -- very remarkable -- "not
{339}
even the world itself would contain, the books written", (@John 21:25). So we do well to have infinitude before us in these matters.
What is in mind now is to bring down the last words of David to our own times, as to what is suitable in persons who rule; those who rule among men. It may be rendered *over men* , but it is very likely it is *among men* , and it is a very beautiful touch I would say, especially as applied to the Lord Jesus as to how He was among the brethren. "But *I* am in the midst of you as the one that serves" (@Luke 22:27), He says. That is a matter of which everyone who is serving in a prominent way should take notice; that is to say, to be *among* the brethren, not above them. Although David does allude here to what is above, he was raised up on high, God has the right to raise up His servant, and not only to raise him up, but to raise him up on *high* ; therefore, it is a most distinguished place. We get others like it, but David is unique. The brethren will all agree that David is always attractive, especially in the book of Revelation where there is so much to distress in the awful judgments of God unfolded. The refinement of David is seen there, Christ being the root of David; so that he is more than an ordinary writer in Scripture, he is a prophet, he is a priest, and he is king. We could apply all these titles to David, but I prefer to apply them to the real David, the Lord Jesus, because He is the Ruler now. So in writing to the assemblies, the Lord presents Himself as the Son of God, whose eyes are like a flame of fire. He is the Son of God, He is the Ruler in the house, He is over the house of God.
That brings me to what I have in mind, namely, the four gospels. I want to break up these few verses in @2 Samuel 23 among the four gospels, because it is a question of our knowing how to rule among men; that is, to rule among one another, "each esteeming the other as more excellent than themselves", (@Philippians 2:3).
{340}
We have to *learn to* be among the brethren and to esteem them; yet not to esteem them at random. One has often said, and I believe it is right, that one has a judgment about everybody that he knows, and everything, too, and the more we practise assessing persons and things, the safer we shall be. I am not to be critical, but truly judging, "do *ye* judge what I say", Paul said (@1 Corinthians 10:15). So, as I said, I am going to break up these four verses in @2 Samuel 23 in the four gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and put the dear brethren into these gospels, to see how we can be in them, and derive from them, and know *how* to rule among the brethren.
Matthew is the assembly gospel, but what is in mind now is that the idea *of many* belongs to Matthew. We must not leave out the idea of many in dealing judicially with the things of God, we must not divide the brethren up too much. I am doubtful about committees among the brethren, setting a few to look after this, that and the other thing. It is a question of the brethren, and how to be amongst them. We must think of the many, whether there be few or many; God has *many*, He has *many* sons. Those who belong to God are innumerable; He is not afraid of big meetings, far otherwise, if they are controlled, if they are ruled, and they must be ruled. If we apply Matthew, it will furnish us with two or three; that is, if it is necessary; but do not forget, if there are two or three, there must be two or three called in, and if there are two, it is "two of you". That is Matthew; they are not ordinary, but "two of you", and then ten of you, twenty of you, one hundred of you. I can run up to numbers in these parts of the world, thank God. Someone told me years ago, that he was amongst the thousands of Israel down here, and I rejoice in that, but then remember that we must be countable, "Let his men be few", (@Deuteronomy 33:6). That is said of Reuben, that is to say, he was
{341}
countable; persons who can be seen and known and used if necessary, within range. You might say, that is reduction. Yes, but it means to be countable, not to be beyond range, but within reasonable compass for reasonable purposes, and God is reasonable. I speak reverently, God is extremely reasonable. Matthew would say, If anything is to be done well, let the persons involved be countable, let them be as few as can do the thing, so as to be under control. So as I have said, we have "two of you", and "two or three" of you, and then we have the extraordinary numbers given in @Matthew 1, the forty-two generations; not that they all lived at once, they did not, but still they are there; they are known, forty-two generations; God knows them. One often says, quoting Paul, "whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows", (@2 Corinthians 12:2). He knows everything, and if it be a question of numbers, He knows, and when He begins to number in Christianity, the thought is soon stopped. It runs up to five thousand in @Acts 4:4; but that is not many for God; still it is a good many. The blessed Spirit of God is here to bring about numbers, conversions, and the number will be enormous; we thank God for that, too. There are no small numbers. Alas, that idea refers to the lake of fire; it is a limited thought as compared with God's thoughts; it is *very* limited; it is a terrible thought, but it is a lake. So God stops numbering at five thousand. As far as I know, Paul never numbers like that. I am afraid of numbering as soon as we go above that; even at that I am afraid of it because it is almost unusable for ordinary purposes.
I am beginning with Matthew, just in the order in which Scripture has the four gospels, because of the question of numbers and how they are to be utilised, how they are to be kept within bounds. I have alluded to the forty-two generations, and who
{342}
can tell how many were in those forty-two generations, and yet they are carefully thinned out; several are left out altogether because of their links with Jezebel. God has His generations, and they are not ordinary generations; they are God's generations. "The generations of Jesus Christ"; that is Matthew, so that we have quality at once. But then the numbers are to be utilised, and so there are to be plenty, but do not forget that they must be countable. That is why I touched on Matthew first, so that the dear brethren will know how to arrange their committees, if we use the word, although I do not like it at all, it is a political word. Matthew says, "two of you", "two or three" of you, meaning that we are of great value in heaven, because that is the idea in Matthew; not that Matthew is taken up much with heaven, although he does speak about heaven, but he never says that Jesus ascended up into heaven, and that means much. It means that He is here *all* the time, and so whenever matters have to be gone into, and large numbers have to be sought out to adjust them, do not forget that the Lord is near; that is the greatest comfort one knows. Even if you have the large numbers, you may forget that the Lord is near in these matters. So that when the crisis comes, we are not concerned about the many that are engaged in the matter, we are concerned about, and know and enjoy, the fact that the Lord is near. If He has not ascended up into heaven, He is down here, and that is what Matthew would say to us, that the Lord is near, so that we can count upon Him in a crisis.
Now I pass on to Mark. If Matthew furnishes the numbers, then Mark furnishes the ability, and when you come to ability, the necessity for numbers more or less fades, and so the word 'gift' belongs to Mark. The Lord, as you know, went up to a mountain and called whom He Himself would, and He named
{343}
twelve (@Mark 3:13,14); that is to say, it is a question of gift. We have already had this today, that they persevered in the teaching of the apostles. These are the ones that have been up in the mountain with the Lord; He made His own selection, and the point was that they should be *with Him* , and that He might send them forth to preach; not anybody, but those who had been accustomed to be with Him. So when you come to Mark, you have ability; you come, therefore, to these different features; Matthew would furnish you with plenty, and as I said before, Matthew alone tells us that they were *all* to drink of the cup, "drink ye all of it", @Matthew 26:27 showing that we are brought into it in a happy sense. Drinking is for satisfaction, so that in Matthew one is brought into happy conditions. Mark speaks of the disciples as being with the Lord; these are the gifted men, the apostles, and you do not need as many as you would in Matthew, because the ability makes up for the loss of numbers. Therefore, we have to consider ability. Paul is a representative of ability.
I think you will all see the importance of being able to do things, and ability to preach is of prime importance, because the Lord was to send them forth to preach, and, therefore, it is said, "how shall they preach unless they have been sent?" (@Romans 10:15). We must not say they must be invited, the point is to be *sent* . The Lord has them up on the mountain with Himself so as to impress them with what He is up there, exaltation is there. It is a question of being sent, as we get in Isaiah, "Here am I; send me" (@Isaiah 6:8). So the Lord sends His ministers out because they are gifted. He sends them out as gifted. "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men ... *he* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers", (@Ephesians 4:8 - 11). He gave
{344}
all these kinds of gifts, but all for one purpose, namely for the edifying of the body of Christ. It is a question, dear brethren, of ability to edify the body of Christ, and there is an end in view, "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" (@Ephesians 4:13). So that we are happy in this service; we have been up there with the Lord, and we are gifted. The Lord has taken care of us that we might be able to do things, to preach and to teach, and so we are happy in the service, and, dear brethren, that is the secret of rule going on happily and prosperously, so that there is no division amongst us; there is to be no dissatisfaction. The Lord arranges through these gifts that there is no dissatisfaction, and therefore, if preaching has to be done, or if teaching has to be done, well, there is satisfaction in the brethren who are preaching or teaching. They are happy in their service, profitable in their service.
Then if we apply the thought to the gospel of Luke, he is a most attractive evangelist, he is not an apostle, but he is the beloved physician. When we come to Luke, it is a question of prayer, and who does not know the need of prayer? You know that it is said of the Lord that He spent the whole night in prayer, showing to us how important prayer is. We have already had it today as to Philippi, the place where prayer was wont to be made; that is, the Monday nights. One always has comfort in the Monday nights. Monday is a day of happenings, maybe difficult things happen after the Lord's day, the first day of the week, but then there is the prayer meeting. The disciple who said to the Lord, "teach us to pray" (@Luke 11:1), not teach *me* to pray, did not want to know more about prayer than the others, he wanted *all* the brethren to know how to pray. Above all, prayer is needed in the care
{345}
meetings, that is to say, where rule is carried, on, and we can be sure that things will go through according to God if we have recourse to prayer. Luke is one who specially speaks of prayer, and the instance I have cited is a most important one, when the disciple said to the Lord, "Teach us to pray (@Luke 11:1)". The acme of the prayer is that the Father will give the Spirit to those who ask Him. It is a matter of prayer. It is said of the Lord in Luke that they "wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth" @Luke 4:22. It is one of the finest tributes we can get of grace, and, therefore, I connect grace with Luke as well as prayer. Then I connect love with Luke, too, though I connect it fully with John, but grace is the fruit of love, as I might say, in a practical sense. Love is of God. "God is love (@1 John 4:8)". Scripture does not say that God is grace, or God is mercy, but "God is love". So if we have God, as dealing with these matters in the care meetings, in the rule of the things of God, then the great point is love. "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", (@John 13:35). It is a question of what is among us; as I said, Luke is grace, but Luke is a priest, too.
You can see what I am seeking to open up to you now, that is to say, the rule that is going on amongst us, especially in these parts of the world; much time is devoted to rule, rule among the brethren. What I wish to do is to lead the brethren into these thoughts which I am endeavouring to set out, so as to reduce, if possible, the amount of labour, the amount of work in the sense of ruling, and ruling according to laws that are given. We may miss the point in ruling through certain laws that are laid down; a ruler should know what the mind of God is, and, therefore, laws are not to be admitted which will mislead the brethren. Constantly you hear, What is this, that and the other thing? Does
{346}
it apply? I am not saying that we should not ask questions or write to brethren who may know better than we, but I do say that before we write far away, we should ask the nearest neighbour we have about anything; take counsel among yourselves. Indeed @Nehemiah 5:7 says, "I consulted with myself"; a very important thing, because it precludes the idea of partisan feeling, and linking ourselves up with partisan brothers and sisters. Take counsel with yourself, says Nehemiah. I would apply that to Mark, of course, and to Luke and to Matthew too.
Now I am coming to love, and *love never fails* . I am now speaking of something that never fails in the rule among men. "The ruler among men shall be just, ruling in the fear of God", @2 Samuel 23:3. Then we are told what he is like, "A morning without clouds". What a man David was, and yet he has to say, that his house was not so before God. There was sorrow with his house, and who is there here who has not to own that in some sense, and it is well to own it. He says, "Although my house be not so before God (@2 Samuel 23:5)". But still David was raised up on high, he was seen afar off, his name became known universally. It was not simply that he was a warrior, he was, perhaps in a sense the greatest, but he was a priest as well, he wore a linen ephod; he was a prophet, he was a priest, he was a king, he had these titles. He was not only a figure of Christ, but he is something of the substance of Christ, because Christ is the root of David. There is something of the substance there, which it is well to keep in mind; he is not simply a figure, but there is substance. This is applicable to many others too, like Elijah. Elijah is one of the most interesting of all the prophets, because he went up into heaven, without dying. Where is he now? What is he doing? These are pertinent questions.
Matthew says, "many bodies of the saints fallen
{347}
asleep arose, and going out of the tombs after his arising, entered into the holy city and appeared unto many" @Matthew 27:52,53. Where are they now? We are left in the position of not knowing, and we might as well accept that, and say that God knows, and rest in the fact that God knows, that there is nothing unknown; God knows everything. In the day when we shall see these men, we shall see Elijah, we shall see Enoch. You say, That is attractive, and so it is. Presently a host of us will go to heaven without dying, a very precious thought, and what I would urge at this point, dear brethren, is that we should love the appearing of the Lord Jesus, not simply His coming for us, but His coming with us; His coming "to be glorified in his saints, and wondered at in all that have believed", (@2 Thessalonians 1:10). That is what is going to be our portion. These things are, therefore, left with God, and it is well to do that, and to say, I do not know, but God knows; thus I am comforted. The thing is not unknown, God knows it, and no doubt in due time He will disclose it. I am coming back again to the thought of love in the fourth gospel, the well-known term for the gospel of John. It is a unique gospel, it is the one I have quoted already, in which we are told that if the works of Christ were "written one by one, ... not even the world itself would contain the books written" @John 21:25. So that we are impressed with the magnitude of the works of Christ, the infinitude of the works of Christ. We are to think of the infinitude of the works of Christ, how wonderful they were! How wonderful they are! So as to the care meeting, if there is love, everything will be solved. @1 Corinthians 13 is a great love chapter, but it is a picture on the wall. It is not like @Acts 20, which is not a picture on the wall simply, it is a chapter of love itself, love substantially. So love is a great thing.
Collectivity is the thought in Matthew; and then
{348}
I touched on Mark as to the question, of ability, the ability which Christ gives, not natural ability, but the ability which Christ gives as we are with Him on the mount. Then I touched on Luke, the grace of the Lord Jesus in Luke, but prayer too. The Lord Jesus prayed the whole night before He appointed the apostles, showing how careful we must be as to appointing committees, showing how needful it is to be careful about committing ourselves, "Lay hands quickly on no man", (@1 Timothy 5:22). If we have to lay hands on people, do it with care. But then as I said, John is love. In reading John, with a view to what I am saying now, I was struck with the place the Spirit is given in chapter 3; that is to say, how people are born again, born again by the Spirit, showing the family of God. The race that God has in mind is born again, and then the facts are given. "Except any one be born of water and of Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God", @John 3:5, showing the quality that is in John before we come to love. Then we come to verse 16, "God so loved the world @John 3:16". We often speak of it, and I would speak of it now, not simply as a gospel text, but as a text for ruling among men, which must be just, which must be in the fear of God, which must be a matter of love. "Love is of God", the Scripture says, "and every one that loves has been begotten of God, and knows God", (@1 John 4:7). These are the greatest things you can hear one say. We are in the realm of love, that would be heaven. I would say that heaven is the realm of love. It is a question of love, not indiscriminate but *intelligent* love, and hence John is full of "Come and see". Do not be content with what you hear; "Come and see" for yourself. Work things out by what you see. Of course, we have to take witnesses and we have to get information; nevertheless, we have in @John 1 twice, "Come and see". It says of the two that
{349}
followed Jesus that "they went therefore, and saw where he abode; and they abode with him that day" (@John 1:39). They never saw such an abode, I would venture to say; think of the abode that Jesus was in! "They abode with him that day (@John 1:39)". What can one say about what they saw! It is John's way of presenting things; come and see for yourself, and work things out from what you see, and, of course, what you eventually see is Christ, because He is put forward in the universe to be seen; "every eye shall see him", (@Revelation 1:7). There is a wonderful time coming for humanity in what they shall see of Christ. To the man in @John 9 the Lord says, "dost thou believe on the Son of God?" @John 9:35. What a question that is! I would ask every one here, Do you believe on the Son of God? I might say *in* the Son of God too, but now I am saying, Do you believe *on* the Son of God? This man said, "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?" (@John 9:36), and the Lord says, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he" (@John 9:37). Then he said, "I believe, Lord: and he did him homage" (@John 9:38); he is another of the worshippers in John.
"God is a spirit", we are told, "and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth", @John 4:24. It does not say that God has a Spirit, but God *is* a Spirit, and that is beyond us; no one has seen Him at any time, nor can see Him at any time, "King of the ages, the incorruptible, invisible, only God", (@1 Timothy 1:17). The man spoken of in @John 9 saw the Lord and he worshipped Him; he said, "I believe, Lord: and he did him homage (@John 9:38)". John gathers people who are worshippers. There are many more, of course, they are innumerable, but there are certain selected in John as worshippers. It is for us to enter into and understand, that God is a Spirit, and that "they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth"; (@John 4:24) it is a question of the truth.
{350}
THE FAITHFULNESS OF GOD
@1 Corinthians 1:9; @1 Corinthians 10:13; @2 Corinthians 1:18 - 22
I have in mind, as it will be observed from the verses read, to speak of the faithfulness of God. It is mentioned in these three scriptures. Firstly, it is said, "by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son", and secondly that He "will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able to bear, but will with the temptation make the issue also", and then finally it was a question of the veracity of the servant of God, that is Paul. Servants are often questioned as to their veracity and transparency, and nothing is more important than that we should be true and transparent and loyal to God, to Christ, and to the saints, and to their interests. So the third scripture is peculiarly important as to veracity, as to transparency in our motives, ways and services. In making these remarks I will take the liberty of referring to the Old Testament as to the great thought of God's faithfulness, and I refer to Genesis, the great patriarchal book where we find old men in responsibility to God, but true in it. In some instances, indeed, as even in Abraham himself, there were deviations from the right path, and also in Isaac and in Jacob, but in general they were true, and proved God's faithfulness in their loyalty to the truth. Abraham had been promised a son, and the son was duly born, Isaac. God thus proved His faithfulness to His promises, as He always does.
One speaks now to the end that not only servants, that is, those who are particularly noted in their services, but that we all may learn, if we have not already done so, to rely on God, that He is faithful. Paul, in speaking of the Son of God as preached by himself and others, says, "whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the
{351}
amen", (@2 Corinthians 1:20). Every promise of God may be reckoned on thus, and we have, dear brethren, exceedingly great and precious promises. The Spirit of God taking account of them would place them in our hearts indelibly, exceedingly great and precious promises. Nothing can be more assuring and comforting than to wait and see how the promises of God are fulfilled, whether it be in general to His people, or whether it be to any one of us, old or young, as to what we may prove as individuals in our own history. God can take account of very small promises or things and bring them to pass. So He would have His witnesses to Himself, for it is said, "he did not leave himself without witness", (@Acts 14:17). Whatever He promises, you can find witnesses to it somewhere, in your acquaintances, or in the Scriptures, the evidences of the faithfulness of God. So as I said, Abraham had been promised a son. He was not unbelieving as to it, he believed God. "Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness", (@Romans 4:3). So the promised child, Isaac, was born, and Abraham is to be tested in relation to this.
I wish now to pursue the line of the patriarchs in the book of Genesis as to these matters. Our day is a day of great difficulties, financially, industrially and socially; international difficulties, threatening things; hence we are all the more cast on God for the fulfilment of His promises, and amongst these promises is that in Paul's word spoken on Mars¬ hill when he said, "he has set a day in which he is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed, giving the proof of it to all in having raised him from among the dead", (@Acts 17:31). That is to say, the idea of resurrection is a great foundation stone in the structure of faithfulness, the faithfulness of God; He has promised things and they are *all* to be fulfilled, every one of
{352}
them. "Whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen". So that, dear brethren, young ones especially, I would urge you now to learn to accustom yourselves to rely upon the faithfulness of God. Whether it be your own personal promises or expectations, or whether it be what relates to the assembly, or to the general purposes of God, learn to count on God for the fulfilment of them. God left Abraham in this sense as the great witness to His faithfulness. And as I said, Isaac was born, and later Abraham was called upon to cast out Ishmael; that is, the man after the flesh. God does not call upon us to support the man after the flesh even though he be our most loved child, daughter or son; God does not call upon us to support him or her. God is faithful to Himself and He has brought in another Man. He has brought in Christ, and He is relying on that Man for everything. So we have to learn to do as Abraham did, he had to do it, because he was called upon by God to do it, to cast out the bondwoman and her son. It was Sarah who asked for this, and her word is quoted as Scripture, a remarkable thing as to her. Abraham was distressed because he was called upon to cast out his own son, Ishmael. But then who was Ishmael? He was born after the flesh and persecuted him that was born after the Spirit. Why should we support the persecutor of Christ? There is no reason at all that we should. So the word to Abraham was, "In all that Sarah hath said to thee hearken to her voice", (@Genesis 21:12). She was speaking the mind of God; that is to say, God had said it, God had supported her in it, and what she was saying to her husband eventually became recorded in Scripture as the word of God. "What says the scripture? Cast out the maid servant and her son", (@Galatians 4:30).
So that Abraham did what his wife had desired and Ishmael was cast out, and then as if God would
{353}
support Abraham now in whatever he had in mind as to his family, we find that Abraham is tested by the Philistine king of the moment. Many of us have families and our families test us as to what we have before us for them. You see, if we have advancement in this world before us, then we have not God with us. If we have that as an active motive in our minds, God says, You will have to go without Me in that. The Philistine king came with his captain to Abraham. Now I am only speaking of this in a practical way to bring out that we will be tested, dear brethren, in regard of counting on God's faithfulness. God will put us to the test as to that, and we do not want to be put to shame in it. We want to be loyal to God as tested by Him. So we have the word, "God tried Abraham", (@Genesis 22:1). Well, this happened after. What I am now speaking about is not the test of Isaac being offered up, but the test in the Philistine king bringing his captain, that is to say, bringing his military ability or whatever it be to bear on the believer. Whether it be military or whatever else, the enemy will use it to test you if you are to be true to God's promises. Abraham said to Abimelech that he had taken away a well of his. How often that happens, dear brethren, that we have a complaint to make as to a fellow man or a fellow believer, a complaint that something has been done that is not fair; there is much of it. This was not fair of Abimelech, and Abraham told him the truth about it, but then he did not leave it at that. He set seven ewe lambs from his flock aside by themselves, and Abimelech said to Abraham, What do you mean by these seven ewe lambs by themselves?
Now, dear brethren, it is often a challenge, when we are unfairly treated, as to what we are going to do about it. Well, you say, Complain! Very good, but then be sure that you carry with you the right
{354}
spirit. Instead of going to law about it, bear the right spirit with you. Tell the truth, bear the right spirit, the spirit of Christ, for that is what God is looking for in these tests that He allows amongst us. So the ewe lambs were set aside by themselves and the Philistine king wanted to know about these lambs. Each of us can work out what I am saying, if he wishes, by comparing the passages I am quoting. What had these ewe lambs to do with the taking away of the well? Well, Abraham said, It is that you might know that *I* dug that well. That was the point. So that if there be any complaint against a neighbour, be sure that the right spirit is there in the complaint, and the additional thought of a digged well, pointing to the Holy Spirit; that is to say, that you have the means of supporting your right spirit. It is not going to die out with the day, it is going to last. You have stated your case and you are standing by the right principles that govern it, but then be sure that you are going to carry the thought through, that that principle which you now possess and is now characterising you is going through, it is going to be yours. Abraham wanted the Philistine king to know that it was his, that Abraham really owned the well. And what is that but the blessed means that God affords us for supporting us in right principles, so that they do not die with us. Job spoke about wisdom dying with people, but it does not die with them, you know, and we do not want it to die with us either. We want to leave wisdom here; God needs it here, and whatever else there is that is needed in the way of support of the testimony, God needs that. So it is to be prolonged; even if we die, the principles are to be prolonged in the presence of the Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit is exhibited in the well.
I have said that much to illustrate what I have in mind about Abraham, and it is to impart to each
{355}
one present the idea of having a right spirit, to carry it along, to make it stand, that it shall go with you; even if you die the principle should stand. If God has brought in a principle, it is not to die with us, God would keep it here in a living way. So the seven ewe lambs were set apart by Abraham, and Abraham said to Abimelech, I want you to take those seven ewe lambs from me. It was not that he needed them, but Abraham needed to have evidence with the Philistine king that the principle of a right spirit should not die with Abraham. It should continue, and it did continue. How well we know it, as we think of our Lord Jesus Christ! How every right principle is yea and amen in Christ! And so the Lord said, "Abraham exulted in that he should see my day", (@John 8:56). One can understand how Abraham would remember this incident and how, not Isaac, but Christ should be the maintainer of every right principle. So the seven ewe lambs were left with the Philistine king and Abraham died; but if he died the principle of right speaking, of right doing, remains, and righteousness is the great need of the moment, dear brethren. God is faithful. I have read three passages to show it, but then God is righteous too, and God is love. God is God, and He is concerned about what is being preserved in His people, and so in John's epistle it says, "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God", @1 John 3:1. That is the idea, God would have His children here to carry on His own thoughts and His own principles, even if they have to suffer for them.
In order to bring out how the spirit of Abraham is carried down further, we have in Isaac in @Genesis 26 another incident in which the Philistine king had not only his captain with him, but his friend; all to influence, not now Abraham, but Isaac. This idea of influence, dear brethren, by the world is a most
{356}
dangerous thing. Wrong influences by the world are current all round us. Isaac was true, and God was with him and supported him, and so we find again it is a question of Beer-sheba. I should have spoken of Beer-sheba. At that particular time Abraham planted a grove at Beer-sheba and he called upon the name of Jehovah, the Eternal God. I wish you to know how the man of faith in those days, and the education is carried down to ourselves, learned how to call upon the Eternal God; that is to say, that God lives. Even if Abraham died, as I was saying, God lives. He is the Eternal God. Wisdom may die, persons who are wise may die. Alas, many of the dear brethren have been taken of late; others may be taken, and if the Lord is desirous to continue His testimony, more of us will go and the thing is to be ready, but then the wisdom that we have is not to die with us. It is to be cherished among the brethren. Our meetings today are to that end, and all such meetings are to teach us, to support us in what is right, so that we may not assume that wisdom dies with us. It does not. It is of God; God has brought in wisdom. "Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption", (@1 Corinthians 1:30). These things are not to die with us, beloved. They are to live; they are made to live in Christ. As I said, the Philistine king, with his friend and the captain of his host, three people, came to Isaac to influence him in the wrong direction, but they failed. Isaac was true. You will say that these things are all well known; I suppose they are, but they are worth knowing again. In the family of Abraham, the idea of Beer-sheba is growing; that is, the idea of the faithfulness of God is growing, and so after Isaac calls the well Sheba, we are told "therefore the name of the city is Beer-sheba, to this day", (@Genesis 26:33). It was just a place before, but now it is a city, meaning that the testimony of
{357}
God is growing in the family of faith, in the family of Abraham.
Now when Isaac is raised from among the dead in figure he does not go down with Abraham, he goes up to heaven, you might say. I have gone to chapter 26, but the facts of chapter 22 would mean that in principle Isaac is not only risen, but he has gone up somewhere, he has gone out of view. Abraham goes down, and his young men, to Beer-sheba. He is settled in Beer-sheba. He lived there, but Isaac is not said to have gone there; that is to say, as we had it today, Christ goes to heaven. He is entitled to go there any time. He is the Son of God and can go to heaven whenever He pleases. He may come to us and He does; but He is the Son of God and therefore has liberty to do what He pleases; I say that most reverently. The Lord has liberty to come as He pleases, either to come to us or to come and go from us into heaven, but even if He goes wisdom remains here. The Spirit remains here in all His power, so the testimony remains here. Isaac did not go down, but Abraham and his young men go down to Beer-sheba. Isaac is now seen in chapter 26, and is tested as Abraham was tested, but he did not fail; he is at Beer-sheba, and I want every one here today to name the thing I am speaking of, to know the faithfulness of God and stand by and count upon it at all times and in all circumstances. And so, as I said the testimony comes to him that his servants had found water, they had dug a well and found water, and "he called it Shebah (@Genesis 26:33)". The general principle for the continuance of things is the presence of the water, which means the Holy Spirit. It can only be in the power of the Holy Spirit that anything can be maintained according to God.
Then to speak further of Abraham's family in @Genesis 46, Jacob is seen at Beer-sheba; he had
{358}
been through a lot. We are coming to the end of his history at the end of Genesis, which book is mainly the history of these three patriarchs. In chapter 46 Jacob goes down to Joseph. It was Joseph who had sent for him, meaning that now we are coming on to the fulfilment of the promises. Joseph is not in the land of Canaan; he is in Egypt, he is among the gentiles. Christ is now amongst the gentiles, dear brethren. He is not among the Jews. His work mainly was among the Jews during His sojourn here, but at Pentecost He is first among the Jews, but presently He is among the gentiles. Christ is among the gentiles now, I mean that is the position, and we can thank God we are all gentiles here; but it is Christ among the gentiles. It is a very precious thought to have before us. Although we are gentiles, we have Christ among us. The Messiah is among the gentiles, He is not among the Jews; He will be, He will come back. "He shall send Jesus Christ" (@Acts 3:20), Peter says, but He is not come yet, not in that sense. He comes to us, as I have been saying, and presently He will come *for* us. He comes *to* us now, He comes *for* us, and then He comes *with* us.
These are three things which I would like to insert here in what I have to say. First, it is the thought of the Lord Jesus coming to us as He does in assembly, and then coming for us according to 1 Thessalonians, and then He is coming *with* us. He will not come without us. He is coming with His saints to be admired *in* them, for they are His glory. He is not coming without us. It is a very precious thought to have before us in all these meetings, dear brethren, that the Lord is amongst us by the Spirit, but He is presently coming for us, and then He comes with us. That is the finish, "to be glorified in his saints, and wondered at in all that have believed", (@2 Thessalonians 1:10). So that is the outlook and I just endeavour to keep it before the brethren in this address that we may all
{359}
be furnished in view of the great events that are ahead of us. The greatest possible events are ahead of us, we are essential to them too, we belong to them, we are part of them, and the thing is to hold ourselves free of the world, to refuse the influence of the Philistine and maintain our liberty in the power of the Spirit which is seen typically in the well.
Now I would just refer to Jacob. It is said that he is going down to Joseph, which is very remarkable because the land was promised to the patriarchs. God said, He espied it for them (@Ezekiel 20:6). He saw the land at a distance, as from heaven, and He espied it for Israel; that is the way He speaks of it, but He is not taking it on yet, He has given us the earnest of the inheritance, but He is not taking on the land as yet, we have to wait for that, and Israel has to wait for it, but then Jacob is going out into Egypt, he is going out among the nations. My thought is that Christ is now among the nations. It is a question of our keeping the charge of the Lord; Aaron's family and Aaron kept the charge of the Lord. It is a great matter to keep the charge of the Lord; and these meetings are all to that end, to strengthen our hearts to keep the charge of the Lord, not to let things go wrong, but to have them go right that the saints may be governed by right principles.
So now, as I said, Jacob was going down to Egypt, he was going out of Canaan, and of course it is bound to affect us if we have to face that situation, but then we are going out to Joseph. There is nothing to fear if we are going out to Christ. It is a question of the position of Christ, whether He is now among the nations or whether He is among the Jews, or whether it be that He is just in heaven. As Peter says, "whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things", (@Acts 3:21). It is just a matter of Christ being in heaven. In @Revelation 12
{360}
it is said that the male child was taken up to God; that is simply a fact; He is taken up there to be out of the way of the devil. But if Christ be *here*, and He is, according to Matthew, "Behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age" @Matthew 28:20. *With you* , not with the Jews, but with you, that is to say, with the believer, the assembly really; that is where Christ is. He is with us. It is very precious to have in our hearts that not simply are we with Him, but He is with us. That is Matthew.
Jacob, as I said, must have been disconsolate at going out of Canaan, but Jehovah told him not to be afraid. "And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beer-sheba; and he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac (@Genesis 46:1)". Notice that, not Abraham, but *Isaac* , it is a question now of Christ risen, everything now hinges on Christ risen. "And God spoke to Israel in the visions of the night and said, Jacob, Jacob! And he said, Here am I. And he said, I am God, the God of thy father (@Genesis 46:2,3)". Notice this, dear brethren, it is the *God of thy father*, not Abraham, but Isaac; "fear not to go down to Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation. I will go down with thee to Egypt, and I will also certainly bring thee up; and Joseph shall put his hand on thine eyes. And Jacob rose up from Beer-sheba; and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, on the waggons that Pharaoh had sent to carry him. And they took their cattle, and their goods which they had acquired in the land of Canaan, and came to Egypt, Jacob and all his seed with him; his sons and his sons¬ sons with him, his daughters and his sons¬ daughters and all his seed he brought with him to Egypt", (@Genesis 46:3 - 7). That is the position now, dear brethren, we are with Christ, He has come down.
Jacob represents ourselves, he is going to Joseph
{361}
and he is taking all his family with him, that is the position, the whole family of God now are to go out. Any links we have in this world are to be renounced, given up as not of any value, not indeed that there are not such things as material things, but as to the moral side of things. The idea is to go out, to give up all that one might attach importance to in this world. It is a question of the family of God, every family is named of the Father, and we are amongst them, and it is a question of going out, going out to Christ. He is not in Canaan, He is among the nations, He is here, He has His treasure here, His children are here, the saints are here, the assembly is here, and the point is for each of us, dear brethren, to bundle all up and go out. It is a time of going out. Let us go out confidently, do not be afraid, because it is a question of Isaac and Jacob and Joseph, and not Abraham any more. It is a question of Christ risen from among the dead; all is secured, all is yea and amen in Christ. There is nothing to fear, go out, go out to Him bearing His reproach.
I now want to come back to the passages I have alluded to; the last one specially: "Now God is faithful, that our word to you is not yea and nay", @2 Corinthians 1:18. Paul is vindicating himself as to how he had been regarding and treating the Corinthians. He had been treating them in love. He loved them, but they thought he was prevaricating, a thought sometimes allowed as to brethren who care for us, but Paul said, "God is faithful, that our word to you is not yea and nay. For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus), did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him. For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us". You see the triumphant point that the apostle reaches in opening up this truth, and it is for us. Of course, the Corinthians
{362}
are not here any more, but the thing is here. These things have not died with the saints, they are here, for the Spirit is here, and all these things pronounced by Paul remain with us, and it is for us to live in them, and to be transparent in our relation both as regards God, and one another. So the passage ends triumphantly, "For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us" (verse 20). That is to say, Paul is vindicating himself and he is vindicating Silvanus and he is vindicating Timotheus. They were three preachers, you might say. If they were here in Melbourne tomorrow evening, Paul would be preaching, Silvanus would be preaching, and Timotheus would be preaching. They were just as simple then as we are now. If the brethren were able to preach, of course they would be asked to preach. It is of great importance if we are carrying on the testimony of God to secure persons who are equal to any given task. Make sure that they are equal to it, that God has made them equal to it, and if they are equal to a given task do not give it to anyone else. Give it to the man who is equal for it. So in this case there were three preachers in Corinth.
You can understand how the brethren would say, How did Paul get on last night? I would ask that question myself. And how did Timotheus do? Where was he preaching? And how did Silvanus do, and where did he preach? You may be sure they were all preaching, and they were preaching Jesus Christ God's Son; that was the point, Jesus Christ God's Son. So we should not ask people to preach who do not know how to preach, because God has given gifts to men, He has sent them all down here by the Spirit. There is no reason why we should not have gifts because they are available; "desire earnestly the greater gifts" (@1 Corinthians 12:31), we are told. The gifts are available and certainly they are
{363}
needed. Then if there is preaching to be done, get a preacher. See that he is gifted. If there is teaching to be done, get a teacher. Whatever else there is to be done, get the man that can do it, for God gives men to do it, He gives freely. Christ has given gifts to men, we are told, "*he* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers", (@Ephesians 4:11). They are all there and there are plenty of them. You may be sure God is not slack on His side in providing what is needed, but the thing is to be sure you get the right men and make room for them, and pray for them, so that you will get results. We may be sure that each one of these three men who laboured in Corinth, Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus, would get converts; their work would be manifest. And so he said that we three preached the Son of God and the point is that the Son of God "did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him. For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen".
And then there is more than that. In order to make the whole position secure, it goes on to say, "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God". It is *God* now, because the great feature in Corinthians is God. It is the assembly of God which is in Corinth. It says, "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". So that we have these three things, the anointing and the sealing and the earnest. These three things are given by God, and they are given freely by Him. God gives to all freely and upbraideth not, so the thing is to covet them. They are there; lay hold of them, because you need them. The saints need them too, and that is what the triumphant end is here. "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed
{364}
us is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". That is the triumphant close of this great subject in these epistles; that is to say, the faithfulness of God. The testimony to it is the gift of the Spirit in the anointing, in the sealing and in the earnest in our hearts, so that we are rich; we could hardly be richer from that point of view. It is a question of knowing the wealth that we have in the Holy Spirit. May God bless the word in this sense!
