{1}
THE SPHERE WHERE CHRIST IS KNOWN
@Luke 22: 7 - 46
I have a few simple thoughts which I desire to put together in connection with the Lord as viewed in three aspects. First at the passover, the second at the Supper and the third in the garden. There is a good deal for souls to reflect upon in these relations in which Christ is viewed. I wish to engage you for a moment with them, and to shew you how the believer today may be guided into the sphere where Christ is known. The Lord suggested that the passover should be prepared and be celebrated in a place that was to be discovered by certain indications. These indications given by the Lord to the disciples are illustrative of how the believer today may be guided into the sphere where Christ's interests are. In that sphere we find certain elements -- some divine, beloved friends, and some alas, the fruit of the working of the flesh.
I wish to shew you the sphere where Christ has influence. There must be a suitable place where He can celebrate the passover with His disciples. No one observant fails to recognise the exceedingly perplexing condition that prevails today. What is needed is guidance. Without guidance we are sure to miss the way or defile the spot -- the spot influenced by the Lord Jesus. There is guidance to be discerned by those with affection, those who desire to reach the spot influenced by the Lord Jesus. That there *is* a spot is certain, but many of the Lord's people are unacquainted with it. I wish to shew you that the Lord Jesus gives guidance, and how it is discerned. First, the man with the pitcher of water -- he is a very interesting man, if you are interested. It is not simply a man (using a pitcher of water as a figure) with the direct teaching; teaching is to have the Spirit behind it, the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of truth. I want you to discover the Spirit's guiding.
{2}
The man with the pitcher of water is very interesting to those who have a need -- those with spiritual thirst. If you are thirsting after righteousness, that man has something for you. He is not stationary, he is in movement. You want to keep your eye on him; if you want to know where he is going, follow him, he leads you on, "There shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water". Directly you become exercised in regard to God's things, someone will meet you; one who has something for you will meet you. I am not wishing to direct you to an individual; the Holy Spirit is here, and He has taken up His abode in vessels, in men. The word is an "earthen pitcher", the Holy Spirit takes up His position in men.
Directly you are exercised, the Spirit will meet you; He is in movement. If there is anything one desires to see, it is movement. Immediately you come into touch with the activities of the Spirit, you find there is a movement in a certain direction; but the question is, do you move? You may say that was a wonderful meeting, that was wonderful ministry: but do you move? The disciples were to follow the man with the pitcher of water. He entered into a house. I shall here call attention to another feature. The goodman of the house expected Christ; keep your eye on that man. Directly you get into the house, you find the house has an owner, "Say unto the goodman of the house, The Master saith unto thee, Where is the guest-chamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?" The goodman of the house respected and recognised the word of Christ. He understood something of teaching. The Lord says, "He shall shew you a large upper room furnished: there make ready". If you want to reach the spot where Christ has influence you must look for the recognition of His authority. I would not place my foot where the authority of Christ is questioned. It is no place for you. Look for these marks -- the man with the pitcher of water, and the recognition by the owner of the house
{3}
of the Teacher or Master. It is a day of lawlessness in which we live. The authority of Christ is rejected. In @2 Timothy 2 we have a perfect exhortation: "Let everyone that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity". You must recognise the authority of the Lord. There is no possible hope for the preservation of the testimony apart from recognising His authority. The next thing is, the room is furnished. If anything marks the religious world, it is furniture. You find people very particular in regard to furnishing. I want to shew you that furniture is important: you do not want a choir -- an important part of furnishing in the religious world -- it is a confession of the absence of the true Singer. The Lord Jesus is the sweet Psalmist of Israel. He is the true David -- He alone leads the choir -- the spiritual choir. David placed the ark in Zion, and composed a psalm to be sung. God's house is a house of song; that you will not find in the furnishings around. There is not an atom of furniture according to God in the religious forms. Today all true furniture is divine.
I now come to another indication; the upper room. The Spirit never uses a word without a purpose. The upper room is, in a way, secluded from the earth, and divinely furnished. I cannot describe the furniture of the assembly, but it is the spot where the Lord meets with His disciples. Everything is there for the celebration of the passover. Enter! I have only indicated it to you, specially for young souls, so that they might have guidance into the circle influenced by the Lord Jesus. In that room the twelve were with Him. He says to them, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you". I am not saying the passover is the Supper, or the Supper the passover, I am only speaking of the Lord's desire. As you enter that circle the Lord impresses you with His desire. When the Supper was instituted -- when He gave them the cup He said, "Drink ye all of it" -- no one was to be absent.
{4}
We have Him here in relation to the passover, the Supper, and the garden. The Passover has reference to His undergoing the judgment -- being subject to God's holy judgment with regard to sin. The Supper is the Lord's affection for His people. The garden is His submission to the will of the Father. The garden is exclusively for the Father -- the question of the Lord taking a body to do the Father's will, "Not my will, but thine be done". I have indicated the distinction between these three, and now wish to dwell on the Supper.
The Supper is not a meal we partake of in regard to our bodies. It was instituted after the passover, which He tasted according to what it meant -- God's holy judgment in regard to sin. He did not eat the Supper. He broke the bread. He appropriated the passover, but at the Supper He thinks of us. The Supper is entirely for believers, not for Israel, but for the assembly. It was instituted after the passover. The Lord broke the bread -- that was His part in it, the Lord giving His body in death. He gave the Supper to us, and it remains with us. He gave it to the disciples, and afterwards it is given to the Gentiles by the apostle Paul. He leaves it with the assembly. The Lord has given His body in death; no other one could have done that. He did so, not as the passover or for the accomplishment of the Father's will, but "my body which is given for you". The Lord misses you, if you are not there. I was saying to some, the Lord has given us all the same food, and the same drink; and the object in it is, that there might be similarity. If christians are not alike, it is because they do not feed on the same food, and drink the same drink. We are all partakers of the one loaf. There is only one loaf. As it is broken, we are reminded of Christ, not as the passover, but as giving His body in death for us. You put forth your hand and partake of it, committing yourself to the communion of the saints. There is only one communion -- the christian communion.
{5}
If it is not that, it is not to be recognised. We are all partakers of the same spiritual food -- all been made to drink of the one Spirit, "Drink ye all of it". Mark gives the bright side, "they all drank of it". It would be a wonderful thing if christians were all drinking of the one Spirit -- one Spirit in unity. We are not united against our will. Drink is enjoyment -- except where the Lord drank the bitter cup. If all were to drink of the one Spirit there would be satisfaction, a common joy, unity -- no effort in it. Unity is a necessity because of the common joy. Divine thoughts are held in common, and that produces unity. Sections, nationalism and the like, are judged. We hold in common the things of God given to us. If you partake of the loaf, and your associations outside are not in accord, you are inconsistent. In 2 Corinthians we have one common object in heaven, "We all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". There is a similarity between christians. If I meet a spiritual man here, and one at the other side of the world, there is a similarity.
I now want to dwell for a moment, on the condition that arose in the presence of all this, "Behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table" -- a solemn statement! In the presence of all this light; there, where all that love was displayed, was the hand of the betrayer. Could Satan proceed further? The table was the spot where the Lord spread out the expression of His love; moreover the one who had loved Him, denied Him. Judas is typical of the Romish system. It has betrayed Him, and cannot be trusted. Protestantism has denied Him. You may not betray Him, and yet deny Him. The denial of Christ is simply that you have another name than His before you. There were a few names in Sardis (i.e. Protestantism) that were worthy and "they shall walk with me in white". The
{6}
Lord loves an open confession of His name. There is only one Name. It is remarkable that in the beginning of Acts they spoke of it as *the* Name -- not another should be known. Remember how the Lord speaks of those who shall deny Him, and says "him will I also deny". Things are reversed there -- the person that denies Christ, is not worthy to be recognised in God's world. Peter denied Him, yet loved Him. There were two elements at work -- the hand of the betrayer; and Peter who gave way and denied Him. I only touch on Peter. It is of all importance that we should be faithful. If you confess Christ, all the power of God will support you. There is a power here, the power of the Spirit. Then "there was also a strife among them, which of them should be held to be the greatest". These things are all familiar to us. We are exposed to ambition, especially if we have any little bit of gift. Then the Lord said to them "The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them ... but ye shall not be so: but ... he that is chief, as he that doth serve". Among the Gentiles they exercised authority, and such are called benefactors. But you cannot patronise the christian, you may have means, gift and education, but these things are not great enough. The great one in christianity is to be a servant, "Whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat or he that serveth? is not he that sitteth at meat? but I am among you as he that serveth". If I am serving you tonight, it is by ministering a portion of meat to you.
The Lord puts the saints at His table, and ministers to them. That is the path for the man of gift, if after the pattern of Christ. The Lord takes a towel, pours water into a basin, girds Himself with the towel, retaining the servant's place, and wipes their feet, with the towel wherewith He was girded. If serving, you are serving those who are greater than yourself. These things are grouped together by the Spirit in connection with the passover, the Supper, and Gethsemane.
{7}
THE CHARACTER OF THE MANHOOD OF CHRIST
@Hebrews 10: 1 - 22
J.T. It occurs to me that we cannot understand christianity, until we see the kind of man Christ was as taking human form here under God's eye. We have to see this before we can understand aright what christianity is; and this passage, it seems to me, would suggest what He was. His thought in becoming Man was to do God's will, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God", "A body hast thou prepared me"; i.e. He answered in every way to God. He, in carrying out God's will, established a title to live down here; and not only so, but having established that, He becomes the sacrifice.
A.N. God's thought in regard to man was set forth in Christ personally.
J.T. Having established a title to live, and that publicly, He is eligible, or qualified to take man's place as sacrifice. All the perfection of Christ comes out under the eye of God, in the burnt-offering; the more the light shone in, the more the perfection shone out. It is not so with us, "The word of God is quick and powerful -- is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", @Hebrews 4: 12. The word of God turned in on us, discloses something very different from what was in Christ. The inner springs of Christ were all active Godward.
J.McP. You get that in the Psalms.
J.T. Yes, sometimes they rise to the full height of Christ's exercises, "Lo, I come", only the Lord could say that.
R.G. The greatness of Christ lies at the foundation of all our hopes.
J.T. Yes, and you get the order of man, which is to remain in the presence of God, so that the covenant is that by which we are formed after the will of God.
{8}
When you think of man, you must go back to the garden of Eden. The moment the Lord appeared as Man here, every thought connected with man came into evidence. The problem to be solved was -- can this Man justify God in regard to every thought of God for man? The problem was infinitely solved in Christ's walk here, so that we get Him as Man in perfection before God, in the midst of lawlessness and corruption, answering to the mind of God. That is Man according to God.
Question as to the covenant.
J.T. He is to God's pleasure, and effectuates the covenant, and by the covenant brings in a new race -- a race with the law written in their hearts and minds, knowing forgiveness by the Spirit, and the law of God transcribed in their hearts and minds. In the Lord's birth, you have the announcement "good pleasure in men", indicating that it was a race that God had in mind. The Lord sets it all forth in His own Person, and then removes the man that offended, and in doing so, brings in a race or order of man, according to God's pleasure. That indicates our position, so that on the one hand we have "By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ ..." that is, sanctification is in the death of Christ; that is the removal of the lawless man. Then it goes on in verse 15, "Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us" -- a witness in regard to God's covenant. Man is retained before God so that the covenant might be effectuated. You get the ministry of the new covenant, that is a ministry of the Spirit, a ministry which forms man after Christ.
G.N. In the old economy the sacrifice was inferior to the priest; in christianity they are equal.
J.T. The offerer and the offering are equal. Take Moses and Aaron; Moses was very much superior to Aaron, and in many respects you get that. Necessarily the priest was superior to the offering, as the latter was
{9}
a mere creature; now the offerer and the offering are equal. The Lord has brought in a new order of man -- it is very important -- He has retained man before God; then the Spirit comes in, so that there is the ministry of the new covenant.
A.N. Explain how we are formed by the new covenant ministry.
J.T. The Spirit is a witness to us; then He refers to the terms of the covenant "their sins and iniquities will I remember no more". It is what the Spirit is doing to us in principle. In christianity it is even more; it is an epistle of Christ. The saints are to be a transcript of Christ -- His letter. You delight in God's will; instead of it being a burden to you, it is a delight. An order of man is brought out like Christ.
A.N. You are in accord with the death of Christ, as regards the removal of the man.
J.T. Fellowship involves that. You put forth your hand. No one can partake of the Supper for you. It is deliberate, and what you commit yourself to is the removal of the man that sinned, "By the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ". You commit yourself to it, and if so, it is inconsistent to allow your own will. If you do God's will, you are a transcript of Christ, so that you fill out the rest of your time to God's will. There is great testimony in that to God. If we accept that we are here in order that God would secure His thoughts in us, pending the establishment of things publicly, then there is a testimony to the order of man that God intends to retain before Him, and that *here*, where sin reigns. The apostle describes it in @Romans 8, "that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us ..." That is a testimony for God, because it was what God intended in the world. He intended that Israel should walk in His will, so christianity takes the place of Israel, and the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in us.
{10}
R.G. Force of "witness to us"?
J.T. He witnessed to us the virtue of the offering. The Spirit witnesses the significance of it.
R.G. The greatness and virtue of it?
J.T. Quite so.
J.McP. Christianity is built up on one offering.
J.T. Yes.
A.N. We think of the ministry of the new covenant more in relation to our blessing than in regard to what it is to accomplish in the service of God.
J.T. Yes. God intended something in Adam, and *that* failed, and something in Israel, and *that* failed; "They, like Adam, have transgressed the covenant". Christ takes it up and maintains it, and that is to be continued; and nothing else will do for God. This epistle is intended to establish in the church, what is set forth in Christ in the gospels. The covenant is "*I* will". Hebrews is not type and antitype; it is a book of contrasts, so when the types are alluded to, it is what they were literally, not typically.
Rem. "Thy will be done on earth".
J.T. That is the principle on which the new order of man will be brought in. The disciples felt in the Lord's presence, they did not know *how* to pray. What constitutes a man great is the way he acts in the presence of light. If there is an accession of light, how are you to act, how are you to be affected? The disciples were properly affected, "Teach us to pray", they say. That is a right desire. So the Lord says: "When ye pray, say, Father, thy name be hallowed; thy kingdom come". Then in @Matthew 6, "thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth". It is the idea the Lord brought in. All His instruction was on that principle, that they might be established here in the will of God.
G.N. Are there conditions in connection with the new covenant?
{11}
J.T. God assumes all the responsibility. It is what God will do, "I will write", etc.
G.N. What is the will of God?
J.T. That is a large subject! You must recognise it as a principle. The moral of Romans is that you might prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. You have to prove it. It takes the whole christian course to prove it ... The first thing in regard to you and me is to set aside our wills. Instead of bringing pleasure, they cause grief every day to God ... the Lord is always unique; in every way that we correspond, there is some distinctive mark as to the Lord. The law is put into our mind, but He came with it.
R.G. It is a great victory to have a generation like that, in a scene of confusion.
J.T. That is the testimony. There is no testimony but that. That is what marks the millennial state of things, the law written in the heart; that is what will mark Israel. The church on high will be the vessel of glory, there is the shining of glory in the face of Jesus in the church. The heavens declare the glory of God; that is what the psalmist says; nothing on earth declares it. The Lord comes down and brings that principle to earth -- God's will. Everything in heaven moved in accord with God's will -- no deviation there -- that is the idea of glory. Now, the Lord brought that to earth -- brought to earth what governed heaven -- makes a complete circuit and goes back to heaven. Now, that is reflected in the church. And then Israel is formed after the law, so that God's will is done on earth as in heaven. Now the testimony is all that is set forth in a contrary scene. All in the coming age is witnessed to. You must have God's will vindicated on earth, so the thought of the will of God is recognised; then you can introduce the idea of approach, but not otherwise.
Question as to God's will.
{12}
J.T. It is what is in the Lord's heart. The fact that He says, "Lo, I come" shows that the disposition is there. It is the order of man. You get two things in @Romans 8, the Spirit of Christ, referring to the order of man like Christ, and who is to continue on earth; and the spirit of adoption, referring to what is in God's heart.
J.McP. "All have sinned and come short of the glory of God".
J.T. The Lord as man was the glory of God here; the ministry is to make you equal to that. All that man is, is out of accord with what God is. Well, Christ is God's glory, and the ministry of the new covenant is to bring us into accord with God's standard; so "we all ... beholding ... the glory of the Lord, are changed", etc. In the 8th of Romans you get the Spirit of Christ; that is the spirit of the Man; then the spirit of adoption is the Spirit of God's Son. The Lord not only kept the law, but magnified it and made it honourable. @Exodus 20 gives the law. It is the assertion of God's rights. Before you can have the tabernacle, the law must be answered to. The second thing is the sacrifice, and that depends on the will of God. Before you can have the sacrifice, you must have the law answered to.
J.McP. What is the secret of approach?
J.T. You know God; you may love God, and not have title to approach. They loved God in the Old Testament, but had not the title to approach that we have. The measure of our approach is the measure of the revelation; it is the measure of liberty accorded to you. With Christians, it is the place Christ has -- nothing short of it.
A.N. I thought it was as you were formed by the ministry of the new covenant.
J.T. Yes, that is *your* measure, but what God grants is another matter. On our side, it follows on the ministry of the new covenant. On His side, it is a question of sovereign pleasure -- what He wills. He is pleased to
{13}
accord us the privilege, but it does not follow that because you love God, you have title to approach, as the Old Testament saints had not the same privileges, though loving God. God determines privilege. He accords to us the privilege of entering the holiest, but we could not have it, if He did not accord it to us. He is sovereign. He discriminates; He accords to us the greatest privilege.
D.D. Referring to going in, has not the believer to be in accord with the One who is in, before he approaches?
J.T. Yes, but the title precedes that. God indicates His pleasure for us in that He has given Christ a place in heaven as Man, as Forerunner. He went in, in @Acts 1, but there was a cloud, there was no indication that the disciples were to go in. "Whom the heaven must receive", Peter said, "until the times of restitution of all things". 'Repent and He will send Him back'; but when you come to @Acts 7, the heavens are opened and Stephen, says "I see ... the Son of man standing on the right hand of God"; there is indicated the mind of God for christians. The heavens are opened; I read there the title, the mind of God for us at the present moment. God must determine the place of every family, "Of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named". I want to see what Christ's place is. That is our place now. We see in the early part of Acts, there is no idea of Christ being a Forerunner; He has gone into heaven, and to be concealed there, it would appear, until the times of restitution of all things; but in @Acts 7, the heavens are opened through, and that is the basis of christianity. The ground is now laid, in principle, of the present dispensation.
A.N. Is there any difference in what the holiest is, to us, and what it will be by and by?
J.T. In the millennium, the veil is again recognised; they will have no title to enter.
{14}
A.N. Then this chapter has no application to Israel?
J.T. No; the covenant and sacrifice will have application to them, but the sacrifice in itself does not take you in.
J.F. What was your thought as regards the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit of adoption?
J.T. The Spirit of Christ is the spirit of Man in testimony here, and if you have not His Spirit, you are not of Him. The Spirit of adoption is in relation to God as Father.
Question as to the covenant.
J.T. The thought of the covenant is the order of Man. Israel had the covenant; but we go further, we go within. Salvation will be when He comes out. In early Acts you have the cities of refuge; the Lord added to the church such as should be saved. In Hebrews the external assembly is not in itself salvation for us; you require to lay hold of the heavenly position in Hebrews, for salvation. It is insisted on in Hebrews. So it is the book of the opened heavens.
J.M. Why does it say "boldness"?
J.T. You have no timidity. It is in contrast to the tabernacle, "the way ... was not yet made manifest". It is *new* in contrast to the old; and "living" refers to the resurrection of Christ, and the power of the Spirit in your heart, so that in approaching God your affections are active.
J.McP. What shall we see inside the holiest?
J.T. The means by which God brings to pass universal blessing. You get into the secret of God; you see what Christ is, as Man before God. The tables within the ark suggest Christ as doing God's will. It is all a question of Christ, so that there you learn the secret of God.
R.L. "We have such an high priest".
J.T. What a thing to get into the secret of God, to see the Man by whom He effects this glorious system,
{15}
a Man who had the law in His heart! Our priesthood is determined by our relation to Christ.
G.N. We are priests by calling.
Ques. Question as to "true heart".
J.T. What a thing to have a company of people with a pure heart -- like David's mighty men. As you enter the holiest, you are in accord with it; you can lay your hand on the ark, because you are formed according to it. Your exercises are in accord with the will of God. You think only of it.
J.M. Do we enter the holiest as individuals or as a company?
J.T. In Hebrews you have not the assembly convened at all, except where it says "not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together". Hebrews shows the privileges that refer to christianity; you get light as to those, but you do not get the assembly convened; so I take it, entering the holiest is a matter of your soul's apprehension. The holiest was prominent in the wilderness.
Question as to the holiest in distinction from the sanctuary.
J.T. The latter is a sanctified place set up; but with the holiest, the idea is, there is nothing holier, hence it is the immediate presence of God. When God's thought is brought to pass, everything is in accord with the ark.
H.H. "None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites".
J.T. We have to learn to recognise God's will. If there was one question raised in the recent difficulty, it was to recognise God's will. The ark is the means by which God brings to pass every thought of His, and when this is accomplished, all is in accord with the ark, so that His will is done on earth, as in heaven. David danced before the ark; it was his way of expressing his delight in the will of God. It is a grand thing to see the means by which God has brought to pass His thoughts;
{16}
then all is an accord with the ark, so that Christ is the centre of everything.
You know we speak of the Lord, and we ought to speak of Him, but you will never understand the ark, unless you see that it is the expression of God's will. Take a man in this city -- obscure, unseen, and desiring to do God's will, what a thing that is for God, what a delight to Him!
{17}
HOW WE ARE LED INTO DIVINE PURPOSE
@2 Corinthians 5: 13 - 18
What is in my mind is to seek to show how we are led into the side of divine purpose. I venture to read this scripture because it sets forth the judgment arrived at by one who knew what it was to be there. I like to refer to this epistle because it shows us the spirit of christianity -- not as in Christ Himself, but the outcome of what was seen in Christ now seen in a man of like passions as ourselves -- the apostle Paul. In that way the truth is in a sense brought nearer to us. I do not deny it was brought near to man in Christ, as Elihu said to Job, "I am as thou ... my terror shall not make thee afraid". Christ drew near to man as a Man, so that the things of God and God Himself might be understood. The gospels present that to us -- what Christ was as Man, drawn near to man so that in One in low estate God might be learned. The epistles in the main show how that is effected in others. That down-stooping of the Lord was effective, so that what He was here among men was reflected in others, and particularly in Paul; so that you have in 2 Corinthians the spirit of christianity presented to you. In the first epistle the terms of the covenant are made very clear, whereas in the second epistle the spirit of the covenant is brought into evidence. Now it is in the spirit of the covenant that we are prepared to say to God; so that you will find the apostle Paul saying "*we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face". It is in this spirit we have to say to God and to glory; and we are set in movement towards the land -- towards Canaan.
I desire to enlarge on these points, because you can understand it is of very great importance that we should be set to enter into the purpose of God, and, as I said, it begins with a right judgment being formed. One would question oneself and others what judgment one
{18}
has formed about things. I mean to say, what kind of judgment have you formed as the result of the gospel coming to you? If you have not come to Paul's judgment of things here it is not a bit likely that you will ever leave them. You were born into them and accept them as a matter of course. The political economy in which you have been born -- the social and commercial relations and the ordinary family relations and duties dependent upon them; all these things you accept as a matter of course. We have very little thought of them save that we are born into them and go on with them. But the thought of God is to set your heart and mind in movement in regard of all that. The gospel comes in to that end -- it is light from God to us and is intended to set our hearts and minds in movement; and if we become active in this way we begin to form a judgment about things. People who have no definite judgment are practically of no use to God. Now one cannot enlarge upon that, but here it is in the epistle; Paul says, "We thus judge". *He* had formed a judgment about *one* thing, and that was that if "one died for all, then all have died". You say, 'Well, I don't understand that, people seem to remain alive here; man moves on as he did before, no more dead than he was before the cross'. The fact is that he was as much dead before it as after it. But suppose they are alive, how many years do they live? It is only a matter of a few years and we pass away. God does not take account of things as we do. If it is a matter of forty or fifty years till the thing becomes an actual fact -- that does not set the fact aside. God speaks of things that be not as though they were. If you are to die next year you are as good as dead now. The apostle's judgment was right. He did not judge by outward appearance, but from a moral point of view. "One died for all, then all have died". It is useless to argue that men live a certain number of years -- there is no *moral* consideration in that. It is simply a matter of God's
{19}
forbearance, "The end of all flesh is come before me", and if they went on for a number of years, it was only in His longsuffering. God said "his days shall be a hundred and twenty years" -- God's arbitrary limit -- He fixes the period. In His own account all was gone -- the end of all flesh had come -- call it the first man or the old man -- in God's account the *man* is gone: "the end" He says, and He *means* the *end*. The secret of it lay in this, that another head had come in -- Noah appears in @Genesis 6. His birth is recorded in @Genesis 5 -- it is the second Man in principle. That is you have a man brought into the scene who is for God -- that man remains. The end of *that* Man has not come. He is for God's pleasure -- that man is to go forward -- his name signifies rest, and hence the other man had disappeared. If the other man is allowed to continue a hundred and twenty years, it is in the presence of the second Man, and simply in God's grace, under the headship of Noah really -- in principle, Christ as the new Head. And Noah is there in activity, as we read of Christ, "in which (Spirit) also going he preached to the spirits which are in prison, heretofore disobedient, when the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah while the ark was preparing". And the first man is allowed a hundred and twenty years in God's grace, really under Noah's headship. In principle the new head was there from the end of @Genesis 5, and God could afford to allow the condemned man to remain in order to preach to him. Wonderful grace! God is longsuffering -- "the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah". It is not a question of tolerating man, but of grace and longsuffering in order that possibly he might be saved. If God allows man to remain in this world, it is to preach to him. Noah was a preacher. The Spirit in which Christ rose from the dead is the Spirit in which He preached through Noah. But man is only given the period allotted and then the whole race disappeared.
{20}
And the whole *does* disappear; for if we take Noah as figurative of that race, *he* disappeared in the ark because he was connected with that race. The ark refers to Christ in the sense of being constituted to survive death, to go through it and survive it. Christ went under death, but He is out of it. He was a new order -- He was always that personally, but He took upon Him our place vicariously, and rose out of it. Now, we are allowed to remain here, but it is not as the ungodly; we are here as a matter of righteousness, only one's title to be here is on the ground of faith -- we have no title in ourselves. Christ established a title for us to remain here. He is the standard of our title to be here; we are taken up under a new Head; He is the One who vindicates God's name. Noah vindicated His name in that he carried through the ark, he carried through clean beasts by sevens, not by twos, but by sevens -- which clean beasts he could take and offer to the Lord; and the Lord smelled a sweet savour. So in @Genesis 9 Jehovah makes a covenant, not only with the world, but with Noah and Noah's sons. They are taken account of formally by God. They were saved on the strength of Noah's faith; but now *they* are viewed and a covenant made with *them*. Now, if we are to live to God, as the apostle says here -- the Lord has established a title for us; it is a matter of judgment -- "having judged this: that one died for all, then all have died". Now, if you live, and we do live, through grace, it is to Him. Do you remember the passage in Hosea? "After two days will he revive is: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight". That is the position -- we are raised up really in the death and resurrection of Christ. That is the ground in Colossians. In @Colossians 3 we are said to be raised up by faith, but faith in what? Faith in the power or operation of God who raised Him from the dead. That is the position we are regarded in there. The great point in Colossians is that Christ might have His place in the hearts of the
{21}
saints; that is the point. Now, you find the apostle insists on that in this epistle; he says, "they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again". That is the position that a right judgment leads us to if we accept the fact that we are all dead -- it is only a matter of time over the earth. Not a trace or vestige of humanity was left in sight -- all disappeared. If that man is here at all, it is in lawlessness, but if in Christ, one is here in righteousness. Christ has established a title for us to live before God; so we are here, really the only people entitled to be here -- entitled to live on this earth before God. Christians should claim the death of Christ as the title to life on this earth before God, but then it *is* before God -- "not ... unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again".
Well now, this passage opens up a wide and large sphere to us. Let us refer for a moment to the epistle to the Romans. I would suggest that the idea of living to another -- "to him who died for them" opens up room for the marital relationship; it is in that connection that the thought in Romans of being to Christ fits in. I connect it in my mind, in the types, with the covenant. You remember the children of Israel, after they were delivered from Egypt Jehovah referring to it afterwards -- to their original love -- says, "I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals", etc. Israel was holiness to Jehovah and they followed after Him. The covenant, in principle, is God's proposal for a marital relationship -- God would take the part of Husband to Israel; and it has reference in that way to @Romans 7. The subject could be easily opened up in the Old Testament. @Romans 5 is really a question of the Red sea. The passage of the sea was the one thing in which it was said the people acted in faith, they were in earnest. Many people are baptised who have not got faith, but the point is that you *should* have faith about
{22}
it; and when it is a matter of light to you, when you have faith, the moral force of it is that you are baptised to Christ, and that is to His death. Now, being baptised to Christ, He has a claim over you, and the result is your body is subject to His will. I would warn young people that unless your will is broken you are useless to the testimony; your will must go. When the will is gone, the body is the Lord's and it becomes a wonderful thing. The fact is it becomes an instrument of righteousness, or rather our members become instruments of righteousness to God. It is in the hands of the Lord; that is where we become really qualified for the testimony. Old people, those who have been long on the way, in the service of the Lord and brought into subjection to Him -- whose wills are gone -- it is wonderful how the Lord takes them away -- I have often thought they are the ones who ought to stay -- but the Lord knows best. The Lord said to Peter, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not". The former is will -- -- "whither thou wouldest", but when old, the Lord says, "another shall gird thee". His will is broken, and he is brought into accord with the ark of the testimony. Instead of his own will, it was a question of the testimony now, "another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not". He suffered martyrdom for the testimony. I have often thought in that way, how important it is that we should begin early in subjection to Christ. It is a simple question of recognising that, as baptised to Christ, we should be subject to Christ, and you are able to be consistent with His death.
Well now, in Romans we get some light as to the Lord's body, which is in full keeping with the idea of the covenant. The Lord, as you will remember, has given the institution of the Supper, and He said, "This
{23}
is my body, which is for you", that is, the Lord devotes His body to the church. I would guard this by saying that He came from heaven saying, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God"; primarily His body was for God's will, but then He took account of the church, and devoted His body to the church. A wonderful testimony -- "This is my body, which is for you". In Romans it is not exactly in that connection, but to show that the Lord relieved us of legal pressure by dying for us: "ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ". You can see what a service He did in His body by relieving us of that bane; but then it is, "that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God ... But now we are delivered from the law ... that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter". There you have the position of the believer, not exactly of the church; but you have light as to that which will ultimately develop into the position of the church, the principle on which the church's relation stands to Christ. Christ has moral claim over your affections. The apostle states it here as judgment "that one died for all, then all have died; and he died for all, that they who live should no longer live to themselves, but to him who died for them and has been raised". In Christ, in resurrection, you have "newness of life". You have the word "new" in @Romans 6 -- "walk in newness of life", and in chapter 7 he devotes His body to free you from the old bond, and thus the link in affection is formed. I connect all that in my mind with Mount Horeb. I was saying this morning that the bride is seen coming up out of the wilderness leaning upon her Beloved. I touch on that for a moment. In the end of @Romans 7 we come to the Deliverer, and you are prepared for the statement at the beginning of the chapter -- the Husband. Chapter 8 is the support of Christ. I want to dwell on that for a
{24}
moment. You remember she was said to be leaning on her Beloved in Song of Solomon -- @Romans 8 presents what I take to be like the arm of Christ. In other words the bond is formed -- and now you have power by which you are supported into the land of promise. There is nothing more important than that. It is a question of what the Spirit is. Now what is the Spirit of Christ in connection with the assembly? It is the power by which He supports her into the land of promise. And in perfect keeping with the position, the brazen serpent is introduced at once; "what the law could not do" -- the apostle shows you the impotency of the law -- God did it -- He sent His own Son for sin and condemned sin in the flesh -- that which troubled you God has condemned. If God has condemned it, you need not be troubled by it any more. The power of the Spirit is there "that the righteousness" (righteous requirement) "of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit". There is great moral power in the fact that you are fulfilling every moral obligation resting upon you, and thus you set forward. I cannot go further in the chapter, but I sought to indicate that thought to you: it is really the arm of Christ in the power of the Spirit for the saints. To follow the types a little further, when they set out after the springing well -- after they recognise the Spirit -- you come to the point in the history of your soul where you recognise the Holy Spirit dwelling in you, and you make up your mind all power is in that Spirit and not in the flesh. There is no power in flesh; but more, it is habitually antagonistic to God; the biggest man in Scripture appears directly after this, and the size of his bed is given. It is remarkable that his bed should be given us; and when the Spirit records the size of a man's bed, you may depend upon it it has some special reference to the kind of man he was. I leave that to your reflection, you will find that the difficulty with most of us is just there; it is that lazy spirit that hinders
{25}
us. The fact is, a bed is a place where there is no exercise; that is the idea. Now, that man was overcome by the power of the Spirit. It is only in the power of the Spirit that that man is overcome. The Spirit of God works in us so that we might be delivered from that slothfulness. The Spirit of God goes on, too, in regard of that. You will remember how Rahab, in speaking to the spies, said 'I remember what *you* did to that man' -- 'We have heard', she said, 'how the Lord overthrew the Egyptians, but you overthrew Sihon and Og'. So, if you recognise the Spirit, his bed goes, a bed of iron six feet wide -- a large bed. All that disappears, the man and his bed, where there is exercise, and only in exercise are you in power to overcome and to go into the land of Canaan. What you find in @Romans 8 is in every contingency arising and in every exercise, the Holy Spirit comes in and aids you in every possible way, and you see clearly that "all things work together for good to them that love God".
You see His purpose now, that we should be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be the Firstborn among many brethren -- the brethren of Christ in their own sphere. Thus we enter into the inheritance. I have indicated to you a little of what the Spirit becomes to us. And now we do not know anyone after the flesh, not even Christ, had we known Him that way, all is a new order of things. Christ is in resurrection, and those who are in relationship to Him. What a change it is to us when we begin to know each other in Christ instead of in the flesh: it makes all the difference as to how you take account of a brother. The apostle Paul had such a keen sense of it that he says he did not know anyone any other way except as in Christ -- he did not know them after the flesh; there is a man with a right judgment. What christianity would be if all christians had such a judgment as that! You see people trying to connect the man in the flesh with Christ, but it is contrary to spiritual
{26}
judgment. Christ is the Man entitled to live; and if men are to be honoured at all, it is not by placing Christ in relation to them, but them in relation to Christ. Then he goes on to the complete thing, "if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation". Now, new creation strictly is connected with Canaan -- a divine sphere where all things are of God. What a sphere that is! What kind of sphere are we connected with? All things are of man from the tower of Babel to the present day, of what man has done, all things of *man*. God's thought in the epistle to the Corinthians was to impress them that they were God's assembly; all things should be of *God*, not of man. And so, when you come to "in Christ" -- to be "in Christ" is new creation -- old things have passed away, all things become new, all things of God.
I trust at least you may have followed. It is a great thing to have the divine end in view, and to form a right judgment and to keep to it, and the Lord will support you in it and you will get more light, your light will increase -- "the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day"; it increases to the full day where all is of God who has reconciled us to Himself.
May God bless His word.
{27}
THE OBJECT OF MINISTRY
@John 21
J.T. I suggest that we might consider a little the object of ministry, and this chapter I think would furnish us with the subject, in the commission given to Peter, and also introducing John in his service. You will observe their service was to be based on what they were in their attachment to Christ. *Attachment to Christ is the basis of service*. John always emphasises love to Christ.
It is rather remarkable that there is nothing in Peter's commission here, as to his having the keys of the kingdom. The fact is overlooked entirely, for in @John 21 it is not the question of order, but of feeding or shepherding individuals. It is not the assembly: in fact the assembly is not taken up by John. Service is taken up with individual love to Christ; you may have any number of individuals, but they love Christ and they love one another. That is how John puts it.
I think this chapter gives us that line of ministry; it is an appendix to the gospel. John did not finish his ministry without seeing the state of things amongst the servants. This chapter presents a very distressing state of things amongst those who served, so that we, who serve now, should never be discouraged when such conditions exist. The Lord Himself begins His interview with them by serving. He did not wait for them to bring in all the fish; He has got all things in control -- all in His own hands -- the fire, the coals and the fish were all prepared and ready. This suggests to us the infinite superiority of Christ in regard to all His servants. The chapter begins with breakdown. Peter, Thomas, Nathanael, the sons of Zebedee, and two others -- seven in all -- they all go on a fishing expedition. Peter and Thomas head the list. Peter had denied the Lord, and Thomas was absent from the first meeting after He
{28}
had risen, chapter 20. They could not give any very good account of themselves!
Ques. Where was Peter leading them to?
J.T. He was going back to his old occupation, and the Lord had already called him out of it.
Ques. Is that the reason why they caught nothing?
J.T. There were no results from their labour from Christ's point of view, and it is well for *us* that it was so.
Rem. There is 'Nothing', 'Night' and 'Nakedness'.
J.T. The catching nothing was a distinct indication that they had gone from the Lord. The Lord was not with them in it.
Rem. John goes on to the end, and this would be interesting when it comes to the end.
J.T. Yes, it becomes very instructive for us. This chapter is written to prevent all discouragement; in fact John's writings are to that end.
Ques. Why does the Lord tell them to cast to the right side of the ship?
J.T. That shows that He had taken account of where they had been. It is a new feature of Christ that is presented.
Rem. The great evidence of breakdown is that there is no sense of intimacy. John calls himself the son of Zebedee, not "the disciple whom Jesus loved".
J.T. Yes, he is in bad company. Peter and Thomas were really disqualified from service by their past actions. The original offence with Peter had not been settled yet.
Rem. In going back to their old calling there was no response to the Lord. They had nothing to give. Recovery is to the Lord and to the brethren.
Rem. The Lord waits until He has Peter in the presence of others before He restores him.
J.T. Yes. Peter had "wept bitterly" for his fall, but his heart had not been yet restored, and the Lord
{29}
allowed Peter to find that out. This fishing expedition gave the Lord an opportunity. Peter's conscience had been met, but his heart was not at ease, as this movement showed. He was moving without Christ, and it is remarkable he does not ask the others to go with him, they say "We also go with thee".
Rem. They were not all there.
J.T. No, it was a party; the others discerned things were not right. It is always well to enquire who is leading. You may get those who are famed for affection like John, and yet he is away from the Lord; but then, the fact that he says "It is the Lord" shows that he knew His features.
Rem. They were not at liberty.
J.T. No. There was no exercise as to the Lord's will for them. Peter was a party leader; he goes back to his fishing on his own will, he suggests the idea and the others are quick to follow. Like the tower of Babel; one suggests to another "let us build us a city and a tower". When people get on party lines they never effect anything.
Rem. They effect nothing from a spiritual point of view.
Rem. Peter forgot what he was called to -- "I will make you fishers of men".
J.T. Yes, he forgot that, "And early morn already breaking, Jesus stood on the shore". The Lord is so active; saints suffer in not rising early. It is the only way to get out of Sodom by getting up early in the morning! You find that right through scripture; Jehovah rose up early (figuratively speaking), "Daily rising up early and sending" His prophets, @Jeremiah 7: 25. There is always a morning after the night, whatever the night may be, whether it be a night of faithfulness, or of distress, you always find the Lord.
Rem. "Joy cometh in the morning". It is night now.
J.T. There are six nights in the first chapter of
{30}
Genesis and seven days. The nights indicate the exercise we go through, but when we come to the seventh there is no night. It requires spiritual energy to get up early in the morning. It is the sluggard that lies in. Christ always rose early. The affections of the women at the end of this gospel are marked by spiritual energy.
Rem. This chapter brings before us the Lord's diligence to put things right.
J.T. Yes, it is very encouraging in a day like this. Christ is there and He has provided the fire, the fish and the coals; they are all ready.
Rem. We should not be content to 'catch nothing'.
J.T. If there is no prosperity you may come to the conclusion that the Lord is not with you, "When therefore they went out on the land, they see a fire of coals there, and fish laid on it, and bread". That was the Lord's provision, and then He says "Bring of the fish which ye have now caught". But He had provision all ready. It is the forethought of the Lord.
Rem. He is not dependent upon their contribution, but yet He tells them to bring theirs. He encourages them to contribute.
J.T. He had raised the question with them -- "have ye anything to eat?" That was to bring out their poverty. He had His own provision apart from their fishing.
Ques. Does it not suggest the character of ministry -- having something to eat?
J.T. You want to know what the people have in the house, "What hast thou in the house"? Elisha says to the woman. He would invite them to contribute what they had got and He would enlarge upon it; they were looking for fish and He has got it for them! Partisan work is very cold, there is nothing for the heart in it.
Ques. What was the point of recognition?
J.T. I think the word "children" would enable them to recognise Him. He says, "Children, have ye anything to eat?" and they answered "No", "That
{31}
disciple therefore whom Jesus loved says to Peter, It is the Lord". I think John was quick at discerning because he knew the Lord so well. He was more intimate with the Lord than the others. Those who know Him best, quickly discern Him. It is not the son of Zebedee now, but the disciple whom Jesus loved; affection comes again into evidence. John is on the high road again. The Lord says something and then the heart begins to burn; John saw it was the Lord and not another. It is one thing to see the Lord, and another thing to hear Him. John in his writing is full of what he saw; he had good eyesight. It is the eyes of love.
Rem. The eyes of the heart.
J.T. Quite so. John is the link of recognition, it is the most spiritual one that is the link of recognition. They are all recovered. Peter had a long way to go; the leader has always a long way to travel back, especially a party leader.
Rem. It was the conscience that was adjusted at the private interview, but now the affections are adjusted.
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Has the shepherd got to do with adjustment?
J.T. Yes. I suppose he has. A shepherd would be qualified to attend to sheep as such. Peter says in his epistle they had now returned to the shepherd and bishop of their souls. He knew the Lord in that way. Where he would have got to if left to himself, it is hard to tell.
Ques. Would you say there is a contrast in the Lord recovering the two on the road to Emmaus, and here? Would you say that in the last chapter of Luke it is the Lord's shepherding care to recover them to the assembly, but here it is recovery to affection?
J.T. It is service that the Lord has in view here. In adjusting Peter the Lord impresses upon him what to do -- "Feed my lambs"; and that service is all based on attachment to Christ. He says to Peter the third time
{32}
"Art thou attached to me?" Peter three times uses the word "attached" as expressive of his affection, and the Lord accepts it and leaves Peter, on his own confession of attachment to Him, to shepherd His sheep.
Ques. Does the thought of adjustment come in @Psalm 23, "thy rod and thy staff"?
J.T. Yes. It is there more what the shepherd is to one who is going on than to a wanderer. The Shepherd leads them in the path.
Ques. Is there any significance in the order here?
J.T. The lambs are not said to need shepherding, it is the sheep that stray -- the old ones; it is very remarkable. You notice in natural life the lambs follow the parent sheep. These sheep had gone astray and the Shepherd is going after them here. The Shepherd is always present, and we can never dispense with Him.
Rem. You require Him on the side of maintenance.
J.T. Yes, the shepherd has to keep the sheep from straying. This passage helps us to understand Peter's ministry -- the impression he received from Christ. The Lord intended an impression by getting at him three times, and then telling him what he was to do afterwards. You must minister to a brother first and then restore him. If ever they are to get restored they must be fed first. The fish is on the fire and the Lord invites them to come and dine. The Lord's service was there. That was His doing.
Rem. This is the second time Peter had left his business. The first time was in @Luke 5. There he was called to be a fisher of men.
J.T. Yes, when you get things done twice in scripture the second time is permanent, "He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second", @Hebrews 10: 9.
Rem. The movements of Jesus are particularly interesting. He comes and takes bread and gives it to them and also the fish.
J.T. The fish is taken out of the sea, and the idea I
{33}
think is that it is universal. The Lord sat down by the sea and opened up to them the truth of the kingdom in @Matthew 13. It is the universal idea.
Ques. Do you get progress in the soul of Peter in his answers to the Lord?
J.T. He had taken the ground of knowing himself better than the Lord knew him, when he said "Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended", and now he has come to the point that the Lord knows best of all, "Thou knowest".
Ques. Why was Peter grieved the third time?
J.T. It had reached his conscience. The Lord intended that it should, and He makes it clear to him.
Rem. It was really a humbling process because he had denied the Lord three times.
J.T. When Joseph was seventeen he was caring for the flock, it is very encouraging to the young; David was another example.
Rem. You would encourage all to start early.
J.T. Yes. Jesus can trust love, it is the only thing the Lord can trust. It is not merely natural affection but divine love. "If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned", @Song of Songs 8: 7. The "three times" is complete testimony; nothing was covered up, it was all out. Peter is qualified now.
There is further adjustment in regard to John; one Levite has nothing to do with another. A priest has to do with all Levites. The Spirit says, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them", @Acts 13: 2. No Levite has any jurisdiction over another. A bishop and archbishop have nothing to do with one another! The Romish system of jurisdiction is built up on Peter, but the Lord here distinctly says that Peter was to have no jurisdiction over John. He says, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" Every Levite is needed, but to his own
{34}
Master he stands or falls. You will not find the word 'apostle' in John's gospel. Nothing official is recorded there.
Rem. "I John, your brother", @Revelation 1: 9.
J.T. Yes. Peter had nothing to do with John. "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me". Mark now the boldness of Peter, "Peter, turning round, sees the disciple whom Jesus loved".
Rem. Paul had no jurisdiction over Apollos.
J.T. No, but he exercised jurisdiction over Timothy, because he was his son. Peter was a man who loved Jesus; he is following now, not fishing. John is reticent, he does not call himself by name. Paul does, he says, "I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ", which signifies littleness. That is just what he was. The name Paul signifies small. Saul was the namesake of the man who was very big in his own estimation, and he started out on a mission of murder, but he was brought down by Christ for service. Saul became Paul; he became in his own eyes less than the least of all saints that he might announce the unsearchable riches of the Christ. In that way he beseeches the saints.
Ques. What is involved in "till I come"?
J.T. John in that way always distinguishes Christ and not himself. It is always the question of bringing in Christ. Administration in John is on the ground of love. "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand". I think we have in the last verse an expression of the greatness of Christ. It is not for our curiosity as filling the world literally with books, but it is the estimate of one who loves Christ.
Ques. Would it carry the thought that He is so great it would take the universe to do it?
J.T. It is the greatest expression the finite mind can take in as to the greatness of Christ.
Rem. It is a calculation in that way; John would be very delighted to see the city after this.
{35}
J.T. Yes! You find a great many references to astronomy in John's writings, although he was a fisherman. Especially is this so in the book of Revelation; it is mysterious -- a book of mysteries -- for those who read and understand. The book of Revelation supposes a knowledge of God in His previous ways with men. So the Lord is mysterious here, and He does not stop to explain; it is left for our exercise. John was very emphatic about the testimony, how it went abroad among the brethren that this one would not die; it is remarkable how things which are not true become magnified amongst the saints.
Ques. Would you say contemplation always leads to calculation? You come to a spiritual judgment of things.
J.T. No doubt; they contemplated His glory, "a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth". Then he says "of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace".
Rem. That was calculation was it not?
J.T. It is the glory as of an only one with a father, as if there was no other.
Rem. Isaac's anti-type.
J.T. There are two sides. Contemplation brings about intelligent formation. *You become what you look at*. Then the apostle says in verse 24 he was transparent, and carried on his ministry in the activity of love.
Ques. What is the difference between the glory in the first chapter of John and the glory in the 17th chapter in regard to the contemplation of the glory?
J.T. It is a similar thought. The first has reference to Him as man here, but the 17th chapter is future. The first is past.
Rem. Contemplation precedes activity.
J.T. Yes. Both are involved in christianity.
{36}
ADJUSTMENT IN RELATION TO THE LORD AND EACH OTHER
@Luke 24: 33 - 40; @John 20: 19 - 23
We learn from this incident in Luke's gospel how the Lord adjusts us in relation to Himself and to each other. From the passage in John's gospel we see how the Lord finds a state suitable to a manifestation. One is the outcome of the other. In John the disciples were not flustered and frightened but rejoiced at His presence. In Luke their faith is hindered through joy, they did not believe for joy; fear and joy alike hindered. Both narratives refer to the same time, but are presented from different standpoints. Luke presents things from the side of the priesthood, that is, he takes account of our need and meets it. His record is in order that we should be helped, and follows on the well-known incident of Emmaus; the two at Emmaus represent a state of soul in which Christ had not His place. The distance they had in their minds to go is measured; there are those who make up their minds as to the distance they are prepared to go and set out to cover the distance. The narrative of Emmaus shows how souls may take up a place of distance from Christ; they may attend the meetings, but there may be a feeling that the best times are gone. It is a doleful tale! Every one who goes to Emmaus is doleful! The best day is the present day; in fact there is no better from the divine side because it is the Spirit's day. A good illustration of a people at a distance is found in the two and a half tribes; they knew the distance they would have to live from God's habitation. Recovery is by a manifestation of Christ. The Lord knows the distance at which each one is from Him; He knows how far or how near one may be. He takes the place of Head in the house at Emmaus. This was to be the great feature of the new order of things, for if the headship of Christ is not recognised, one is
{37}
out of the enjoyment of it altogether. Immediately after the manifestation He vanished, and they rose that same hour and returned to Jerusalem. Christ's headship is only rightly known in its own sphere, for He is Son over the house; He did not actually tell them to go to Jerusalem. There was a spiritual foundation in those two which is assumed by the Lord's course towards them.
Whatever the distance at which we may be from Him, the Lord knows it. Peter is an example. Although there had been several manifestations to him he was not restored until the Lord had probed him three times, see @John 21. Why do we choose to remain at a distance? Often it is because of our love for our homes and our families, which really is what marked the two and a half tribes. The Supper is intended to keep us near Him, and it has a voice to us if we are at a distance. These disciples returned to Jerusalem and found the eleven and those with them; Christ Himself had appointed the eleven, and so they represented His authority. No one is really recovered unless he is prepared to accept the authority of Christ. The Lord selects His own way of manifesting Himself; He manifests Himself three times (@John 20 and 21), each different from the others; so it becomes a question how He may do it to you. After the manifestation at Emmaus He disappeared and left them now to act, and they returned that same hour of the night; they had seen the Lord risen and alive and that moves them. If you get light you convey what has impressed you. Verse 35 was what impressed them so they got what the Lord intended for them. It was not the unfolding of scripture, the point is to have a contribution, they could give an account of what impressed them.
At Emmaus it is a household scene, the Lord takes the house-father's place; they were to get the good of this elsewhere -- at Jerusalem. They became contributors
{38}
at once -- they related what occurred on the way. It suggests how things are to be, the breaking of bread was to have a great place. A contribution is not necessarily a knowledge of scripture. The assembly is marked by contributions from those who have had manifestations; Mary had a manifestation and a message. The two at Emmaus were not qualified to receive a message. Our homes damage most of us -- that is, they occupy the first place. The word to Abraham was "Get thee out ... from thy father's house". Our ancestry and position come into our minds as we turn towards our houses. Our faces need to be towards the assembly; we should always have a sense of our relation towards Christ and the saints. "As they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst". They were suited to a visitation but they were not adjusted. We may be suited to a point, but we need to be wholly adjusted. It says "they were terrified". We should seek to be in the condition for manifestation. This flows from a knowledge of the Lord. His hands and His feet are the evidence of His death. The feet show the journey He has taken in order to reach us, whereas in John it is a question of His love -- His hands and His side. In Luke we see more the service side, it was a real Man who had taken this journey. He then proceeds to eat a piece of a broiled fish, etc. Here we see a real Man. In John He is the Last Adam: and His side has reference no doubt to the fact that Eve came out of Adam's side.
In John's gospel the Father is more in view. Luke begins with a priestly family. Most of us are defective as regards the priestly state. Luke shows how the Lord left a priestly family behind Him on earth, @Luke 24: 53. In Matthew they were to meet at Galilee, that is in relation to the Gentiles; that gospel was written with a view to the setting aside of the Jewish system. In Mark we are shown how the apostles were to carry on the new service with guidance and support from heaven, not
{39}
from Jerusalem. In Luke we have adjustment as to the discerning of the Lord when He manifests Himself.
On the mount of transfiguration Peter "wist not what to say", @Mark 9: 6. It is a reproach. Silence is painful when it is the result of slothfulness and spiritual dumbness. There is a silence of *power* and a silence of *weakness*. We need to be more evenly balanced. In spite of "such things have befallen me", @Leviticus 10: 19, it is the mark of the priest to be evenly balanced. The sympathy of Christ maintains you in mellowness. There is no excuse for fleshly activity in the sanctuary. The priests were not even to mourn for their relatives (@Leviticus 10) -- sanctuary requirements were so stringent. The chapter says they were not to drink strong drink and is intended to regulate the priests in their service. The claims of the flesh must not influence us. Priesthood belongs really to the mediatorial system. It is necessary now for the state, and the circumstances, in which we are. The priest is also a son, so that his service is founded on the love peculiar to that relationship. All service in the assembly must be of that character. No Levite knew what to do without the guidance of the priest.
In @John 20 the assembly is presented as normal. It is what the Lord is to us and what we are, and so on a higher level. Mary's message had produced a certain suitability. They were His brethren. His mind was the same for them in Luke but they were afraid; here it was the Jews they were afraid of -- a very wholesome fear to have. Verse 19 emphasises the thought of disciples, not necessarily the eleven. Therefore it is not their official place. He came to where the disciples were. John puts it "having seen the Lord" -- they saw Him. The peace He gives them is His own peace. A state of peace is so important. A troubled heart is detrimental to the enjoyment of the Lord's presence. Thomas was absent; he is a type of the Jew, and also alas, many others at the present time! This made him more difficult of
{40}
adjustment. Absentees are apt to be infidel. The Supper is the gathering centre. In John they were sent out in the spirit of the heavenly Man. He breathes into them, showing the character of the testimony: "as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you". Here it is how they are sent out. What they do is final. It is for *disciples* simply, and shows the exalted position of the saints. It is the spirit and dignity in which they go out.
{41}
RESTORATION
@Hosea 6: 1 - 3; @Isaiah 38: 9 - 20
Restoration is in view. We find in meeting the responsibility of the church a want of energy, energy of affection that there might be a response. Two days refer to the period of the Lord's ministry, the third day is resurrection. Pentecost corresponds morally. They were on resurrection ground. They were living *in* His sight, many try to live *out* of His sight. One should be exercised that the response of his heart is ever God-ward; God looks for energy of life. In @Romans 6 we reckon ourselves among the living. God has torn and only He can heal. He may use certain instrumentalities to humble us, but only *He* can heal us. The knowledge of God in a soul is the only thing that can save us at such a time. David bowed under the hand of God. Whether He binds up or tears, it is to one end, that the living might praise Him. Discipline is to the end that we might come to the house of the Lord as worshippers. The effect of Christ's ministry before His death was revival but not life; the third day is life; we are quickened in our affections that we may live before God. God is our refuge and resource. If He has done it, it is that He might have us before Him in life, that we might have power, not only to live here, but to respond to God's love. Romans shows us how our state is met consistently with God's righteousness. Colossians is the third day, resurrection, we are raised by faith, quickened together, living in God's sight, you are conscious of it.
We should be more concerned about what God sees than what the brethren see. In @Mark 11: 11 the Lord came into the temple, and looked around; He inspects. He came into the temple, but He did not stay there. He went out to Bethany. He surveys all christendom, but He does not stay there. In @Mark 3 he looked around on His brethren. He sees christians wherever they are, but
{42}
He stayed in the circle. They would have Him come outside, but He answered them saying "Who is my mother, or my brethren? And he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother". It was God's will for them at that time to sit around Him and hear Him! He is always 'looking around'. He has a right to it, "As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten". A true christian may be so thoroughly asleep that he is no different from the dead. "Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light", "Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord", @Hosea 6: 3. Paul's doctrine would lead one on to know the Lord. Rain is ministry, refreshment. Christian blessedness lies in two things -- the knowledge of God and the knowledge of ourselves.
@Isaiah 38 is "What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath done it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul". Bitterness of soul is Marah, self-judgment, remembering what the flesh is, it is a bitter thing. "O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit"; his discipline was not for wrong-doing, but to bring about *life*. We must be *living* to answer to a *living* God. He is thinking of God, and says, "For the grave cannot praise thee, death can *not* celebrate thee". God would get no praise from the grave, but "The living, the living, he shall praise thee". God's discipline was to the end that He might be praised by the living -- "One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple", @Psalm 27: 4. It is not enough to desire, one must resolve; resolution is stronger than desire. One may know what it is to go on in communion with the Lord but lose
{43}
it; in such a case one may be "torn" of the Lord and left for awhile.
@Isaiah 38: 20 -- The house of the Lord is a moral thought, "Holiness becometh thine house, O Lord, for ever". The house of God is the circle of the saints recognizing what is according to God. Singing on the stringed instruments would be in the meeting -- He touches the hearts of the saints and there is vibration. The father shall make known the truth to the children like Paul to Timothy. Faithful men like Hezekiah reached a higher plane than Job or Jacob. He sang to the stringed instruments in the house of the Lord. You look for freshness every time you come to the meeting. The Lord touches the stringed instruments. We want to be available to the Lord -- that should be our exercise.
{44}
PRIESTHOOD
@Ezra 9: 1 - 10; @Hebrews 10: 19 - 22; @Hebrews 13: 10 - 16
I wish to say a word about priesthood, particularly the instincts that mark it, and the clothing, and to show also the sphere in which it is exercised. The instincts of priesthood are of great importance, for without them we either ignore what is of God or act clumsily in regard of it. When Jacob had the great privilege opened up to him of being in the house of God "he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place"! indicating that he was wanting in priestly instincts and sympathies, not to say priestly clothes, he was certainly wanting in them. Now David, referring afterwards to the ark said "we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the wood" and called upon Jehovah to arise and enter into His rest, He and the ark of His strength. He had priestly instincts, for under David the priesthood was subordinated to the king; the priest was to walk before Jehovah's anointed, that is, the king had the first place; but then, happily, David was truly a priest; he was a priest in the principle to his instincts and desires; so he neglected his natural comforts, that is one mark of priesthood, and another is that one neglects one's natural relations. Levi said to his father and his mother "I have not seen him", he was true to God and so God gave unto him His covenant of peace, "My covenant was with him of life and peace". Levi was true when Israel proved deceitful. Levi stood by Moses and maintained things for God. And so David had priestly instincts; in fact we are told that he was clothed with the linen ephod and danced before the ark of the Lord, a remarkable exhibition of, not only priestly instincts, but priestly delights; the ark was everything to him, and so He says, "Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy saints shout for joy". These were the desires
{45}
of David, and so God answers him. I mention this, because it is encouraging when we have right desires. God answers David immediately and says, "I will also clothe her priests with salvation". Now, righteousness in us necessarily precedes salvation. You must have on the robe of righteousness before you can have the robe of salvation. It is of great importance that we should understand what such clothes as that are, that as we have to say to God and His things we are righteous in all our relations, and, on the other hand, we are free from all earthly influences, we are saved.
Now, I brought those points forward so that you might see how priestly instincts develop and how God answers them, and so I take it that the letter to the Hebrews is that of a priest. Throughout the letter he is concerned as regards what is due to God. He begins by the divine speaking: "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son". That is the language of a priest, "For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they seek the law". He does not profess to be that, there is no official assumption in the letter; Christ is said to be the Apostle and High Priest; nevertheless, the whole letter is stamped with priestly instincts and desires, so that he takes up the ark, as one may say, in the first chapter, and speaks of Christ in the most touching and yet the most reverential way; he brings forward what Christ is personally, that is the first thing with a priest, Christ must be considered first, His dignity, His glory. Then he proceeds, in the second chapter, to bring in Christ in relation to us, for he is really laying the basis for priestly exercise and service in the saints, so he brings in Christ in relation to man and says "For both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one". That is the priestly family. It is wonderful, dear brethren, that God is pleased so to regard us. If you recall the genealogy in
{46}
@Exodus 6, when the Spirit of God arrives at Levi, He stops. There is no further genealogy given there; that is to say, He has arrived at the priestly family, and then He finally brings in "this is that Moses and Aaron". If you have the priestly family, then you have the service of God secured, and that is the first thing with God -- "that he may minister unto me in the priest's office".
Now, I need not say that priesthood in us is not a development. It would be a very great mistake if we were to assume that. Priesthood is a calling, a priest is one who belongs to the family of priests. I was endeavouring to point out this morning how in Luke the atmosphere of heaven is brought down here. Directly the Babe is born there is a ministry of the angels to the shepherds, announcing glad tidings of great joy, and then presently there was a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God. It was priestly. And then, following upon that, you find Simeon coming into the temple by the Spirit. That is a priest. So that Luke brings in, in that way, the priestly family; and the Lord, in the last chapter is seen ascending into heaven in the attitude of the High Priest; He lifts up His hands and blesses His people and "as he was blessing them, he ... was *carried up* into heaven", and the blessed ones, returning to Jerusalem, enter into the temple of God and are found there praising and blessing God. So the priestly family is brought to light.
Now in Peter we have the formal statement that we are "a holy priesthood". It is not that you should be that. I would call attention to that, dear brethren, because, although, no doubt, most here know that, we should be clear about it, that it is not a question of development; it is that I belong to the family, and I cannot make myself a member of the family. Jesus has done it; as the scriptures say, "Unto him that ... hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father". That belongs to every believer, and I would seek to
{47}
dwell upon it at this time. I wanted to show how in Ezra the things that I have been speaking of came into evidence. He is very careful to tell us at the outset (chapter 7) that he belonged to the family of Aaron. I might say in passing that Ezra makes a great deal of genealogy. I have no doubt that it was he who wrote the Books of the Chronicles, and so in the last days of the dispensation of the church the book of Ezra fits in, because the point is that each of us should shew his genealogy. Am I a priest or not? I may claim it, but I have to prove it. And so Ezra is very careful to prove his genealogy, and having proved it he tells us that he "prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord". That is what is proper to a priest. If you claim priesthood, then prove it, prove your genealogy. You may ask me, How? By nature I must bring forward in my manner and spirit the traits of the priest; and so Ezra, in unmistakable language, says that he set his heart to seek the law of his God, and seeking it, he became a "ready scribe" in it. We must not deprecate writing. Writing has a great place in scripture. Now the Lord Jesus Christ is really that, if you understand me. It is He who writes, and I believe that His writing on the christian proves the christian's genealogy. The apostle John speaks of the things that the Lord Jesus did. He says, I have been writing to show seven signs, and he hung up on these seven signs a tablet, which we may read and run: "these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name". That is what he wrote them for; he did not write in any exhaustive way, he wants us to understand. Not a scriptural writer writes exhaustively: holy men of old were moved by the Holy Spirit and they wrote what they were moved to write, but no scriptural writer attempts to be exhaustive. John says formally, I have made no attempt to be exhaustive. I have simply written these things for you, but if all the other things were written,
{48}
he says, "I suppose that not even the world itself would contain the books written". So that if anybody wants to write christianity exhaustively he has a very big order. But the Lord Jesus can do it, and I believe that everything will find an answer in some way so that things will be written, nothing will be lost. In John's gospel we are told that the fragments are all to be gathered up so that nothing is to be lost. Ezra was a ready scribe, he wrote the law of God, and I have no doubt that one finds touches, as I said, throughout the Books of Chronicles: he makes a great deal of David, they are written from the standpoint of the house of David and I have no doubt that in the last days of the church the Holy Spirit would work so that Christ should be supreme -- as I have remarked on a previous occasion -- the Headstone. Zerubbabel lays the foundation, but he puts up the Headstone also and they shout, "Grace, grace unto it". It is Christ in the affections of the saints.
Well now, Ezra heard that the people of God were contracting unholy alliances. That, alas! is a practice that is very prevalent today among the people of God. As we maintain distance from God in our souls it is inevitable that we should contract unholy alliances, and Ezra, with true priestly instinct, humbles himself about it. One would love to see that now, that the Holy Spirit would bring about a sense that the alliances which many of the people of God have formed are unholy. The priest notices it, because he considers for God, and so Ezra sat down overwhelmed and rent his mantle and his garment and plucked off the hair of his head -- remarkable exercise; and now at the evening oblation he arose. That is, as he apprehends Christ as He is before God, he has confidence. He has confidence in God. And we have every reason to have confidence at the present time, for what Christ was at the beginning He is now, not only us-ward, but God-ward. He stands before God in all the efficacy of His work, and the
{49}
fragrance and worth is there in the presence of God. We may have every encouragement to turn to God. I wonder if we are accustomed to that? I am endeavouring to bring before you the great importance of taking up your priestly responsibilities and your priestly privileges, and approaching God in prayer on account of the conditions that exist in the assembly; one is assured on account of the unchangeable efficacy of the sacrifice of Christ in the presence of God. Priesthood is thus assured before God. And then he confesses his sins and the sins of the nation, and he goes on to say of Jehovah, "to give us a nail in his holy place" and then further, "and to give us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem". These are the two points. God has given these to us, I am assured, at the present time, and I read the passage in @Hebrews 10 so that we might see the bearing of the nail. I have no doubt the nail is typically the Lord Jesus Christ. Have you assurance in your soul as to having a fixed place there? The psalmist says "When shall I come and appear before God?" His soul thirsted for God: for the living God; but then he was far away. How many there are like that! And then in a later psalm it is said: "They go from strength to strength: each one will appear before God in Zion". It is a question of God's purpose. Zion is always that. God has His own fixed place in which He is to be approached, let us remember that. One rests in that, that one has come to @Hebrews 10, it is not simply that you are called to it, the point is to come to it. Hence he brings forward that which is requisite for it first, saying "Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies ... and having a great priest over the house of God". We do not acquire either of these things, they are supplied. We want to see that in christianity it is a time of supply from the divine side. He has accorded to us boldness of access, by the blood of Jesus, to the holiest of all; and then, on the other
{50}
hand, He has accorded to us a great Priest over His house. How wonderful for the soul that God has opened up to me a way, He has accorded to me boldness of access. Christendom has gone back to the old way, ceremonies and rites, whereas the new way is living; the ground of it is the blood of Jesus, but then it is living, which I apprehend involves that I have the Spirit. I approach in the energy of the Spirit and then I have a great Priest over the house of God. Things in Hebrews are new and great; we have a 'great salvation', we have a 'great Priest' not only a High Priest, there were many high priests that were not great priests. A great Priest has affection and sympathy, but He has power, so that the house being under His influence -- for it is that -- and under His supervision and control, and His ordering, the soul has perfect liberty. I do not know of anything so blessed as to come to know the influence of Christ in the house of God. In the next statement he does not speak of what we have accorded to us, but what we must bring: "with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience, and washed as to our body with pure water". Having these things, let us draw near, and so we come to the realization of what Ezra speaks of, we have a nail in the holy place. We have an abiding place in the holiest of all in that sense -- a sure footing there, for Christ is there. The nearer you get to God, the more sensitive you become of your acceptance. I repeat that. The nearer you draw to God the more conscious you are of the delight He has in you in Christ. The further you are away, the more the enemy has the advantage, for you are not conscious in the same way of the divine love and interest in you. The nearer you are to God, the more sensitive you are of the fixed abode, that is, the nail. The 'nail' in Isaiah is said to be in a 'sure place', but the nail here is in the sanctuary.
Well now, the wall in Judah and Jerusalem is another
{51}
matter. The wall is for protection. So that the nail in the holy place is God's portion -- my relation with God, and the wall is the protection that I find in the fellowship of the people of God. I have great encouragement to speak to young christians about fellowship, because fellowship is becoming the dominant feature of the world now, leagues and bonds binding the people of the world together, and one trembles for the young especially. I would call your attention to this, that God has given to us a wall and it is given to us in Jerusalem; that is to say, fellowship is in connection with God's purpose, it is connected with government. No individual government, no independency can set it up; it is the fellowship of God's Son, it is the fellowship of the apostles; the fellowship of His death; it is fellowship one with another. If you do not love the brethren you do not value that last statement. Fellowship with one another appeals to my heart if I love the brethren, and so in chapter 13 it is the public position. "We have an altar". That is the "we" of mutuality. It is an exclusive altar. We have an altar whereat they who serve the tabernacle have no right to eat. God in that way issues a warning to all who ally themselves with ceremonial religion, with a revival of the tabernacle system, that they are shut out from the exclusive altar of christians. It is a solemn thing to be allied with that which is a revival of the old tabernacle system, that is, a ceremonial system. We should not be afraid of that word exclusive, because it is quite scriptural. The Lord acted upon it in the gospels: He selected three men to take them up the mount of transfiguration. He left out the other nine. He selected them in His own sovereign right and He excluded others. So the altar which christians have is an exclusive altar; it is exclusive of all that is of the flesh, and then it is exclusive of those who are affiliated with the tabernacle system, human religion, set up in ceremonialism. If there is one here who is serving that, I would call your
{52}
attention to this, that you have no right to eat. If you are a christian, you are a priest, and you should be exercised about the true altar of God and about the true sanctuary of God; that altar is available to you on the principle of separation and only on that principle, for separation from evil is God's principle. "Therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, *bearing his reproach*". It is public. I have often said that the Lord went to heaven in private, but He went out of the world in public; and baptism, the fellowship of His table, of His death, are public, so that His reproach is connected with your baptism, and His reproach is connected with your fellowship: we might as well accept that. Now it is not that you have to, but rather that you do: "bearing", you accept it as a privilege. If in the government of God I am placed in circumstances where reproach comes upon me, it is privilege, "For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake". Suffering I apprehend to be the purple of the tabernacle. Purple is a royal colour, but it is a royal colour in suffering. Those that suffer reign. Hence it is an immense advantage to suffer, for the reigning is commensurate with the suffering. So it says, "without the gate" of the city. That is public -- terrible to the flesh! There was a man "coming out of the country" when Jesus went out at the gate. The two that went on their way to Emmaus were 'going into the country', that was the wrong course, beloved friends. The time now was to be marked by going into the city, the city being a principle. The man was "coming out of the country" and he had the honour of bearing the cross of Christ. It was a marvellous privilege, in a way, unsought for, perhaps, but it was accorded to him "coming out of the country". According to Mark's record the two were going into the country (chapter 16, verse 12) without saying to what part, suggesting that they were going away from the divine centre, "Let us go forth
{53}
therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach". I suppose it is like the man who came up out of the country bearing the cross of Christ, so now we take up the privilege of bearing the reproach of Christ publicly, pending the time when He appears. Alongside of that we have the exclusive altar. Let us emphasize our exclusiveness. I was speaking last night of the rights of christians: the altar of God belongs to us. Let us glory in it, "By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name".
If we have an altar, and if we eat at it, it is obvious that sacrifice has to be made, and the sacrifice is such as Peter calls a priestly sacrifice, a sacrifice of praise, spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. So that in that way we come into the public service of God and we are found answering to the gospel of Luke. The gospel of Luke is the gospel of joy, joy that is brought in from heaven, and this epistle shows us the saints offering to God the fruit of their lips, giving thanks to His name.
May God help us. I would especially commend to you the two points that I have named from Ezra, that is, that we have a nail in the holy place, that means a sure footing; and then on the other hand we have a wall and our fellowship is protection. It is a remarkable thing that in Ezra they build the altar to protect themselves. If you read the third chapter you will find that is the first thing they build "for fear ... of the people of those countries", and the altar being set up. God defends it. You may depend upon it that where God's rights are owned He will protect you.
{54}
THE LIGHT OF THINGS WE HAVE COME TO
@Hebrews 12: 22 to end
J.T. I thought it would be helpful to us to get the light of the things we have come to, especially as an element of support in view of "the race that is set before us" as it says. The apostle, the writer, says in the tenth chapter that the saints to whom he wrote had "need of patience", and he cites the prophet Habakkuk to show what there was to look forward to -- the coming of the Lord, and then continues to cite the passage in regard of faith "the just shall live by faith". Habakkuk said that the vision had in view that the reader should run. The apostle introduces the varied examples of faith and sets them down as a cloud of witnesses for us, that we might "run with patience the race that is set before us" and he then brings in the discipline of God as a means of clearing our vision, so that we might see clearly. I mention these things that lead up to the subject of the epistle, because it is an element of support to us, in the race, that we should have clearly before us what we *shall* come to literally, but what we *have* come to now as a faith system, and as having come to these things, to find out what they really are -- what each element is, for our present enjoyment.
D.L.H. In Hebrews, one very great point is to shew that these poor believers in Christ from among the Jews had really got the very things, in a spiritual way, which had been held out as promises to the people in connection with the land; they had it all spiritually.
J.T. And is it not a question of their having come to the things in their souls? The point is that they should come to the things.
D.L.H. That is so; they were all there.
J.T. They were all there, and these are the things that are involved in the position that we have taken up
{55}
as believers. A person might be very illiterate, but as becoming a citizen of the United Kingdom he has come to all the things that are in the Kingdom in the way of privileges and advantages.
D.L.H. Then the Spirit of God sets these things forth -- the advantages, as it were.
J.T. Yes.
A.M.H. Would you say that you have come to a system of support and encouragement in contrast to one of demand and fear -- is that the thought?
J.T. Yes, I should say that.
Ques. Is that why Mount Zion is put in the forefront?
J.T. I think it is; it is the constitution of the system, so to speak, the underlying principle, that is, that all is dependent on what God is -- His sovereign mercy.
D.L.H. All based, I suppose, upon resurrection?
J.T. Resurrection is, I suppose, the great evidence of God's intervention, but it has a delivering effect in the soul, because whatever one is one owes to God's sovereign mercy, not to anything hereditary or acquired. Whatever one is, whatever one has, it is all the outcome of God's sovereign mercy.
J.H.J. Why do you think we get all these things in the 12th chapter and not earlier in the epistle?
J.T. I think there is development in the teaching of the epistle. The epistle is intended to lead our souls on to solid ground, and I think all these elements have a delivering effect; they deliver us from all that may attach to us and all that we might boast in outwardly, and set us on *solid spiritual ground*. It is not only that God will do the thing, but He has done it; Mount Zion involves that He has done it and that He rests in what He has accomplished -- God dwells there.
J.M. Is Mount Zion the fruit of the place that Christ now occupies before God -- is that how He has done it?
{56}
J.T. Yes, it is what is to be seen, not only Christ risen, but the position He occupies, "Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion", it is what God has done. Men may complain and resist and band themselves together against it, but it is done.
D.L.H. I suppose @Psalm 78 really sets forth the thought of Mount Zion in a very powerful way.
J.T. That is what I thought, it was when everything was lost "Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine. And he smote his enemies ... he put them to a perpetual reproach", all that referring to the death and resurrection of Christ.
D.L.H. Evidently. Then He chose.
J.T. He chose, and He built, and all that is what God did. One feels the importance of that, because things are so shaky; it is intended that things should shake under our feet, so that we might turn to what is unshakeable.
Ques. None of these things is visible: is that in contrast to what was visible in the holy land?
J.T. They are not to be touched -- not material things for the moment: not that they do not take material form, because they will; all these things will be livingly existent in the future, coordinated, and we shall have our part in them, but it is a question of what each individual christian can take account of as having come to himself so that he may explore.
Ques. All these things establish our faith?
J.T. They are intended to strengthen us in the race; we are not treading an uncertain step, we know what we are about, we know what we have before us; and the point is that they are educational in the soul now, and one of the most important elements of my education is that I should see that anything that I am worth speaking about (as Paul says, "by the grace of God I am what I am", and the christian *is* something) is through the sovereign mercy of God.
{57}
A.M.H. That would have a very delivering effect in oneself, because it is humbling, is it not?
J.T. That is what I thought.
J.H.J. You commence, do you not, with looking off unto Jesus, then you get the light of this wonderful system opened up, really the world to come?
J.T. Well, the first thing is the constitution, that is, the general principle underlying christianity, and underlying the whole purpose of God in the future is that He has effected it. He has done it.
A.M.H. Do you connect three things with Mount Zion, sovereignty, stability and mercy?
J.T. Sovereignty, mercy and stability; but you have more than that. When you come to what is stable you have added the thought, "... he built His sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which he hath established for ever", that is, the thing is not only abstract, it is concrete, and what God builds is built for ever, the building is firm. I suppose one of the most interesting studies in a way is the reference to faith apprehending that the worlds were framed by *the word of God*. "He spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast". The firmness, the stability, lies in the will of God; it must be so. But then there is not only stability, there is structure, there is formation and ornamentation, order and beauty; that is the outcome of His word, the expression of His mind, and faith takes all in; so that even as to the material system faith apprehends that it is the word of God that has framed it; whatever there is in the way of ornamentation and regularity, balance and so forth, it is the word of God. And so in regard to the spiritual structure, it is on the same principle. Hence the next thing you get here is the city of the living God -- a wonderful theme for the soul!
D.L.H. Light, order and administration, all found in connection with God's city.
{58}
J.T. Quite so, and the thing is replete with life, that is, it is the city of the living God, and heavenly Jerusalem. It takes very little to alter a city that man has built -- the city of Berlin, what a change there is there! God can alter things here so very quickly, whatever glory there is goes very quickly, but in the city of the living God there is no possibility of change or decay, it is replete with life.
Ques. I suppose you see it at the end of Revelation with much more detail.
J.T. That is an expansion of this, but it is all here.
D.L.H. I have often wondered in my own mind how it is exactly that God takes up the thought of a city; it is very remarkable, because the idea of a city first occurs in connection with man -- with Cain, and the first mention of the city comes in that association, which is not at all a good one: contrariwise, it is connected with man's will, trying to make an ordered place of pleasure and amusement and satisfaction for himself here. Well, God takes up that thought; now what do you think about that?
J.T. I suppose it is for deliverance, because the thought of the city has a very great place in man's mind.
D.L.H. Evidently.
J.T. You see it with Lot, he clung to Sodom and, finding that he could not stay, he would bargain for a little city; illustrative of how the natural man clings to an ordered state of things in that way. But it says, God has prepared for them a city, a better country. God anticipated the thing; it is a political idea, that which man seeks. God prepares a city.
D.L.H. There is the idea of centralisation and a spot whence light issues, and order and administration, and I suppose, in a sense, security too: all that seems to be connected with the thought of a city.
A.M.H. Did Satan get a hold on man in that way and then God brings in His city as a set off against that?
{59}
J.T. That is what I thought, after the flood the idea revived, "let us build us a city", that was existent in Abram's world, the world out of which he was called.
Ques. There is a centre of interest?
J.T. I think it effects deliverance, politically. There are more politics in us than we are prepared to admit, more national feeling than we are prepared to admit: you said today, Mr. H, that we should not profess to have national feelings, but as a matter of fact one knows one's own self that national feeling is one of the most deeply rooted things in us.
D.L.H. It is in the blood. Only from the christian's standpoint you cannot conceive of it, it will not work: the moment you bring in christianity, away with your nations, because christianity knows no nations, so far as I see.
J.T. No.
W.C. Does the passage "The kingdom of God shall be taken from you" in Matthew refer to any actual nation.
J.T. I think it is an abstract reference to Paul's ministry.
Rem. Peter speaks of a "holy nation".
J.T. God has not given up the idea of a nation, because He is the Author of nations, it was He who divided them, and it was a mercy that He did so, because it has become a check on sin; it was a certain limitation to man's world, the division of peoples. Imperialism was for the overthrow of that; Nimrod was Satan's tool to overthrow the division that God in mercy had made.
D.L.H. Supposing we are praying at a meeting for prayer, how could a christian, if he is intelligent in what christianity is, talk about 'our king'; it seems to me that the word would perish in your mouth if you tried it, it would not work, because, here is a French brother, or a German brother for that matter, or some other person
{60}
might be present, and how could he pray for 'our king'; it will not do at all. It is quite obvious from the christian standpoint there is no such thought; we pray for kings and for all that are in authority, surely.
A.M.H. I suppose we may have the light of that, but unless we have another political system, as Mr. T, was suggesting, our hearts are still holding to the system here.
D.L.H. Well, what a good thing it is that we have another system, and a very good one too, and it is going to stand when all the others will totter at their foundations.
J.T. You have another country, a heavenly city, and you may say a heavenly kingdom -- three things that go to make up the national position. "... we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved".
A.M.H. Mount Zion and the city -- where are those? You seem to make some distinction between what God chose, as if that might be the plan, and then what He builded, as if it might be the execution.
J.T. Yes. His choice is the site of the building, "here will I dwell, for I have desired it". Then the building is set up there. The building, of course, the habitation, is not in view; the city is not exactly the habitation; still, the idea of the building was on that site.
N.L. What does the thought of "Jerusalem" suggest to you?
J.T. It is the heavenly Jerusalem here. I think it is the name of the primary city that God had in His mind. The first mention of it is in the Book of Joshua; but David took Goliath's head into that city, as if anticipating the mind of God that that should be the centre of rule in the kingdom. I do not know what you might link with the name, perhaps you have something in your mind?
N.L. You get it again in Galatians, do you not, "Jerusalem which is above"; I wondered what the Spirit of God would convey to us in that way.
{61}
J.T. It was the name of "the city of the great King", and faith cherished it until it was displaced by the heavenly system, the heavenly things; so that it would be in that way the church as the heavenly capital of the universe.
J.B.C. Will the city have served its purpose completely in the world to come? In the opening of @Revelation 21 you get the same vessel but looked at more in its character. I was thinking of what you were saying, that it is connected with power and administration in a settled form is it not? I thought it would serve the will of God until the completion of the world to come.
J.T. Then it becomes a tabernacle of God.
J.B.C. I thought so.
J.T. Yes, where He dwells.
D.L.H. I think in the eternal state it takes the character of the holy Jerusalem. I suppose the heavenly Jerusalem stands somewhat in contrast to the earthly Jerusalem.
J.T. I think priority is the thought in it, in what is heavenly; "He that cometh from above is above all" and what is of heaven has priority to what is on the earth.
D.L.H. "I ... saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven", that is the eternal condition of things, but here in Hebrews, it seems to me to be the heavenly city, somewhat in contrast to the earthly Jerusalem, which was the centre of all Israel's hopes.
J.M. Is it on the line of the Songs of degrees -- what we go up to as God's great centre, rather than what comes out?
J.T. Yes. I think that the first statement here is what the city is -- how it is constituted, it is the city of the *living* God; and then the next thing, I think, is that it is in liberty and necessarily has priority to what is on the earth; so that the liberty side is seen more in Revelation, it comes down "having the glory of God"; it is free.
{62}
W.C. Would the saints in the early chapters of Acts represent it?
J.T. I have no doubt that the foundations and the exterior of it may be traced in the Acts, but it is Paul who gives the interior, the *heavenly* Jerusalem; he gives it, I apprehend, that touch.
Everything in the early part of the Acts is marked by life, that is, spiritual energy: if it were the serving of tables, looking after the ordinary material things in the assembly, it was by those who were filled with the Holy Spirit, they were replete with life; nothing was under hard *officialism*, but it was all in the energy of life. I think you have a remarkable connection in the history of Stephen between the city of the living God and the heavenly Jerusalem; there is development from the energy of life into the angelic face of the Lord's servant, his face was like the face of an angel; it was heavenly.
These things, in that way, are extremely educational, because the point for us, it seems to me, as has often been remarked, is to go back to the beginning, "That which was from the beginning". The city of the living God is what marks the disciples in the early part of the Acts, and the Lord set the thing, as it were, before them by assembling with them for forty days. "He shewed himself alive"; it was a living Man in the energy of life that was amongst them. It can easily be understood that if He shewed Himself at all it would be alive, but the Spirit says "He *shewed* himself *alive*". He brings in the word "alive".
H.N. How would they be constituted heavenly?
J.T. I think Paul brings that element in. It was in the mind of God from the outset, but it awaited the ministry of Paul to bring out the full position of the church. He went into Damascus and preached in the synagogues that Jesus was the Son of God, and that lays the basis for the heavenly position and liberty. So that Paul and Barnabas went to Antioch and stayed
{63}
there a whole year, they lived there, and it seems to me -- not that the Spirit of God says so formally -- that the connection is very striking, because it was there that the disciples were first called christians. They got a definite position in this world as outside and independent of what had position on the earth, they were followers of the Christ, and then we have the fact stated that they ministered to the Lord and "the Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". There is liberty for the Spirit, which is suggestive of the heavenly city, it is not held by any earthly claims, the Holy Spirit is free in it from any earthly trammels whatsoever. Then you have following upon that, Paul and his company.
H.N. I would like a little help in regard to what you were saying as to the city being the product of Paul's ministry. Why is it that, in the end of the Revelation, the city is identified with the twelve and Paul is not brought into view?
J.T. Because it is the external thing, it is what comes under the eyes of the universe, but the inner springs all connect themselves with Paul's ministry.
N.L. You do not get that thought in the first part of the twenty-first chapter; the thought of the twelve apostles comes out in connection with the city in the world to come.
J.T. Quite so.
N.L. You get the thought of the new Jerusalem in the first part of chapter 21 and in connection with Philadelphia, do you not? I was rather struck with that wonderful promise to the overcomer. I do not know if it is inopportune to ask how it works out.
J.T. I think it is very fitting, because Philadelphia involves the recovery of the truth of the church, and it shows that an overcomer would value the thought of the heavenly city, because anything that the Lord promises to you is what you value; He knows you value it.
{64}
W.C. What is the thought in the expression "the beloved city"?
J.T. I think it is a very suggestive expression; it shows what God thinks about it. The word "beloved" is very striking in scripture.
W.C. In the Psalm referred to (78) it speaks of "the mount Zion which he loved"; would "the beloved city" in Revelation be the development of that?
J.T. I suppose it would. You have the city added. Mount Zion is more the site.
W.C. There would be that found which is entirely according to God there.
J.T. Yes, there is much made of the city in the Psalms.
J.B.C. I was thinking, that the thought of Mount Zion gives you the sovereign power of God which accomplishes His own pleasure, you get the idea of the divine foundation of all there. But when you come to the city you have more what is built, what is formed, and would not that involve, not only the sovereignty of God, but also what He brings to pass in the souls of His people. A city must be built in detail; the conception is sovereign, but the execution is in detail.
J.T. Quite so, and wisdom comes out in the skill with which things are done. But Zion is sometimes identified with a structure; we are asked to go into it, walk about it, tell the towers, and take account of it in its varied features.
D.L.H. "Mark ye well her bulwarks".
J.T. Yes, it is worth reading, that Psalm. (@Psalm 48 read). Remarkable tribute to the city!
D.L.H. Jerusalem is not mentioned, it is Mount Zion.
J.T. In that way the connection is very intimate. But the thought of the heavenly Jerusalem commands the attention particularly, because it is not only living, but it is a heavenly thing, it is such a delivering element from the earth.
{65}
But we must proceed, there are several elements and the next one, to my mind, is one we ought to pay attention to, that is, "the universal gathering"; I think that is how it reads.
D.L.H. "To myriads of angels, the universal gathering".
J.T. That is the third thing mentioned, which would greatly aid us in delivering us from localism, because it is a question of what is universal.
J.M. Is that why angels are brought in?
J.T. Well, I think, according to the way they are presented in scripture, they are very sympathetic with what God does *everywhere*, beginning at the foundations of the earth; but then here they are a representative company -- "myriads of angels, the universal gathering"; not only are they there by way of a host, a number, but they represent the universe, as you might say, they are not local. I do not know whether that commends itself to you?
D.L.H. Yes. I think so; it is remarkable the way that angels are introduced in regard to the divine system which christians are viewed as having come to -- I mean because they are christians.
J.T. And to think of them assembling! To think of their intelligence! The National Congress as it is called in America is supposed to represent the wisdom of the different departments of the realm; but think of the wisdom that is found in this holy congress of holy myriads, dating back as they do, according to Job, to the foundations of the earth! Think of all the experience that they have had! They have been the executors of the will of God in every dispensation. Think of the political wisdom, as you might say! -- because they have had to do with government very largely: their sympathies and concern, all is universal, they are not local. I mention it because if you move about among the people of God you will find that in the prayer meetings the expressed
{66}
interest is usually bounded by the town limits; perhaps the brothers that visit are mentioned, but the universal interests of Christ, so far as one has observed, are very little in the hearts of God's people, and I believe that this element here is intended to instruct us as to the universalism of the things of God. If we have come to this gathering, it is for us to understand what it means.
A.M.H. So that if you get the thought of a centre in the city, this is now your outlook, is it? We want to look round upon the whole of what God is doing.
D.L.H. Then is the idea that the saints forming the church have come into the good of the angelic ministry, at the present moment, in a kind of anticipatory way, in view of what will be seen in the world to come, when I suppose every family, angels included, will exactly fit into the precise niche which God has appointed?
J.T. I do not think we shall be surprised when we see the angels in the city gates if we have been exercised through our wilderness history, because as you say, that is what they have been to us. They are sent out, it says, "to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation". It is not that they may always be ministering directly to me, but they are acting in the world on our account; things that happen politically and internationally are all, more or less, under their supervision and all is moved and governed on our account.
D.L.H. So that the activity of these myriads of angels is a very important activity in view of the church at the moment. We are not very conscious of it, but there it is, and we have come to it.
J.T. We are entitled to reckon on divine intervention governmentally in this world, and you pray in the light of it; you are not to be overwhelmed by happenings, because things will only go so far.
J.B.C. Do you not think that if this were better understood it would save us from many an anxiety?
J.T. I think that. I know it in my own soul; I am
{67}
anxious about things and I find that at the bottom of my heart I knew they would be all right, yet I could not rest in it. God's angels are attending, but we do not *rest* in what we really believe at the bottom of our hearts, if you can understand what I mean.
D.L.H. I suppose the political element comes in rather in Daniel. "The prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me", the angel says.
J.T. That book helps greatly in the elucidation of this reference; the angels are seen there acting in the empires of the world.
D.L.H. And so doing God's pleasure in acting on behalf of God's dear people.
J.T. That man praying, Daniel, is thinking of the interests of God everywhere and the angel comes to him.
Rem. We have instances in the Acts of the Apostles.
J.T. Yes, take Peter.
N.L. When Mr. G. Cutting was in South Africa at the time of the battle of Colenso, there were some remarkable instances of the preservation of christians, he wrote home and said the angels were busy that day.
D.L.H. I suppose they are busy oftentimes when we do not notice it.
N.L. When we are asleep.
A.M.H. It is rather remarkable that the measure of the city is "according to the measure of a man, that is, of the angel"; have you any thought as to that?
J.T. I do not know; beyond that the city is all that a man energized by the Spirit of God could desire, there is nothing lacking there.
D.L.H. The Lord Himself assumes angelic form in the Revelation, now and again.
H.N. Would this "universal gathering" bring in the imperial idea just as the city gives the political idea?
J.T. I should say so, the angels represent that;
{68}
and the effect of their government would be to bring all in under Christ.
D.L.H. There again, it is a curious thing that the imperial idea first of all originated, apparently, in man's independent mind. God seems to take up that thought, so we find "who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords", @1 Timothy 6: 15. That is Christ.
J.T. The next reference is to those that are privileged: you come to such a people as these. We want to know who these people are and what their privileges are. One can identify oneself with each of these things: I can identify myself with each of these features.
A.M.H. Would you say how?
J.T. Well, for instance, "the firstborn" ones. I am one of these; I have to take account of them as privileged, but then I am entitled to merge myself in them, and if I go in to explore I find out I am one of them; what a discovery that is! I am one of the privileged ones. I have a firstborn's place: that eclipses all hereditary honours. Where am I now? I belong to the assembly of the firstborn ones, registered in heaven. There is a book "Who's who" in heaven as well as on earth, and that book contains these people, that book tells you who they are.
A.M.H. I was rather thinking of the other features we have been considering, as to how you connect yourself with the "innumerable company of angels", for instance.
J.T. Well, I have a place in the administration, you know.
J.B.C. Do you get the light of this in the epistle to the Romans, "heirs of God"; and then it is emphasised "and joint-heirs with Christ": that gives the peculiar dignity of the company.
J.T. Yes, "joint-heirs with Christ". I notice it does not say you should have come to these things, but it says
{69}
"ye are come"; it is what the christian has come to; it is for him to find out what each thing is.
H.N. Would you mind giving a word on "God the judge of all".
J.T. The point is, I think -- have I a grievance? -- and most of us have grievances. Well now, I have come to God the judge of all. I suppose the greatest difficulty in the world is that no one's word is final. But God's word is final and He has power to enforce it, and I have come to Him, so that I can leave it with Him. And then I have come "to the spirits of just men made perfect". What society that is! I get amongst them. The question is, am I one of those?
Ques. Does that refer to those who have passed away?
J.T. It is an abstract reference. All are made perfect in that day; but every saint has a spirit which is just. It does not say that we have come to just men, but that we have come to the spirits of just men made perfect.
H.N. Now give us a word on the last.
J.T. Then you have "Jesus the mediator of the new covenant". That is the one Man that stands out pre-eminently amid that throng, that vast throng of the redeemed: there is one Man that stands out there for the soul -- Jesus. It is the Man; He holds the soul; the soul is detained before Him and it is from Him that all takes character. And He has made good the love of God; He is the mediator of the new covenant. He has made it effective; every christian can say in the history of his soul 'He has made the love of God effective in my soul through His death'.
D.L.H. And He establishes the will of God. I suppose that is another point -- the covenant.
J.B.C. We have connected those things with the race: is it in your mind that we are going on, in that way, to the blessed actuality of them, but presently we have come to them spiritually: they are real?
{70}
J.T. That is what I thought. One is invigorated by the thought that one has come to these things.
J.B.C. I was interested in what you said at the beginning about the vision: "for he with whom these things are not present is blind, short-sighted". I think it would be a great aid in running the race if these things were present to us.
J.T. Just so.
{71}
THE EXEMPLIFICATION OF THE TRUTH (1)
@Acts 11
J.T. What I think is apparent in the Acts is that the Lord in employing different vessels in the promulgation of the testimony, and in operating in different sections and countries, involving sectional feeling, maintained practical unity and caused the truth to spread; and in causing it to spread He caused it to be exemplified in those who spread it, as He had exemplified it Himself as recorded in the gospels. The apostles, being the children of wisdom, exemplified the truth, not only in their service but in their general walk and ways, corresponding with the testimony. The disciples are said to have been called Christians first in Antioch. They stand out there as followers of Christ, and it should be noted that this is in connection with the service of Barnabas and Saul.
In meeting the difficulty mentioned in chapter 6, the Lord took up others besides the apostles and carried on the work; it was carried on effectively in Stephen and Philip particularly, and in others. Then we find the Holy Spirit, in resuming the record of Peter's service, brings forth certain facts that would show he had profited by the experience. The Lord evidently taught His servant, by the very difficulties that arose, what was needed at the moment. The first person who received blessing through Peter, as his service is resumed, is one who had been a paralytic, Aeneas was raised up and ordered to make his bed for himself, as if to intimate that the circumstances now required that the believer should know how to act *for himself*, @Acts 9: 34. Then in the case of Dorcas, the facts suggest that she, although an active woman and efficient in her service, *died*. In what followed the apostle Peter emphasized *life*. She is given back to the saints and widows as a *living* woman. All this, I think, is intended to give colour to the section from which we have read. Light goes out to the Gentiles
{72}
and they are admitted into the kingdom through a man whose service is marked by these things. I mention all that to indicate the exercise I had in suggesting this section. I wanted to show (referring to the types) how the parts of the tabernacle were set up and divinely held together.
R.S.S. What is the analogy between the tabernacle and the assembly as at the beginning?
J.T. I think the tabernacle was intended to represent the full effect of the testimony in this dispensation. It was not intended to represent simply what the twelve did. I take it that it more particularly referred to Paul's service, including the twelve of course.
R.S.S. In what way?
J.T. It was made in *parts* and then set up. In effecting this, as at the beginning, wisdom is put to the test. It triumphed in the apostles. Wisdom is emphasized in Exodus in the two men who were employed in its construction -- Bezaleel and Aholiab. It is a question largely of love, but love acting wisely, and I think these chapters -- @Acts 11 - 15 -- show how wisdom acted to hold and maintain things according to God.
W.H.F. Does not the tabernacle express what is more extended than the assembly?
J.T. It was a figurative representation of things in the heavens and includes the world to come, but all this is held now, tentatively, in the church; thus we have "Christ being come high priest of the good things to come, by the better and more perfect tabernacle", @Hebrews 9: 11. I think some of our brethren present had an exercise as to the vital side of the truth. Things are to be held vitally or they are not really held at all. Divine things are to be held in love.
A.F.M. You referred to Antioch just now. What particular feature of the tabernacle appeared there?
J.T. It was what we may call the independent action of the Holy Spirit. It was the fruit of those that were
{73}
scattered through the persecution that arose in Stephen's time. Generally speaking, the service was carried on in relation to Jews, or Jewish proselytes, but some went on and spoke to the Grecians, with the result that many were turned to the Lord; and then the church that was at Jerusalem, recognizing a new feature had come up, wisely sent out Barnabas; and Barnabas, being an unjealous, good man, full of the Spirit, went and sought out Saul, and Saul being brought there, he and Barnabas assembled with the saints. The word 'assembly' is used, and the word 'crowd' is used, @Acts 11: 24 - 26. The fact that they *assembled* with the saints would show they were on tabernacle, or assembly lines, and they remained for a year in Antioch. So the full thought of the assembly comes into evidence, as the beginning of chapter 13 shows, but all was linked on, Barnabas being, so to say, the golden link that the type suggests; he linked all on with Jerusalem. The time was coming when the full truth of the church would come out, the mystery, when all should be linked up with heaven, but in the ways of God Jerusalem was still recognized and unity maintained. The enemy was defeated in his effort to introduce sectional or party feeling and room was made for the Holy Spirit. So we find, "the Holy Spirit said", chapter 13: 2.
A.F.M. In connection with the thought of the tabernacle, how would you regard these christians at Antioch -- as boards or curtains?
J.T. Both. The presence of Paul and Barnabas was used. They were taught the truth of the assembly which involves the boards and curtains of the tabernacle. I think Romans is that which brings in the boards.
E.P.L. When the Holy Spirit appeared in times of revival such as we have in the Acts, and is pleased to open the door to the Gentiles, it seems He acted simultaneously in different places; and it does not appear that those in Antioch had knowledge of Peter's action in receiving Cornelius.
{74}
J.T. The Holy Spirit was acting simultaneously, still there was a formal action by Peter which must take place so that the Gentiles should be admitted. He had the keys of the kingdom.
F.L. There is a moral line which underlies all this and which in a way gives a suggestion as to where what is vital is to be found. In chapter 6, to which reference was made, the apostles said it was not right for them to serve tables; in a sense it was beneath them, and it suggests they had made but poor use of the time when they sat with the Lord over against the temple and the Lord puts His valuation upon what a certain *widow* was doing. That is, she was putting all her living into the house of God, and the Lord estimates that, He assesses it, and they were with Him. When it came to a question of the widows they say in effect, it is beneath us and we will give ourselves to the word of God and to prayer. The answer of the Lord to that is in Stephen and Philip, and then again later on, when the door is open, as we get it here, and Jew and Gentile have to be brought together. Saul and Barnabas are distinguished in this; in their ministry they have committed to them, as it were, the serving of tables. They gathered the bounty and carried it to Jerusalem, and in that act, so to speak, of vitality, gave practical evidence of how the Lord was bringing together the Jew and Gentile, so making of twain one new man.
R.S.S. The fact that they sent the ministry by them to Jerusalem showed affection.
J.T. We notice that in meeting these contingencies that arose the effect was increase in a vital way. The word of God, it says in chapter 6, increased, and the number of the disciples multiplied, and a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith. These are the results, and so in the attack through Saul on the assembly the effect was that the assemblies were edified and multiplied, and had the comfort of the Spirit.
{75}
J.D. Is it not just as great a part of the truth that the Holy Spirit is down here in men as that Christ is in heaven?
J.T. Quite.
J.D. So, if He is down here, consequent upon Christ going up there, what He will maintain here will be Christ.
J.T. It is wonderfully interesting to see divine wisdom meeting adverse conditions. Do you not think so?
J.D. Yes. Reference was made to what took place in the preceding chapter. Peter in discussing it said, "and the Spirit said to me to go with them, nothing doubting". Then he goes on to say that as he spoke "the Holy Spirit fell upon them even as upon us". In Peter there was the divine nature. Christ's sensibilities were there, His feelings, hence he was available for the Spirit.
H.G. In that connection, I was wondering whether the constituent parts of the tabernacle, the gold, silver, brass, blue, purple, etc., were not really the product of the covenant? In @Exodus 15 you get the people delivered, in chapter 20 the covenant comes in and is amplified in the chapters that follow; but the result of Christ being written in the heart in covenant character was that you get all these various glories of Christ in the saints, and under the skill of these men of wisdom there is a place for them all. Through the wisdom of the Head one's exercise would be to make room for *all* that is of Christ.
J.T. Variety marks the Lord's endowment of the church. He gave *some* apostles, *some* evangelists, *some* prophets, *some* pastors and teachers.
H.G. In the tabernacle everything seems to be normal. I mean to say, there is no failure in connection with the material there apparently. It is all the positive work of God, the effect of the positive writing of Christ
{76}
in the saints, knitted together. We have in these chapters, no doubt, the adjustment necessary in view of what might have caused distance in these servants.
J.T. I think that under the Lord's hand that which was vital was preserved. In spite of the presence of what was extraneous, what was of God was preserved. That is the wonder, you might say, of christianity, that under the Lord's care and the constant activity of the Holy Spirit in us, what is of God is preserved and linked up together in spite of contrariety in me, and in spite of contrariety in you.
W.C.R. In the sheet let down from heaven there is variety; they come down together in the sheet, suggesting I suppose that we are to dwell together. Normally they would prey upon one another, but it is that which *God has cleansed*, and so He brings in adjustment so that they can be together.
J.T. Just so; and you notice it was "knit at the four corners:" there is the intimation, it seems, of universal or general security. All is securely held.
W.C.R. Peter had gone to the housetop to pray and ecstasy came upon him; in this state God reveals His great thought to him. Peter had been adjusted for the new service he was to render. It seems to me there is great teaching in that for us -- as to our being adjusted to one another. God brings elements together which naturally would not be together. The presence of the Holy Spirit explains this. As you say, it is wonderful how we can be together, the Lord maintaining us.
J.T. Well now, the enemy would use certain of the attendant circumstances of this great movement to bring in division. That is what this chapter opens with. It says, "The apostles and the brethren who were in Judaea heard that the nations also had received the word of God; and when Peter went up to Jerusalem, *they of the circumcision* contended with him, saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised and hast eaten with
{77}
them". Now that was true but it was not all the truth. It was the enemy's effort to use an attendant circumstance to the testimony to make a breach among the saints.
G.A.T. Would you say the brethren in Jerusalem were not open for the movement of the Spirit?
J.T. They were. You see the binding spirit is in the apostles, "The apostles and the brethren who were in Judaea heard that the nations also had received the word of God". That was evidently news which they valued. But it says, "When Peter went up to Jerusalem, they of the circumcision contended with him" -- not the apostles and brethren.
G.A.T. What class are they?
J.T. They were religious men after the flesh.
J.D. And that is what we have now, the fleshly official class will always oppose the moral, and the movements of the Spirit.
H.G. They of the circumcision were not in correspondence with the materials of the tabernacle at all.
J.T. No, but the apostles and brethren were, because the apostles represent the cherubim in the curtains, a most essential element. The *brethren* may be said to represent the links of affection in the system.
A.F.M. What do you mean by the cherubim in the curtains?
J.T. The authority of Christ, which can never be abrogated.
A.F.M. It is very instructive to see how the apostle, in his explanation, saves the situation.
J.T. He is a child of wisdom. It is one of the greatest exercises one has, and I am sure brethren have generally, how to meet difficulties that arise. The situation here was delicate and this was a skilful attack. The opposers do not state the whole case; they do not say what happened; they merely mention one thing. Job says, "How hast thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?"
{78}
When you do that you have the truth. Peter states the whole truth and the whole truth carries the consciences of those who were exercised.
H.G. Peter does not stand on his dignity. Our brother was speaking of the Lord's appreciation of the woman who served. He saw in her the product of Himself -- "I am among you as he that serveth" -- and one feels, as serving one another, we have to divest ourselves of our dignity. In view of conserving things, as we see in @Acts 15, Paul did this.
J.T. I think that is a good word. Peter did not stand on the fact that he was a great apostle and had the keys of the kingdom.
H.G. No, nor on the mere fact of his vision.
F.L. Nor on the mere fact of his being right. I think that sometimes, when we have a consciousness of being right, we fall back upon the sort of dignity of that, and say, I do not care to go into things any further. But what is suggested in reference to Peter here, and to Paul later on, is that when there is a good conscience in the inquirer he is perfectly willing to be put on his defence and give the fullest explanation. I suppose that where there is not a good conscience in the inquirer, and you feel there is malice in the attack, one is justified in leaving the issue with the Lord; but where there is a good conscience in the inquirer there would be willingness and humility to give an explanation; and I think it is helpful to see that in times like these, when we have questions coming up constantly.
J.T. Peter's patient, humble defence of his actions and position affords a very excellent object lesson for every one of us.
J.B. @Ephesians 4 brings before us meekness and lowliness. As I understand it, that is what characterizes those among whom God dwells. These came out pre-eminently in the Lord Jesus when here, and now we see Peter manifesting those moral qualities in making his
{79}
defence. Paul's being content with what one might call a menial service is meekness and lowliness.
R.S.S. The Lord's consideration for His people is seen in what He did in regard to Peter. I refer to the vision. And is it not a very striking illustration of the fact that seeing a thing in type and figure has a tremendous effect upon our minds and moral being? Peter recounted this whole matter. It had convinced him that God was making a new departure, and now his recounting it had precisely the same effect on the others. If he had said, 'the Lord spoke to me', or 'the Holy Spirit spoke to me', there might have been a question -- 'Were you not mistaken. Peter?' But he recounted the whole thing exactly as it happened, and the effect on his spirit was reproduced in theirs; it says, "When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life".
J.D. Do you not think praying would lead to ecstasy, and ecstasy to revelations?
W.C.R. What do you mean by ecstasy?
J.D. I suppose the man was carried beyond himself, and I think it is quite possible to be carried beyond yourself if you are available for the Spirit, and then you get visions, real true ones. There was a state in Peter to which communications could be made. The Lord is very glad to make known His mind if there is a state to make it known to.
J.T. And prayer, as you said, leads to it.
W.Bs. It is very noticeable that the marked events in the Lord's life took place in connection with prayer: His baptism, the transfiguration and His death; and it seems to have been the same with Peter here.
J.T. What you are impressed with is the wondrous patience with which God treats His servants so as to bring them to a state where He can communicate to them; here He was fitting Peter to use the keys divinely,
{80}
as you might say, in moral dignity. He might have used them otherwise, but now God has brought him into complete sympathy with Himself in using them.
F.L. Peter was hungry and desired to eat. There was the state beneath that longed for something. It was not satisfied with what *had been*. Then there comes the prayer and the ecstasy, and the enlightenment from God, leading to the use of the keys, which leads on to Paul's line of the one new man.
J.D. In the beatitudes the Lord said, "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness". Possibly we have not given Peter credit enough for the desire for righteousness he had. He must have had wondrous impressions as to the Lord's mind when he became the vessel for the opening out of the mind of God in regard to the Gentiles.
A.F.M. In regard to his explanation here in this chapter, do we not have the importance of testimony? The Spirit had spoken, saying he should go, doubting nothing, and then the *six men* who accompanied him are mentioned.
J.T. It says, "I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in an ecstasy I saw a vision, a certain vessel descending like a great sheet, let down by four corners out of heaven, and it came even to me". He goes on to say in effect, what else could I do? -- God was working and I worked with Him. He impresses upon them that he was *acting with God*. He says, "on which having fixed mine eyes, I considered, and saw the quadrupeds of the earth, and the wild beasts, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the heaven". He fixed his eyes on the vision and *considered*.
F.L. It suggests in @Genesis 7 God had put the creatures with Noah in the ark in preparation for a new order of things, a new sphere in which those quadrupeds and creeping things were to develop.
J.T. And do you not think Noah helps us as to
{81}
discrimination? He sent out the raven first, but it did not return; then he sent out the dove and it returned to him. Noah thus learned by experience. He knew the clean animals and the unclean ones.
W.Bs. These creatures as seen in the sheet would be objectionable to the natural mind, especially of a Jew; he would not admit that they could be brought into connection with God.
J.T. Although he fastens his eyes on them, and considers them, Peter is not left to his own resources as to how to act or what conclusions to draw. It says, "I heard also a voice saying to me, Rise up, Peter, slay and eat. And I said, In no wise, Lord, for common or unclean has never entered into my mouth. And a voice answered the second time out of heaven, What God has cleansed do not *thou* make common. And this took place thrice, and again all was drawn up into heaven; and lo, immediately three men were at the house". He has thus the mind of God before he has to say to the three men.
H.G. Before his praying he is brought to the house by the seaside, which is suggestive. The Mediterranean lay before him, which possibly may have suggested to him the Gentile world. We can hardly think how a man who had the Holy Spirit could have his affections hemmed in. They must of necessity go out to all men. He needed instruction. Even the divine nature in a man needs enlightenment. If you and I do not understand each other it might not be flesh working -- it might be the divine nature in you, or myself, or both of us, that needed instruction.
J.T. You mean that it required that Peter should come to the Gentiles to get help?
H.G. Yes, and then his affection might have been going out to them, but his Jewish prejudices held him back. That is, the work of God in us is sometimes beyond our light.
J.T. Coming into contact with each other makes
{82}
such a great difference. When giving this account of the matter, Peter had already had intercourse with Cornelius and his company. It makes such a difference when you have had to do with a man instead of hearing of him or from him.
J.B. Would you say that God was making known to Peter in this way a "greater and more perfect tabernacle"?
J.T. Well, quite. Peter was a fisherman and he would have remembered, doubtless, that the Lord had in an emergency controlled the sea, finding the piece of money in the mouth of the fish. He would have recalled the possibilities of the sea for God.
H.G. The Roman world lay before him there. The Mediterranean was simply the basin of the Roman world.
F.L. As a fisherman he was familiar with the Jewish lake. Now he has that which is the expression of the wide world. God says, I will show you that it is all clean, "What God has cleansed".
E.P.L. I wonder if you would connect what you have been saying with the Lord's words in the last chapter of Luke, that they should preach to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Jerusalem was the Jewish centre, and here we have the different steps by which God's centre was removed from earth to heaven. Antioch was not an earthly centre as Jerusalem was: the real centre was Christ in heaven.
J.T. Peter would be impressed with the place heaven had in the vision.
G.W.H. He would go back to @Matthew 16. "On this rock I will build my assembly". It is the Lord's operation from heaven here.
R.S.S. And it was there He committed the keys to him that he is using now.
W.C.R. The four corners would suggest the universal dominion of the Son of man.
J.T. What I would very much like for myself, as well as for my brethren, is to see how all is *held together*,
{83}
because if you look at the church as it is today you can hardly conceive of anything that is outwardly more fragile, and yet it is *held*, and the point is to see *how* it is held. It is not held by outward formalisms. Our brother spoke particularly of things being vital, which really means the work of God in our souls, and I think Peter had come to John's line when he resumed his service as recorded in chapter 9. That is, he had come to life. He presents Dorcas to the saints *alive*.
J.D. The coming down of the Spirit of God, consequent upon redemption, must have all men in view, because, as you have been suggesting, He is here not simply on behalf of the Son of David, but also on behalf of the Son of man, so that all have come into the view of God; and what Peter needed instruction in, I suppose, was the full extent of the redemptive work of Christ. I do not know whether you see the truth of @Matthew 16 in the sheet or not, but you see greater than that: the Son of man, who is over all the works of God's hands.
W.C.R. It is because reconciliation has been accomplished, otherwise God could not approach men, as indicated here.
J.T. As our brother remarks, the nations come into the view of God. Simeon remarks: "A light for revelation of the Gentiles", @Luke 2: 32. The veil is taken off so they are now before God and taken up tentatively in reconciliation. "What God has cleansed" is abstract. We know that was not subjectively true of the Gentiles as a whole, but it was in the abstract.
J.S. The fact that it came out of heaven has a bearing.
J.T. I think it has a very great bearing because the Son of man is there. It is a representative title. God had raised Him from the dead and given Him glory. He is there representative of men, as I understand, and all are in that way taken account of abstractly.
{84}
F.L. It has to be regarded abstractly because the passage speaks of quadrupeds, etc. Divine cleansing would change them and render them suitable to God. The power of death had to come in, "Arise, Peter; slay and eat". The cleansing involved a change from what is presented in the sheet. The gospel would effect this change. Cornelius and his company had none of the features of the wild beasts.
J.D. In the world to come the lion and the lamb will dwell together. I do not suppose the Spirit of God has any particular delight in letting us know what the beasts will do then. I would rather judge that is setting forth the moral elements found in men. Neither of these things will be found there. Men will be found together; and what marks the world to come is now seen in the assembly.
J.B. Is it not significant that Cornelius was a soldier of the most terrible beast of all?
G.A.T. I thought that what the vessel contained represented the church from God's side, and Peter saw what we were naturally.
J.T. Yes, it is not that they were to remain in this state. As our brother points out, the lion and lamb lie down together, "The sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice den"; no doubt it will be seen literally in the future, but if one of us is naturally a lion and another a lamb, we will be together. That is the moral victory of christianity: the natural features are displaced through the work of God.
G.A.T. What did the vessel actually contain?
J.T. What the Gentile world presented. As the apostle says: "For we were once ourselves also without intelligence, disobedient, wandering in error, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. But when the kindness and love to man of our Saviour God appeared, not on
{85}
the principle of works which have been done in righteousness which *we* had done, but according to his own mercy he saved us through the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit, which he poured out on us richly". @Titus 3: 3 - 6. That is how things are brought about -- what we *were* and what we *are*. It is through the redemption-work of Christ and the pouring out of the Spirit.
W.Bs. The assembly is viewed as derived from Christ, apart from the sinful history of those who form it. There is also what we have in @Ephesians 2: 3; "and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others" -- what *we were*. Is the latter the view taken in this sheet?
J.T. Yes; I think it is the Roman side of the truth. @Romans 1 and 2 describe what we were. But now God was making no difference and was cleansing the Gentiles. What the church is as derived from Christ is Ephesian truth. Strictly, union is found only in Ephesians, but Romans is historical. It is what I have been and what God has made me through redemption. It is not a question of new creation, but what is brought about through redemption; whereas Ephesians is what I was in His counsels, so my history, in that sense, begins with Christ.
J.D. It does not seem to me to be a question of individuals here at all. It is that the nations as a whole have come into the view of God; the nations stand on the ground of reconciliation, so Peter is free to go out to them.
J.T. Quite so, the nations were to be offered up as sanctified by the Holy Spirit, @Romans 15: 16.
{86}
THE EXEMPLIFICATION OF THE TRUTH (2)
@Acts 12
W.Bs. The 11th chapter sets forth the *religious* element, in the way of opposition. This chapter presents the *political* element. Herod represents this.
W.E. It is significant that what he did "pleased the Jews".
J.T. The fact that *Peter* is preserved has its own place in this connection.
W.C.R. Does Peter still represent the vessel of testimony?
J.T. I think he represents the authority of Christ; an authority that was founded not only on his commission but also on his experience. Experience is an important feature in the vessels of the testimony. Alongside the fresh energy that had set in, the energy of life, he who represented divine authority is preserved of God, notwithstanding the effort of Satan to destroy him.
J.B. Is there any significance in the fact that, the door of blessing being now opened to the Gentiles, persecution comes from that source? This is the first time in the Acts we read of persecution coming from the *secular* government. Hitherto it was the priests.
J.T. I think Herod is the antichrist, although not allowed to develop.
A.F.M. Is your thought that the authority of the Lord is continued in regard to the testimony?
J.T. Yes. That was the reason why I suggested that this chapter should be read, that we might see how important it is that authority founded on experience should be preserved alongside the fresh impulse given to the testimony.
W.C.R. What do you mean by the authority of the Lord being preserved?
J.T. Well, today we have no appointees of Christ, we have no officers. We have often heard that, but it
{87}
must not be assumed that there is no authority here. There is, and there will be while the Holy Spirit remains, and authority is usually founded on experience. Authority now must be moral.
C.A.M. You are speaking of things in an administrative way, are you not?
J.T. Well, even if there be no direct application of the authority it is a great thing to see that it exists, Peter is not seen here as active in service, but as *preserved*. We see how in chapter 15 he comes in and meets the situation with divine wisdom, in conjunction with James. He is preserved here.
C.A.M. Would you say again just what he represents today?
J.T. Any moral formation based on experience with God, involving weight and leadership among the saints.
F.L. I think this is a continuation of the mount of transfiguration. Peter, James and John were with the Lord on the mount, and James now gets the cup and baptism which the Lord promised he should. John is held in reserve and remains to the end -- "If I will that he tarry till I come". Peter is marked off for death but is preserved for a while longer. Peter, as it were, comes out from amongst the dead. He comes out from the prison house. I suppose there is a suggestion in that way of the two witnesses of @Revelation 11. That is, death and resurrection in connection with witness. Is that on the line of what you have before you?
J.T. I think Peter describes the cherubim and John the seraphim. The cherubim is preserved here of God. The earlier chapters -- that is, 9, 10, and 11 -- show Peter's education (if one may speak humbly in this way); what he had acquired through the experience arising out of the murmuring; but this is a divine intervention, not a question of Peter's education nor of his work, but of how God preserves the element of authority amongst His people.
{88}
G.A.T. Do you think God would be using this to prove to Peter what the Lord told him that the gates of hell should not prevail against the church? @Matthew 16: 18.
J.T. Yes. I think Matthew is the cherubim, and Peter has his place in that; but John is the seraphim side. That is, it is priestly, but priestly in the sense of guarding the person of the Lord Jesus. He takes care of His personal dignity; Peter is in general the representative of divine authority.
W.C.R. In giving him the keys the Lord spoke about binding and loosing. Would that be authority?
J.T. Surely.
R.S.S. You used an expression, authority founded upon experience with God: I was wondering if it might be illustrated in Paul in the shipwreck. He was not a seafaring man and yet he knew what ought to be done a good deal better than the captain of the vessel, and not hearkening to him they sustained great loss. He spoke with great authority on board that vessel time and again. Is that the thought?
J.T. Yes. If you apply the shipwreck to the church it becomes all the more apparent. They did not listen to Paul.
R.S.S. When you speak of authority based on experience with God, it is moral.
J.T. Oh, quite. As I was remarking, no brother would assume to be an official directly ordained today, but there are elder brethren, and our exercise should be that God would preserve them among us; the saints need them. They need the experience that they have. A young man might have life, but he cannot have what an old man has, a man who has been with God for years.
H.G. Rehoboam lost ten-twelfths of his kingdom by refusing the counsel of the old men. On the other hand, Paul says to Timothy, "Let no one despise thy youth". One needs to know how to maintain the balance.
{89}
J.T. Quite. There was really no one like Timothy. I think Paul had a certain feeling of discrepancy in putting forward a young man, but there was no one else. The old ones apparently were not available. But the saints need all there is available.
F.L. The fact is that the divine system is one of beautiful balance, and it takes account of the fact that those who ripen in experience pass off the scene and there is constantly being fitted in from the other end that which is in the energy and vigour of vitality; then there are those that lie between, and things are never rightly proportioned unless they are always in evidence. So the old should look with joy and with a welcome hand to those whom the Lord is expanding and opening out in spiritual vitality; and the young should look with gratitude upon those who are experienced in the ways of God and have stood long years as an asset in the house of God, and the fact is, nothing is right unless there is place for both of them. Now the older amongst us have something the young cannot have. They have experience, as you say, and in the house of God nothing is right unless there is the recognition of the divine ways. Provision is made for both and they are supposed to be sympathetic. Now if we lack that sympathy then there is fertile ground for dissension and trouble, and it will come.
H.G. I was wondering as to the point before you: this morning we were looking at the conservation of divine resources; the activity of grace amongst us is the preservative against disintegration. The only safeguard is the grace of God working amongst us. Is this the thought of the providence of God coming in to conserve what is of God?
J.T. That is what I thought; God acting providentially -- through an angel -- to preserve Peter.
F.L. I think the interest of the thing is immense; the testimony is one. Peter and James, it seems to me,
{90}
must be regarded as one; so, while death is working, the intervention of God in preserving life is working also. The testimony is one and it is ever supported by what is fitted in, so if James expresses that which goes down in death. Paul is ready to be worked into the testimony. It is always maintained and carried.
J.T. You see a great impulse given here. That is, that the scattered ones are occupied in the testimony, in preaching. Here you have an extraordinary situation, the scattered ones acting, as we may say, on their own volition. It says, "Those then that had been scattered went through the countries announcing the glad tidings of the word", @Acts 8: 4. I do not know that you noticed that but it is a remarkable expression at that particular juncture. You have in chapter 8 the glad tidings of *the word*, the glad tidings of *the kingdom*, and the glad tidings *of Jesus*; but the scattered ones announced the glad tidings of *the word*: in other words, what they had in their own souls. Now it says in the 11th chapter, "They then who had been scattered abroad through the tribulation that took place on the occasion of Stephen, passed through the country to Phoenicia, ... who entering into Antioch spoke to the Greeks also, announcing the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus". Now that is an extraordinary situation; an entirely new development. They were not commissioned. It is obviously the energy of life in them. They loved the Lord, the word of God was in them, and they preached, but what would be the result if that went on? There must be coordination. The activities of God here through His people must be coordinated. Otherwise you would have every one doing what is right in his own eyes. What would you say to that?
J.D. I am listening with great interest to what you say.
J.T. Do you not think that where you have a condition such as we now have, this instruction is
{91}
needed? We have had leaders and the Lord has taken them. Now how are things to be maintained? We have movements here and there, evidences of the Holy Spirit's activities that we cannot but rejoice in; but then, the element of divine authority, involving order and coordination must be recognized. The house of God is one and is ruled by Christ. There must be full acknowledgement of that fact and of all the elements He employs. Those who have experience with God are of the utmost importance in the house of God, and I think that chapter 12 is introduced in order to bring that into evidence; and chapter 15 following upon it, shows the wisdom of it: whilst there was no restraint on the impulse of the Spirit, there was coordination and regulation, so that unity was preserved.
J.D. What do you refer to in chapter 12?
J.T. The preservation of Peter. He was preserved by God providentially, but evidently preserved for the ordering of the house.
F.L. You refer to the value of the experience that Peter had.
J.T. Yes, look at the precious treasure that was in that man. Think of what there was there, the experience that he had acquired with Christ in His ministry here and subsequently. It was a priceless treasure. Well, there is such a treasure today too to maintain; of course, of a much less degree, but still most essential.
A.F.M. Would you get an illustration of this in Jacob, to whom the truth of the house of God was committed? At the end of his ripe experience he gathers his sons around him and foretells what should befall them in the last days. There was the authority of God there and the voice of wisdom, etc.
J.T. Yes, a comparison between @Genesis 49 and @Deuteronomy 33 helps in regard to that very thing. In the first it is, "Hearken unto Israel your father". It is, really the parental authority of Christ, as you might say.
{92}
But in @Deuteronomy 33 it is not the father, but the man of God -- "the blessing, wherewith Moses the *man of God* blessed the children of Israel".
J.D. It looks from this chapter as though God acted in answer to the prayers of the assembly. It says, "unceasing prayer was made by the assembly to God concerning him".
J.T. But it seems that whilst they maintained the outward order of prayer they were not up to their prayers. That is, I think the chapter shows us (without, of course, emphasizing it) that decline had set in at Jerusalem. The prayer meeting was kept up as usual, but when that which was prayed for appears they do not believe it could be possible.
F.L. There again the *younger* element is shown in Rhoda. She has the joy and intelligence of the thing when those who were further on in a certain way and would be able to give expression in their prayers, as you say, were not up to what had transpired. The evidence of God's hand was real and she accepted it. I can see at the present time the same thing -- the young grasping, in the energy of faith, what God gives when the older ones are a little dubious about it.
J.T. We have the old and young beautifully linked together in Rhoda and Peter. She recognizes *his voice*.
R.S.S. You said, if I understood you, that Peter's preservation seems to be in view of the church.
J.D. It is good to solicit God on behalf of certain men who are specially valuable to the church. As far as I see, neither Peter nor those who prayed for him were up to the movements of God here. Peter thinks he has seen a vision. He is not sure about the thing at all. It seems to me that what we have coming out here is the authority of the Lord for the assembly. I was thinking of the difference between Peter's preservation and John Baptist's head being cut off; the latter closes a dispensation and there is no angel to deliver him, but there
{93}
is an angel to deliver Peter because there is a new moral dispensation which the Lord would maintain.
F.L. Do you not think we are prepared here for a transference? That is, Peter is virtually seen as having filled his day; the ministry the Lord gave him was in the main accomplished; things are being prepared for a transference to Paul, so that, while he is delivered out of prison and, as you say, the ripe experience is preserved to the assembly, it is not he that carries things on. Another comes in to carry them on, and I think in the house of God there is nothing more interesting than to see how when one has, as it were, completed his course, another or others come in and continue the work.
J.T. And it is most important for us to take account of *all* that God has provided. Peter was peculiarly valuable at this juncture, as representing the authority of Christ, strengthened, as it was, by the moral weight which his great experience would accord him. But Paul and Barnabas were to be the active vessels. The effect of the service of the scattered ones is gathered up and brought under the teaching and influence of Barnabas and Saul. Thus the assembly at Antioch was formed. This was an additional asset, as one may say -- an assembly through which the Holy Spirit can act. It seems to me that these chapters help in that way to show how the results of the work of God are all seen in their relative value, and then all coordinated so as to be in their settings according to the direction of the Lord and thus available as He needs them.
F.L. And would you not say of a vessel in the house of God that its service may be changed or take different form? That is, Peter had yet to produce his two beautiful letters, which have been such a wealth of comfort and light to the assembly.
J.B. The apostolic element, represented in Peter, is preserved in those two epistles to us.
{94}
G.A.T. You said we were liable to have the form of prayer without being affected by it.
J.T. I think that is the lesson to be gathered. We have our prayer meetings, etc., but is faith commensurate with these outward forms? Chapter 12 is to show how God intervened, and how in result "the word of God" it says, "grew and spread itself", verse 24. That is a feature of the house. The word of God has been in it uninterruptedly, and that works. As the apostle says, it "is not bound". But it is most interesting to see how the result of the work of the scattered ones is brought under the teaching of Barnabas and Saul.
J.D. Well now, what would correspond with that today, in view of the ruin of the church?
J.T. It says, "A great number believed and turned to the Lord. And the report concerning them reached the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem" chapter 11: 21 - 22, and then it says, "And they sent out Barnabas". Notice, *Barnabas*. I take him to represent the golden clasps of the tabernacle. Being "a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit" he would link with what was of God. They selected the right man to send. That was wisdom, and they prescribed where he was to go. He was to go as far as to Antioch, and it says, "who, having arrived and seeing the grace of God, rejoiced". You will pardon my going into details, but what I think is that in the varied activities of the Holy Spirit (in whatever section or country) the spirit that marked Barnabas takes account of it and rejoices in it. He is not for the moment in the least occupied with how it affects him or his locality, or country. It is a question of what is of God, wherever it is. It says, "he went away to Tarsus to seek out Saul". He did not write or send for him. He *went* for him and sought him out. You can understand the conversation that would ensue when he met him. The passage further reads, "And having found him, he brought him to Antioch. And so it was with
{95}
them that for a whole year they were gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd: and the disciples were first called christians in Antioch". Now I gather from that, that in order to really appreciate a work of God in a locality one has to go there, and indeed *live* there; not only for a month, but for a whole year; because if you are to understand the vicissitudes of assembly history locally you must not only summer with the brethren, but *winter* with them. They stayed a whole year, and during the time *assembled* with the brethren and taught them. They thus became available to Christ, as chapter 13 shows, in the testimony, and it was a wonderful triumph. And so it says, they were first called christians at Antioch. There were other movements, but this shows how the assembly was formed at Antioch, and what the result was. You have that in the 13th chapter -- *the Lord is ministered to*. You do not get that in a 'crowd'. The effect of the preaching was that a 'crowd' was added to the Lord, but it is in the *assembly* the Lord is ministered to; and the assembly at Antioch, in that sense, was obviously formed through the ministry of these men. By visiting Antioch, Barnabas evidently discerned what was needed there, and so he went to Tarsus to seek Saul.
J.D. Would that be more a question of what was local; and you might have any brother visiting the place, or you might have a local brother raised up in the place to bring about that moral coordination you are speaking of? I see the principle working at the commencement, but are we not to have moral coordination today?
J.T. I am sure that the Holy Spirit operates sovereignly and there are the same feelings and exercises, but then there are local conditions that are not alike. For instance, at Crete (@Titus 1) you would need a different line of ministry because of the kind of people there, etc. I think what I remarked is right, that if brethren could only visit one another and see what exists in all the
{96}
localities of the world, there would be a different view in many instances, from what is now held.
G.A.T. You get a different impression by being in a place than through letters regarding it.
J.T. When they would detain the Lord at Capernaum, He says, "I must preach the kingdom of God to *other cities also*, for therefore am I sent". It was the levitical side He emphasized. It makes an immense difference in your estimate of a company of saints when you visit them, and see what they have to contend with and stay with them a year.
G.A.T. What do you mean by a year?
J.T. The different exercises come to light; what they have to contend with. The apostle speaks of *wintering* with certain ones.
R.S.S. He was three years at Ephesus, and a year and a half at Corinth.
J.T. And a year at Antioch, and he came back there. Barnabas and Saul became for a while local brethren at Antioch.
H.G. And your thought is that ministering to the Lord and also hearing the voice of the Holy Spirit (it says, "The Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul"), these things are brought into view in connection with coordination -- not exactly what you had before, the action of the Spirit? The scattered ones were working and the Holy Spirit recognized their work, and, while souls were blessed, you must have coordination, and hearkening to His voice.
J.T. That is what I thought. One can see how the Lord's assets increased, so to speak, because Antioch may be regarded as a sample. The apostle Paul enlarges on this thought in the way he uses the word "assemblies", showing that the Lord had, in these companies, formed the truth of the assembly.
A.F.M. A verse in @Acts 15 would substantiate what you say; "But after certain days Paul said to Barnabas,
{97}
Let us return now and visit the brethren in every city where we have announced the word of the Lord, and see how they are getting on". That is the principle you are getting at?
J.T. Yes -- see how they are getting on locally.
F.L. What I would like is a little clearer distinction between two things that to my mind are both right. I do not know that I see the distinction as clearly as one would like. One is that universal touch that comes from Christ as Head, and through the presence and power of the Holy Spirit, which gives unity of thought and engagement of attention. At widely divergent points, wherever there is spiritual exercise, you will find it is moving along certain definite lines, which can only be through impulse from the Head and the presence of the Holy Spirit. That is one thing, and I think we all of us set a good deal of store by that. The other is the contact with individual localities. It seems to me that in the present condition of things there are many localities which are in spiritual vigour, who receive very little from those who may visit them; the need is met through men raised up locally; the supply is from the Head, through the presence of the Holy Spirit; one way and another joints and bands are exercised about that which is the truth for the time, which is of general exercise in the assembly; and yet they may have but very little contact with the Pauls and Barnabases. Is that not a feature of the broken state of things today?
J.T. No doubt, but to arrive at the truth we have to see how things were at the beginning; under the government of God things are extremely weak now and most of those who serve are men who work with their hands. It has turned out that way, but some years ago it was not so. Mr. Darby, for instance, traversed the globe as he had opportunity. That was in accordance with true levitical instinct and activity; as the Lord said, "I must preach the kingdom of God to *other cities* also: for therefore am I sent".
{98}
Well, now, is it not possible for the Lord to bring about conditions today in which brethren can be visited in their localities, so that what is of God is discerned, and what is not of God. Features that mark a locality are likely to characterize the saints there (e.g. Corinth and Crete) and it is necessary to know these features in order to minister intelligently. The apostle informed Titus as to the Cretans. It is most important that saints should be visited (especially if there are difficulties) whenever possible. I have found my judgment wholly changed when I met brethren and conversed with them, saw them in their locality; I believe any one engaged in levitical work ought to go as far afield as possible.
W.H.F. I was at many meetings with Mr. Darby and I do not know of any brother that supported evangelisation as he did. Again and again he made the remark that if brethren ceased to be evangelistic they would wither; and I would say just here that I think we need to be greatly stirred up in relation to that, that we ought to be more increasingly sympathetic with the Lord in relation to the spreading of the glad tidings.
J.T. I believe that. What we see at the end of this chapter is "But the word of God *grew and spread itself*" verse 24. It was the word *itself*. Then we have, "And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, having fulfilled the service entrusted to them" -- a remarkable commendation of these two devoted men, that when they were sent up with money to Jerusalem they fulfilled the service and returned to Antioch.
J.D. It is remarkable what it says; "Immediately" (speaking of Herod) "an angel of the Lord smote him, because he did not give the glory to God, and he expired, eaten of worms. *But* the word of God grew and spread itself". It is put in contrast to what had taken place with him who is a type of the antichrist, "The word of God" is the testimony.
F.L. There is something remarkable about the
{99}
continuity of things. We see in Esau and the Edomites the implacable hatred of everything established in the sovereignty of God, which is seen in Jacob and the children of Israel. There was the effort to destroy the man child when Christ was born; and now the effort for the destruction of Peter. Herod was an Edomite.
{100}
THE EXEMPLIFICATION OF THE TRUTH (3)
@Acts 13
W.Bs. There is a change here: the testimony is now connected with "Paul and his company". I have wondered if, in the order that we learn things in our souls, the epistles of Peter do not precede the epistles of Paul. The teaching we get in the epistles of Peter is more elementary and governmental. In Paul's epistles things are more developed. The assembly is brought into view, and the counsels of God.
J.T. Yes; Peter emphasizes the government of God, the element of government being so essential to construction. Without the maintenance of the government of God, we cannot have the assembly developed. Paul comes in on the line of construction. He is the "wise *master-builder*". Peter is not said to be that. Peter had "the keys of the kingdom of heaven". His service, therefore, is largely in relation to government, but if government is established there is liberty for building.
W.C.R. How does the government of God affect us?
J.T. Well, it subdues the will, and, on the other hand, it protects me against evil. Government is necessarily charged with these two features: the repression of lawlessness in the subjects of the kingdom, and the defence of these subjects from outward attack.
A.F.M. Do you connect that with the cherubim?
J.T. Yes.
J.B. And with the apostle?
J.T. I think Peter represents it, and hence the importance of chapter 12.
G.W.H. The elements of the kingdom are there preserved, in view of construction.
J.T. That is it exactly.
H.G. It is said of the Lord that He will "shepherd them" (the nations) "with an iron rod" -- a peculiar expression. I suppose under His rule people will find the
{101}
beneficence of government; so in Peter you get the thought of shepherding.
J.T. If there is one word that spells the need of the world today it is "*government*", and I think what obtains in the world is very largely reflected in the church.
W.E. Would you say the path of righteousness prepares you for the building, which is brought in by Paul?
J.T. Just so, and the development in these chapters shows how Peter's service, in conjunction with James and the others at Jerusalem, is effective to make way for Paul, in view of the corrupting element that went out from Jerusalem.
L.G.M. Would you say that Peter's work was getting the material together and Paul's putting it in place?
J.T. I would not go so far as to say that he prepared Paul's material. I think the vision (chapter 10) on which we have been dwelling, suggested that Paul's ministry would come from heaven, but Paul brought in the material as well. He supplied the material as well as the design. Hence he says, "Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ", and it was he that laid it as a wise *master-builder*, @1 Corinthians 3.
F.L. Peter, through the vision, had indicated to him the kind of material that would be found and used; but, as you say, Paul goes and gets the material.
J.T. There is no doubt that the presence of Barnabas and Saul at Antioch is the explanation of the remarkable product that is presented in this chapter: "the assembly which was there".
F.L. You were saying yesterday that they were there long enough, and identified in that way, that they were of that assembly locally. There were in Antioch in the assembly prophets and teachers, and Barnabas and Saul were included. I was thinking of the order -- prophets and teachers.
{102}
J.T. It is the order in which the gifts were given. The assembly was provided with all that was required and the result was that "they were ministering to the Lord and fasting". I think we see the result here -- what there was for the Lord, and in connection with that, "the Holy Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them".
H.G. What is the character of that service -- ministering to the Lord? Have we anything of it?
J.T. I think the chapter presents to us the teaching of Numbers: the priestly element and the levitical element dependent upon it.
J.B. Is this the assembly God-ward?
H.G. I think so, but I was inquiring as to the practical side: have we anything answering to it definitely?
J.T. Well. I think we have. I have no doubt the Supper becomes the occasion in which there is ministry to the Lord.
H.G. Yes. I fully go with that. I thought this more something special.
F.L. There seems to be the suggestion that things here were in perfect normality and order, and that there was produced, as it were, an excess. There were the prophets and teachers and the evidence of priestly exercise towards the Lord: He was ministered to. Thus the Holy Spirit is able to direct that Barnabas and Saul be separated for the work whereunto He had appointed them.
G.W.H. I would like to ask before going on, what is the thought in a prophet?
J.T. One that brings the mind of God in, I think. It was the gift that was to be especially desired according to 1 Corinthians.
F.L. Would you say, one who brings the light of God in at any time upon the existing condition? Today, for instance, the state of the church is not what it was in
{103}
Antioch, but the prophet brings in the mind of God for the present-day exercise.
J.T. Yes, the order of the gifts was apostles, then prophets, then evangelists, then pastors and teachers -- pastors and teachers being in one man.
J.B. They were set in the assembly, and therefore a prophet with his gift would be relative to the assembly, would he not?
J.T. He would. The apostle brings in authority. He asserts the authority of God in Christ. The prophet brings in the mind of God. If you have these features you have what God can, so to speak, add to, and the evangelist adds. Very often the difficulty in meetings is that the condition for addition does not exist -- I mean the principle of housekeeping, "He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children", @Psalm 113: 9. The conditions existed at Antioch with which God can identify Himself.
A.F.M. The pastor and teacher would take care of those the evangelist brought in.
R.S.S. Are we to regard Barnabas and Saul here as evangelists sent forth?
J.T. Yes. I think so.
W.Bs. I notice in @1 Corinthians 12 the order is apostles, prophets, teachers, then miraculous powers. In @Ephesians 4: 11 it is apostles, prophets, evangelists, teachers. There is a difference.
J.T. Yes, because I think the state at Corinth scarcely warranted the idea of evangelisation. The evangelist is omitted. The conditions did not exist for it, but at Ephesus they existed.
R.S.S. There is not much use bringing forth children if you have not a home in which to bring them up.
H.G. Why does the *Holy Spirit* speak here? Later on, in @Acts 16, Paul and others "were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia".
J.T. I think the point here is to emphasize the fact
{104}
that the Holy Spirit had now a vessel in connection with which He could operate, and He is acting sovereignly. He says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". And then it says, "They let them go;" as if they were held in links of affection with the local company. Being let go, they were sent forth by the Holy Spirit. The church did not send them forth. The church let them go, but the Holy Spirit sent them forth. He suggests the function of Eleazar, who is said to be the prince of the princes of the Levites, @Numbers 3: 32. That is, the priestly element, and the Holy Spirit linking Himself with it. The Levites, Barnabas and Saul, go out in connection with that.
H.G. But of course for your *own* direction you would look to the Lord.
J.T. Quite. Of course Barnabas and Saul would look to the Lord for direction; for after all to his own master the servant stands or falls.
H.G. I was meaning that you would look to the *Lord*, not exactly to the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Yes. But at this juncture prominence is given to the sovereign activity of the Holy Spirit -- no doubt to check the metropolitan spirit at Jerusalem.
R.S.S. It says, "The Holy Spirit said". Probably it was through some one that He expressed Himself, would you not think so?
J.T. Possibly. The point is, it was *He* that said it.
R.S.S. Yes, and it was recognized by them that it was the Holy Spirit speaking.
F.L. The whole idea here is a new departure in the divine way. That is, it is not Jerusalem. It is a new centre of divine operation outside of the Jewish land and city; and everything takes character from that new point of departure, and I suppose that adds to the gravity of what John Mark did when he left Barnabas and Paul and went back to Jerusalem.
J.T. The Lord had spoken of the testimony of the
{105}
Spirit and also of the apostles as distinguished from Him, @John 15: 26, 27. It is the work of the Spirit largely in these chapters, but when you come to the fifteenth they are beautifully blended: "It has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us", the apostles say.
A.F.M. I suppose these men, Barnabas and Saul, had been growing up in their place, and now they are at the disposal of the Lord in this attitude of prayer and fasting, so the Spirit can now speak in this way. Would that be the order? So, as levites, whilst their service was at Antioch, it was not confined to Antioch. It was worldwide in character.
J.T. Quite, and you will notice Saul is the last mentioned.
J.D. Yes. I was just noticing that.
J.S. Are those mentioned in the early part of the chapter regarded as local brothers here?
J.T. I think so. They are in the assembly; not viewed as visitors, but viewed as in "the assembly which was there".
F.L. It is very interesting to see all through the Acts the way in which what is official is recognized along with what is distinctly on moral lines. Stephen and Philip were not introduced in any official way; and so Paul. All is on moral lines and there is no jealousy about it, no protest. I think there is nothing more beautiful than to see the way in which the service was adjusted and carried on.
J.T. The Scriptures present the things that occurred and they are allowed to speak for themselves. Barnabas went himself and brought Saul from Tarsus and both laboured together for a year in the assembly at Antioch, and Saul is the last man mentioned in the list of servants.
R.S.S. It does not say, 'Separate Me Barnabas, Saul *and John*'. They had John to their minister, and he got discouraged and gave up, and, as we read afterwards, left the work, chapter 15: 38. Have you any comment
{106}
to make on that? He was not especially appointed by the Spirit to accompany them.
J.T. I think he represents an element that falls in with the testimony, and circumstances test it. It was right that he should be there, but circumstances tested him. What is to be noticed is that his departure came in after we have the expression, "Paul and his company". It was *that* company he left. If it had been *Barnabas* and his company, I dare say he would have stayed.
J.D. Which would you prefer -- Joab or Jonathan?
J.T. I would certainly attach more moral importance to Jonathan. I think he had genuine affection for David, whereas I do not think Joab had. Jonathan was largely governed by natural considerations, and was outwardly on the wrong side, but he loved David; Joab was an ambitious, clever man, although on David's side. He had no moral worth.
F.L. We have them at all times -- men who have intelligence without spirituality. Sooner or later they make shipwreck of themselves and those affected by them. Ability that is not controlled by affection to the Lord is a very dangerous thing.
J.T. Yes, indeed. Jonathan has spiritual initiative. I mean, he "*wrought with God*". He had no direct commission, but he sees an opportunity (under most difficult circumstances, too) and he wrought with God, @1 Samuel 14: 45. Afterwards he manifested his appreciation of David.
J.B. Is that not the point with regard to these five ministering to the Lord? They took the Lord into consideration, exercising priestly functions; and the Lord could take two of those and they could be trusted with this great service, would you say?
J.T. Just so. So the fact that Barnabas heads the list and Saul ends it opens up an extremely interesting point. That is, the change from Barnabas and Saul, to Paul and Barnabas. It is the adjustment in this chain of
{107}
circumstances (by the Lord's skilful hand, through the priestly discernment of the saints) that becomes intensely interesting, and that is what we get here. I am very doubtful if Barnabas stood the test fully.
A.F.M. It is another phase of difficulty that we have to face now, is it not?
J.T. It is a difficulty constantly confronting us; confronting you, and me, and everybody, because the sovereignty of the Lord, or of the Holy Spirit, is ever present, and one can never tell what He will do.
H.G. You feel the sovereignty of the Holy Spirit was along moral lines. The man who was morally the greatest man came to the top, did he not?
J.T. That is right.
H.G. And it would appear in regard to Mark that the position was too much for him. I judge the energy with Paul was much greater than with Barnabas.
W.Bs. He came under a changed name.
J.T. Yes, and you will notice it says "Who also is Paul" -- indeed the word "is" is not there even. It is "Who also Paul". It may refer to the apostle's estimate of himself.
A.F.M. You are not surprised at what follows, are you? "But Saul, who also Paul, *filled with the Holy Spirit*", verse 9. There is correspondence between his name and this fact.
H.G. Does the blinding of this man, this sorcerer, suggest the judicial blindness of the nation of Israel and Paul coming out in his particular work in regard to the nations?
J.T. He described him fully and says, "Behold, the Lord's hand is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season" -- for a *season*. It is a judicial pronouncement, I judge, of the state of the Jews. They are not to see the sun for a season -- it is not for ever.
A.F.M. The Sun of righteousness will arise for them by and by, with healing in His wings.
{108}
J.T. Yes. What Israel seeks for he has not obtained.
F.L. "God hath given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear; unto this day". But it is not death. The suggestion is that after a season the eyes will be opened.
J.T. The veil is on their heart, "When it shall turn to the Lord the veil shall be taken away", @2 Corinthians 3: 16.
J.D. According to what you have been saying as to Paul coming in on the line of construction, it is important to notice that when the proconsul desires to hear the word of God he sends for Barnabas and Saul, and the sorcerer opposes Barnabas and Saul, but it was Saul who pronounced the judgment. He comes to the front in a way to detect evil and pronounce judgment. While he is constructive, he sets aside in principle, with one stroke the whole Jewish system. Then it seems to me he can proceed on the lines of construction. In his own soul he had come to the end of Judaism in the destruction of the sorcerer.
W.E. Would you say in that way he is exercising his gift as a prophet, in order that he may go on to his gift as teacher?
J.D. I believe that. There is something deep in it, to my mind. It seems to me that in the change of this man's name to Paul he has an insight to the whole heavenly system now. What brings him to the front, it seems, is his ability to detect evil and set it aside, so that he can go on with the building. I think the principle is true today.
H.G. As a matter of fact in the sermon that Paul preaches in regard to the Lord Jesus, he speaks of His burial, which Peter does not. Peter never leaves out resurrection, of course, but Paul mentions burial. In that sense he clears the ground of any material that could not be used for construction. It is very much as you have spoken in regard to @1 Corinthians 3. Paul was a wise *master-builder*, or architect; he clears the ground in
{109}
@1 Corinthians 1 by introducing Jesus Christ *crucified*, and then he says, "Of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus" -- suggesting, I suppose, the material for the building.
J.D. The prohibition of light is a most serious thing. That is what Paul charged this man with when he says: "O full of all deceit and all craft, son of the devil, enemy of all righteousness; wilt thou not cease perverting the right paths of the Lord?" So it is evident that a new line is to be taken and the ground is being cleared for it. Paul's soul is filled with it.
J.T. And so the importance of what has been remarked -- "Saul, who also is Paul, *filled with the Holy Spirit*" -- that was the vessel; one that could be filled with the Holy Spirit.
J.D. Would you judge that his moral training had been completed in Arabia?
J.T. I have no doubt that it had, although, of course, it would be continuous. It is very interesting to see the steps in Paul's training. Before he went to Arabia it says that, after his eyes were opened, "straightway there fell from his eyes as it were scales, and he saw, and rising up was baptized; and, having received food, got strength". These are the facts and then it says, "And he was with the disciples who were in Damascus certain days", *with them*. Then it says, "And straightway in the synagogues he preached Jesus that *he* is the Son of God" @Acts 9: 18 - 20; but before he preached he was *with the disciples* certain days. That was the kind of training that he began with. He learned what it was to be with the saints before he took up service. And then it says, "But Saul increased the more in power, and confounded the Jews who dwelt in Damascus, proving that this is the Christ. Now when many days were fulfilled, the Jews consulted together to kill him. But their plot became known to Saul. And they watched also the gates both day and night, that they might kill him; but the disciples took him by night and let him down through the wall,
{110}
lowering him in a basket. And having arrived at Jerusalem he essayed to *join himself to the disciples*", @Acts 9: 22 - 26. That was the way he looked at things. It was not his service first. It was the *disciples* first. He wanted to be one of them practically.
J.D. Not simply believers; it is the forming of moral character -- disciples.
J.T. At Jerusalem "all were afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple", but he *was* a disciple. "But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and related to them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus. And he was *with them coming in and going out* at Jerusalem". And then it says, "and speaking boldly in the name of the Lord. And he spoke and discussed with the Hellenists; but they sought to kill him. And the brethren knowing it, brought him down to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus". Now that is the course he went through before he went to Tarsus. What he went through there is not for us to conjecture, but undoubtedly he went through much.
J.D. I believe there is a moral Arabia for every man that is to be used of God. He has his three years in Arabia.
R.S.S. And when was he in Arabia the three years?
J.D. After he had been with the disciples. Possibly he carried with him, to isolation, all the effects of his conversations and life with the disciples. Now with us, I believe our character is formed with the brethren we associate with, but we have our Arabia concurrently.
R.S.S. Was he in Arabia, do you think, before or after his being at Tarsus?
W.Bs. In Galatians we get the order of events. God was pleased to reveal His Son in him -- that is, at Damascus. Afterwards he went to Arabia. I judge this was prior to his going to Jerusalem.
{111}
J.T. The statement in the epistle to the Galatians is, "But when God, who set me apart even from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations, immediately I took not counsel with flesh and blood, nor went I up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me; but I went to Arabia, and again returned to Damascus. Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem".
F.L. What one notices with a great deal of admiration is that while Paul had the revelation, the light of God concerning His intentions, mentioning him as a vessel of distinction, when it comes to the actual putting of things into practice he assumes nothing; but goes on in the line of simple levitical service; and as he develops moral characteristics, the Lord puts His seal upon that and brings him out into his singular glory, his unique place as the vessel of the testimony. I think that is greatly to be admired. I was thinking that it is very easy for us to be jealous (just speaking perfectly plainly), but in the sphere of God there is no room for jealousy. I remember Mr. Raven emphasizing that, when the Lord was introduced into the world, the first to acclaim Him were the angels, although they were to lose their place of superiority; they were to be lower than man; but there is no jealousy about it, and so through the whole line of what we are following here everything is brought in in such exquisite moral beauty. There is no place for jealousy, and Paul himself, filled as he is as the vessel of the testimony, waits. He is patient and the Lord opens the way for him. I am sure there is a lot in that.
J.D. Do you not think that the forming of the character (forming of character is a great thing) of Paul was through the men he companied with? He saw Christ in them morally. He heard the words of the Lord from the glory, "Why persecutest thou me?" and when he comes in amongst them he finds the "me" in moral
{112}
characteristics, and begins to take on the character himself in the power of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. It is very interesting here that attention is called to the company -- "Paul and his company". In 2 Timothy we see how that company was reduced, but it is there, as you remarked. "Luke alone is with me;" an examination of his gospel shows how fully Luke was *with* Paul, and how one would love to be in the last days in that company.
J.D. Yes, you remarked in prayer about those who sailed with us. I thought for myself I would like to sail with Paul, "God hath given thee all them that sail with thee".
R.S.S. Do you not think Luke was with him in the shipwreck?
J.D. Yes; that word to him on the stormy voyage of the testimony through this world was wonderful: "God hath given thee all them that sail with thee". It is a great point to sail with Paul.
J.S. Giving it a present moral application is very helpful.
J.D. Very helpful.
J.T. Especially as they *all get to land* in spite of the shipwreck.
Ques. Do you think that is where the Ephesians came short, because they did not sail with Paul?
J.D. They would have been numbered amongst those in Asia that had forsaken him.
F.L. Luke identified himself in the voyage very clearly: "when it had been determined that we should sail to Italy;" and "when *we* got safe to land".
J.T. And getting safe to land is not exactly being translated to heaven; it is arriving on solid footing now in the apprehension of the purpose of God.
J.D. I do not know that you will go with it, but I was saying the other day that that passage in Ephesians is not a point of time: "That we should be holy and
{113}
without blame before him in love". It is a moral consummation, to be reached now.
J.T. Just so. As regards the company, it is very remarkable that the Holy Spirit should set it down this way immediately in connection with the departure of John; as if to call special attention now to Paul. The ground is now occupied by Paul and his company. There is thus room made for the full unfolding of the mystery.
W.E. And do you not think there is indicated to us in Paul and his company the smallness of things publicly that must characterize us to the close? That is, one is struck first of all with the fact that the name is changed from Saul to Paul, before the company comes into view.
G.A.T. Does Paul's company include all christians, or does it indicate a certain state of soul?
J.T. I think the best way to arrive at it now is by 2 Timothy. Of course it was a large company at one time. Compare chapters 18 and 19.
J.B. John Mark had the opportunity to continue but he separated from this company.
J.T. Quite so. The gospel of John is a sort of winnowing gospel. It removes the chaff and leaves only what is real, so that there can be no doubt that John in that way supports Paul, as it has often been remarked. It preserves the Pauline company. "Will ye also go away?" the Lord says. And why were they going away? Because the words that He spoke were spirit and life. And Peter comes forward and says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God;" so John would help in that way to bring the light of God that would uphold Paul's doctrine. Mr. Darby said, 'Do not forget John, but cleave to Paul', and I believe that is a word for us. The testimony of Paul is to be cleaved to if we are to be saved. We must listen to Paul.
Rem. The company in that way would be distinctly on moral lines.
{114}
J.D. And you might add would be distinguished by moral features. The company is the company by moral features, for there is no other company.
F.L. Hence the gravity of John Mark's departure to go back to Jerusalem. He was not only separated from the company, but he was going back to that which for the time being the Spirit of God was preparing to leave in the new departure, so that the moral significance of his step becomes emphasized when we see the moral significance of Paul and his company.
W.E. Would you say that in that way John Mark indicates a sympathy with Jerusalem rather than with Antioch?
F.L. It indicates a certain state. We have been trying to get the present day application of these things, and if we see certain lines along which the Spirit of God is helping us, well now the test of those things comes home. Some turn back into natural things or even go further. Thus their state of soul is exposed. The meetings that we are having now, I take it, are intended to raise questions and exercises in that way. It is very interesting to see what marked Paul and his company, but what about ourselves?
J.D. I was thinking of your reference to Luke as having companied with Paul, and his gospel being a testimony to this. To him Paul's ministry must have set forth the meat-offering.
J.T. Yes. John returned to Jerusalem, it says, and the sad word is used "separated from them". This makes his defection more serious, for it indicates his mind as regards the company to which attention is called. It puts it in a clear light. The Holy Spirit does not *say* he was wrong in doing it; it is for us to see. But then it says, "They, passing through" -- they go on, the testimony moves notwithstanding defections, "But they, passing through from Perga, came to Antioch of Pisidia; and entering into the synagogue on the sabbath day they sat down".
{115}
I would just call attention to this, because, in passing on, the true levitical instinct comes to light. He goes into the synagogue and awaits his opportunity to speak. So he sits down there, and presently, "after the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, Brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation to the people, speak", It is what one would call levitical wisdom -- waiting for your opportunity.
F.L. How beautifully he reflects the manner and spirit of Christ. The Lord in going into the synagogue on the sabbath day, as His custom was, there was given to Him the roll of the prophet Isaiah. There was thus a marked correspondence between the servant and his Master.
G.A.T. What Paul does here is a little on the line of what is now objected to, going into the synagogues about us.
J.T. God had not as yet cast off the Jews. It was the grace of Christ warning them; but the lesson to be learned from this action of Paul and Barnabas is that we *wait for open doors*. We are in our own circle; we know how things are and know who is in charge, but evangelical work is outside and we have to recognize the conditions that may exist there. I mean what the government of God may allow. Here the rulers of the synagogue were recognized.
G.A.T. That does not give me the liberty to go where I please, does it?
J.T. Then what you see is they wait on their opportunity. That is a great feature of levitical work, to be subject, wait on your opportunity.
J.D. Paul could have told these men of his vision and that the whole Jewish system was being set aside, but he waits on God and He opened the door for him. Like Eliezer (@Genesis 24) he is "in the way" and waits for his opportunity. He would have been at a disadvantage if he had stood up before.
{116}
R.S.S. It is rather remarkable that the ruler of the synagogue says, "Brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation to the people, speak". But in Paul's beautiful address there is not a word of exhortation, because the thought of exhortation is that you stir up what is already there, but, as you say, there was very little for God there. On the other hand, instead of exhorting them he really presents God in a most marvellous way.
J.D. Yes, and I was thinking that if you and I travel with Paul and his company the Holy Spirit will make opportunities for us; because Paul and his company in a sense are here yet.
J.T. The levitical skill shown by the apostle's manner here is very noteworthy: first in the way in which he comported himself so as not to prejudice his position; then he is requested to speak, and in what he said we have an illustration of how he was "made all things to all men". Instead of antagonizing them in any way, he addresses them on the lines of the promises, and their privileges, saying, "Israelites, and ye that fear God, hearken". He knew very well what was there as regards the flesh, but he trusted in another element -- that the fear of God was there. You see the result now, in the end of the chapter, of Paul's service. The Holy Spirit always brings in the *result* of divine movement. It says, "The disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit". What a result that was!
W.Bs. Why take up that name "Israelites" here?
J.T. It had a spiritual significance, involving privilege, "The God of this people Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the people in their sojourn in the land of Egypt, and with a high arm brought them out of it". It is a very consistent presentation of the book of Exodus, and it would all encourage them to listen to him, because he was accrediting them with being the same people.
F.L. It was the breaking of the power of the world-system
{117}
which was now holding them, in view of the introduction of a new system. Here, in a very honest way, he goes right to the very kernel: a people was hatched, so to speak, in a day, and came out in deliverance from the world-system.
J.T. If you compare this with Stephen's speech you will see a noticeable contrast. Stephen states the things that were against them; they were stiffnecked; they always resisted the Holy Spirit, their fathers and themselves; but this is presented, like Luke's gospel, from the bright side so as to encourage attention and interest.
R.S.S. From the grace side. It is all about what *God* did. God did so and so, but Stephen was addressing their consciences and really indicting them.
G.W.H. In regard to the pathway of Paul, do you think he got the light of counsel in the third heavens?
J.T. No. I think all he got in the way of revelation for the saints was by the Spirit. That is what I understand. What he heard in the third heavens he says was unutterable.
W.H.F. Was he not sovereignly chosen as a vessel?
J.T. Oh, yes. "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit". I think he refers there to how things came to him.
W.H.F. It was plain that he was distinctly called in connection with the counsel of God to unfold the mystery of the church.
J.T. Just so.
R.S.S. What was the great gain in connection with what our brother spoke of?
J.T. Confirmation for his own soul.
G.W.H. Was it confirmation for himself? Had he the light of counsel before this?
J.T. Yes, what he heard in the third heavens was confirmatory.
{118}
G.W.H. Would you say the third heavens is open to all saints?
J.T. Yes, in a sense. It is "a man in Christ" here, not an apostle. He did not go up to paradise as an apostle, although it would help him in apostolic labours, but it was as a man in Christ. He spoke of the event as occurring fourteen years before, so that it was evidently rare.
{119}
THE EXEMPLIFICATION OF THE TRUTH (4)
@Acts 14
R.S.S. Perhaps you might give us a few words on this chapter.
J.T. Well, it affords a further evidence of the levitical skill with which the apostle carried on his labours, inasmuch as it gives us an example of his manner in speaking to *Gentiles*; the 13th chapter shows how he spoke to *Jews*. Verse 15 says -- "Men, why do ye these things? *We* also are men of like passions with you, preaching to you to turn from these vanities to the living God, who made the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and all things in them; who in the past generations suffered all the nations to go in their own ways, though indeed he did not leave himself without witness, doing good, and giving to you from heaven rain and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with food and gladness". That is an example of how he preached to the Gentiles. Taking both together we have examples of how he became all things to all men, that he might gain the more. To the Jews he became a Jew, but to the Gentiles he did not become a Gentile, but he spoke as a *man*. He was a man as they were, so that he begins, "*We* also are *men of like passions with you*".
F.L. You see the same example in Athens when he came to that city and saw it given over to demon worship, which I suppose was the sort of idolatry which involved that the things of nature were deified. Paul speaks of the altar "To the unknown God". He says, "Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you", And then he proceeds as *a man*: "For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God". And then he brings in the new order of Man in the new sphere as God's answer to that -- Jesus and the resurrection.
{120}
J.T. That is quite confirmatory of what we have here and it helps practically as showing how levitical service is carried on: you take account of those to whom you minister and seek to get their point of view and go with it *as far as you can legitimately*.
A.F.M. So whether it is in the synagogue amongst the Jews, or here amongst the heathen, he is guided by what he finds by spiritual wisdom, and here it is creation he bases his thoughts upon; he comes down to the creation itself so as to help them.
J.T. We can go a considerable way with any class of men. There are *some* things that we have in common with all.
F.L. Luke enlarges on that line in connecting the genealogy of the Lord with *Adam*. So that, as you say, with any class of men we have some things in common, but then there comes the divergent point.
J.T. Luke is specially evangelistic. If you compare him with Matthew, you will find that Matthew in no way attempts to conciliate the Jew or meet his prejudices. On the contrary, he approaches the subject in such wise as to rebuke, convict and set aside the Jew. He begins with Jerusalem under the influence of Herod, who had a murderous spirit and ends with Jesus, not ascending from the Mount of Olives or Jerusalem, but in Galilee communicating with the twelve, sending them out to the nations. That is, he disregards Jerusalem and all that it stood for throughout: whereas Luke begins with Jerusalem, not as under the domination of a murderous king, but as having a priest serving before God in His temple, whose wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and they were blameless. Zacharias is seen ministering in the temple at the golden altar before God and receiving communications there. The Jew is thus encouraged, his cherished institution being recognized. There is nothing to arouse opposition or resentment in the manner in which Luke presents the gospel, and so he ends his
{121}
narrative with this, that repentance and remission of sins must be preached among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem: and He leaves the city and goes out to Bethany, and ascends to heaven, and the disciples *return to Jerusalem*, to the temple, praising and blessing God. So Luke is pre-eminently evangelical. He does not excite opposition. He approaches the Jews in the spirit of conciliation and I believe this is a feature in evangelisation. If we are to gain men, we must go with them as far as we can legitimately, not further.
J.D. What you are saying about the gospel of Luke shows that the moral link between heaven and earth is preserved there. Regarding what we have been referring to here, would you be free to say this is a Levite carrying the ark of the covenant from place to place? What I mean is that the covenant is found in a Man, and Paul was in keeping with it.
J.T. Yes. I have no doubt that you get the priestly and levitical features together in Paul. That is, the priest took care of the ark -- it was to be covered before carried. It referred to the person of Christ; but still it is carried, and I have no doubt, as you say, we see it here; that is, the *testimony* to Christ in the gospel.
J.D. I was thinking of the word of reconciliation, that, just as we heard last night in regard to the covenant, it was committed to Paul. New creation was involved. Reconciliation had been effected in Paul and he went about as the setting forth of new creation. The word of it was there and the accomplishment of reconciliation was in that man.
J.T. He exemplified what he preached, you mean?
J.D. Exactly.
H.G. And it would seem as though there was something very living with Paul at this juncture, because he refers to these three cities in 2 Timothy in connection with persecution -- Antioch, Iconium and Lystra. Things are apparently going from bad to worse as regards the
{122}
persecution. At Antioch they expel him, at Iconium they attempt to stone him, and at Lystra they do it.
F.L. As to bearing the ark of the testimony, it may not be so apparent how it could be applied at the present time in connection with evangelisation. Wherever you preach, Christ in a way is known: He has been already presented. Paul and Barnabas, and Silas had that which was unique; they preached Christ where He was never heard of. And therefore, in a very peculiar way, it seems to me, they were the bearers of the ark of the testimony, and it was an immense privilege. Paul was never diverted from that path, no matter what he met in it.
H.G. I was thinking of that. It would show the imperishable character of the testimony. We read about James being beheaded and Peter left; but it does not matter if I am cut off and you left, or I am left and you cut off, the thing is maintained livingly.
J.T. The Acts presents the movements of the tent of testimony. In this the whole levitical company was employed: each had his own part to bear. I have no doubt that in the testimony of Paul we get the full answer to these things. Indeed it becomes more emphatic after Barnabas leaves him. Chapter 15 is the end of a period. You have after this chapter the introduction of the gospel into Europe. You have Philippi, Thessalonica, Athens, Corinth and then again he goes back to Asia and completes the full counsel, or mind of God in the structure he rears up at Ephesus.
F.L. I was going to say in that connection that wherever an assembly was formed the tabernacle was there in principle. Not alone the ark, but the tabernacle is in view also.
J.T. Quite; Ecclesiastes speaks of "masters of assemblies", Paul formed assemblies and these answered locally to the setting up of the tent of the testimony.
{123}
H.G. You include the work of the Gershonites as well as of the Kohathites, and they had a heavy part. They had wagons.
J.T. Quite.
C.A.M. So not only the ark, but the altars, the golden altar and the altar of sacrifice, both of these you see in the course of things such as at Philippi.
J.T. As our brother points out, there was first of all the service of the Kohathites. They were particularly entrusted with the holy utensils, the ark and the vessels of the sanctuary; but the Gershonites and Merarites had also their parts to carry, and I have no doubt that you see it all here.
F.L. Not forgetting the priestly family.
J.T. They are particularly brought in in this section as regulating the Levites. I think that is the way it stands, because Numbers is the levitical book. Leviticus is strictly the priestly book.
A.F.M. When you speak of the priests being brought in as regulating the Levites you refer to what we had this morning where "The Holy Spirit said".
J.T. You get it at Antioch: they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, and it was as they ministered that you have the directions as to Barnabas and Paul -- as it were, Eleazar ordering the service of the Levites, @Numbers 3: 32. After @Numbers 21 you have nothing of the service of the Gershonites or the Merarites. At Jordan it is "the priests *the* Levites" -- not priests *and* Levites. It is not any longer a question of the tent of the testimony, but of the ark of the covenant. That is to say, it is a question of Christ personally dealing with death, making a way for us into the presence of God in His own land. We may notice in the end of @Acts 14 the beautiful mark of approval on levitical work. In verse 26 it says, "and thence they sailed away to Antioch, whence they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which they had fulfilled. And having arrived,
{124}
and having brought together the assembly, they related to them all that God had done with them, and that he had opened a door of faith to the nations. And they stayed no little time with the disciples". I mention that because it is an additional touch by the Spirit as to the effectiveness of levitical service, seen in these devoted men. They go back to the company from whence they had gone out, and they had fulfilled their mission, and then it says that they brought the assembly together and related to them all that God had done with them, and that He had opened a door of faith to the nations. And then "They stayed no little time with the disciples".
{125}
THE EXEMPLIFICATION OF THE TRUTH (5)
@Acts 15
J.S. Would you mind giving us a little outline of this chapter?
J.T. It has its own place in the teaching of the book showing how God preserved, at the beginning, outward unity among the saints. The seeds of sectional feeling and prejudice had already appeared in the history of the church, chapter 6, which were met in divine wisdom; and now the enemy would corrupt the Gentile believers by erroneous *teaching*. I think its first appearance is here.
A.F.M. Would you say this chapter is cherubic in character?
J.T. I think it is. I think it is government. The contention was between certain men that came down from Jerusalem and Barnabas and Paul; but then it was decided to refer the matter to the apostles and elders, showing the wisdom that possessed the saints at Antioch; that is, the recognition of the authority that existed and still acted with God in Jerusalem. The result was that the truth was preserved and the brethren with it.
W.Bs. In the 14th and 15th chapters you have the two elements that have been in the world from the first: in the 14th more the character of violence and persecution, in the 15th corruption. These two elements always go together. The corrupting element is more inside. False teaching generally arises within, does it not? It is more destructive than the persecution outside.
J.T. Quite so. You will notice in the history of the churches that evil teaching comes in in the third, in Pergamos, "the doctrine of Balaam", and "the doctrine of Nicolaitanes;" and then in Thyatira you have a prophetess, one professing to speak for God. She teaches the Lord's servants to eat idol sacrifices and commit fornication. She *taught* that. When a thing takes the form of teaching, if erroneous, it becomes
{126}
corruptive. Persecution, which was from without, was seen in Smyrna. But the wisdom with which the thing is met here is to be noticed. The chapter suggests what is cherubic, as our brother suggests; that is, the authority of God vested in the apostles.
W.Bs. Where do you get that now? The same evil things and worse things are current. Where do you get that which protects the saints of God at the present time?
J.T. Well, it would be in that which the Holy Spirit forms. We have no apostles of course, nor appointed elders, but we have the Scriptures, and then there is the voice of the Lord in the addresses to the seven churches, what *He* says; and the voice of the Spirit. Further, the Holy Spirit forms men so that they have moral weight among the saints.
F.L. If we take the 2nd and 3rd of Revelation, in the words of the Lord we have the concrete presentation of the characters of evil which successively have come in. We are left in no doubt about them and in each case the Lord casts the overcomer upon the Spirit: "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches". But it is to be noted that nothing specific is given of what the Spirit would say, so that it is clear we are left until the time and the occasion, *then* the voice of the Spirit will make itself heard to those that have an ear to hear; but you must be in the line of the testimony to hear what the Spirit is saying in that particular day.
J.T. It is *what* He says.
F.L. What He will do will be to give through those who have the prophetic spirit a present application to what is already recorded, making it living and vital for the need of the moment.
W.Bs. It would be through "faithful men".
W.E. In that connection it is instructive that it says, "For it has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us", verse 28.
{127}
H.G. Where grace and wisdom are in operation, not only is the then difficulty met, but there is great excess. It is met for all time as regards the Gentile christians through the judgment arrived at in Jerusalem; and then the church at Antioch gets the benefit of the consolation from Judas and Silas, and evidently Paul gets a new companion in labour. In connection with it there is the thought of the trespass-offering -- if a wrong had been done the wrong was not simply righted, but there is a fifth part added. There was excess and you look for that in connection with the righting of anything wrong. Otherwise it is not triumph. There should be spoil from every conflict.
J.B. How about the seven stars that are in the right hand of the Lord? Would they not continue at the present moment -- the angels of the seven churches?
J.T. There is this to be said about them, that up to Thyatira He *holds* them but after that He *has* them. That is, the public ecclesiastical position is no longer recognized, but He has them.
J.B. Accessible to Himself?
J.T. Yes, He has them. In regard to the trespass-offering as you mentioned it, it is worthy of note that the offering was to be a *ram*. That is, the difficulty lay in the want of development and full maturity. We have to come to that in our souls. The absence of it underlies trespass.
W.C.R. I do not understand just what you mean by that. You say it was a ram in the trespass-offering?
J.T. I think a ram denotes full maturity. It is the want of that that leads to trespass. We are to be grown men in our minds.
H.G. And yet where the trespass does come in, if you bring Christ in there is distinct gain.
F.L. Is that not the thought in the ram?
J.T. It is what Christ is, the perfection of manhood. He restored that which He took not away.
{128}
A.F.M. In the case before us then, those who taught that they must be circumcised had not arrived at spiritual manhood or they would have been above such a thought.
J.T. They were going back to the nursery (@Galatians 4: 1 - 3), as under the law. Souls were under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the father. The 'time' has now arrived and it involves sonship and liberty.
G.A.T. What would correspond now to the attack spoken of here?
J.T. All the sects around us are more or less the results of this; that is, the application of the law to Christianity.
F.L. There has been reversion to Judaism. The Jewish system is very appealing to what is natural in man for religion, and Christendom has not hesitated to revert to Judaism, and to follow elements from paganism, and combine them. It is easy to distinguish those elements, so that I suppose in Corinth one side was especially working and in Galatia the other side worked. We see the effect around us and it is what in the mercy of God we seek to be delivered from.
W.Bs. In the 1st verse of this chapter, and in the 11th verse we get one side very distinctly against the other. The 1st says, "If ye shall not have been circumcised according to the custom of Moses, ye cannot be saved". Peter says in the 11th verse, "But we believe that we shall be saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus". Now that is a great contrast.
F.L. I hope we shall not pass over that 11th verse without admiring the exquisite grace that came out in Peter there as a Jewish believer.
R.S.S. Saying that the Jews were saved like the Gentiles?
F.L. Being a Jewish believer, we should naturally expect he would say: 'But we believe *they* shall be saved
{129}
by the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same manner as we also', but he puts it that "we shall be saved ... in the same manner as they also". There is the absence of all superiority or priority.
W.Bs. Peter is full of grace himself.
J.T. The way the matter is met in that way is very beautiful as showing, as our brother suggests, what we get in the trespass-offering -- the fulness of manhood. You have manhood in Peter and in James; and indeed in the apostles and elder brethren I think you have it beautifully presented, and that is what the enemy would efface. He would lead the saints back to the nursery, to the time when they were in bondage.
H.G. In @Galatians 2, where Paul speaks of going up to Jerusalem, he said it was by revelation; now I was wondering if you would regard him in that way as a Kohathite carrying the ark of the testimony, for he was anxious that the whole tabernacle should be maintained intact; here he is like a Merarite and Gershonite.
J.T. That is very suggestive indeed. The position of the apostles at Jerusalem had reference to the tent of the testimony, and the decision to send Paul and Barnabas there I think shows that the saints at Antioch entered into the mind of God in this respect. It might have been said, 'Well, why not settle it here?' but there were certain features yet to come out in regard to the tabernacle. The truth of the body and of the temple had not yet been developed fully, in the ways of God. So far, the twelve at Jerusalem were still recognized. The tent of the testimony moved on, but it included every bit of the work of God, wherever it was, and all was to be coordinated. That was a great problem to be worked out so as to show how the work of God rises above sectional or national feeling. Outward unity was preserved thus, but we can understand that after the epistle to the Corinthians was written you would not get anything like this. The matter at Corinth was to be settled at *Corinth*.
{130}
F.L. But the springs of action which would lead to the settlement of a matter on the ground of 1 Corinthians are revealed here, in the way in which man handles man and mind meets mind, and they are in subjection to each other at the same time that they maintain things for God. There is discussion but a right judgment is reached. Thus we have a good example set before us if we have to deal with similar problems now.
R.S.S. A most serious division was threatened for if it had been carried through it might have brought to pass the existence of a Jewish church and a Gentile church. Of course God's hand was over it in preventing that, and this chapter. I judge, is one of the most helpful in the Scriptures in regard to how to meet a case of discipline. That is, you get divine principles which are always applicable in every case of discipline. For instance, the apostles and elders came together to consider this matter. It does not say that the whole assembly came together to consider it. It has been very well said that the assembly is not deliberative; it is executive. The *brethren* deliberate. I mean those whom we should regard as more responsible because of their age or experience; they deliberate. There are cases, alas! that come up on which it would be highly unseemly to deliberate with all present. That is a matter for brothers to go into. The apostles and elders deliberated at Jerusalem, but when a decision was given the assembly was brought in. A "common judgment" verse 25 is the great thing to keep before us in any question that comes up, and it is not always easy to reach it. There may be, and nearly always is, some difference, and it is a great thing to wait, if possible, until a common judgment can be reached before action is taken; and when a common judgment is reached by the brothers it is not very difficult to present the case before the whole assembly, and then the assembly acts. It is executive but not deliberative and it should always be borne in mind that the essential
{131}
thing is to carry, if possible, the whole gathering with the judgment, which may involve a great deal.
J.T. The arrival at a common judgment that the Holy Spirit endorses is greatly accelerated by the presence on the part of those who have to say to it of living interest in what *God is doing* in a general way. That is, in a case of discipline we are apt to confine ourselves wholly to it, which in itself must always be somewhat withering, but what one notices here is how beautifully dispersed throughout the inquiry and deliberation is the spirit of interest in what God is doing. Of Barnabas and Paul it says: "They therefore, having been set on their way by the assembly, passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, relating the conversion of those of the nations". They did not occupy them with the cause of the dissension at Antioch. Their hearts were filled with what God was doing, not what these erroneous teachers were doing. That would come up in time. And then it says, "they caused great joy to all the brethren". I think that is very fine at the outset.
J.S. That is, they were occupied with what was positive.
J.T. Yes, with what God was doing. Then it says, "And being arrived at Jerusalem, they were received by the assembly". We might expect it would be the apostles, but it was the assembly that received them. I think that is quite in keeping with what was in their own hearts, what God was doing. The assembly would be interested in that.
F.L. If you finish the verse you see that.
J.T. "And related all that God had wrought with them". That was a good tonic, so to say, for the saints at Jerusalem before they had to look into this matter of discussion.
A.F.M. I was noticing that. They do not primarily present or press their case. They relate what God had wrought with them, and then that forms an occasion for
{132}
this trouble that was brewing to present itself on the part of the Pharisees.
J.T. The enemy cannot be inactive. They do not present their case according to the record. They presented what God was doing. The Pharisees introduced what had been the occasion of the discussion. Now to return to what we were saying, I think we do well to take notice that, in these matters of difficulty, ultimate success from God's point of view is dependent on divine love in the brethren you appeal to. What the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, were occupied with was God's operations, and if you appeal to the brethren you will find a response in them normally to that.
F.L. "And all the multitude kept silence and listened to Barnabas and Paul relating all the signs and wonders which God had wrought among the nations by them" verse 12. As you say, the emphasis all the way through is on that which was positive and constructive, and which was the divine work.
J.T. You see they of the circumcision move and then the apostles and elders come together. Then Peter makes his statement, and then you have again what they had to say -- Barnabas and Paul. That was the thing. And then you have James decision, so that the whole proceedings are maintained on a high level. They are in relation to what God is doing.
J.S. They are not occupied with what the enemy is doing.
J.T. No, that falls into its place. The level is so high that the truth takes form and the decision of the apostles and elders asserting it is very sweeping. It begins as follows: "Inasmuch as we have heard that some who went out from amongst us have troubled you by words, upsetting your souls, saying that ye must be circumcised and keep the law; to whom we gave no commandment", etc.
F.L. I try to think when I go into what we call a
{133}
brothers meeting (for want of a better name) that, while we are touching things which in themselves appear low and almost menial, and as you said just now, sometimes withering, one gets greatest help in regarding the thing from the dignity of the house of God and the divine system, and how these things are related to that system; and the exercise has an immense effect upon the spiritual welfare of those who are for the time together in the bonds of fellowship. I think it is helpful to see that we can touch the very lowest things in connection with the house of God and become ennobled through the exercise in that way.
J.D. In the return of the remnant from Babylon, where there was no verification as to the genealogy of certain priests, it was held in abeyance until one should arise with Urim and Thummim. Now there really are cases that arise amongst the saints that outsiders can hardly touch; they are not on the spot. They may be acquainted with the thing but not with the spirits of those walking in regard to the circumstances. Do you not think that if there is waiting on the Lord He will raise up a priest with Urim and Thummim, who will have eaten the sin-offering and thus will carry the brethren with him?
J.T. I am sure that is so, and in fact even in companies like those at Galatia, such ones as you describe are supposed to exist. It does not say '*If* there be spiritual ones', but "if even a man be taken in some fault, ye who *are* spiritual restore such a one".
J.D. It is easy to go by precedent, but I think in this connection it is a dangerous thing to go by precedent. What do you think?
J.T. Every case of course has its own features. You may get general indications from precedent, but, as you say, that will not do by itself. You must have the priest, and in saying that I am referring to the book of Leviticus, where you go for instruction in connection with discipline, because everything depended on the
{134}
judgment of the priest. It is very significant to my mind that the apostle assumes that in the Galatian church there were spiritual ones, in spite of the fact that they were suffering seriously from legal teaching; and what occurs to me is that if we are simple enough, there is more of the priestly state than we might assume. You might get it too in a sister. One has often noticed that you find in a sister often a clear judgment as to a matter of discipline.
J.D. In that connection you have, "But the Spirit speaks expressly", @1 Timothy 4: 1, so that you might have the Spirit speaking in this way in regard to a case in a sister, where the brethren could not give a clear judgment; and thus the matter brought (to those that were spiritual at least) to a conclusion.
F.L. Of course in all this we have to be humbled and recognize that we have to accept and suffer from our limitations. It is a day of confusion and if half a dozen, say, in a place take up the privilege of the Supper and the bonds of fellowship, and something comes in, it may affect them each one, and they may have to wait and be in a sense incompetent to develop the spirit of the priest with Urim and Thummim. We have our limitations due to the character of the day, and we must accept them. It happens not infrequently in such a little company that not the most spiritual mind guides, but the most subtle and cleverest mind; so that, looking upon ourselves as coming from a number of little companies, we have to recognize that in the day of disorder and confusion we have elements which may baffle us for a time before the Lord gives an issue, and ofttimes we are cast down in confusion because the unspiritual or subtle ones have sway, and not the spiritual ones, but then there should not be discouragement. It should set those who are godly in exercise so that room should be made for the Spirit so that a right judgment should be reached.
{135}
R.S.S. With further reference to what is said in Galatians: "If even a man be taken in some fault, ye who are spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of meekness, considering thyself lest *thou* also be tempted". Should any one touch a question of discipline that is not spiritual?
F.L. Who is to decide?
R.S.S. It is a very exercising question to me. If a case comes up, in the light of the scripture I have quoted, should I touch it? Am I spiritual enough?
J.T. It is a question of recovery there, of course: "Ye who are spiritual restore such a one", but abstractedly you have to take account of all as spiritual. I mean each has the Holy Spirit, and when it comes to acting for the Lord in a case of discipline all have to be taken into account, as we see here. It says, "the apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter. And much discussion having taken place", etc. And then after the discussion was over, and the statements of Peter and James are rendered, it says: "Then it seemed good to the apostles and to the elders, with the whole assembly".
A.P. You would not call this discipline, would you?
J.T. No, but it indicates how things are done. The apostles and elders represent those whom God would in a special way hold responsible for a judgment. As was remarked at the beginning, deliberation is by them, but administration includes the whole company. That is, you must take into account the whole company if there is to be a formal act or committal to some course involving discipline.
R.S.S. Yes, it is very noticeable that the apostles and elders do not *decide* this question. They come to a conclusion, but they were all together and it was brought before the whole assembly, including the apostles and elders; and therefore for several brothers to get together and decide to do something is highly out
{136}
of order. It is an act that carries no weight with it at all.
A.F.M. How about the epistle, the letter they sent, which was dictated by the apostles and elder brethren? Would you say a word about that? It was not dictated by the whole company.
J.T. Well, the assembly could not teach, you know. The assembly at Jerusalem could scarcely say anything that should regulate the assembly at Antioch. Coming back to the thought of the cherubim, that was represented in the apostles and the elders.
C.A.M. Would it be right to say something about the spirit of the thing, of what they arrived at? They go back to Noah's day, do they not? Then God gave *living* things as slain, to be eaten. Do you think that has a moral significance?
J.T. I think it has. It does not appear that flesh was eaten before that time. It seems that men were, as we speak, vegetarians till then; but now that the weight of government was set on Noah. I suppose we have the suggestion of food that would be needed to support that, so that animals were given as food to them. But the reference to @Genesis 9 here is that things strangled and blood should not be eaten.
H.G. As to the application of this, I was thinking of 1 Timothy, in connection with the order of the house of God. Paul says, "But the end of what is enjoined is love out of a pure heart and a good conscience and unfeigned faith; which things some having missed, have turned aside to vain discourse, desiring to be law-teachers". That is, if we are not formed in the divine nature, so as to be able to meet evil by the power of good, we shall revert in principle to law. We shall make demands upon one another which can never correct things. On the other hand, the result of the operation of love in connection with this difficulty at Antioch was that the Gentiles remembered the poor -- a wonderful
{137}
answer to the Judaising teachers because the corrective which Paul and the apostles brought in produced an outflow of love from the Gentiles to those very Jews! So that after all it is a question of moral stamina.
J.T. That is what I had in mind in remarking about the high level on which the inquiry was conducted. Peter's statement, for instance, is not of one who asserts his authority. He is not asserting his authority as an apostle. Note how it reads: "*ye* know that from the earliest days God amongst you chose that the nations by my mouth should hear the word of the glad tidings and believe. And the heart-knowing God bore them witness, giving them the Holy Spirit as to us also, and put no difference between us and them, having purified their hearts by faith. Now therefore why tempt ye God, by putting a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear? But we believe that we shall be saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same manner as they also". Now there is a statement that carries its own weight. In matters like this we have to bring in conviction. It is not what I hold or believe simply; the thing has to be set forth so as to carry conviction in the souls of those that hear and this marks Peter's speech here. Who can dispute it? The issue really was between God and these evil teachers. And then there is no more said save that "all the multitude kept silence and listened to Barnabas and Paul relating all the signs and wonders which God had wrought among the nations by them". That was a result, as you might say. There was an ear to listen. Then it says, "And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying, Brethren, listen to me". You see the order and the high plane on which the inquiry is conducted, so that the result is according to God and such as to carry conviction to everyone concerned. That is the happy result that we should always seek, it seems to me, in difficulties. You want the
{138}
consciences of all carried, and that can only be done by a setting forth of things in a positive way in the energy of divine love, for "Love never fails".
J.S. Do you think the consciences of the Judaising teachers were carried here?
J.T. I do not know that they were, but in the way the multitude was carried they would be overwhelmed for the time, at least.
G.A.T. Have you not seen that same thing happen in brothers meetings? Brethren would be talking a good bit about a thing and unexpectedly some brother would speak and settle the matter by what he said.
J.T. Quite. It is positive occupation with what was of God that marks the proceedings here.
G.W.H. You would say then, in order for things to be done right, whatever we touch, whether the prayer-meeting, reading, or otherwise, we have to come from a high plane? What would the plane be?
J.T. Oh, I think it is occupation with God and His purpose and how He is working to reach it.
J.S. Would you say that here it is the work of God among the nations?
J.T. Yes. When the Holy Spirit came what marked the saints was that they were speaking about the wonderful things of God, and these can always be spoken about.
J.B. These were incontrovertible facts, and they knew them.
J.T. Quite, so really it would be very salutary in times of difficulty to bring in what you know God is doing.
J.S. Does it denote a state of weakness if you are occupied with what the enemy is doing?
J.T. I think it does, and where difficulties crop up in localities what I have observed is that the poor brethren feed upon the wretched things that grow out of difficulties, and what invariably is needed is positive food to lift their souls out of that and connect them with what God is doing. Certainly the confusion that may exist
{139}
is not God's work. The enemy has effected it and would occupy the saints with it; they need to be engaged with what God is doing.
A.P. Do you not make a difference between local and general difficulties?
J.T. Well there is a difference, certainly, but fellowship is both local and general, and if we cannot have the general we should not pretend to have the local fellowship. What you see here is the coordination of the work of God. That is what you get in these chapters. The great burden of the hearts of Barnabas and Paul is what God is doing, and the result of the inquiry is a decision that causes joy in all those in whom God was working, verse 31. That is what you want.
C.A.M. Would you connect this matter of food here with the sheet let down? You know these creatures were let down to Peter in connection with what he should eat. Do you see any connection?
J.T. There may be a connection in that. There is liberty to partake of what God in His bounty provides. Of course if we apply that spiritually we can see the bearing of it. The point of this chapter is to maintain the liberties of God's people.
C.A.M. So that Peter, you would imagine, would be quite ready for such a decision as this?
J.T. Just so, and then the eastern and western branches of the church are maintained in happy unity in a positive way, and as we proceed in the narrative. Thessalonica is brought in, and it is said of them that they became imitators of the assemblies of God which were in Judaea, @1 Thessalonians 2: 14, showing that Paul's labours resulted in that. He directly avoided anything like sectional feeling; but the work of God was coordinated. He did not establish the assemblies of God in Judaea, but the result of his labours in Greece was marked by this, that they imitated those churches. They looked to Judaea for a model.
{140}
C.A.M. As far as the governmental side was concerned?
J.T. Yes, quite, but do you not see that that is of great importance now because God is working everywhere? He is not working on sectional lines. He works in different localities, but the point is to bring all into coordination. It is one work and the effort should be to keep it linked up together so that all is seen to be of God, and the results are for God. Rome claims to be catholic, but there is no church less catholic than Rome. The very fact that it is Rome and that almost all the bishops were Roman, or Italian, proves it is the most sectional of all the churches. It is essentially sectional and yet it claims to be catholic. The church is divided into eastern and western branches. Now the Holy Spirit is here striving against that, and what He would do now is to maintain unity amongst the people of God in all the sections of the world. I think the principle of catholicity is one of the most important we can have before us at the present time.
W.H.F. Your thought is to occupy the saints with good, not evil. Oft-times ministry comes in in connection with a local difficulty that helps, but when brothers outside interfere they often bring in trouble. I have known that in many instances in my time, but I hold that, while a brother is with the Lord and capable of ministering to the saints in the locality, he will effect a great deal more in bringing about a right adjustment of the thing according to the Lord than those interfering will.
J.B. Why does James bring in the tabernacle of David; and what is it?
J.T. The strict fulfilment of this would look on to another day. He brings it in here, as Joel is brought in earlier (@Acts 2: 16), to support what God is doing now.
J.B. Referring to government?
J.T. I suppose so. David is representative of
{141}
government, so the gospel of Matthew begins with that. "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham" -- not Son of Abraham, Son of David, but "Son of David", because the government was in connection with David.
J.D. There has been quite a bit of reference made to what God is doing. What do you judge God to be doing today?
J.T. Forming the church in bridal affections, pending the return of Christ; the Supper having been in a most remarkable way brought in in recent years as the centre, as you might say, of all that the Holy Spirit has been ministering. It is to bring about, as I understand it, church affection.
W.H.F. Do you not think that the ministry of John comes in here in order to bring that about?
J.T. No doubt. The Supper is the central point, I think, of all that the Holy Spirit has been ministering in recent years, and it appeals to the saints as nothing else does as to the love of Christ; and God is working in connection with that, as I apprehend it, and it involves the whole church, and so one would be concerned that in all his activities he would have the *whole* church in view.
H.G. I hardly know of anything more injurious morally than the carrying on of that which denotes the love of Christ, whereas there is state altogether abhorrent to Christ existing.
W.E. Was that not strikingly true at Corinth?
F.L. The question there was -- Is there a writing of Christ in the hearts? The evil that existed there was enough to make one think that there was nothing left. But the apostle speaks of the Supper; indeed it is brought in as a sweet challenge to the affections. If there is response to that, there is a writing of Christ; happily this was so, as the second epistle proves. And the fact that the Supper has remained in abeyance during
{142}
most of the period of the Lord's absence and is revived at the end, suggests how it comes in as the challenge to the affections, to decide whether there is a true writing of Christ. So, while one fully goes with what is said about the shame of continuing the breaking of bread where the moral condition is gone, yet the breaking of bread will continue to the end and will be used in the development of bridal affections.
J.T. Yes. It involves movement. "As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew" -- "*As often*". First days of the week come; why should there not be eating? The Supper is to be continued. The epistle to the Corinthians in no sense suggested the cessation of the breaking of bread. The point was to "keep the feast ... *with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth*".
{143}
THE VALUE OF A MODEL
@Luke 7: 44; @1 Corinthians 4: 17; @Ephesians 3: 1 - 4
I have in mind to present the idea of a model, knowing that God works on that principle. Even in the formation of the creation of man God wrought on this principle: He had Christ in His mind. He intended that what He had in His mind -- wisdom expressed in man -- should find some expression beforehand in Adam. The book of Proverbs shows that wisdom was there in all God's operations. We have brought out in the gospel of Luke divine wisdom in One come near to us, come so near and outwardly in such a small compass that He may be known from every point of view. John says "the Word became flesh" without breaking up for us into detail what the incarnation conveyed. He was concerned about the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he hastens to tell us that having become flesh He dwelt among us, and "we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father", chapter 1: 14. We are introduced to the Person immediately, but in verse 18 His relation to the Father is made prominent: He stands in a unique place, the only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father. But Luke presents Him in relation to man, and identifies Him in His genealogy *with* men. So Luke, in his own divinely taught way, breaks up for us in beautiful and effective detail, the manner of the incarnation, and the wisdom attaching to it. We find Him at eight days old in the arms of a priest in the temple, and thus the light radiates, not yet exactly from the Babe, but from the prophetic words uttered by the Spirit from the priest. And so the Lord is presented to us until He appears at the baptism of John. These chapters to which I allude radiate with divine wisdom -- wisdom was there, had come nigh to man in the most intimate possible way, not only in Mary but in the arms of Simeon. One commends these chapters as food for young ones, especially young priests,
{144}
so that they might develop and see how wisdom develops in that blessed Babe. There was increase in wisdom and stature there, so that at the juncture when spiritual individuality began to shew itself, He asserted His Father's claims. He had been in the most intimate relationship with men, but now He asserts that He must be about His Father's business. We see wisdom emerges into spiritual individuality, and this is of all moment in relation to other issues of the testimony. Mary says, "thy father and I have sought thee", but He makes no allusion to Joseph, He says, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" That was not Joseph. There is the emerging into the spiritual -- not that the Lord was ever anything different, only as a model. He was subject to His parents later on, but at this point He was realising His individual responsibility; at twelve years old there was the detachment from the natural to the spiritual. Mary says, "Thy father and I" -- she was on natural lines. He says, "My Father's business".
Then we have, "Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age". This was not merely historical, but the consciousness in Jesus Himself of full maturity: He is the vessel of wisdom's wondrous ways. In chapter 4 He enters into the synagogue. We find Him oftener in the synagogue in Luke than elsewhere, because grace would triumph over the religious prejudices. That prejudice rose to positive murder in the first synagogue, nevertheless He entered into it, and took what was of God, He took the Bible. We may be thankful if there are Bibles in the synagogues around us even if there is hostility. Thank God the Bible is appointed to be read in churches. The Lord took the roll of Scripture, and acting in wisdom He turned to the page in Isaiah, and read it and sat down. It was as if He were reminding them of the dispensation about to be inaugurated, and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on Him. We see the skill in the Lord in His first ministry, how He carried the whole
{145}
synagogue with Him; nevertheless there was a murderous opposition to Him; but He was there and they bore Him witness of the words of grace that proceeded out of His mouth. What a testimony! I mention this to show how Luke would bring out the wisdom of God in a Man.
Simon invites Him into his house. A Pharisee was as opposed as the synagogue; nevertheless his house was open to Christ, and wisdom says, 'I will avail myself of that'. There is nothing narrow about wisdom it rises above every opposition to bring God in, and so He goes to Simon's house. Now He not only Himself expresses wisdom, but He has a product, a woman; that is what He was after, He would bring in the children of wisdom: "Wisdom is justified of all her children". As the Lord proceeds to speak to Simon, He turns to the woman. Can the Lord turn to me as a model? He turns to the woman, He knew what was there, He knew all about her, she had justified wisdom in the Pharisee's house, in a hostile scene. God would bring about the justification of wisdom in an atmosphere of bitter opposition. He says to Simon, "Seest thou this woman?" Can the Lord call attention to anyone in Teignmouth in that way? Persons that do misdeeds occupy us: we are, alas, obliged to be occupied with misdeeds; but if we have to be the word is, 'Is there a wise man among you?' At Corinth there was apparently no such one. Wisdom is the principal thing. In the days of David one woman saved the city. She in her wisdom went to the men; she did not act arbitrarily, she carried the men with her in what she was doing. She called to Joab over the wall, and she charges him with the disposition to destroy the inheritance of the Lord. She was concerned about the city and would save it; she did not wish to protect the wicked person, the rebel, she secured his head and cast it over the wall. No divinely-wise person shelters a wicked person. We must see to it that the inheritance of the Lord is saved as well as the wicked dealt with. The spirit of the wicked may be saved in the
{146}
day of the Lord: it is according to the power of the Lord that the spirit of the believer is saved, though his wickedness has to be dealt with. So this woman in her wisdom saved the city. Here the Lord has a woman to call attention to. I do not know anything more important than that, in a locality, there should be a person, even if only one, whom the Lord can call attention to, "Seest thou this woman?" He calls attention to her as a lover of Himself. She was such a lover of Christ and expressed wisdom by her love, for wisdom is the handmaid of love. She was a lover of Christ and a child of wisdom, she justified wisdom in a hostile atmosphere, and the Lord called attention to her. She knew He was in the Pharisee's house; wisdom's children know every movement of Christ, she knew He was there but we are not told how she knew. If you were in heaven every movement of Christ would be interesting to you. The angels in heaven are interested in every movement of Christ; He is supreme there and commands every intelligence, they know what He is doing. She knew He was in the house, and she entered the house. His presence was enough for her, and in that chilly atmosphere she expressed wisdom and love. Open rebuke is better than secret love, we are told. There is no expression of secret love; it is what is expressed that justifies wisdom. It was not secret love with this woman, it was open, and she expressed it, so the Lord has in her a model. I think this woman is Luke's model of what answers to Christ, she is the product of the presence of wisdom in this world. The Lord had seen everything she did, Simon had not. It is of the greatest moment that there should be at least one person in each locality to whom the Lord can call attention. The Lord turns to Simon and tells him the meaning of what she did. She is a model for us of a lover of Christ. The Lord could call attention to her to rebuke Simon; He rebukes the Pharisee by the model.
Now at Corinth the model was wanting; there was no
{147}
one there that the apostle could refer to in his letter as one to be noted; so he says, 'I have sent to you my child Timothy'. With the letter in which there were the mind and light of God there was a model. The first epistle to the Corinthians brought in the mind and light of God, but it was a dark situation. The assembly at Corinth had become corrupted and damaged; the enemy had been at work and fleshly principles had been introduced, and open wickedness was allowed, so the letter brings in light on that dark situation. When darkness is working, nothing is more refreshing than light. God said, "Let there be light" but there was more than light, there was the model. "I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ", @1 Corinthians 4: 17. Now we have the principle of representation, one who represents Christ; Paul did, he represented the authority of Christ, so the epistle is couched in the language of authority; he could have come with a rod, but instead of that he wrote; nevertheless the letter was couched in the language of authority, and Timothy was to represent that, he was to represent Paul. How great a thing it is to represent the Lord in any way! The idea of representation at the present time must involve moral weight, not only that I know how to love but I exercise wisdom in my love and I have moral weight. With moral weight goes moral authority. We cannot have the assembly without some representation of Christ. I am not speaking of anything beyond the reach of anyone here. Timothy was a simple believer, a timid young man who had to be stirred up himself, yet he was Paul's child. Such a one as Paul could delegate and send to Corinth as representative of him. The importance of the representation of Christ in a locality is great, that there should be something that speaks of the authority of the Lord. If you run through this letter you will see how authority marks it and how it enters into detail: the question of marriage, idolatry,
{148}
order at the Lord's supper, ministry, even the collection of the saints -- all these things and many others are written of authoritatively. So the apostle says "If any man think himself to be a prophet or spiritual let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 14: 37.
Now I want to say a word in closing about the model in understanding. We have had love expressed in wisdom, and authority in a representative, a delegate, one who had in mind what the apostle was and could express it. Now in Ephesians I think we have a model in understanding: we want a man who knows. John says, "We know". There is a remarkable word in Ecclesiastes which says, "What man is, is known", chapter 6: 10. It was no doubt intended for our time when men pretend to think that what a man is, is still in doubt, but Solomon says, 'What a man is is known', the whole truth is out. There is no need of further investigation, in regard of him. We do not need to dig in the earth for evidence of what man is. It is important in assembly matters that we should learn what man is; if so we do not expect much from him. How much expectation we have of one another. The knowledge of man would set that aside, there is no use in expecting anything from anybody according to the flesh. In @John 2 it says, the Lord "Knew what was in man", and in chapter 3 "We speak that we do know". He has come down from heaven and speaks authoritatively of things. He has spoken of earthly things, now He says, I speak of heavenly things. We have the idea in the Lord of One who knew. Here was a Man in lowly guise outwardly but He knew. Now Paul calls attention to himself as a man who knew and he wished the saints to know. He wanted the Ephesian saints to know that there was a man on earth who knew the mystery. The Ephesian saints were the most advanced assembly; they were instructed, and yet the apostle intimates to them that there was more than they had. He
{149}
had written before and he calls their attention to that and says, "Ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery of the Christ". Elsewhere he wished that they should understand the mystery, but here he wished them to understand his intelligence in the mystery in order that they might become like him. If he could understand, why could not they? So we have a model in intelligence, one who knows. The Lord would impress on us that we should seek knowledge. One said, "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge" (@Hosea 4: 6) and that same prophet tells us that those who knew the resurrection said, "Then shall we know". It is in the apprehension of the resurrection power of God to raise Christ that we see full knowledge. Think of what Christ is! Is that all known to you? Think of the range of knowledge there is! The apostle says that "Ye can understand my intelligence". One man had it anyway, so it is within our range. Think of the vast range of things set before us, "Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord". Think of Christ going forth out of death. How much do I understand of it? He is going forth as the morning dawn. The prophet goes on to speak of coming things, coming as the latter rain on the earth. So the knowledge once begun would continue, we should continue on to know. The apostle in Ephesians would attract the saints by opening up a vista of things in Christ; he says, "ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery". One man anyway had intelligence of the mystery.
So we have a model of love, a lover of Christ; then a model representative of authority; and a model of intelligence. I believe with these three in any locality you have the means of maintaining things for God -- discipline, church order, and all that comes within the range of church administration and responsibility; everything would be adjusted according to God.
{150}
GOD'S LOVE FOR HIS PEOPLE (1)
@Malachi 1; @Malachi 2: 1 - 10
J.T. This prophet seems to deal with a state of great weakness among the people of God and of great indifference to His rights. I thought it would be helpful to look at it from the standpoint of His love to His people. In the second verse He says "I have loved you". The expression, I think, does not refer to any particular time but throughout the whole history of His relations with Israel, "I have loved you, saith Jehovah". It is God bearing witness to His own love.
T.E. Is this present or past?
J.T. It is historical, referring backwards. For us it is what He has been to the assembly from the outset. What He has to say to them is based on that. There is very little response generally until chapter 3 where there is a little. God in what is presented in this prophet opens up what He feels about their indifference. How keenly He feels it! The burden of Malachi is to Israel, not to any particular locality. No doubt it applied first to the time when the remnant had returned. God's love is for all Israel.
T.E. The state of the people is known by their offerings.
J.T. One's offering indicates the state of one's soul. God would dwell on His love to us. How enduring it was! Israel spiritually is seen in the introduction, although the application had special reference to Jacob. It could never apply to Esau, for there never had been such a transaction between Jehovah and Esau as between Jehovah and Jacob -- I mean the wrestling. The term 'father' is emphasised in this message. He was a Father and a Master. This is God stressing His love for Israel and that He retained His dignity. He never gave it up. His dignity was never given up; He required what was due to Him.
{151}
W. He looked for a son as Father and for a servant as Master.
J.T. The two things run together -- the liberty of a son and the fear of a servant; they are balancing thoughts -- "If then I be a father, where is mine honour? And if I be a master, where is my fear?" The reference to Esau suggests the whole history of two men and two families. There is the spiritual line which developed in Jacob, involving the relation of brother according to God; then the fleshly line of Esau in which brotherly relation was also professed, but the spirit of it wholly wanting. These two things run down the history of the world as of Israel. There are those who profess to be brethren and want the spirit of it, and there are those who *are* brethren and have the spirit which fits it. Historically Jacob was loved and Esau hated. There was concrete cause for the hatred of Esau. We are told of his implacable hatred of his brother Jacob in the book of Obadiah. There is also cause for the love of Jacob because of the brotherly spirit found in Israel.
T.E. That would seem to solve the thought of God hating.
J.T. God does not hate sovereignly but historically. The element of sovereignty was introduced before the children were born; it was said the elder was to serve the younger before doing either good or evil. But the divine love and hatred were not sovereign but historical; there was a cause for it. You cannot say you cannot help being hated. If I am not loved it is because I am not lovable.
Ques. Would a christian speak about hating any person?
J.T. That is not becoming to a Christian. God uses it here; the Psalmist speaks of hating with a perfect hatred. There is some sense in which it applies, although the language is not suitable to our dispensation. What is hateful should be hated.
{152}
E.M. Does this apply to principles and not to persons?
J.T. In the New Testament we are told to love our enemies because God would emphasise the spirit of this dispensation. The hateful thing remains, and those that are hateful, but God would characterise this dispensation by withholding such expressions. That which is hateful exists.
E.M. "Hate father and mother and one's own life also"?
J.T. That must be taken in its own context. From the standpoint of what is spiritual one hates the claim the natural has on one. If allowed it would ruin you; you have to hate it.
Ques. You do not suggest that the love of God in that way is confined or is for the family circle alone; it is universal in its bearing?
J.T. There are two features of love here -- the love of compassion and the love of relationship, "God so loved the world, etc". -- that is the love of compassion. God being man's Creator loves him in that way with a compassionate love. The love of God for men has appeared. @Genesis 1 and 2 are examples. @Genesis 1 is the Creator; He created man simply. @Genesis 2 is Jehovah's love -- Adam is His offspring. Adam is not only His creation, but His offspring. He breathed His spirit into him. So it is Jehovah in @Genesis 2. God is in relation to man. There is a love attached to that, and that is distinct from the love which attaches to Him as Creator. The creature is not brought into the covenant God entered into with man.
E.M. The giving of His spirit to man is the greatest expression of His love.
J.T. *We* cry 'Abba Father' by the Spirit. There is an allusion in that to Adam and that he received a spirit which the creature did not. The spirit of the creature goes downwards, that of man upward. So that there is a
{153}
link between God and man early. @Genesis 2 is amplified and opened up by the gift of the Spirit whereby *we* cry 'Abba Father'. We do not get our spirits from our parents; the spirit returns to God who gave it. Each one gets his spirit from God so there is a link. This enables one to be very restful with regard to all mankind -- each has a spirit given him; God follows that up. @Genesis 1 is the world in the order in which God created it.
Ques. How does @Genesis 2 apply today?
J.T. That alludes to christianity. The world in @John 3 alludes to @Genesis 1 -- everything in the scene He brought out of chaos. Later the world took on a moral character -- alienated from God by wicked works. The christian is to repudiate it. When God reverts back to it, it is set up in redemption -- sin removed from it. We are not then enjoined not to love it or the things in it. God will be in relation with it. There is love involved in the relation with God -- "I have loved you". He had entered into a covenant with Israel. It enlarges your thoughts to see how wide the heart of God is. Jacob and Esau were both blessed concerning things to come. Jacob had the better part but Esau had a good start from God and had overtures made to him again and again. Was not Esau Jacob's brother? He did not answer to it. Esau never manifested the spirit of a brother. Esau was never a believer in the true sense of the word. He despised his birthright. Although outwardly in relation with God and blessed of God, he was never a believer. There are thousands of people today who answer to this; they despise their birthright and enjoy natural things, yet retain the term of brethren.
T.E. They have no appreciation of the heavenly calling.
Ques. We have the love of God in the covenant; is there a corresponding one in the family?
J.T. God entered into a covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; it referred to the family and came out
{154}
in Jacob. It was not developed in Isaac because, although Jacob and Esau were of the same mother, one was born after the spirit and one after the flesh. Jacob had twelve sons of four mothers -- all blessed -- the whole twelve tribes serve God instantly. The family idea in Jacob remains intact, therefore God loved Jacob. He was a father. God loves children.
Rem. Now He speaks to the priests.
J.T. That is the secret of declension; the priests were not right. They were subjects of the love of God which speaks of brethren and carries the right thought of the spirit of the family. This comes out in the millennium in the whole twelve tribes.
The love of continuance -- historical love -- comes right down the line. If there is not reciprocal affection, there is only a shell. The Spirit of God proceeds a little now on the line of Esau. How solemn it is! What will was at work in Esau! God in His infinite grace has broken down this self-will, the thing which would set up things without God.
E.M. There is the recognition of things having failed but the restitution of them without acknowledging this.
J.T. We know the judgment of God is upon it. Wherever the spirit of brethren is wanting, the effort is to reinstate things, and with apparent success. But God says "They shall build, but I will throw down; and men shall call them the territory of wickedness, and the people against whom Jehovah hath indignation for ever". That to my mind is a most solemn thing. These systems are built up without an atom of the spirit of brethren.
Rem. Is Laodicea a culmination? The spirit of brethren is found in Philadelphia; the Lord says, "I have loved thee".
T.E. There is no reality without that Spirit of love, no matter how great the system may be.
{155}
J.T. They may get great machinery into action and great results but God is against it. He breaks it down and finally it is shown up as the territory of wickedness. Many join in this collusion in wickedness and yet claim to be brethren -- a pretence of relationship without the spirit of it. Christendom not only breaks down but is exposed as the territory of wickedness because opposed to Christ. Esau represents this throughout Scripture. Not that there are not individuals there who are really believers. This does not attach to Israel, but Esau represents it fully. In Israel there were some that feared the Lord. Israelites who were unregenerate were Edomites really. Herod had part with Israel; he asks for the Scriptures, he had respect for the Bible, yet had a murderous attitude towards Christ.
Esau was born into it and he sold it. There was a deliberate giving up of what came to him by birth. God hates that. He gives up his blessing and privileges and hates his brother permanently; he never relents.
E.M. The children of the saints giving up their privilege and not appreciating it -- is that the spirit of Esau?
J.T. You have an illustration in the children of Benjamin and Judah coming out to David in his stronghold. Although outwardly in relationship with him they have to be challenged as to whether they really love him -- "If ye be come peaceably". This refers to those with whom the brethren are in relation.
Rem. The great thing in speaking to the children of the saints is to find out if they have the Spirit.
J.T. Being born of christian parents will not guarantee this. In that connection you get the Spirit mentioned in @1 Chronicles 12. The Spirit came on Amasai. It is the Spirit we are to rely on. This all shows what the spirit of brethren seen in Jacob is to God. How pleasurable! The other had worked out in disregard of God both as Father and Master. This is more serious
{156}
than opposition to brethren -- disregard of God as Father and as Master. Here they are disputing this. Things are contended and denied -- "Wherein hast thou loved us?" They say in verse 6, "Wherein have we despised thy name?" They are disputing everything. You always find this when people are away from God. He says, "Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar ... ye say, The table of Jehovah is contemptible". They offer the blind for sacrifice, the lame, the sick. So that it goes on to say in the next chapter there has been a profaning of the covenant -- that is what is happening. God loved them but they did not love God. God was true to His part. There are two sides to the covenant -- God loves me; I love God.
W. What was indicated in verse 5, "Your eyes shall see it"?
J.T. That is God speaking to Israel; they would see His judgment on Esau.
W. His discipline with His people accomplished something for Himself. Edom never repudiated this.
J.T. Edom was to be a perpetual desolation for ever. This question will never be raised again by Israel. There will be the total destruction of Edom. In the future He deals with the whole system that claims the relationship of brethren, without the spirit of it. It is destroyed. Scripture abounds with Edom's final doom; it is for ever. Some will be preserved. This refers to the systems around in which the idea of brethren is retained but the spirit is against it. There are thousands of real believers in a system which is in absolute hatred of God. God's hatred will be expressed against it. Revelation shows how awful the destruction will be. The initial idea of these systems is to do harm to Christ as in David's wives, Merab and Michal -- that is behind all these systems. Edom is left for Israel to exterminate. Those in whom the spirit of brethren is developed are to destroy the opposite. It is, anticipating what He will
{157}
do with them in the strong delusion sent on those who received not the *love* of the truth. Now it is not so much a great system, but what is nearer home, an imitation of the remnant.
Rem. In @Romans 8 it says, "For thy sake we are killed all the day long". Why kill the servant?
E.M. The best of me hates Christ. If I am not affected livingly by the truth, hatred is at work.
J.T. Saul spared the best things -- the things that Satan can use most effectively against Christ. The king of the Amalekites signifies the delicacy and refinement of the flesh. Samuel hewed him in pieces.
Rem. We ourselves also were hateful and hating one another.
J.T. If we do not judge ourselves in matters locally we may find the spirit of Edom. God gave him the opportunity of being a brother -- he was the elder of two most intimately connected. He had all the advantage of being a twin and the elder of the two, yet he was utterly disregardful of his brother and of the inheritance. He is just looked at as flesh, yet wearing the title of brother all the time. It was said to Israel -- 'You must not touch Esau, he is your brother'. God would not allow them to pass through his fields but ordered them to go on the king's highway, and yet he was called a *brother*!
Rem. Esau pleads with his father and he *does* give him a blessing.
J.T. He would be equal with Jacob. This brings out the character of the dispensation. Isaac blessed both Jacob and Esau. Outwardly Esau had the same opportunities. Esau would not allow Jacob to have any advantages.
Simon believed because of the signs. Peter and John came down from Jerusalem and the Samaritans received the Spirit. Simon said 'I would like to have that', that is, the power to give the Spirit. He would not be
{158}
less than Peter. He saw there was a greater one there and would not be outdone -- 'I will give you money for that'. That was what actuated Esau when he cried bitterly for the blessing.
Rem. It is the motives which underlie things which weigh with God.
J.T. Philip did not arouse his jealousy, but the power to give the Spirit did. "Thy money perish with thee". Outwardly he was a believer but inwardly he was full of iniquity. God hates that.
Jacob valued what was of God and God knew it. God looks not on the outward appearance but on the heart. Samuel looked on Eliab and thought he was the Lord's choice.
Rem. The blessing was there for somebody and Jacob valued it.
J.T. Jacob sacrificed his reputation to get it. God took account of that. He had faith.
Ques. Jacob in wrestling valued the blessing?
J.T. He valued the blessing from God. Birthright is one thing, it comes to me; I have nothing to do with that, but blessing is something additional and refers to what *God is*. It is more than the inheritance, it is blessing.
Before all that, we have Isaac, who represents God. He kissed Jacob and smelled him -- "The smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed". That refers to potentiality -- there was power there, fertility there, in the smell of the field. The Lord has blessed all that. Jacob had that experience with his father before he came to the house.
What comes out here is -- if those who are in relation to God fail, God never gives up His thought. If I do not provide what is for God another will, "For from the rising of the sun even unto its setting my name shall be great among the nations; and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
{159}
oblation: for my name shall be great among the nations, saith Jehovah of hosts".
T.E. Does that look on to the millennial day?
J.T. There is also an allusion to the present time. God has this among the Gentiles. One often thinks of the rising of the sun and the going down -- what God has as Father, and Christ as Head of the assembly, on the first day of every week. How little conception could a Jew have of the Messiah coming in view of going into death, and the gospel going out to every nation through His rejection amongst His own people. It is greater now than in the millennium -- a *pure* oblation, *in every place*. The apostle, in the first epistle to the Corinthians, addresses all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Rem. It was an exercising word for Israel in that day but none the less for us?
Rem. The thing was to be carried on.
J.T. It all impresses you with what God will do. If I fail in responding He will take up others.
Ques. What about the table of the Lord and the altar?
J.T. The table is the place where things are set out for food. There would be that in which things are set out. What did not go up in the fire for them was to be for the priest -- a well laden table. In Solomon's day there were 120,000 small cattle sacrificed. Think of the food there was! They were failing to provide this -- the table was not regarded. The subject of priesthood enters into that.
{160}
GOD'S LOVE FOR HIS PEOPLE (2)
@Malachi 3
J.T. The address in chapter 2 is to the priests -- "This commandment is for you".
Ques. Would these be the responsible persons?
J.T. Yes, according to this, that is a believer in his relation to God.
Rem. The priest had light.
J.T. We have the light governing the position of the priest brought in in Levi. He had answered to it. The thing that God is requiring is not an abstract principle but has been expressed in some one. Levi answered to the thought of priesthood. In some representative of Levi this is seen. He says, "My covenant with him was of life and peace, and I gave them to him that he might fear; and he feared me" -- read verses 5 - 7. This is the way of God in the prophets to call attention to the truth in earlier days. Levi is the expression of the priesthood, it was seen in him.
Ques. Why is this?
J.T. To show the thing He is asserting is not beyond us; it is attainable, within our reach. Phinehas was a striking exemplification of this. The departure which is contemplated in this book is the outcome of the want of true priestly state. The commandment is for every one of us. All christians are priests. It is a question of each of us maintaining right relations with God. Then we have power to help one another; we have power with God and with man.
W. They shall offer up an oblation in righteousness. It is open to us.
J.T. The second chapter is a commandment; the third the Lord coming in Himself. He comes in in His messenger. The commandment is to prepare the way. Paul could not come to Corinth; the priestly state was not there. He comes to them by the epistle, then he
{161}
sends Timothy, a representative, before coming himself to set everything in order. Correspondence is a long distance action but effective. It tests us, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me", @John 14: 21. They love Him even though He is absent.
E.M. The commandments bring about conditions to bring Him here.
J.T. They clean things out and prepare for the Lord. It is not His coming which is alluded to here but the priests sphere -- the temple. Light comes in in the commandment. In 1 Corinthians the apostle put the obligation on them to put things right, which they did. They might learn in Timothy his (Paul's) ways as in Christ. One spiritual person in a company is a model the Lord can call attention to. It is a great thing to have one person right. In Timothy at Corinth there was not only a man that could be called attention to but he was Paul's representative. The Lord in His course called attention to certain ones -- "Seest thou this woman?" @Luke 7. See Timothy, what a man *he* is! The spiritual element would rally to Timothy.
Ques. Is a messenger of the covenant in keeping with what God is as revealed?
J.T. The third chapter begins with that -- "Behold, I send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me ... saith Jehovah of hosts". We are not told who this messenger was, "Behold, I send unto you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and terrible day of Jehovah" (chapter 4: 5) applies to John the Baptist. In Mark's gospel it is rather to bring in the temple service of God and the Levites. The Lord had to do it. This is what He promises to do here, to deal with matters fully in complete measures. The Lord brought in the commandment first; for those, to whom the word of the Lord came, exemplified what they taught. They *were* what they taught, as in Hebrews
{162}
13: 7 -- "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God; and considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith". These not only spoke the word but they were models. One is what one says. The Lord could say -- "Altogether that which I also say unto you".
Rem. Paul said "Those things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do", @Philippians 4: 9.
J.T. That is very comprehensive -- what they had heard and seen, not only among themselves but elsewhere.
A 'messenger' here is representative rather -- the same word as 'angel' -- someone who represents the Lord not only in what he teaches but in what he is. That is how the recovery came about, through men raised up and gifted by God, but they were also in keeping with their teaching. The apostle could say to the Galatians -- "To whom, as before your very eyes. Jesus Christ has been portrayed, crucified among you", @Galatians 3: 1. He refers to himself.
Ques. In what way?
J.T. That they should see the idea of crucifixion. He bore it out in his ways. Crucified with Christ is a stronger word than dying, which does not carry with it the ignominy, reproach and shame.
You have the idea of the messenger first and then the Lord Himself comes in and goes to the root of everything. Everything will be dealt with. It is a question now of the temple of God, what is suitable to God. The cleansing of the temple is figurative of what the Lord came to do. No doubt the money-changers, etc., went back again but it was a sign of what was due to God, what He will do permanently later on. No doubt, the disciples afterwards understood it. In @John 2 He alludes to the temple as His Father's house. In verse 19 He says, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise
{163}
it up". The disciples after He was risen understood this scripture as bearing on the resurrection. There is nothing right for God till you have the temple, "The Lord whom ye seek will suddenly come to his temple, and the Angel of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he cometh, saith Jehovah of hosts. But who shall endure the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? For he will be like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's lye. And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he will purify the children of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver; and they shall offer unto Jehovah an oblation in righteousness. Then shall the oblation of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto Jehovah, as in the days of old, and as in former years", verses 1 - 4. The Lord Himself does this. We might see how the Lord has come in in our own time. Anyone spiritual will recognise His commandment. The commandment brings the priest to light. The spiritual man is the priest. Following on the commandment the representative of the Lord was there. Then the Lord comes in. It is now what He does Himself amongst us.
Ques. Why suddenly?
J.T. This is brought in to warn us. We are to be on our guard and be ready. The apostle could say to the Corinthians "how much diligence it wrought in *you*, ... what fear ... what zeal", etc., @2 Corinthians 7: 11. The second letter brings in the covenant. Here it is the Angel of the covenant. In the second letter he says, "Examine your own selves if ye be in the faith; prove your own selves: do ye not recognise yourselves, that Jesus Christ is in you?" @2 Corinthians 13: 5. Who shall endure the day of His coming? If you are a true man you will welcome it.
T.E. The Lord said of the woman in @Luke 7 "Seest thou this woman?"
J.T. In you here, in Limavady, as walking in righteousness, etc., the Lord has a person He can appeal to in the town. You have that before you. The woman knew
{164}
He was in the house. Canticles shows that the true lover always finds out where the Lord is. In @Luke 7 He appeals to her. She wept over His feet, washed them, anointed them and kissed them. She was one of wisdom's children; that is not a mere accidental incident -- it is put down by the Holy Spirit for us. They had the same opportunity. Simon as host had very great advantages; he had right of way in his own house. She was an intruder. He was the host and had great opportunity to show attention to Christ. If he had only understood He was the Lord of glory. He did not even give Him water to wash His feet, "Seest thou this woman?" the Lord says to Simon. "She is my ideal; you are the opposite to that". The Lord had in this woman a model. Are we aspiring to be what the Lord can call attention to?
Rem. The apostle said "Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ", @1 Corinthians 11: 1.
J.T. He was the model himself. Timothy was the nearest. The apostle could not go to Corinth except with a rod; he would rather let grace prevail. The Lord comes in as Angel of the covenant and then deals with Levi. See how 1st and 2nd Corinthians correspond. Before we are priests we must know the love of God. The covenant is the means. He is the Angel of that. Christ is the Minister of the covenant, and we look on the glory of the Lord. He brings the love of God into our hearts. As the covenant is effective in our hearts we love God and are brought near to God; it constitutes us priests. It goes on to say "I will come near to you in judgment". It was written for us; we see how it works out today. The commandment supposes you *do* love -- "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me". If there be not the love, the commandment does not beget it. He only can bring in the love which is in Christ Jesus. He comes in with it -- the Angel of the covenant brings in the love. If you see Christ as the expression of the love of God, He is the
{165}
most lovable object in the whole of the universe. It is a lover He points to, not one whom He loved. She loved much, "If anyone love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", says the apostle, @1 Corinthians 16: 22. The covenant coming in brings Christ before you. If you have anything of God in you, you love Christ.
Ques. At the Supper we are there as lovers of Christ?
J.T. Companies of the Lord's people gathered together on the first day of the week to partake of the Supper are delightful to heaven. The Lord calls attention to it, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood". I understand the glory of the Lord in @2 Corinthians 3 is that He brings in the love of God. He attested it in His death -- it is the witness. The thing is to be brought into your heart. He brings it with Him and so it is brought into our hearts and made effective. There is no more delightful service than pointing here to the glory of the Lord. The Lord is that Spirit. He directs your heart into the love of God in that way.
Ques. What is the thought of the covenant mentioned in the Supper?
J.T. To bring the love of God before us. It fills the house like the odour of the ointment. To shed abroad that love in our hearts is His present service. The cup is the witness to it, objectively, to what I have already in my heart by the Spirit. How can we increase that love? The Lord's supper is for that purpose. You come back to the greatness of the thing as you partake of the Lord's supper. He laid down His life for you and for the assembly. But what is He to us severally? Every time you look at it objectively you love the Lord more. Self-judgment must go on; nothing must be allowed to divert -- "Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat". That is the time to discern oneself, in eating and drinking. The real formative thing is what is presented objectively in all its magnitude. The hearts of the two going to Emmaus were burning by His words. They
{166}
did not go back in His company, but went back in the light of having seen Him in the breaking of bread. Seeing Him is when the formation takes place.
So the end of this chapter. @Malachi 3, through the commandment and manifestation, brings about a remnant pleasurable to the Lord. The promises are to the whole of christendom; the net result for God is in those who fear the Lord. They spake often one to another. There is nothing in the old economy to warrant this. They know what to do; they love one another. It is extremely simple. They are the net result of all this ministry. We have been dwelling on Genesis as dealing with recovery for God's pleasure in four features. These closing verses correspond to what is for God's pleasure. In speaking one to another, there is what is for God's pleasure. And the Lord hearkened and heard "and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared Jehovah, and that thought upon his name". That is what there is for God. This would answer to 2 Timothy -- those who departed from iniquity and called upon the Lord out of a pure heart.
Ques. What is the book of remembrance?
J.T. To emphasise how precious they were, a book was written before Him for them. He would never forget them; they were constantly before Him. Those who "thought upon his name", that is, the things which came out regarding Jehovah in the Old Testament, how they would go over these, what He was, all about Adam, Enoch and all the men of faith, as we try to do in our measure. He has come in historically for recovery. The refiner's fire has been operating in the way of discipline so that there should be priests and Levites according to God.
T.E. How do we look at the saints as 'temple'?
J.T. In Corinthians the saints are spoken of as the place of light. Here He comes in judicially but brings in the love of God. He cleanses the sons of Levi.
{167}
T.E. Does this apply to the recovery of the saints now?
J.T. It may be applied. He brought in the love of God and revived the thought of the Lord's supper, these being so emphasised. There must be the formation of priests. Going on with external things without priesthood was at the back of all this state. The priest is able to distinguish between the righteous and the wicked.
E.M. A priest in his function is known by his discernment.
J.T. The Holy Spirit sheds the love of God abroad in your heart. @Romans 12 is the answer to @Romans 5. It is service on a lower basis but still service. The judgment seat in 2 Corinthians is brought in as a help with regard to what the apostle had in his mind -- "We are zealous, whether present or absent, to be agreeable to him", @2 Corinthians 5: 9. That is priesthood.
Rem. "And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers", @Malachi 4: 6.
J.T. It is beautiful to see the result of all this ministry -- "They that feared the Lord spake often one to another".
W. In the midst of the 'stout words' these true hearts turn to righteousness.
F.I. "One to another" -- brotherly relations are maintained.
J.T. In contrast with that there is the territory of wickedness, chapter 1: 4, a people against whom Jehovah has indignation for ever. Where the spirit of brethren is not recognised as present, that is the end; it will become known as the territory of wickedness. The priesthood which the Lord is developing is to have a place where holiness is known. The priests were put under discipline because they were not righteous -- "Who shall stand when he appeareth ... He will purify the children of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver". That is
{168}
what is going on, "Who shall stand when he appeareth?" -- "He that doeth truth cometh to the light"; those who are real welcome it. The refining process goes on so that Levi might present a pure offering. This is of great concern to us, to serve God rightly -- "They shall offer unto Jehovah an oblation in righteousness". That is what He has by him; an oblation of righteousness is pleasurable to Jehovah. That applies to prayer and other things -- how you speak to God. We are to pray with the Spirit and pray with the understanding also. You only speak to God in the measure of your appreciation of Christ. He taught them how to pray.
Rem. The Lord helps His people to express what they have, but they might have more than they could express. A pure offering is worship acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
T.E. Priesthood is not confined to those taking an outward part or sisters would be excluded.
J.T. Priesthood in a sister is the state of her soul as prayer is offered. Hannah prayed. Worship goes a little beyond sacrifice.
E.M. As regards sisters if there is priestly state in a company their exercises will find expression in a brother.
J.T. That is according to the state of the company. The Holy Spirit knows what is there. After all God takes account of what is in our hearts. A cheque is of value according to what is in the bank. In other conditions there is neither male nor female but we are as the angels, that is the kind of being.
This word of instruction here, verse 7, should be noted -- "Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith Jehovah of hosts". "Will a man rob God? But ye rob me". In alienation of soul there is always disparaging, always questioning and resenting things. God goes on "Ye rob me". 'You had things but you did not bring them; you did not bring what was due to Me; you
{169}
did not fulfil your obligations' -- "Me ye rob, even this whole nation. Bring the whole tithe into the treasure-house", verse 10. This is an appeal to the whole of christendom. It has gone forth but they have not responded to it. We get the response in the verses at the end of the chapter. I will "pour you out a blessing till there be no place for it" -- they were the ones who got the good of all this.
Israel were all put under tithes. Jacob inaugurated that when he volunteered to give a tenth. God accepted it. He will take what you give Him. It became a law. Abraham gave a tenth to Melchisedec and Jacob took it from that.
Rem. God accepted the widow's two mites. He will take anything we give.
J.T. Here it refers to a known obligation. In @Luke 1 and 2 we have those who feared the Lord -- Zacharias and his wife, Mary, Simeon, Anna -- all in beautiful connection. In going over the ground they would be speaking about the Lord and thinking on His name. They would get an understanding of things. This has a very present application. Luke writes in the present tense.
T.E. The apostle in writing to the gentile churches does not mention the thought of priests.
J.T. The 'priest' is only a term taken from the Old Testament and used chiefly in writing to Jewish christians. A spiritual man is the same thing -- "Ye which are spiritual, restore such a one". There is the thought of liberty, one qualified to approach God. These conversations with those people would be for their encouragement. Light would come in as they spoke together *often*. Some districts have no Bible readings at all -- a pitiable thing -- it does not come up to those mentioned here -- speaking *often*. When you have the opportunity, get together. You are meeting an obligation. God would come in for you. In little companies of God's people coming together, light would
{170}
come in. There are no official terms in these closing verses, no priests, no temple; they would *realise* all these things.
Verse 10. The tithe principle is with us. What we would bring at the Supper greatly affects what we would have to give in this way. We get the windows of heaven mentioned three times in Scripture. The first is in judgment at the flood; the second in @2 Kings 7 -- as if God could not make windows in heaven. Here He says Himself He will do it. The great thing is to have a sense that things come down, to emphasise the *wealth* of heaven. Pentecost is the full answer, the Holy Spirit coming out of heaven. The net broke with the blessing of the Lord.
@Hebrews 10 speaks of not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together. It is put as an obligation there. Those here did it and did it often.
{171}
THE WITNESS OF THE SPIRIT
@Acts 13: 1 - 3; @1 John 5: 6, 8; @Hebrews 10: 15 - 17; @Romans 8: 16
I have it before me to speak about the witness of the Spirit, and have selected these passages because they set out the features in the main, of that witness; but I refer to the Acts in order to call attention to that in which He bears witness; so that we may have before us the conditions in which the Spirit witnesses amongst the people of God. The Book of the Acts furnishes us with the conditions in which the Spirit witnessed at the outset. These conditions can never be attained, I need not say, as they then existed, but nevertheless, the Scriptures contemplate that there should be the continuance of the witness of the Spirit. And so in the addresses to the assemblies in Revelation, we find that in the last four assemblies addressed, the idea of overcoming is introduced before we have the speaking of the Spirit; that is to say, the overcomers in these assemblies furnish the Spirit with conditions in which He speaks. And so one is encouraged to urge overcoming personally, and I may say, collectively, in order that there may be conditions in which the Holy Spirit witnesses.
Now these conditions indicated in the Acts contemplate at the outset the saints together in one place. Those who were thus together had been under the Lord's tuition; they had seen how He had operated in His service, and that in Him there was a vessel in which the Holy Spirit could operate without hindrance. A wonderful opportunity! an opportunity that none since have had. It was by the Spirit of God He operated. They saw, or could have seen, that, as anointed of the Spirit, He was carried into the wilderness to be tempted; that is to say, the Spirit of God was in a vessel in perfect freedom to take the initiative, although, after the temptation in the wilderness, the Lord is said to have returned in the
{172}
power of the Spirit. He returned into the sphere of His service in the power of the Spirit, indicating that that service would be carried on in the power of the Spirit; and so, in the synagogue of Nazareth He said, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor". He thus announces that His service was to be carried on in the power of the Spirit; and so those who companied with Him could see how He moved in the power of the Spirit and how the Holy Spirit operated here in a vessel. And so, as risen from the dead, He charged the apostles by the Spirit; that is what we find in the opening of the Acts. They would thus be reminded that the dispensation should be in the power of the Spirit.
I want now to touch for a moment on the conditions that prevailed in Jerusalem, because Jerusalem was to be primarily the theatre of the Spirit's testimony. The apostles were to abide there until they were clothed with power from on high, so that the first great witness of the Spirit was in that city. It is well to take note of that, that the first great testimony of God was rendered to a city, shewing the place that cities have in the mind of God. They are centralisations of population; they represent the power of the world; they represent what Satan does, and what man does, and what he is capable of, "Let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth", @Genesis 11: 4. That is what was in the mind of man, and God came down to see that city and that tower, indicating that He shewed His interest in men, even though they had turned away from Him. So we are told in @Genesis 10 that Nimrod "began to be a mighty one in the earth", and the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and that the builder of Nineveh was of the kingdom of Nimrod; "From that land went out Asshur and built Nineveh". Nineveh was a city therefore which had its origin in a man who was a
{173}
mighty one upon the earth -- one who represented the energy of man supremely. There is nothing about a city to attract divine interest save as we understand what God is, as infinitely above man's will and man's sin. So we find later that He sends the prophet, His servant Jonah, to preach to that city. I refer to that so that you might see how God regards cities, and how He, in the infinitude of His grace, rises above man's guilt, and bears witness to His grace where guilt is at its height. And so the Lord commanded the apostles to remain in the city of Jerusalem until they should be clothed with power from on high; signifying that He would have a witness there, and He would have it in heavenly power; it should lack nothing; it should be representative of God as set forth in the ministry of Christ and in the death of Christ, and they were to begin in Jerusalem.
Well now, the conditions are seen in the opening of the 2nd chapter of Acts; they were together in one place. I do not know that the same expression -- "in one place" -- is found again in the Acts. What you find here is that the Holy Spirit came to persons who were great enough morally to receive Him; and as the Holy Spirit sat on each of them, they began to speak as the Spirit gave them utterance. They were morally qualified to be the vessels of the Spirit. Now, what I would point out in regard of the conditions at Jerusalem is that you find in the succeeding chapters a representation of all that with which the people of God are familiar at the present time in the way of gatherings, In chapter 2 there is first the breaking of bread in houses; Scripture gives us no clue as to the number of houses, but there were three thousand at least in Jerusalem who were believers on the day of Pentecost, and the Holy Spirit says that they were together, although He does not say "in one place". They were together characteristically; wherever two of them met, they were heart and soul one; wherever a dozen of them met, they were heart and soul one; wherever
{174}
fifty of them met, they were of one heart and one soul; and those two, or those twelve, or those fifty, were severally vessels through which the Holy Spirit witnessed. The witness permeated the city, and it was alleged that they were filling Jerusalem with their doctrine. In order to provide for this, the Lord in His wisdom had ministered in houses; He had set before the eyes of His apostles how houses could be employed in the testimony, and furthermore, in feeding five thousand persons at one time, He had directed that they should be divided up into a hundred groups. They would thus have become familiar with the divine way that, whilst the transaction was one -- five thousand being fed at one time -- they were fed in one hundred companies; so that those in Jerusalem would understand that the administration of the Spirit -- the witness of the Spirit to Jerusalem -- should reach Jerusalem thus. And so we find, as I said, in chapter 2 the breaking of bread in houses, or, as it should read "in house", meaning that that was the *character* of the thing. That there were plenty of houses available, there cannot be a question. Then, in chapter 5, we find that the apostles preached the glad tidings that Jesus was the Christ, in houses, as well as in the temple; and furthermore that they taught in houses, as well as in the temple, verse 42. We see, therefore, that Jerusalem was permeated with the testimony of God, both in the way of preaching in houses and in the way of teaching. Houses, therefore, became available for the Spirit to witness in in the way of announcing that Jesus was the Christ, in the way of announcing the gospel, and in the way of teaching; in other words, there were gospel meetings in the houses and readings in which the apostles and others taught. Then, passing on to chapter 12, we find that the whole assembly is praying. Peter was in prison, and prayer was made for him by the assembly; and then, as he is released, doubtless in answer to their prayers, he goes to the house of Mary,
{175}
which was one of the places of prayer. Thus we can see how the customs that God has brought about amongst is marked the early believers. There was the breaking of bread, there was the preaching, there was the teaching, there were the prayer meetings in houses, and finally there was what we call the 'care' meetings -- a meeting which obtains different designations amongst us but which implies that the interests of Christ are taken care of in wisdom; where those who have the care of things on their hearts draw together to take counsel, and, indeed, to discuss them. In chapter 15, we read of "much discussion having taken place". From the book of the Acts we see that the Holy Spirit operates in all these relations in meetings. Referring again to chapter 15, it says that the apostles and elders came together to consider the question which had arisen as to circumcision, and "much discussion having taken place". Peter stands up, and speaks, and conveys the mind of God, and James stands up and confirms it; and then the apostles and elders, with the whole assembly, endorse the decision; and then the Holy Spirit is said to be with them. "It seemed good", they say, "to the Holy Spirit and to us". It is encouraging thus to see that the things that God has revived -- the customs, the means by which the Holy Spirit operates amongst us -- marked the early christians; and in no case is the care meeting the least important. In it we take care of the interests of Christ and we find His support so that right principles and right practices are maintained, and thus there is transparency amongst the saints. One of the most baneful things that one observes in moving about amongst the saints is the handling of matters by a group. Every believer in the assembly is a priest, and the priests are the custodians of the law, and every believer is responsible to see that the principles governing the assembly are maintained.
Now I want to shew how it was worked out at Antioch, for God was now moving out amongst the gentiles, and
{176}
the gentiles were not to be deprived of the means of witness which marked Jerusalem. So we find at Antioch conditions as in @Acts 1; there we have the composition of the assembly given by name, and in this chapter we have the composition of the assembly in its leading representatives given by name. We have thus a precedent established for recognition amongst us of those who are marked by spirituality, by intelligence, and by devotedness. It is due to such that they should be recognised, and their recognition is for our advantage; and so we are told who were there, and what they were doing. What were they doing? They were ministering to the Lord. Was that all? No, it was not all, they were fasting. Men who minister to the Lord and fast are recognised specially in heaven. They have God before them; they do not consider for themselves; they deny the flesh, not only in its bad sense, but even in its legitimate sense. When the Lord spoke of going to the cross to die, Peter said, "Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee". If Peter said that to the Lord, he would say it to himself; when the time came for martyrdom, for sacrifice, he would consider for himself. How easily we allow the Lord's interests to lapse out of consideration for ourselves! There is not the denial of the flesh, there is not the fasting. There may be the outward form and order that marks the service of God, but without the fasting it must lose its power, and we must cease to become the vessels of the Spirit; whereas where the ministry is maintained by fasting, the Holy Spirit has a sphere and conditions in which to operate, so that it says, "As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them". How great is that position! I have already alluded to overcoming in the Revelation, and I believe that the conditions answering at the present time to what we get in @Acts 13 depend on personal overcoming. If all in the meeting are not marked by it, certainly those who
{177}
lead should be marked by it; and if those who lead are marked by it, we shall find the Holy Spirit acting -- it may be designating those who are to minister. There is great need for ministering; there is great need of preaching and teaching; and, if the conditions exist, we may be perfectly assured that the Holy Spirit will nominate certain ones to maintain the ministry. I have been thinking lately of the work of the ministry, how the Lord would have it maintained, and how essential that it should be maintained if the saints are to be cared for and fed. I believe that if the conditions exist, we shall find the Holy Spirit putting forward those whom He has qualified for the work of the ministry. Has the work of the ministry a place with us dear brethren? It has a great place in heaven, "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men", @Ephesians 4: 8. What for? "For the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ". God would have us "all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". Mark the expression, "the fulness"; it is no question of His deity, of His Person, but of His fulness, that is to say, *what has come out in Him as Man*; the ministry is that the saints should arrive at that; and hence the great importance of ministers nominated by the Spirit; and I believe we shall have them, as the conditions exist.
Now to go on to the other three passages we read; I want to shew you what the witness of the Spirit is in regard to the death of Christ, for if He has vessels or ministers for witnessing, He will emphasise the death of Christ, we may be sure of that. I need not say that the fundamentals of the truth are being assailed, and so John says here, "We know that the Son of God is come". He brushes aside ignominiously all speculation as to Christ (for there was much even then), and he says, "we know".
{178}
It is not here a question of Christ coming into this world and going out of it; the point is that He has come into the sphere of testimony and has not left it. How did he come into it? He came in by water and blood -- a wonderful witness to divine forethought, for how could God work out a righteous, holy order of things in this world without the means of cleansing? And so the Son has come in with the means of cleansing -- the water and the blood. The water is put first, because John is dealing with the state of the saints. The water deals with the flesh in the saints; the blood deals with sins on the conscience; but it is the Spirit, he says, that beareth witness. The Lord would lay it upon us to maintain that witness -- the witness to the death of Christ -- to what it means; and if the Spirit has secured vessels or ministers, they will begin with that. They will make prominent what the water means; they will not admit of the allowance of the world and worldly principles amongst the saints. Christ has come in by water and by blood, and it is the Spirit that beareth witness; so that, if there be the conditions, the Spirit will bear witness to the significance of the water and the significance of the blood. We shall have, therefore, a ministry, an insistent ministry, on the import, not only of the blood of Christ, but of the water. The water comes first here, and I need not say that is what is most essential as we are gathered together. As brought together in the light of the assembly, as in 1 Corinthians, what is needed is the water, and that is what Paul applied. His first letter to them is the water, it is a question of bringing to bear on the saints the death of Christ as dealing with the flesh: the Corinthians were fleshly, they were carnal.
Now as to the witness of the Spirit in regard to the love of God; unless the water is effectual, we shall not be prepared for the love of God; we may go on with the light, but we shall not have the love. You will remember, no doubt, that remarkable meeting between Moses and
{179}
Aaron on the mount of God, @Exodus 4: 27, Moses had the light, for God had shone upon him in the bush and had spoken to him, but Aaron had love. On the way back to Egypt, by the way in the inn, the Lord met Moses and sought to slay him -- a most remarkable thing! Here was the vessel of the light; the bush had burned, he had turned aside to see it, and God had spoken to him. He had enlightened him, and yet He sought to slay him -- a most serious matter! The light did not protect him, for God will not suffer the flesh in us, even though we be enlightened. Was it a feigned attempt on the part of God to slay Moses? Not at all, brethren, He meant it. Why? Because of the circumcision. Moses had neglected the circumcision; he had allowed the flesh. With all the light that he had, the Lord sought to slay him; but Aaron was on his way. Jehovah had said to Moses, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart", @Exodus 4: 14. If you meet the brother who has affection, he is glad to see you. So the Lord had directed Aaron to go out to meet Moses, and he met him on the mount of God. Aaron was a divine provision, for the mountain of God is a place where things are provided, and one of the most important features of the provision is the brother who has got affection. And so it says, when Aaron met Moses on the mount of God he kissed him; Aaron had the love. Moses had the light and Aaron had the love; these two must always be combined, they must never be divorced; the light and the love are indissolubly in our Apostle and High Priest, and are they not to be combined in the priestly family? Are we to be content with light without the love? We shall be, unless we use the water; unless the flesh is dealt with unsparingly, we shall not have the love, we shall cultivate the flesh, and family relationships, and shall retain these traits of the flesh that distinguish men in this world. Hence the
{180}
necessity for the water, or we shall never have the love. Can we do without the love? Can we do without our Aarons, those who love us spiritually, who express genuine affection for us? We cannot. If we could have heard Moses pray that night, I am sure we should have heard him give thanks to God for Aaron; he was a divine provision on the mount of God; he had the love. I do not deny that Moses had love, for he had, especially later; he was a wonderful man. But that is how the scripture presents it here: Moses had light and Aaron had love and now they are combined, they are combined in affection, for Aaron kissed Moses. So unless we apply the water, unless the witness of the Spirit in regard of the water and the blood is effective, we shall not have the witness of the Spirit in regard of the love of God.
In @Hebrews 10, after the death of Christ in its bearing upon our consciences is dealt with, we have this remarkable statement, "The Holy Spirit also is a witness *to us*", and what comes out is a quotation from the Book of Jeremiah. The Old Testament is brought into *present* service. It is not "it is written", or "as saith the prophet" here: it is a question of what the Holy Spirit says -- what He is saying at the present moment for us. Jeremiah is brought into the present moment, and made to be a vessel for the witness of the Spirit; hence the great value of the Old Testament, it is brought in livingly by the Spirit who wrote it. You say, Jeremiah wrote it; it is not said so here: the Holy Spirit wrote it; but here it is that the Holy Spirit *bears* us witness; He bears a present witness as to the new covenant. "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says". What does He say? Many things; but above all He will tell us about the love of God. He will keep that before us. He will keep the water before us, He will insist on that; He will keep the blood before us in its bearing on the conscience, for "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin"; but He will keep the love of God before us -- He is a
{181}
faithful witness. He brings in the Old Testament and makes it speak to us livingly. The Holy Spirit revels in what is new. God had spoken of old about something new, and now it is brought into living freshness by a quotation from Jeremiah in the mouth of the Spirit of God. The Spirit witnesses to us, and the witness really implies the love of God. I am speaking of the new covenant now in the sense in which it is unfolded to us in the Lord's supper; the Lord says "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you". All that God is in Christ -- the love of God which is in Christ Jesus -- is available for us; it is all in Christ, and the Holy Spirit witnesses to us that it is there, and more than that, He brings it into our hearts and sheds it abroad there.
There is just one other thing I would speak of, and in a way it is the most touching of all, and that is, that "the Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God". I think you can see the order of these Scriptures. The witness of the death of Christ maintains us in purity and with a good conscience; the witness of the covenant maintains us in the light of the love of God. We cannot do without the love of God, and there should be response in the brethren in the way of affection in the light of the love of God. Aaron kissed Moses, we saw, then they went together. There was a witness, for witness on the part of God is not only a question of light, but of love; they went together to Pharaoh; Moses did not go alone. But now we have in this verse in @Romans 8 the Spirit witnessing with our spirit -- it is the Holy Spirit *in* us. He witnesses with our spirit, that is to say, He makes us conscious in our spirit, that we are the children of God. The spirit belongs to God, I need not remind you, and it returns to God; He is the Father of spirits. Every man, woman and child in the world has his spirit from God; and God knows every one; but what comes out here is that the Holy Spirit witnesses with our spirit that we are the children of God.
{182}
We have the witness, we have the consciousness. He makes us conscious that we are the children of God, "And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together".
You will thus see, dear brethren, the great gain of maintaining conditions for the Holy Spirit to witness in, and maintaining that witness amongst us of which these scriptures speak. And I would again refer to the addresses to the assemblies; these conditions amongst us depend on overcoming, and overcoming is in individuals -- "he that overcometh". The overcomer maintains the link with God, and God comes in through him, and the Holy Spirit witnesses through him. I believe the overcomer in all these four assemblies will insist on the first principles, he will insist on being in accord with what obtained in Jerusalem -- the breaking of bread, the preaching, the teaching, meetings for prayer; and there would be care for the saints. It is out of all reason to think that the saints should not be the subjects of care, and that the government of God should not be maintained amongst them. This requires wise counsel, and every bit of experience should be called into action, so that the mind and will of God should prevail and that there should be conditions in which the Holy Spirit can witness.
{183}
MEETINGS OF THE SAINTS IN WHICH THE LORD HAS PART
@1 Samuel 16: 1 - 13
J.T. This chapter reminds us of an ordinary meeting of the saints in which the Lord has His part, and yet we blunder. There are times of negative questions until the Lord comes in: then there is something positive. So here in our chapter there was nothing positive until David was brought in. There is no meeting until the Lord comes in, who orders all our procedure. It is important to pay attention to what the Lord has told us today.
Here you see Samuel started with the wrong man. Big brothers do not always guarantee big meetings. The Lord sometimes stays away to test our hearts as to what is really before us.
J.O.S. You think Samuel had not learned the lesson of Saul's rejection?
J.T. He had not the rejection of Saul before his soul, he remembered he was anointed.
F.J.D. We often have the light of things.
J.T. We often admit the wrong man. Why should Samuel say "Surely the Lord's anointed is before him" on looking at Eliab. And the Lord has to say the same thing -- that he has rejected Eliab, Abinadab, etc. -- to each of the seven. We ought to know whom the Lord had rejected, 1 Corinthians is the initial regulation which we are apt to miss. The directions are very important, as they are here, for the Lord shows us exactly what to do.
J.O.S. I was wondering as to the heifer which you mentioned in your prayer, if it was the thought of bringing in death.
J.T. It is doing away with the man in rejection. It is what we may have to do. Saul is a good illustration -- he represents the *objective* side -- what we may have -- without any corresponding *subjectiveness*, like the
{184}
Corinthians -- the apostle gives them credit for coming behind in nothing. There was no idea of the heifer except in the house of Chloe, they were all wanting in responding to the death of Christ. It was a *red* heifer -- *red* marks off; so Christ was *marked off*. The heifer is what is brought about in us. So here Samuel should not have been looking for big men, men comparing themselves among themselves.
-- L. I was asked the other day whether we had any big men amongst us. I asked him what he meant; he said, doctors, etc.
J.T. In 1 Chronicles it says *headmen* not *big men* -- it is a question of spiritual men, as we get in the Galatian epistle "Ye who are spiritual", The *heifer is* not a question of *big persons*, but what is *subjective* in *big persons* -- it is *affection*.
F.J.D. What does Saul suggest?
J.T. He was a Philistine but he was anointed. He was a big man and Samuel was not delivered from him, because we find him mourning for him.
F.J.D. How would that contrast with the mourning of David?
J.T. That is his comeliness; he could not rejoice over his enemy. It could not be in the heart of David; that is you do not throw an Edomite's stone at him. He did not rejoice in his calamity. That is the fine kind of sentiment you see brought out in Ephesians. It also says "Tell it not in Gath".
J.O.S. If a spiritual man like Samuel went astray, we could not claim to be so spiritual in regard to the Lord's interests. Samuel apparently knew the character of Saul yet he was mourning for him.
J.T. It is very incongruous.
J.O.S. We ought to be afraid of ourselves. In Corinthians it says "If anyone think himself to be ... spiritual, let him recognise ... the Lord's commandment", (@1 Corinthians 14: 37); that is, discern the will of God.
{185}
Samuel missed it here but he is adjusted and comes round to it, and now he is *waiting* for the Lord. He says, "Neither hath the Lord chosen these".
F.T. He is able to discern the Lord in the meeting.
J.T. A wrong step in the meeting puts you off. You go through long heart-searching until the Lord *does* come in. There was nothing of Christ to help in saying, 'The Lord has not chosen this or that' -- it is negative.
J.O.S. You may take a prominent part in the meeting but that may not be the last word from the Lord.
J.T. I have rejected him from reigning over Israel. "Fill thine *horn* with oil" -- now *horn* is taken from an animal in death -- "and go ... I have provided me a king amongst his sons". It is all in God's hands, and all hinges on that, but it is not enough, you must *wait* on the Lord. The Lord has something to communicate, "Whom I *name* unto thee". We must *wait* for the Lord to *name*. Samuel kept all the instructions but he must *wait* for God to do something. *He* must move next; that is how the assembly stands. While we keep all the directions, which is important, God has a right to *say* something. It is a question of God *naming* the thing, and you may be sure God will bring *Christ* in. He has Christ in His heart, therefore He will *name* Him.
Rem. I was thinking, Saul was anointed but not with a horn. Not through death.
J.T. That is very important. There is a right order, directions must be kept. In 1 Corinthians the apostle tells them certain things and says 'when I come, there will be more'.
J.O.S. Do I understand then that directions are connected with public order when assembled together?
J.T. Yes.
-- M. Would you say it was the beginning of Saul's downfall by not *waiting*, and then he goes from bad to worse?
J.O.S. Samuel, a spiritual man, fails in the same thing.
{186}
J.T. That is very solemn and important -- *not waiting* -- Christ has not been called in. There may be singing of hymns, everything outwardly correct, and yet Christ may not have had His place.
J.O.S. The Philistines were in the land but they had not passed by way of death.
J.T. In speaking to Samuel the Lord says, "I have rejected him" (Saul) "from reigning over Israel". It is *Israel* now; when Saul was called to be king it was to reign over *My people*.
-- L. I was wondering whether the Lord would bring this before us in view of preservation. We should not like to be like Saul, who went from bad to worse.
J.T. Even men like Samuel, Paul and Peter needed adjusting.
F.T. Samuel proved he was spiritual because he was quickly adjusted.
J.T. We might be looking at the flesh. In Peter, it might be looking at the Jew instead of the gentile -- Simon. When the sheet was let down it was the turning point for Peter for he went down nothing doubting.
I thought that Samuel was not in the attitude of making any suggestion but Jesse makes the suggestion of the sons. Then Samuel has to say at the end there must be another son, so that Jesse also needed to be adjusted. He had to say there was the youngest who was minding the sheep. Jesse was the worst for why should David have been left out? It was not fair; there was a total neglect of Christ. In every case up to the present Samuel has to say, "Neither has the Lord chosen this".
J.O.S. Had Samuel had the mind of the Lord he would not have had to have the seven sons to pass before him.
J.T. If you miss the mind of the Lord, if the natural mind pushes out a man before God, you will have to go through this exercise.
J.O.S. Is there a tendency to put aside a person in a meeting, whom the Lord would have put forward?
{187}
J.T. I have often seen in meetings, one and another put forth and yet Christ is not in activity. And now here Samuel did not know the name of the Lord's anointed. He had missed it seven times. But Samuel says we will not sit down till he comes. Samuel is on spiritual ground now. He says to Jesse "Send and fetch him"; that is a humiliating spectacle because there had not been the *spiritual waiting* 'till Christ come in!' So Jesse sent and brought David, "Now he was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to". And the Lord said, "Arise, anoint him". God has His man now, and we shall have a good meeting. It is all negative and humiliating work until Christ is brought in. Jesse has proved himself quite unspiritual up to this time but now he is not so far gone that he cannot be used to send out for David. He brought him in. Jesse made allusion to his employment -- he was keeping sheep; that was a good remark.
-- R. When Eliab was rejected it said "Look not on his countenance", yet when the right man is brought in his countenance is the first thing to be mentioned.
J.T. In Eliab there was something that appealed to Samuel naturally, showing he was not delivered from Saul. 'Ruddy' implies energy of life. Three things are said of David, but nothing about height or stature, nothing to correspond with Goliath the Philistine -- nothing big or powerful; but what is said of David refers to moral qualities. When we shall see Christ there is no lordliness we shall desire in *Him*. There was nothing in Christ outwardly to attract you or me to Him, but there are all the moral qualities in David.
J.O.S. When the brothers see him on another occasion they say 'He has only come to see the battle', but there was none to see. They followed Saul but David did not.
-- M. What is the force of Saul seeking the asses and David minding the sheep?
{188}
J.T. It was a moral discrepancy in the asses being lost: why were they lost? The maidens in the city knew more than Saul and could tell him what he did not know. It is the subjective side coming into prominence. Saul did not know where the prophet was. God has His part now.
-- W. You were likening this chapter to one of our meetings -- the whole company *standing at one point*, and David brought in, for the Lord says, "Arise, anoint him". Is that process always in our meetings?
J.T. Yes, God has His part when He can bring His Man in. Some reference to Christ is made, then God has His part. And all voices are hushed when God is brought in. What would God say to us with regard to Christ?
J.O.S. "We will not sit *at table*;" is there some significance in that?
J.T. How can you sit down when David's place is empty. Here the point is, it cannot be empty. There is dignity in sitting down. Lazarus was one who sat at table -- a place of dignity. We do not want David's seat to be empty but I am afraid His place is empty in many a place where the Lord's supper is supposed to be celebrated.
J.O.S. The spiritual element does not sit down, but you can with Samuel, the prophetic element.
J.T. It is to Jesse's credit that he *sent* and *brought* him in. There is subjection in that.
J.O.S. It is a very happy thing when we are prepared to be adjusted. There is a tendency to cling to a thing if we have said it.
J.T. They could not sit down. We must make room for Christ. There were parties in Paul's time -- some of Paul, some of Cephas, some of Christ. Heads of parties -- that does not belong to Christ. Peter fails the same way; he says "let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias", @Mark 9: 5. But
{189}
the Lord says as it were 'Behold the *One* whom I have *named* -- anoint Him; anoint Him *in the midst* of his brethren; if they are spiritual they will accept Him'. Samuel took the *horn* of oil. It is all over with Samuel now, he does not minister now; the prophetic ministry is not needed, it is all David now. Samuel *judged* Israel all the days of his life. It is only when Samuel dies that the *church* comes to light and that in Abigail. We ought to accept everything that comes to us in the death of Christ. We want to reach Christ first, then the church comes to light in Abigail.
Served in his generation under the will of God is a greater thought. What you come into in reading this book after this chapter is, David is admired after his victory over Goliath; the maidens praise him, which is the subjective side brought into evidence.
The Church of Rome and the Church of England are intent on doing damage, not by immediate rejection but by Satan -- damage to Christ. Saul was intent on doing damage to David. We must be on our guard against that; that cannot be, 'being espoused to Christ' if we seek to damage Him. So Abigail comes to light.
J.O.S. Abigail, it is said, "was of good understanding", @1 Samuel 25: 3. David missed it in a way. It must be to bring out the excellency of the church. Abigail knows what to do when she hears the result from the young men.
F.J.D. When Christ comes in all the differences disappear.
J.T. David is anointed in *the midst of his brethren*. You can quite understand the rivalry amongst these young men, but when Christ gets His place there becomes subduedness, we become brethren.
J.O.S. The Lord Jehovah being the hope of Israel, Samuel should not have been looking for man as such in hope.
J.T. They might have known that if God has
{190}
rejected a man. He is not going to take up another man of that order.
J.O.S. We have to learn in our local setting that God has refused man in the flesh, so we have to look out for spirituality in the saints.
J.T. A young man has got in and it is not easy to reject him.
F.J.D. The chapter would suggest that even Samuel found a difficulty.
J.T. The apostle Paul's ministry was to keep that man of flesh out. He says "I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified", @1 Corinthians 2: 2. So that is what we have to have before us.
J.O.S. David is prepared to do menial service, he is prepared to play before Saul, although he knows that Saul is set aside.
J.T. Personal features and the power against wicked spirits have to be put forth. David had more than Saul for he had much more than Samuel. One of Saul's young men says "I have *seen* a son of Jesse ... who is skilled in playing". Here is a young man observing spiritual intelligence. He takes account of him, skilled in playing, which is the key to David's ministry for he found spiritual healing for the people of God; and this young man took account of it. It is a fine thing to be able to take account of Christ. Behold I have *seen*, shewing how observant he was.
The Lord said to His disciples when here on earth, "Who do ye say that I am", @Matthew 16: 15. It was the Lord's challenge. This young man could say he had *seen David*.
F.J.D. Do you think @1 Corinthians 13 shows how far we can go on without love?
F.T. David being skilled in playing helped Saul.
J.T. It brings out his better feelings.
I suppose this young man would be John in giving
{191}
such a beautiful contemplation of Christ, a full account of the Person.
"I am the root and offspring of David".
{192}
THE PRESENT SERVICE OF THE SON OF GOD
@1 John 3: 8; @John 8: 30 - 36
John's writings are recognised by those who have spiritual intelligence as specially intended for the last days, and in this connection it is significant that the Son as such is seen in service, for it is a question of undoing the works of the devil, as John says, in the epistle from which I read. The devil sins from the beginning, so that his works extend far back and are multitudinous, God knowing well where to place responsibility. Not one of his works fails to come under divine scrutiny. He will be dealt with accordingly. God will deal with him. He never deals with him in a disciplinary way as He does with man, but in a punitive way; and so he will be dealt with according to the sure, discriminating, calculating judgment of God. The Revelation leaves us in no doubt as to this, nor as to his identity, for he is seen there as bearing all his identifying titles. But what is going on now is the undoing of what he has done. He is robbed of his power; not that he has not power, for it is said that he has the might of death; not that he had, but that he has; he is not without power, and he is active in the use of what he has, especially in relation to what God is doing. These meetings, thank God now so numerous, occasion special activity on Satan's part; for we learn in the Old Testament that as God would take Joshua the high priest and clothe him with festival-robes, removing the filthy ones, Satan was there to resist Him. And so it is that in what God is doing. Satan is active -- a very solemn consideration! -- a consideration that should induce prayerfulness with regard to all the service of God, that the enemy, as in the days of Job, as he goes up with the sons of God, should be rebuked; as it is said, "The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee". We may reckon on that at every meeting, but it should induce intense care
{193}
and prayerfulness, for he is ready to undo what God does; and as I was saying, his works extend far back, but I am thinking of them in their present manifestation.
Christendom is in a general way the evidence of the last great phase of his works -- not being able to obliterate the testimony in the early christians, for they endured, thank God; they suffered, they would not give up the truth, and therefore they founded the assembly, so to speak; they founded it immutably. God did it through them. Being unable to obliterate or root up what was thus established by God, he set about to corrupt. So that in reading the early history of the assembly it is painful to observe the rapid decline from apostolic times, the rapidity with which the truth and the testimony were dragged down and corrupted. The Spirit of God foresaw this in the apostles times. They were energetic in foreseeing and preparing the saints for the attack, so that Paul says to the Corinthians, "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy", @1 Corinthians 3: 17. Strong word! But the corruption has gone on, so that we see abroad a huge system -- we speak of it as system -- corrupted. And now the question is how the undoing of this is to proceed and whether we have a part in that, whether we see what God is doing. It is a question of the Son of God, the manifestation of the Son of God: "To this end the Son of God has been manifested, that he might undo the works of the devil". It is a question of how the work of the devil, this widespread work of the devil, is to be undone. It is not that God is setting it aside in a public way, it will be presently; but it is a question of how it is undone in a moral sense now, so that we escape its consequences -- at least so as to worship God. Now it is a matter of the profoundest importance, dear brethren, how this extensive, elaborative work of the devil, his masterpiece indeed, is to be undone. It is a great thing to have a part in this service. It is for us to have part in it, because there is nothing God has more interest in
{194}
than to bring His people into the thing that He is doing, like Jonathan who wrought with God on one particular day: he and another undertook to do something which meant the undoing of Saul's folly, the consequences of it. He wrought with God on one day; and that is the thing Paul suggests in addressing the Corinthians, that very thing -- we are fellow-workers of God, otherwise we shall be contravening what He is doing; for the Lord says as to the principle: "He that gathers not with me scatters", @Matthew 12: 30. We must be *with* Him. And so, to illustrate this, you will all remember the woman of whom Luke writes, who was bent over for eighteen years -- a well known incident. I refer to it now because one has seen persons, known of persons amongst us, nominally so, not really, who had been eighteen years under the influence of some work of the devil, some wrong principle -- I will say no more; and they went back to it when they might have been straightened, made to stand upright and worship God, children of Abraham. They went back. That is a sorrowful consideration, because the undoing of the work of the devil is to be permanent or it is not done at all. What the Son of God does is done, and done for ever. There is no record that that woman ever became bent over again; not but what there are instances in the Lord's service where the moral effect of His gracious service seemed shallow, as in the case of the man at the pool of Bethesda. The Lord said to him when He raised him up, "Sin no more". That meant He was not sure of him; He had no confidence in the man. And also the woman in this 8th chapter, He said the same thing to her, "Sin no more". It is a solemn thing to receive benefit in this way, to find the work of the devil in some way undone, and yet to sin again. A worse thing comes upon us. I refer to that in a practical way, dear brethren, because my object here tonight is to show how that the undoing of the works of the devil by the Son of God, is done; it is a perfect, permanent thing.
{195}
We want things to be final if they are of any value, as the apostle says, "If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him", @Hebrews 10: 38. Going back is in principle apostasy, especially when one has been there before and goes back.
Well now, John, as I said, brings in the Son of God, and that is what has been emphasized for several years -- the Son of God. So that in speaking with our brethren in various systems (if we are to come in for the undoing, if they are to come in for the undoing of the works of the devil) nothing can be more helpful initially than to ask them, 'What do you think about Christ?' The Lord raised that question even with His followers. He raises it with every one of His followers, I am sure. He says "Who do men say that I the Son of man am?" @Matthew 16: 13. Well, some said that He was this one and that one of the servants of God of the Old Testament, such as Jeremiah or one of the prophets, but He says, "Who do ye say that I am?" for that is what everything hinges on. Without the knowledge of the Person we must be defective, nor shall we stand without it; as He says to the disciples in another place, "Will ye also go away?" There has been a certain drift here, to be simple and practical, in this region, it was a going away, "Will ye also go away?" @John 6: 67. The Lord would challenge us. I remember receiving a letter from a brother once who was questioned as to some conduct of his, some reprehensible conduct, and he sat down and wrote a letter, and said, 'I withdraw from fellowship'. What fellowship did he withdraw from? What did he understand? What are you withdrawing from? If you use the word fellowship -- the scriptural use of the word is that it is the fellowship of God's Son -- are you withdrawing from that? If he said that the fellowship is not that fellowship and I cannot go on, it would be quite intelligent and commendable. But he says, 'I withdraw from fellowship'. There is always a cause, and it is not always given; the real root cause is not always stated.
{196}
But here is a man professedly withdrawing from what? The fellowship -- the fellowship of God's Son. Did he know from what he was withdrawing? He did not know; but he came back again, thank God! He did not know from what he was withdrawing. It is the fellowship of God's Son; that is what it is. If you say 'I withdraw from that', you are exposed. And so, the Lord said, "Will ye also go away?" Peter said, "Lord, to whom shall we go?" To whom? It is a question of a Person and that is the test. To go away from that Person -- what does it mean? It means apostasy. I do not mean to unchristianise people by it for it may be ignorance; I mean a state of soul; that is the drift, "Thou hast words of life eternal". That is the Person. The Person had these words. *He* had them. They were living. They were there. Anyone could hear Him speak. They go away from Him. Peter says, "To whom shall we go?" He was the Christ, the Holy One of God. And so, if we are to help our brethren who are in these systems, nothing can be more appropriate than to introduce the question of the Person of Christ. What do you think of Him? Well, if he is a christian at all, if he has a spark of love for Christ, he will speak and talk about Christ. He may run away from you if you speak about the church, but if he has a spark of affection for Christ he will listen if you speak about Christ. And so John's gospel -- in the first thirteen verses he does not refer to the sonship of Christ, and yet it is the great leading theme of his gospel. The first reference to it is in the 14th verse, and it is to make it attractive. I do not confine it to that, but it is that. It is as if John were to say, 'This is a wonderful thing to see, to contemplate'. It is no question of the church; John does not use the word in his gospel -- the word church or assembly. It is no question of that; it is a question of the attractiveness of the Person, and so he says, "We have contemplated his glory". He was an eyewitness. He was amongst
{197}
others an eyewitness of the glory of Christ as the Son of the Father. "We have contemplated his glory", he says, "a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". Is that not attractive? If you have half a heart for Christ, or a bit of a heart for Christ, or a bit of an ear for Christ or His word, you will stop and think and listen. Well, that is the idea, dear brethren, in John's gospel. He is the most attractive Person: that is the way he presents it. It is a son with a father, *with* a father, the glory is radiant there. And then having attracted your heart he proceeds to show how this Person deals with matters; He is the Son of God. He does not record the numerous miracles that the synoptic gospels do, but virtually says that it is not necessary to do that. If you do get one glimpse of the glory of that Person you will not need to hear of all these wonderful things that He did. And so, he only records some seven or so. They are just called signs, meaning that they confirm, every one of them confirms you as to what you have seen, a glimpse of that glorious Person, the Son of the Father. And I may say here, dear brethren, whatever people say, that the Scriptures always connect Sonship with a Man here on this earth to be seen, to be handled, as John says, to be contemplated. But, oh, He is so attractive; that is virtually what John says: "a glory as of an only-begotten with a father".
If you get the ear of christians in that way, you lead them forward, and you see how, as they come under the influence of the Lord in their minds and affections, that the Son of God begins to undo the works of the devil. Can we take any other name than His? I cannot say, 'I am a Roman Catholic', or 'I am a Lutheran'. No. I cannot say that in His hearing. He is apt to say some things to remind me about that. Why do you take that name? He says to Philadelphia for instance: "Thou ... hast not denied *my* name". How many are denying His name -- unintentionally, I admit -- taking on another. He would whisper in your ear, 'That is not just fair to Me'.
{198}
Nor is it; nor is it logical. And so, He proceeds; the works of the devil are gradually undone. The man or the woman is led on step by step to a position in relation to that glorious Person, the fellowship of God's Son, for it is no less than that. It is the dignity of it. The reproach of it is another thing, for it is reproach. Reproach attaches to it, but look at the dignity of it, the fellowship of God's Son.
I am endeavouring to make the thing simple. The works of the devil have to be undone, and if they are to be undone in every way in a moral sense now, we have to understand sonship as applied to us; and I may say, dear brethren, that is the leading thought in the Son of God becoming a Man, the Son being a Man, that He makes room for others, that we might receive sonship. I wonder if everybody here has received it. It is not a question of birth. To be of the *children* of God is a question of birth -- who have been *born*. Birth in regard of sonship applies only to Christ as far as I see in Scripture; "*Thou* art my Son: this day have I begotten thee", @Hebrews 1: 5. It is either by birth or adoption. It is not by adoption in Christ: He is a Son by birth: "This day have I begotten thee". With us it is adoption; but how great it is to be adopted! One might in ordinary things be born in very low circumstances and be adopted by a very great personage, but if the great person who adopts him could impart his spirit to him, the lowly birth disappears altogether. Dignity is one of the features of sonship, not simply because I am in the rank of a son, but because I have got the spirit of a son. And so we are told that, "when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law, that he might redeem those under law, that we might receive sonship" -- receive it, @Galatians 4: 4, 5. It is a matter of light. It is a matter presented to the mind as light. It is the mind of God for me and for every believer; and then the apostle goes on to say: "Because
{199}
ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying Abba, Father". Now notice the word 'crying'. It is not the cry of pain. It is not that at all. It is the cry of energy. It is the cry of feeling. How blessed a feeling it is to cry, Abba, Father. A cry expresses feeling; it may be sorrow, it may be bitterness, but not always; it may be joy, and certainly it is if I cry, "Abba, Father", my heart is full of joy. I do not cry without some cause, some consciousness, and how great is the consciousness of sonship. The Spirit cries; in fact, in Galatians, I suppose, to accustom me to the idea -- He cries in me, "Abba, Father". But in @Romans 8 it is "we cry"; the believer cries by the Spirit. He has not given us the spirit of bondage again for fear, the spirit of bondage induces fear: but the Spirit of adoption. What a word that is! "Whereby we cry, Abba, Father". We cry! These two words put together are the exact words used by our Lord Jesus Christ, and as has often been remarked, the first word, Abba, has never been translated into any language as far as I know. It is the exact word that Christ used in the garden of Gethsemane, and what can be more touching than that! What can be more expressive of the undoing of the work of the devil than that a human heart hitherto held captive should be now controlled by the Spirit of adoption, and cry in the language of Jesus in Gethsemane, when He was approaching the great work whereby He was to undo all the works of the devil -- the very thing He said: "Abba, Father". "Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee: take away this cup from me", @Mark 14: 36. And now the Holy Spirit in the believer -- by Him the believer says, "Abba, Father". Now that is what is going on, and there is no real undoing for us, in a moral sense, of the works of the devil aside from that. It is a question of what the Son of God is doing at the present time. He will do more presently; He will remove publicly all the effects of the works of the devil; He takes away the sin of the world, and
{200}
the devil himself will be bound with a chain and cast into an abyss for a thousand years, and afterwards let loose for a season, and then cast for ever into the lake of fire, and every trace of his work will be removed. But what the Lord is doing at the end of the dispensation is undoing the works of the devil in a few of us, in Christians. It is to bring us back, to deliver us step by step by the knowledge of Himself, delivering us so that we come into sonship. That is why I read in the 8th chapter of John, a chapter that is as profound, even more profound; it is one in which the Person of Christ shines out with peculiar lustre, the chapter in which He says, "Before Abraham was, I am". "Abraham", He says, "rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad". How it gladdens the heart to see the day of Christ, "He saw it, and was glad". That is what is going on, to bring the saints into the realm of holy gladness in the light of the day of Christ. And so, as He was proceeding with the remarks according to this wonderful chapter, it says that many of the Jews believed on Him. Now that is the position; many believe nominally on Christ, but that is not enough for Him; it is not just enough that we should believe on Him because of what He says. Certain evangelists would be glad to go after and count such converts. They believed because of certain things the Lord was saying. He was saying wonderful things, and no doubt they were touched; but the Lord would test them, because it is a question of undoing all that has been done; the works of the devil since Pentecost till the present time. It is now a question of my coming as an individual into the good of this undoing by the Son of God, being intelligent.
And so, the Lord says to those who believe: "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed". Now I have been remarking about persons going back, that is, not continuing in His word. Think of a person professing to have his eyes opened to a course in which
{201}
he had his part for years, and then going back! Going back! So the Lord makes the point here -- it is not a question of taking up a public attitude, but continuing in the word, that is, in the mind of God; that enters into the position, for our position, dear brethren, is nothing if it does not involve intelligence as to the mind of God, in continuance in the word. We have two things in the 14th chapter, that is, the commandment and then the word: "If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him". It hinges on the words being kept, and the words being kept imply dwelling conditions for divine Persons. They can come and abide, not to rebuke but to abide. There are tabernacle conditions where the word is kept. This raises a storm, and it is always so as soon as you bring in the question of the word of God, not only the commandment, but the word opening up so many details and glories, but which some people say is hair splitting -- it is a question of words and details. And so it raised a storm. The Jews speak, and the Lord says. "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free". That is the position. It is a question of the word, of the truth, of the liberation that belongs to me, the holy liberty that belongs to me. That raised a storm. It always raises a storm where there is an unjudged condition. You will always have a storm if the word of Christ, if the truth, is insisted on; and that is what the Lord insists on here. It is a question of the word of truth; and they answer Him. "We are Abraham's seed, and have never been under bondage to any one; how sayest thou, Ye shall become free?" I cannot stop to examine this remark of theirs, but it is most interesting as illustrative of the human mind in nominal believers, but how illogical and absurd. They were in bondage, their very pennies, their coins, were testimony to their bondage, and yet they say: "We ... have never
{202}
been under bondage to any one"; but they had been under bondage since the days of Daniel, and they are in bondage yet. That is the natural mind. It is illogical; and that is what we have to deal with in nominal believers, unspiritual persons. But they could not stand the truth. That is the test, dear brethren. There can be no undoing of the works of the devil unless there is respect for the word of Christ and the truth, "Ye shall know the truth", as He says. Is it not worth knowing, and the liberty that follows in its train? He does not stop there. They go on with their remarks and then the Lord says: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin. And the servant abideth not in the house for ever: but the Son abideth ever". This is a remarkable illustration of the use of words -- how the Lord turns the question of the servants of sin into the idea of a servant and simply says that a servant does not abide in the house. Of course, a sinner does not abide in the house, but the Lord is gracious and He just puts it on you that you are a servant, without saying that you are a servant of sin, and you do not abide in the house for ever. It is a very gracious way of putting it, and a very effective way of putting it. You are a servant of sin; he that serves sin is a bondman and no bondman abides in the house. He does not go beyond the casting out of Hagar and Ishmael in the thought, but it is a deeper matter here -- it is a question of sin. The Lord does not go beyond the question of bondage, of service, that the bondman does not abide in the house. Can I endure that if I have a heart for Christ? I cannot endure being cast out of the house; to be put out of fellowship is the principle of it, but I cannot endure to be cast out of the house. Think of all that affection, that glorious Person whom John depicts in the 1st chapter. Can I be happy out of that house where He is seen as the Son with the Father in His glory, and where those people are? Look at them -- the saints of God, they are all there, they
{203}
belong to the house! The Lord outlines it beautifully and so He says: "If therefore the Son shall set you free, ye shall be really free", and one who is really free, in him the works of the devil are manifestly undone. He is free; not only is he free inside, but he is free from the influence of sin, he does not serve it again. That is, in him manifestly the Son of God has undone the works of the devil. He is now for God; so that it says elsewhere: "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God", @Romans 8: 14. That is the position, dear brethren. That is what the Son of God is doing at the present time. He is undoing the works of the devil. It may be with a few, but it is real; so the point is the testimony of it. With one wave of His power He will wipe out all this world of sin by and by, but now He is setting people free in sonship, bringing them into companionship with Himself in the house where they are really free. May the Lord bless the word.
{204}
MATERNAL FEATURES
@Galatians 4: 26; @Genesis 21: 9, 10; @Genesis 27: 6 - 13; @Judges 5: 6, 7; @2 Samuel 20: 16 - 19
These scriptures present to us the maternal idea which has great significance in the mind of God, and which most believers understand, and hence the loss as in the churches of Galatia, one idea being that the mother, as the wife, is trustworthy and is counted upon to look after the affairs of the husband in his absence. At all times, of course, but there is no need of accentuating the idea when he is present. It is always there, but it is in the absence of Christ that the mother feature is emphasised, and the absence of it became apparent in the assemblies of Galatia. Whilst the apostle was there he was professedly greatly valued; they would have plucked out their eyes to give them to him, and they received him as an angel of God; he represented the authority of Christ among them, but in his absence the mother spirit failed.
The mother spirit is presented typically in Sarah. It is that spirit which pervades the assemblies that would discern in detail the activities of the bond-slave -- of Hagar and her son. The gatherings of the saints are exposed in that whilst there may be full recognition of government and even leadership, all goes well while such are present and in action, but in their absence there is want of the acceptance of responsibility to care for the Lord's interests. There is the absence of vigilance, not in certain distinguished ones in the gatherings, but in all forming the gatherings, so that all working of the flesh is not discerned and is allowed to work until those who have the special ability to deal with it reappear. There should be the dealing with it promptly, for, although the gatherings of the saints may be wanting in individuals of moral power, there is always the opportunity of recourse to prayer and the resolve that this must not be. If I cannot deal with it, it must not be; the Lord can and will.
{205}
So that in Sarah we have the great initial idea, and first in her faith. She is reckoned as having faith in regard to the birth of Isaac. If we have faith as regards the work of God in our localities, we shall appraise the result of it. Even although it be a weak brother he must not be destroyed; he is valuable in our eyes. Faith understands at what cost he has been brought about, and so Sarah being vigilant discerned the mocking. Ishmael was not persecuting Isaac corporally; he was not striking him; there was no evidence of that. What he was doing might pass without notice by an unspiritual eye. It might be a matter to be passed over as of little or no consequence, but not so with a true mother. Fleshly elements springing up, especially amongst the young, are passed over very often by the unspiritual, but not by the spiritual. I could perhaps enumerate evidences of it more or less present in every gathering represented here. Whereas the true Sarah would discern it at once. It is the element of the mother in regard of the saints viewed in their infancy, as I may say; not viewed according to the relative value of infants, but according to the mind of God about them. Isaac is viewed by Sarah in the light of the mind of God, and it makes an immense difference whether I view a believer according to his stature and spiritual power or whether I view him potentially.
The weaning time had come, the weaning time of Isaac -- the child of promise, that is, a child previously spoken of, a child spoken of prophetically, and every one of us has been previously spoken of. How far back I cannot tell, but we have been previously spoken of, our very names have been matters of counsel. It is as viewing the saints thus that their potentialities become great, for we have all been previously spoken of in relation to counsel. Hence his value, and we cannot afford to have him damaged; we cannot afford to have such persecuted, for Ishmael was persecuting the child born after the Spirit. Isaac had been previously spoken of, and he was
{206}
born after the Spirit -- his very nature, so to speak, is spiritual, viewed in that way, for we have to understand it spiritually. So the initial idea of the mother is in Sarah. She understands the previous thoughts in regard of the child. He has been placed in the divine counsels; he has been spoken of with affection; he has been the occasion of joy -- his very name signifies that, so that it is of the greatest importance to the continuance of the gatherings -- not in so many persons, but in the spiritual sense, the sense in which Isaac typifies them -- that this maternal element should exist, and that no one should disclaim responsibility as to it.
So Sarah saw. It does not say that Abraham saw. Abraham is the specially responsible side, the father, but the mother is with the children all the time. That is the principle. She knows them from the very outset, she sees all that happens, and she must not disclaim responsibility. Let no one assume irresponsibility if anything dishonouring is seen. We cannot say it belongs to the elder brethren. I am responsible, even if they do not see, and if I see I act, and God respects my action. This mother principle brings all into responsibility and consequent vigilance, and not only vigilance, but action based on vigilance, based on what is seen. So that Sarah says, "Cast out this handmaid and her son". Ishmael is not to "inherit with my son". If things are to continue according to God, all that is of the flesh in its activities must be expunged in the gatherings of the saints.
Now I come on to Rebecca, because she represents maternal vigilance in regard of the saints viewed in their responsibility. Jacob was not a babe, he was a full-grown man at this juncture. Rebecca is not classed with Sarah as a mother; she is not said to have become a mother by faith. Sarah became a mother on the principle of faith; Rebecca became a mother on the faith of her husband, but she had maternal instincts, not only in regard of her young babes, but in regard of the grown-up
{207}
ones. Esau is not persecuting Jacob. Isaac was seeking to fix the blessing on the wrong man. We see that often, dear brethren. We see certain brothers pushed forward in meetings for distinction, a thing to be abhorred. Let the Lord do that; it is His right to bring brothers forward for leadership or whatever it may be. Abraham had failed in regard of Isaac; now Isaac is failing in regard of Jacob -- the specially responsible element is failing. What about the mother element? the generality of the saints, as we say? Here is a brother pushed forward, he is to be the leader. Who is doing this? Spiritual instincts set themselves against it. It is a question of the rights of the Lord, a question of divine rights; the Lord reserves that for Himself. It is almost certain that a mistake is made if anyone is pushed forward. The Lord has His own reserves. Jacob was a plain man; he dwelt in tents. Esau was a man of the field. He was much more commendable to the natural mind, and may be, had more parts, as we speak, than his brother. But Rebecca understood, and she was not deceived. She had her ears open; she heard what passed. The true mother will have her ears open to what passes. It is not a question of mere gossip. She heard what Isaac said, and she understood what Esau was doing. She had the mind of God; she understood that the elder should serve the younger, and she determined that the mind of God should go through. We must have the mind of God. If the divine choice does not go forward the enemy has the advantage. Nominations for prominence on the part of the people of God are most abhorrent to heaven, and heaven will not admit of them at all, nor will the spiritual. The spiritual may have to suffer, but suffer they will.
So Rebecca directs Jacob. Jacob questions the wisdom of her counsel, for you can quite understand that he saw it involved great danger, but the true mother says, "On me be thy curse". That is, the spirit of Christ will suffer rather than let the mind of God and the divine choice be passed by.
{208}
Now that is another side, but an important side. It is not a question of infant Isaacs now, but of grown-up Jacobs. They were twins, as we say, but not in the mind of God; there was really no relation between them. Jacob supplanted Esau at the outset, for that is what his name means; he was a supplanter, but rightly so; it was spiritual. That is to say, the man after the flesh must be supplanted. But how? Only by spiritual power. But I am speaking of Rebecca, the motherly spirit that heard what passed in the house; it did not miss her; she heard what Isaac said to Esau, and she immediately set about to frustrate the work of the enemy, and so she says, "On me be thy curse, my son". She is willing to go that far. That is the spirit of Christ in the mother.
So we find in regard of Jacob afterwards that Esau himself has to recognise that he obeyed. You may depend upon it, the secret of promotion in the service of God is obedience, not only to the father but to the mother. Esau had to recognise afterwards that Jacob "had obeyed his father and his mother", @Genesis 28: 7. There can be no promotion in the service of God aside from subjection, not only to the Lord but to the brethren. For that is the idea -- submission to the brethren. "Submitting yourselves to one another in the fear of Christ", @Ephesians 5: 21. It is the way to promotion; if there is to be effective service there has to be obedience to the father and to the mother. When I say the father, I refer to divine authority, whether it be in Christ or in others here, those who represent Christ; but when I speak of the mother, it is a subjective thought, what there is in all the saints, whether locally or generally. So that Esau has to own that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother. That is the way the matter stands in regard of the saints, viewed individually first in their infancy spiritually, and then in their grown-up relations, when the time has come for them to be taken up to be distinguished, to receive the blessing.
Now I pass on to Deborah, because I wish to show
{209}
you how this principle extends from individuals to the general position -- "a mother in Israel". A mother in Israel is more than a mother in a local meeting. She is universal, that is to say, it is when the saints become enlarged and begin to think of things universally, of all the interests of Christ on earth. In speaking thus one is reminded of what one observes in attending meetings for prayer. It is one's privilege to attend many meetings, perhaps more prayer-meetings than many brethren attend, and it is in the prayer-meeting that this mother spirit is seen. It is there you begin to feel the power of it, and what one longs for is to see more expansion, prayers inclusive of all the interests of Christ on earth, for that is the idea of a mother in Israel. There is only one Israel, and that is the "Israel of God". I have no doubt the apostle had that in mind when he said to the Galatians "Peace upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God", chapter 6: 16. That is a spiritual thought. Our prayer-meetings should exhibit the spirit of the mother in relation to the Israel of God. That is to say, a saint in the Antipodes is as valuable to Christ as a saint in this country; he is of the "Israel of God". We do not want to make saints inferior to one another because of their geographical position; that has nothing to do with our value or our place in the counsels of God or in the testimony down here. Some may occupy the outposts. How much do we think of the brethren who under the will of God are driven out into isolation, unprotected by the fellowship and society of their brethren, but they are of great interest to heaven. They deserve our prayers; if we are mothers in Israel we shall pray for them; they belong to Israel.
So what you find with Deborah is, "In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the roads were unused, and the travellers on highways went by crooked paths. The villages ceased in Israel". The idea of highways links up with what is universal. We do not
{210}
want them closed up, nor do we wish to see them grass-grown without footsteps. There are the "footsteps of the flock", @Song of Songs 1: 8. They are seen, so to speak, around the meeting-places of the saints, but then the highways are for travellers, not only persons who take tickets by train or by sea, but persons who travel by faith, who travel by prayer, who in the wakeful hours of the night travel throughout the world and think of the isolated ones and the small villages, so to say, that are apt to cease in Israel. Highways are great principles that extend throughout, you see. They are not bounded or hindered by national barriers at all. A spiritual highway of God has nothing to do with national barriers. And so Deborah refers back mournfully to the days of Shamgar, great man as he was who slew with an ox-goad six hundred Philistines. It was a great exploit, but he paid no attention apparently to the highways. We may do exploits and forget the highways, but, as I say, in the wakeful hours of the night we may travel the highways. We may do exploits on the platform, but the highways are to be traversed in faith, linking up the Israel of God. They were the highways of God, but the people went in the byways. You may be sure that where the highways are neglected, where the mothers in Israel cease, the villages will cease and the people will go in byways leading nowhere in regard of the things of God. I urge this, dear brethren. Deborah represents the opening up of the highways of God; she represents the formation and maintenance of villages, that allude in a typical way to meetings, but meetings linked up, not in isolation, not congregational assemblies, but catholic assemblies, assemblies in which, as the apostle says, the principles of God are recognised: "Thus I ordain in all the assemblies", @1 Corinthians 7: 17. That is the idea of Israel, the catholic spirit that overthrows national boundaries, sectional boundaries and family boundaries, and thinks of the Israel of God. That is Deborah.
{211}
You say, How does it happen? It is very simple. She was a believer that took account of things and felt them. Dwelling between Ramah and Bethel, she dwelt in a healthy neighbourhood spiritually, and she dwelt under her own palm-tree. She was not a plagiarist or a borrower; she had the sense of victory by her own faith. That is what she was, and when war has to be made, she is ready for war and takes the lead in it. She says to Barak, "Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?" That is the idea of opening up the highways of God, "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual", says the apostle, "let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. That is how the principle of Deborah is developed; it is in having recourse to the commandments, "Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?" We must obey the commandment. As the Lord says, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, *he* it is that loves me", @John 14: 21. Then she is the first to speak about lovers of God in the book. She says, "Let them that love him be as the rising of the sun in its might", @Judges 5: 31. The sun is not local, it is universal; there is nothing hid from its heat, and that is her desire for lovers of God, that they may be as the sun in its might. That is Deborah, a most important side of the maternal feature -- a "mother in Israel".
Now the wise woman of Abel is the last illustration that I have selected, and a most important one, because it is she that faces Joab. The history of Joab enters into this, but I cannot dwell on that now. Joab is a man that represents that element that is always professedly on the side of Christ, but with selfish motives, a most dangerous thing. You may always be on the line of the truth, the last word of ministry you may espouse, but you may have a selfish motive all the time and be hard in your spirit. That is Joab -- sometimes too hard for the spiritual, for David has to admit that the sons of Zeruiah were too
{212}
hard for him, but then he was always avowedly on the right side. And he is now on the right side. He has just killed a man in cold blood who stood in his way. That is Joab, yet he is on the right side. If he were at a care-meeting, he would say this man must be slain, must be put out of fellowship, as we speak. But what about himself? He has just murdered a man.
But here is a woman and she causes him to listen to her. He had not been accustomed to be spoken to like that. Even David at times could not speak to him like that, but he has got to listen to her, and he has got to tell her his name. This is a woman of power. How much it is needed! -- persons who are free from the fear of man which always brings a snare. Had she cowered before him the position would be lost, and the city destroyed, for Joab was sapping the strength of the city. He was no mean general but he had to meet this woman. She represents an element of courage, of confidence in God, and an element that respected what was at the beginning, for she says, "They were wont to speak in old time saying, Just inquire in Abel". That is to say, she calls attention to first principles. It is not only now, as it was with Deborah, a question of obedience to the commandment, but what they did at the beginning. It is the setting aside of all human innovations in the church of God, and oh! how much there is, and how easily we let them in too, even in a small way in our gatherings. But not for this wise woman. She says, "They were wont to speak in old time saying, just inquire in Abel; and so they ended". There is no long argument with this woman, no heated disputations, no quarrels in the care-meeting; with her; there the matter ended. We want the end of the matter.
Who is this woman? She is a mother in Israel. Joab has got to stand by and answer to his name. Oh! how that courage is needed, that confidence that will challenge the most renowned when it is a question of what is right and wrong, when it is a question of a city -- for it is not a
{213}
village here. Deborah spoke of villages; this woman deals with the city. She has the radiation of government in her mind; she has a great view of the assembly typically. However little, it is no less than that which will come out of heaven -- our true mother -- radiating light to the universe. That is what she had in her mind typically -- a city, and a mother in Israel.
Joab in his ruthlessness was about to destroy it. He might have rightly said there was a wicked man there. True enough, but there was some other way of getting at him besides destroying the city. The great principle in warfare is to destroy as little as possible and to save all possible. The last great battle that Joab fought was in the wood of Ephraim, and there were twenty thousand men destroyed by the wood alone. A wood has no heart, no conscience, no intelligence. Why should people be destroyed on that principle? If people are to be destroyed let them be destroyed in righteousness. Why destroy a city? That is what he was doing. He was sapping the city to destroy, and the woman would go down with it. Sheba of course would go down, but the woman would go down too. See how easily by our self-will we may destroy what is so precious to heaven -- a city and a mother in Israel. But she saves the position courageously; she makes that man answer to his name. She asked him to listen, and he does listen, and she charges him with what he was doing.
Well, dear brethren, you can see how important this is, and how the Lord would bring every one of us in our gatherings into these great principles. If we are true to them, we shall stand and the position will be invulnerable. And as I said, the idea of the mother includes everyone in every gathering, and Israel includes all. The "Israel of God" is a great catholic idea; it includes all the saints viewed spiritually, and the mother in Israel would be concerned about every one of them, every gathering in the world and every saint in the world. If we cannot take
{214}
the highways literally we can take them in faith, maintaining the connections between the gatherings of the saints and maintaining the connections between them individually, and in the spirit of Rebecca, die rather than have the idea blotted out. The position is open to anyone. Some of us understand the greatness of it, and one would seek that everyone understood the greatness of the position. It is no less than the Israel of God, and a mother in that is an immense thought. She secures the thing; she has first-hand knowledge, as I said. The mother takes care of her husband's affairs; she is there all the time, so to speak, "The heart of her husband", it says "confideth in her", @Proverbs 31: 11. She looks after his interests; she knows all about the children. That is the principle of the thing. From the very beginning she knows. She watches over them till they grow up, and then she has an eye to all the interests of her husband. She is a "mother in Israel".
May God help us as to this. There is a word in this, that the sisters -- the young ones especially -- may not assume that they have no responsibility. It attaches to every brother and every sister, young and old, to watch for things, and thoroughly deal with the incoming of the flesh, however small. As this wise woman said, "I am peaceable and faithful in Israel". How God loves such as that, persons who are peaceable, that is to say, sons of peace. But then it is not peace at any price, but peace with faithfulness, and peace with honour, peace that maintains what is due to the Lord Jesus Christ, for we are to follow righteousness, faith, love and peace -- righteousness first. May the Lord bless these thoughts to us.
{215}
SERVICE IN VIEW OF RESULTS
@Matthew 4; @Romans 15: 18 - 21
J.T. We may read the gospels as seeking a knowledge of Christ, and we may read them with a view to seeking the example He sets before us; and the suggestion is that we might get some apprehension of Him in this sense in Matthew, as setting before us in this chapter the idea of energy in service, and the results that accrue; that He served for results; and Matthew gives us the results immediately. He gives an epitome of them before he enters into the details. He gives us in the last paragraph of this chapter a remarkable outline of the results of the Lord's service. It says, "Jesus went round the whole of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every bodily weakness among the people. And his fame went out into the whole of Syria, and they brought to him all that were ill, suffering under various diseases and pains, and those possessed by demons, and lunatics, and paralytics; and he healed them. And great crowds followed him from Galilee, and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judaea, and beyond the Jordan". It seems to me it would be of help to us, not only those who may have special ability in the service of the testimony, but to all, to view the Lord in this light, and the immense results presented here in brief, obviously to catch our eye in the book before we enter into it in detail, that christianity or our position in this world is intended to be resultful. In @Romans 15 we see the spirit that marked the apostle Paul, the immense area covered, and the manner of his preaching, how he fully preached, and that it was not in fleshly energy, but in the power of the Spirit, as he says. I think we may see by the Lord's help how this works out in the Lord's service in Matthew. First that, as anointed, having been baptised, He is "carried up into the wilderness
{216}
by the Spirit", as it says "to be tempted of the devil". That is where we view ourselves in active service severally or as of the assembly. The lesson is we begin with making room for the Spirit, so that the Spirit is free, because that is objectively the great position on earth. The Holy Spirit is here, and if here, room has to be made for Him; otherwise He is either grieved or quenched.
W.A.T. Is it the thought He was carried?
J.T. I think so. It is to call attention to the fact that in Him, at the very outset, room was made for the Spirit to act. Later He acts by the Spirit, but first the position is there must be room for the Spirit, whether in each of us individually or viewed as in the assembly.
Ques. Would it show the importance of being empty vessels so to speak?
J.T. Yes, of all that would mark us in the flesh. There was nothing to be displaced with the Lord. In us there is much to be displaced. Nothing can be more important than to make room for the Spirit. It is what marked Pentecost; they began with that. The Holy Spirit was free to come in under the conditions. The conditions that were in the hundred and twenty are described first, and then the Spirit comes. If the Spirit has to be occupied with displacing or battling with our wills and the flesh in us, there is little or no testimony.
W.A.T. Is it not almost the same with John in Patmos, that he was carried in the Spirit?
J.T. He was "in the Spirit on the Lord's day".
W.A.T. This is a little different, is it?
J.T. It shows how thoroughly he was free of himself, that instead of being occupied with natural things, although isolated, he was in the Spirit. He was also in prison, but he was in the Spirit, and the book of Revelation helps because it all follows on that.
F.G.W. In Mark's gospel the Lord is driven, but in Luke He is led; how does that bear on this, "carried up ... by the Spirit?"
{217}
J.T. It is a very interesting comparison. Mark gives what is most urgent, the driving. I think it is well to call attention to the urgency and the necessity for it from the divine side, and on the other, how the holy nature of Jesus recoiled from having to do with the devil at all. It is to His glory that it should be so, but it is urgent that it should be so from the divine side, so that Mark says He was driven *out* into the wilderness, meaning, I suppose, that He was in thorough isolation with no support at all, nothing at all to rely upon as to external circumstances -- driven out into it. Then Luke would point out that He was led *in* it, as the best reading is, which means that He was not simply led into it, but led in all His movements in it, which is another side, and a side to be relied upon, that the Spirit will be with us, in having to do with the devil; whereas here He is carried. Although having power in Himself, it is the Spirit's power, the Spirit doing it; not that He is using the Spirit, but the Spirit carrying Him of Himself, showing how entirely under the control of the Spirit He was.
F.G.W. Would Mark in that way give the feature that should mark the servant, that he would be slow to touch evil in any way?
J.T. And if he has to touch it in any way, to deny entirely any outside support. The devil is met in the strength that God gives you, so that the Lord comes out as the Stronger binding the strong man. It is to bring out the great power that is in Christ, "He was with the wild beasts", we are told in Mark.
F.G.W. Does Luke go with @Romans 8 at all?
J.T. I think it does, "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God", verse 14. I think Luke brings out the position of the Son as led by the Spirit, but Matthew is to show that full room is made for the Spirit to act. Carrying is a deliberate action. It is urgent, of course, but it is deliberate. Driving is
{218}
more urgent, but carrying is deliberate, that every precaution would be taken in carrying.
Ques. Why does Luke say, "Full of the Holy Spirit?"
J.T. It would mean just what we are saying, that nothing would interfere with His free action.
F.G.W. In the last chapter of Daniel it speaks of those who do exploits. Has this the doing of exploits in view, in being carried up?
J.T. That is very good. Up to this time there was no exploit. Of course what came out in the cross was greater; here He is simply binding the strong man, but on the cross He annulled him who had the might of death. The binding is important because it gives you a free hand to move on according to your own strength and wisdom, so that here He says, "Get thee away, Satan", and Satan has to leave. It says, "Then the devil leaves him, and behold, angels came and ministered to him". Now He is free, and I think there is that which corresponds in our own experience. Those whom God would use are as a rule put through some such test as this.
J.W.T. You mean they have to meet the power of the enemy in some way?
J.T. Yes; the Lord orders it so that we find our strength. It is important to know your measure. The young men are said to be strong because they have overcome the wicked one, but there are other dangers afterwards. "Angels came and ministered to him", which in our case would be providential help from God, and that help might lead to some means that would enable us to go into the world, so we have to watch that we do not abuse the result of any angelic service.
W.A.T. Is the ministry of angels what we may count on as found in the path of the will of God?
J.T. I think we may look for that, but we have to be on our guard that we do not abuse or misuse what may come to us under the providence of God.
{219}
J.W.T. How would you say we could do that?
J.T. You can understand how a man that is helped of God in his service might begin to think about turning it to account to improve his position in the world. Of the Lord here it says, "The devil leaves him, and behold angels came and ministered to him. But having heard that John was delivered up, he departed into Galilee: and having left Nazareth, he went and dwelt at Capernaum". He moves in relation to the testimony, not staying in Nazareth where He was brought up. He has no thought of anything like that; nothing to be added to Him I think. It was His own country; that is, where we are brought up is where we would be apt to build ourselves up, to show we have emerged from a lowly estate to a greater estate. I mean, the government of God may put it in our way and we are tested. The Lord went into Galilee, which was a despised place in itself, and then He left Nazareth where He was brought up and went to Capernaum, because Capernaum, according to this chapter, represents the place of testimony in the Old Testament. So that @Isaiah 9 is immediately quoted; He is moving in relation to the testimony.
F.W. I was going to ask as to the bearing of the fasting for forty days and nights and then hungering, which apparently precedes the attack of Satan.
J.T. I suppose the thought is that He is fully tested in His circumstances before Satan comes. He is at the extremity of need in His circumstances, as you might say, and it will be observed that the word "tempter" is used here, which is peculiar. The tempter, being a tempter, watches his opportunity; he comes at the opportune time, "Afterwards he hungered. And the tempter coming up to him, said ..." He waited till He hungered, till there was the evidence of His extremity. It is when we are tested in our circumstances that the enemy seeks to take advantage of us.
F.W. You mentioned in prayer as to the young
{220}
leaving that which is natural in a day like this. I was wondering whether this was part of the way things are worked out with us. The Lord here fasted and did without that which was natural, you might say, and it is when He hungered that Satan comes in. Do you think an occasion like this would be in a peculiar way the object of an attack of Satan?
J.T. Quite. I think it shows that, and the testimony is carried on as we know what fasting means. It is denying ourselves of what is legitimate, and as doing so we are exposed to the attack of the enemy.
F.W. So that if we are governed by an ulterior motive other than the Lord's interests we shall probably succumb to Satan?
J.T. This chapter brings out the motives behind, you mean? We have a wily foe, because the word employed here is "tempter". That is a word all young people should take notice of, because a tempter is skilful in his tempting and waits the opportunity when he is most likely to succeed. Forty is a symbol in scripture of a full period of testing. Can I continue in self-denial for that length of time? It is the thought of training; I will need to do it later for power, "This kind does not go out but by prayer and fasting", chapter 17: 21. It is a training which in later days I can use effectively to bring in excess of power. Sometimes you need more power than ordinarily, and that is the way the training enables you to bring it in.
Ques. Would the condition of natural weakness involved by fasting throw one more on to the power of the Lord?
J.T. I think that is the lesson to be learnt. The tempter said, "If thou be the Son of God, speak, that these stones may become loaves of bread". That was very adroit. It was a challenge to the salutation from heaven in chapter 3. The enemy was fully aware of that salutation and of the Spirit coming upon Him. It was an effort to get the Lord out of the position of dependence,
{221}
as if to say. You have power to take yourself out of these circumstances, and if you are the Son of God, why do you not do it? Instead of rendering homage to the Son of God he wished to get Him out of the position of dependence by using the very title.
F.W. Why does the tempter use the title "Son of God" here?
J.T. I suppose it is his adroitness to suggest that the very dignity that belongs to Him ought to be used, skilfully hiding that fact that he wished to allure Him out of the position of dependence. But the Lord declined to take up the title Son of God. What was proper to man was the point. It was in the mind of God to show how truly Man He was, not yet to show by His movements that He was the Son, but that He was in man's place, truly a Man maintaining man's place.
Ques. Could we say that the whole world has been tested by the Sonship of the Lord?
J.T. Quite. It enters into @Philippians 2, because there it is Man in Christ over against man in Adam. He had subsisted in the form of God, and the announcement from heaven indicated who He was personally, and Satan's intent was to allure Him out of the position of dependence, and throw Him back to His deity. "If", he says. It was not that he wished to honour Him as God, but to use that to allure Him out of man's position of dependence. So that it is the mind that is in Christ Jesus that is before us here. He refused. He "did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God". Satan could not tempt Him on those lines. That is what he is seeking to do, to throw Him back on to that principle, whereas He is in a position that involved another principle. The principle of deity had long been existent, but the principle of manhood had never really been set out according to God. It was never set out in Adam, nor in Israel, and the point was that there should be a Man here according to God.
{222}
H.M.G. The answer is given that "Man shall not live by bread alone". It is man in that regard.
J.T. I think so. The testing out of what the deity is -- what God is essentially -- is not the point at all. It is a question of what man should be.
F.G.W. So that His being carried up was to bring out the perfection that was there?
J.T. That is right, and I think that is in view in Philippians: "Let this mind be in you". It is not that which was in Christ as God, but in Christ Jesus -- the Man.
F.G.W. Applying the principle to ourselves, does it suggest that unless there is a certain formative work in the believer he does not come in for this peculiar kind of testing? It suggests there is a formative work in the believer and the Spirit would delight to bring it forward to show what perfection has been wrought.
J.T. So that we are in the presence of His Manhood, not babyhood. It is what man should be, that is, man in the wilderness and having been there for forty years, because it is the Deuteronomic position here. It is not the Red Sea here; it is man having the Spirit.
F.W. On the same principle would it be as gold tried in the fire?
J.T. It would, only gold usually represents what is of God towards man. I think what is before us is the divine thought which was never realised in Adam nor in Israel. It was no question of the Deity; that is not the point. God is not submitting that to a test down here. It is not what God is, but what man is or should be. Satan would throw the Lord back on His deity, but that is not the point, the point is what man should be.
Ques. Are you thinking of the position of obedience that is proper to man?
J.T. Quite.
Ques. That is why you spoke of the Lord as an example for us?
J.T. Just so. It is what man should be, how man
{223}
should live, so that he brings in Deuteronomy as the scripture that deals with Israel in that position.
Ques. Is that seen in what is said at the end of the previous chapter; "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness?" I wondered whether there was One there in whom all righteousness was fulfilled.
J.T. That shows the kind of Man that was there which is very important, and He says, not it becometh Me but *us*.
Ques. In that way do you link the thought of righteousness with obedience and dependence?
J.T. Righteousness is what is right; the rights of God come in first. He has a right to man's obedience.
J.O.S. Satan is not able to understand the mind that is in Christ Jesus.
J.T. Well, he did not understand. No doubt he thought he could divert the Lord by throwing Him back on His deity, which the Lord refused. He does not allude to His Sonship at all, it is a question of what is proper to man, and that of course brings us in. As has just been remarked, "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". That is the ground we should take. So that it says, "Man shall not live by bread alone". How the mind is directed back to the great prominence given to the word "Man" in @Genesis 2. Now the thing is to be exemplified in the most perfect way. How delightful to heaven! How all the references to man in Genesis, especially in the early chapters, would come into the Lord's mind. It was in the mind of heaven; now it was all to be verified in the most perfect manner, and what the Lord would do is to bring us into the spirit of all this and see what we are brought to. So He says, "But by every word which goes out through God's mouth". Now it is not simply what is written, but God's mouth, the Lord having in mind undoubtedly to suggest the blessedness of having direct contact with God, that it is not what He writes to us, but what comes from the
{224}
mouth of God. How delightful it would have been if Adam had responded in this way at the beginning when he heard the voice of the Lord God, walking. That voice could only speak good to him, but he hid himself from it. Now the Lord is facing God as it were. It is a question as to what comes from the mouth of God; it is God and man brought together. It is delightful to think that what had been in the mind of God is now materialising and taking form, and God is never to be robbed of it. God has got man, "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness" is just to bring us into this.
Ques. Would this link up with the tree of life?
J.T. I think it would.
W.A.T. Righteousness and life are brought together.
J.T. That is right.
W.A.T. Would the principle of @Isaiah 50: 4 be here in regard to the words from God's mouth, listening to Him and what He has to say?
J.T. What a wonderful range is opened up in the Lord's own mind as at the age of twelve He is in the temple hearing and asking questions. There can be no doubt He touched on Genesis in His questions and perhaps in His answers. We are not told but the whole range would be before Him; He would know what God was set for, that it was a question of having man wholly in His affections, so that He is now ready for all that would come from God's mouth, for it is not simply one thing, but "by every word", not simply the thoughts presented in sentences but *words* -- every word. His ear was wakened morning by morning as the instructed, it says.
W.A.T. It suggests a nearness which I think is most important. You cannot hear unless you are near.
Ques. How do we secure those divine communications?
J.T. It is a question of whether we have an ear to hear, because most believers rely on the Scriptures. Of course, we should all rely on the Scriptures, but then
{225}
most believers overlook that it is a question of God speaking. The Holy Spirit being here, there is a living voice and that voice is the voice of God, so he that has an ear is to hear what the Spirit says. He is speaking all the time, and one cannot afford to miss one word. It is not a question of revelation as we say, or new scriptures, adding to scripture, but divine thoughts, what comes to us as divine thoughts by words. It is constant. It is not what the Spirit said, but what the Spirit *says*, and what He says to the churches. That is, there is something that God is speaking to; He is speaking to the churches, and we want to hear all that He says to the churches.
Ques. Would you say these temptations that were presented to the Lord were the same as were presented to Adam?
J.T. Exactly; it is the same kind of thing, something to exalt you, you know. The first was to throw the Lord back on His deity. That was the adroitness of the enemy's onslaught. Then, in Matthew, the next is the religious side, but Luke gives us the political side second, because he is dealing more with the gentiles, and a Roman citizen would think rather of political honours than religious honours. But Matthew is dealing with the Jewish era, and he brings in the religious side second.
Ques. Would our energy in service cause us to tempt the Lord at times? If it is misplaced it is likely to tempt the Lord.
J.T. What appeals to us is position. The devil sets Him on the edge of the temple, a very dangerous position, and one that rather exposes the ignorance of the enemy. The position to be set in is not the edge but the holiest inside, a position that takes us out of sight altogether, where we are with God. We do not reach God on the edge of the temple; we reach Him in the holiest. Satan did not suggest that. What was in his mind was that man naturally would like a conspicuous place.
{226}
Rem. It says, "The devil takes him"; he would not have been able to take Him into the holiest.
J.T. Quite right, although Judas got in there. I mean to say, the thing had come into man's hands really, and the sorrowful side is that Judas could get in there. The Lord Jesus never went in there; the holiest belonged only to the priest, but Judas got in, for it was there the money was cast down. Satan is thinking now a young brother wants to preach. What does he want to preach for? Is it because he would like to be conspicuous? He would rather be on the platform than in the holiest, rather than in his closet shut up with God. That is what the enemy thinks of. The natural mind is just that too, whereas the Lord says in chapter 6, 'if you want to be honoured, enter into thy closet and shut thy door, and pray to thy Father in secret, and He will reward thee openly'. It is much safer to be rewarded openly by the Father than to be on the edge of the temple. The edge of the temple suggests the enemy's word here, "Cast thyself down". You cannot count on God to keep you on the pinnacle, but you can trust Him if you go into the closet, and He will honour you if you are there.
F.G.W. Is that taken up in @Psalm 91, "He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High?"
J.T. Very good. On the edge of the temple one is greatly exposed. Do you cast yourself down dependent on God or dependent on yourself? Because Satan here misquoted the scripture, and that is what a person is exposed to when he is in that state of aspiration in religious things. We are exposed to misquotation. There is a good deal of that abroad, inaccuracy in ministry and misuse of scripture, a thing to be noticed here. But the Lord does not rebuke the devil for it; He refused it, and it is written down here for us to learn the great danger of the misuse of scripture.
Ques. Is it important to see that in Luke the devil
{227}
left the Lord for a season, and later He said, "The prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me".
J.T. Here in Matthew he just leaves Him.
J.O.S. Does the third temptation shew what Satan had before him all the time, so the Lord names him?
J.T. Yes; he is exposed. He is no longer the tempter but the adversary, that is to say, he may overthrow you.
Ques. Would you say he has no opening with this Man? Satan is no match for Him.
J.T. That is what comes out. He keeps on though on this principle with all of us, although he has been defeated by the Lord Jesus, and that is the thing to watch. So "Satan" would mean that he was not only Christ's enemy but the general enemy. He is the enemy of God and all men; that is what "Satan" implies.
Ques. And it is not sufficient to tell the enemy he is a defeated foe; we have got to tell him something else?
J.T. We have to shew him something else, that you have on the whole armour of God, the same armour that Jesus had. It is the whole armour, so there is nothing vulnerable, and there is not any armour for the back, you know. It is all for the front, showing that you face him; you do not turn your back. He has to do that, "Resist the devil and he will flee"; you never have to. He had to leave the Lord here.
J.O.S. Do you see Paul in @Acts 16, facing the enemy? He was grieved by what the woman said, "These men are bondmen of the most High God", and he faced the enemy: "I enjoin thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her".
J.T. He was grieved, feeling the first thing. That is, you feel how victorious the enemy's action is, and how specious it was: "These men are bondmen of the most High God". It is the same thing as the pinnacle of the temple. He would elevate you to throw you back on your own dignity. "These men are bondmen of the most High God, who announce to you the way of
{228}
salvation". That was the devil's adroitness, and it happened many days, and the apostle felt it. It is when you feel things that the power comes.
Ques. I suppose having the spirit of God you would be sensitive to all the power of the enemy, would you not?
J.T. It is the sensitiveness with which God feels things. Now, to get the full scope of the scripture, what we see here is that the Lord, having heard that John was delivered up, "departed into Galilee: and having left Nazareth, he went and dwelt at Capernaum, which is on the seaside in the borders of Zabulon and Nepthalim, that that might be fulfilled which was spoken through Esaias the prophet". He is now free and cared for providentially; He lacks nothing now; He is not hungering now; He is not turning stones into bread. He is leaving things in God's hands to provide for Him; angels ministered to Him. But He hears that John is cast into prison, that he was delivered up. That is He is observant of what is happening in the field of service. We are not to be oblivious to that. Other servants are there. I am referring to this as an example, that we are not to think of ourselves as the only persons that God is going to use. There are others, and John represents that side. It says that Peter stood up with the eleven, which means that there were others. And here was John, and the Lord knew what he was doing, and now he is cast into prison. Well, there is a great need of help. It is not that I wish to push myself in the service. The need exists. I look abroad on the field -- that is a great matter -- and see where the need is. Now John is cast into prison. A great servant has been removed through death, and I begin to think how that is going to be met; not that I should have prominence, yet the need is there. But the Lord does not immediately act, and the next thing is that He moves into Capernaum. He leaves Nazareth, His natural place, for now, protected by the
{229}
angels of God. He may expect conflict and material support. He leaves Nazareth and goes to a point which scripture indicated was to be the place of light. That is to say, the true servant stresses scripture. The Lord knew well enough where all these texts were. We know from @Luke 4 how He quoted exactly what fitted the position at Nazareth, but the passage here is very wide. He does not quote it, but the Holy Spirit speaks of it as fulfilled by His movements. He is not quoting it to support His position, but fulfilling it in what He is doing. It is an important matter that the whole scheme of God is one, that the whole thing existed on His coming into manhood, so the whole scheme is one, and everyone of us fits into it. We are in the scheme of God or nothing, so the question is, Am I fitting into the divine thought? As the Lord says of Paul, "This man is an elect vessel to me", (@Acts 9: 15); he is going to fill a wonderful place. And so here the movements of the Lord fit in with the mind of God. How great a thing that is morally, so that @Isaiah 9 is exemplified in the Lord's movements in leaving the town of His bringing up for the town of Capernaum. Nazareth, although despised, was really a much healthier position than Capernaum, but the Lord is showing that He is fitting in with the mind of God, and we must never be other than that. If I am not, I am lawless.
Ques. Is that illustrated in the movements of the Lord's servants in Acts -- Peter and Philip and others?
J.T. I think so; the Holy Spirit mentions them as fitting in with the mind of God. It is very delightful to fit in with the mind of God communicated hundreds of years before.
Ques. Would what you have been saying be beautifully illustrated by Nehemiah? He felt the need, and circumstances were so ordered that he could be free for the service.
J.T. Quite so. So here it is the one place where it
{230}
says the Lord dwelt. @John 1 says, He dwelt among us, that is to say, amongst certain persons, but here He is living in a certain town, and it brings up what I am in my private circumstances before I start preaching -- what the neighbours see every morning.
Ques. Would it be connected with the verse we have read in Romans? "For I will not dare to speak anything of the things which Christ has not wrought by me".
J.T. Well, you see, He is not working yet; He is just living there. It is a question of what they see in you in your town every day, and what they see in me in New York. The neighbours live all around you, and it is what they see in you every morning, what your manner of life is, whether there is light in it. Think of living next door to the Lord Jesus! What you would see every day if you were observant! What the passage in Isaiah required was light; that is, the mind of God requires that there should be light in those circumstances, not in my ministry yet, but in my everyday life. The mind of God requires light in that, not while I am in the meetings only, but where I live, in my house.
W.A.T. It says it was on the seaside, as if you would be near to the vast expanse of things; you would not be too local, in that way. Would it take account of the vast range of the interests of God?
J.T. I think so. One's personal circumstances ought to bear on his whole ministry. What was that young man in his youth? What was the manner of his life? How was he at home in his father's house? How was he after he got married? What has he been in business? All that necessarily enters into a man's position in the service of God, and we cannot take short cuts in the service of God. We have to go through things daily with the enemy, and then in our ordinary movements in regard to our living associations. We have to move in relation to God and fit in with the divine scheme. It is said of the Lord Jesus in Philippians, "Taking *his* place
{231}
in the likeness of *men*", not in the likeness of *man*, but in the likeness of *men*. But "having been found in figure as a *man*, humbled himself".
Ques. Is verse 16 of our chapter that which was to be seen in the Lord here?
J.T. That is what I was just coming to, "That that might be fulfilled which was spoken through Esaias the prophet, saying, Land of Zabulon and land of Nepthalim, way of the sea beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations: -- the people sitting in darkness has seen a great light, and to those sitting in the country and shadow of death, to them has light sprung up". That is what is alluded to. The great light was where He dwelt, not His ministry yet, but where He dwelt.
Ques. Is the same feature seen in Simon Peter and Andrew? They were working when the Lord called them.
J.T. That is the next thing that comes out. It is very beautiful to see the order in the Lord's blessed life, and how it is recorded that it might be an example for us all, for it is not a question of a divine Person acting as a divine Person, but in manhood. That is the point, what man is to be, so it is where He is living as a Man that there is light; light radiates from that house where He is living.
Rem. Saul was at Tarsus first before he came to Antioch.
J.T. The Lord told Ananias from the very outset where he came from, so we must never forget that is where he is to shine before he takes up his ministry.
Ques. You mean that, as set forth here, what we are precedes what we say?
J.T. That is the idea. In our everyday life there is light. That is the divine requirement for service.
Ques. Have you in mind that the quotation from Isaiah apparently refers to the Lord dwelling at Capernaum?
{232}
J.T. Clearly. They were sitting in darkness but the light shone on them, "The true light was that which, coming into the world, lightens every man", @John 1: 9.
J.O.S. Does the Lord refer to this thought when He speaks of Capernaum being raised up to heaven?
J.T. Yes; He refers to this wonderful testimony in it. Of course, there was more in it than this; it was the great sphere of His testimony. Now the next thing is, "From that time began Jesus to preach". You might say it is from the time you are sent out, but it is not. He was anointed, and all this precedes His preaching; it was after He overcame the devil and shone in His private life that He began to preach. Then the next thing is, "Walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers". Now it is a question of discernment as to likely material for the service, what God is seeking; because after all, what is our service if there is no result, and we want to get the most likely material wherever it is. The servant needs discernment. The Lord was walking by the sea, but it was not a mere walk for pleasure or health; He was looking around for material, so to say.
Rem. The apostle Paul takes Timothy because he is well reported of by the brethren.
J.T. Very good; it is important to find the most likely material.
W.A.T. So in the every day path and your own place you have before you to be on the look-out for that which is to be brought in, so to speak?
J.T. You are under obligation now, for you are commissioned. You must shew results, according to the parable of the talents, and you want to work where you get the results.
Rem. Two brothers would be good material for fellowship.
J.T. That is so. You notice they are actually working here. "He saw two brothers, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they
{233}
were fishers; and he says to them, Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men". He saw them casting a net in, which is an important thing, and you may depend they were doing it well. If they are doing that well they will very likely be useful in the service of God, because the thing must be done well.
F.G.W. In the early days tangible results loomed very largely in the eyes of those who took up publicly the Lord's service. You would not exactly encourage tangible results but more the sense of divine support?
J.T. I think you want to have in your mind what God needs. Do you think God has results in mind in your service? It may not be converts, but it may be something else -- the perfecting of the saints.
F.G.W. Not so easy to count.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Do you not see in @Ephesians 5 the results of this light having shone into the soul?
J.T. Just so. The point here is that the light was there, not the result of it but that it was there, and it ought to be there in every one of us, that our private lives should be light, and from that point you begin to preach.
H.M.G. You were speaking about fitting in with the service of God. Would the call of the Lord, "Come after me", be that fitting in?
J.T. He said, "I will make you fishers of men". Making is a feature of Matthew. "Make disciples of all the nations", chapter 28: 19. It is not simply by preaching, but the question of moral power with people, and that is what comes out here: "I will make you fishers of men". Then the next two are James and John. They are "in the ship with Zebedee their father, mending their trawl-nets, and he called them; and they, having left the ship and their father, immediately followed him". It does not say He would make them anything but He called them, and that is enough. If He calls, I leave all the rest with Him.
{234}
Rem. To follow Him would be to walk as He walked.
J.T. And more than that. It is a question of what He will do with you. He told Peter and Andrew what He would do with them, but not James and John. I think it would suggest they would have more confidence, they would leave it to Him. Some of us need to be told what we are going to be, others do not. It is enough for the Lord to call us, and we leave all the rest with Him.
W.A.T. It says they were with Zebedee their father. Is that a further thought?
J.T. I think instead of family relations, His call would mean there was something behind it.
Ques. Do you think the principle of leadership is seen? Of Moses it is said that he led his sheep to the backside of the desert to the mountain of God.
J.T. That is very good. It is very beautiful here. In Peter's case He says, "I will make you fishers of men", but of James and John it only says "he called them; and they, having left the ship and their father, immediately followed him". There is a test. Of course, Peter and Andrew left the ship, but these leave the ship and their father. It means there is an element introduced that overcomes natural claims. They "left the ship and their father".
Ques. Would it be what Abraham was called to do?
J.T. Exactly, to leave his father's house. "They, having left the ship and their father, immediately followed him". I gather from Mark that Zebedee was a man of some distinction, for it says that he had hired servants, and John tells us himself that he was known to the high priest, so there must have been some distinction. In their trade they were probably fish merchants as well as fishers, so to leave that would be a wrench.
Rem. One asked to be allowed first to bury his father.
J.T. They do not; they leave immediately.
F.G.W. Have you anything to say on the passage in Romans?
{235}
J.T. Not more than I am saying. It is how all this is exemplified, and the apostle Paul, the extent of his journeyings and the result, the offering up of the nations, and how it was all in the power of the Spirit of God. The going out of all this is sure to be resultful according to God.
Ques. Would the whole of Galilee here correspond to the circuit that Paul speaks of?
J.T. I thought so. It is the whole area here, because you will notice at the end of the paragraph we have "Galilee, and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judaea, and beyond the Jordan". It was a wide area, and it would correspond with the whole area now, making disciples of all the nations. That is what Paul had in mind. He had moved as far as the Adriatic, and he would go as far as Spain which was the utmost westerly limit. That is what he had in mind, and in the midst of all that apostolic and evangelical service, he speaks about being a deacon to carry money to the poor saints at Jerusalem, showing the readiness to do anything in the service of the Lord.
Ques. Why was the Lord subjected to these temptations seeing that there was no possibility of failure?
J.T. Oh! it was to bring out the perfection that was there, which is delightful to God; as the meat-offering, which refers to His humanity, was tested by the fire to bring out the perfection that was there; and then, as we said, it is an example for us.
Ques. It is God-ward, not man-ward?
J.T. That is right.
{236}
LOVE AND WITNESS SECURED BY THE GOSPEL
@Luke 7: 44 - 50; @Luke 8: 35 - 39
In the service of the gospel one feels peculiarly at home in speaking from Luke, for the whole book breathes evangelically. Scripture generally affords gospel texts from the very first chapter to the last, it is just lit up with gospel texts, but Luke breathes the gospel, telling us at the outset, as the Babe Jesus was born, that the fact boded good pleasure in men, so that all men are in view. He stresses repentance, speaking not only about persons who repent once for all, but who are repenting sinners, who are marked by that feature, and from the time that repentance begins good pleasure begins. There is joy in heaven, we are told, over one sinner that repenteth; and so, as the prodigal, who stands out in this book as the great gospel subject, begins to move towards his father, every step he took was pleasing to heaven. For there was not only the repentance inwardly which his father as representing God could alone discern, but every step he took on the way back afforded good pleasure to heaven. Of course, he was more delightful when he got back and had the fine clothes on, the finest clothes in heaven, for clothes go a long way in making us pleasing, and when we have on the best, they greatly enhance our delightfulness, but every step he took as he went back to his father occasioned his father pleasure, "His father saw him", we are told, "when he was yet a great way off", and he ran. That is one of the features of the returning -- God's delight in regard of those that were afar off. However far off, every step they take in coming back is not wearisome to heaven; it is pleasing to heaven. So that the great epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, which speaks so much of God and His counsels and His great love and His rich mercy, puts those that are afar off before those that are near, and moreover, says that Jesus Himself was
{237}
the preacher: "Coming, he has preached the glad tidings of peace to you who were afar off, and the glad tidings of peace to those who were nigh", @Ephesians 2: 17. Those that were afar off were thought of first, and in their return God was very active; He was pleased in their movement. When the father of the prodigal met him, we are told that he covered him with kisses. That would shew how pleased he was, as if he could kiss him all over, every bit of him was pleasing to the father, for it was not simply an ordinary kiss; he covered him with kisses; the whole person was pleasing. That is how love took account of those of us who were afar off and without God in this world; that is how God regarded us and how He regards us. He is not one whit changed. He looks abroad on the gentile world and is as pleased as ever, with those who turn to Him; He is just as pleased tonight as He was two thousand years ago when the gentiles began to come back.
That is how Luke would impress us; he would disarm every bit of fear and prejudice in the way he presents God. The angel came, as you remember, and was beside the shepherds who were away off in the country looking after their flocks, and the angel of the Lord was there, and the glory shone there. It was a wonderful time. Heaven was aglow with what was happening, and the angel told them what had happened, not simply that the Child was born, but born "to you" When? "Today"; not yesterday; no, heaven would not wait for another day; that very day. What happened that day? A Saviour was born -- born "to you". Where? "In David's city". Who is He? "Christ the Lord". Then there was the multitude of the heavenly host round about them praising God. What were they speaking about? "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". What a word that is for us -- men, including women, of course; it is the word for the race -- that God is going to be pleased with us. Not with
{238}
our sins, not with our naughty doings, but with us. That is how Luke would bathe our minds and hearts in approaching us with Jesus, so that no one should dread or fear or be dismayed. Heaven is interested, and the very first movement in the recognition of our naughty ways and the desire not to sin any more pleases heaven. The pleasure begins as soon as we begin to repent.
What a wonderful time heaven has had ever since. You say, what sorrow heaven has been occasioned. Yes, and God is capable of grief. We are told in Genesis that man's conduct grieved Him every day, but He is not overwhelmed with the grief. He is the blessed God, and the word 'blessed' in that respect may be rendered 'happy'. God is infinitely beyond the guilt of man; He is ever what He is, and He is capable of pleasure, and that when one begins to repent. That is God. And it goes on. It is to be seen in heaven; it is in the presence of the angels; they joy when men repent, although it does not actually say that the angels rejoice; it is in the presence of the angels. Some of our hymns do say so, but it is not quite true. Not that I would say they do not.
Gabriel is one of the leading angels, and there are leading angels -- archangels; Gabriel is the one in Luke. He is not the military angel. We do not call in military persons in the gospel; we do not need them. Gabriel is the priest in heaven and he represents the side of sympathy. Michael is the military angel, important in his department, so to speak, but Luke brings in Gabriel, a well-known angel, with whom Daniel was conversant, a most interesting angel. He is the one that superintends publicly at the transcending events of the birth of Jesus and the birth of John the Baptist. He announces himself: "I am Gabriel". Let us be sure that heaven is intensely interested when a great dignitary comes down like that "standing on the right of the altar of incense". And then he speaks to Mary; so that he represents the thought of sympathy. But the joy,
{239}
although undoubtedly shared by such an angel as Gabriel, is in His presence. It is a question of God, that God is pleased, that God has joy, when a person *begins* to repent. But then He continues too; it is the repenting sinner that is pleasing to Him. It is not the thing, the repentance, but the person. That is the idea. God says, 'I have that person'. He has him morally as soon as he begins to repent. He will be more pleasing to Him when he gets on the best robe in heaven which will greatly enhance him, but God is pleased with him when he begins to repent. I wonder if there is any one here who has not begun to repent; that is the road to salvation; there is no forgiveness without it. There is forgiveness with God, but not for you without repentance.
Now what I have said brings me to these two cases, and I want to shew from these two persons -- for they are model persons -- how the saved believer takes up a position here in this world in relation to Christ. He or she will have a place in heaven, but that is not the point in the gospel. The rights of God must come first in the gospel as in everything, and if I am saved, I am saved in relation to the rights of God, what He will do with me. If in His counsels He has a place in heaven for me, good and well. I rejoice in that; but if He requires me here on earth I rejoice in that too and accept it. Generally He has a place on earth for us first. He needs us here, and that is why I read chapter 7 first, because it is a question of the great importance of a lover of Jesus in this world. Think of that -- a lover of Jesus in this world. That is what is in view in chapter 7. We are not told anything about the history of this woman, although she was seen in the house of Simon the Pharisee. We must distinguish between Simon the Pharisee and Simon the leper. It is not the house of Simon the leper. The woman who anointed the Lord Jesus in the house of Simon the leper had a much better atmosphere in which to serve Him; the whole atmosphere I might say was
{240}
favourable. Although Judas and some of the others complained about her, the house of Simon the leper was a favourable one, but this is the house of Simon the Pharisee, and we hear nothing of this woman except that she is here in this house. It is one of Luke's beautiful pictures. We have nothing about her history previous to that, but she had a history -- a bad one, but not all bad. There was repentance there; there was a sense of grace with her or she would never have come into that house. You have come here tonight. I hope there is somebody under conviction. If there is, you are in a better position than the house of Simon the Pharisee. It is much easier to believe in this room than in the house of Simon the Pharisee. There the atmosphere is against you, but here it is all in your favour, so it is of great importance to get into an environment like this; it is an advantage. She was in an adverse environment, but love prevailed. She loved much. Why? Because she was forgiven much. It is love of that kind. It is not put as if it were begotten by the Person of Jesus, but no one can doubt that she was a lover of Jesus. The Lord puts it as if it were a question of her forgiveness; she was forgiven much.
This brings up an important matter, that if I am seeking salvation, how much I have got to settle; for God keeps books, and He is infinitely correct in everything that He does. He keeps books, and if matters have to be settled, it is important that we should understand the sin question has to be gone into. God went into it thoroughly with Jesus at Calvary; there was nothing omitted there. God goes to the root of matters; He went so far in dealing with this matter at Calvary that He hid His face from His beloved Son. That is what He thinks of sin -- of sins, and Jesus said, "They are more than the hairs of my head", @Psalm 40: 12, a figure of the number of sins; they are all reckoned. God, as I said, is infinitely correct, and He has records; and so
{241}
it is well to remember that if we are seeking blessing from God; and I hope nobody is here without that in view. This is not a religious meeting; it is a meeting to help souls. We are here on behalf of Christ to be of service to you, and matters have to be gone into according to God. It is a question of 'much'. She was forgiven much, and she knew it. Her love is put on that account. She was forgiven much, and she loved accordingly. That is the secret of so little love amongst the people of God. There has to be the reckoning of what has gone before, and that is what God wishes to impress upon us. It is a question of the amount, and so the Lord in dealing with Simon brings up the matter of the five hundred and the fifty pence debtors, "Which of them therefore will love him most?" The point in this chapter is that the sinner has to reckon up the amount; he must go to the root of matters; God went to the root of matters, as I said, and if we are to come into the love that God looks for and values, we must go to the root of matters. Whether it be five hundred or fifty, let us go to the root of matters. It is for our blessing. God does not wish us to carry them; He is impressing upon us the importance of reckoning the amount, so that we will see the extent of the grace that He has wrought on our behalf, what Jesus suffered, what it cost Him that we might be forgiven -- for forgiveness is for sins confessed.
Now this forgiven person is a lover; that is what I want to come to, and the value of a lover here in this world, the value of a lover on account of forgiveness. For you will meet thousands of people who need forgiveness, and you say, I am a lover because of forgiveness; I can help people who need forgiveness; I measure my love by my forgiveness; you need forgiveness, and I want to tell you that I love because I have been forgiven; I want you to be forgiven, and to be forgiven is a question of reckoning up your account. What it means is judging yourself and dealing with the sin question as it is,
{242}
for "all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God". If you read the epistle to the Romans which deals with this great subject of the gospel, you will find this great question is all dealt with in its enormity, and thus our spiritual joy and blessing are bound up in our dealing with it according to that.
Well, I am almost in the position of a conscriptor for lovers of Jesus now in this world, persons who love on account of forgiveness. They understand grace. The dispensation, according to Luke, began when the Lord Jesus Christ was risen from the dead, and He appeared to Simon, as it is said. That was a man who needed forgiveness. He sinned most meanly and in a disgraceful way, and yet the Lord appeared to him first. He is going to be a most important man in the service, and it is a question of grace. He loved because he was forgiven. He loved otherwise, I know; he says, "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I am attached to thee" (@John 21: 17), and he was. He loved just on this principle; he knew grace. Nobody knew it better. And so did this woman. The Lord is asking for such. If you are forgiven tonight He wishes you to be here as one of His lovers. What will you do? If you are one of the lovers of Christ you have to love Him in an adverse scene. We shall love Him in heaven sure enough, love Him eternally, but that will not be an adverse scene. Everybody will love Him there; there are very few loving Him here.
So He turns to the woman. He does not turn to Simon, He turns to the woman and speaks to Simon. It is one of the features of Luke. He turned to His disciples, we are told in chapter 10, and now He turns to the woman. How lovely that is! I want to enlist lovers of Jesus for this town. He has His own way of doing things; He does things divinely. He is great and glorious, far beyond the conditions of anyone here, and only the Father knows Him -- for that is scripture. He is great and glorious, and does things His own way, and He has
{243}
a way of turning to one who loves Him in this town and calling other people's attention to him. How lovely that is, to have the Lord turn towards you and speak to somebody else about you. How important are lovers of Jesus, persons who love because they are forgiven! Then hear Him say to Simon, 'You did not do this, she did that'. The Lord is contrasting, He turned to the woman. She would not delay breaking bread when the time came; if she were in a town where the breaking of bread was the custom amongst the lovers of Christ, she would be amongst them. No lover of Jesus would put that off. It is His request, His desire, and no lover of Jesus will put it off. That is what the lovers of Jesus do, and He points to them.
He has His own way, as I said. He told the cleansed leper to go and shew himself to the priest "as Moses ordained, for a testimony to them". It was not for a testimony to him; it was, of course, a testimony to the priest, but "to them". It is indefinite, so that, whether people see or not, the lovers of Jesus in this town are a witness; they are a testimony "to them". And He turns towards us. How He turns towards us on the first day of the week! How blessed is the thought of having Him turn towards us and speak to other people about us. It is the principle of the gospel that there are some in this world who love Jesus, and love because they are forgiven, and He turns towards them and calls attention to what they are doing. That is the idea. I should not be here tonight did I not believe that the Lord turns towards those of us who love Him. We are of immense importance to Him, and if there is one seeking blessing here tonight I wish to press on you, and on all of us, that the Lord needs such.
Now there were those there who in their hearts opposed the Lord in this. He had already brought in the idea of the account, and now He says to the woman, "Thy sins are forgiven". He turned to her and told her that.
{244}
It may be He would say that to some one here. If there is one here whose sins are not forgiven, I would say it to you on His behalf, that is, if you have faith, for it is on the principle of faith. Forgiveness is with God; His attitude is forgiveness towards every one, but it is only for those who believe, "Righteousness of God by faith of Jesus Christ towards all and upon all those who believe", @Romans 3: 22. That is the position, and now He says, "Thy sins are forgiven". What that must have been to her. He had been talking about her love. I do not believe she would have said anything about it, but He did. The Lord knew, and He put a name to her actions, as in the case of the blind man in @John 9. He said, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he". The blind man did not understand, but the Lord knew. So she had really loved Him, and the Lord said, "Thy sins are forgiven". What a word that is! She had faith in her soul; her whole attitude and conduct shewed that she had faith. Then the opposers say, "Who is this who forgives also sins?" but the Lord just brushed it aside, paying no attention to such voices as that; they are not worth noticing, and He says to her, "Thy faith has saved thee; go in peace".
It is not faith here, you notice, as in Romans. In Romans faith is treated as a principle, but here faith is her property, and very wonderful property it is. It is said to be the gift of God. It is one of the greatest bits of property a man can hold -- "thy faith". However little, the Lord says you have enough to save you. It is on that principle, but you have it. She had it; she had that wealth; she was rich in faith. That is the point the Lord makes. I wonder if there is any one here faltering because he thinks he has not enough faith. The Lord says that what you have is enough. He speaks elsewhere of faith as a grain of mustard seed that will remove this mountain; that is the way the Lord looks at your faith. I would encourage any one here who has faith
{245}
and who is debarred from coming forward because he has not enough. The Lord says, "Thy faith"; it is what you have. Everything shewed she had it. The fact that you are here tonight would rather encourage me to believe it. Why did you come? Being here tonight, I believe the Lord credits you with it. He credits us with everything He can, and the least bit of faith in your soul is enough, "Thy faith", He says. He brushes the opposers aside; they are not worth attention, but there is that woman. She is in His mind. Somebody here is in His mind. We are all in His mind, but somebody is in His mind tonight, and He would say to you, 'Your faith has saved you; go in peace'. She is told to go, which means that she is to remain here on that principle. The Lord virtually says to her, 'I have the fullest confidence in you. I want you here so that I can point to you again'; and He did, no doubt. We never hear of her, as far as we know. Mary Magdalene may be the same, but I am not prepared to say that, she comes in the next chapter. The Lord told her to go. He would not have told her to go if she were not trustworthy. Earlier in the chapter He delivered up the young man to his mother; He did not tell him to go, but He did this woman. She was a lover and you can trust love; "Love never fails", @1 Corinthians 13: 8; and the Lord has great need of lovers in this world.
Now, in chapter 8 we have a man, and it is not now a question of love but of intelligence. When we come to the side of the man it is a question of the representation of God, and the Lord has need of that too. He has need of men in this and every town of the world who can represent Him. The woman is someone He can point to; He turned to the woman and spoke about her, but He needs men, the idea being that "where sin abounded grace has overabounded", @Romans 5: 20. That is what this man represents. He represents grace in power, not grace in affection, but in power overcoming evil in the
{246}
person. The kingdom of God is grace acting in power so as to bring about the representation of God in this world. God needs that. He needs it in the gospel field; He needs it in His service. And so they came out to see what happened to this man who had a legion of demons in him, the idea being to represent the power of Satan dominating a man, and the kingdom of God overcoming that. As the Lord says, "If I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then indeed the kingdom of God is come upon you", @Matthew 12: 28. It is a question of the kingdom of God, and that is to set up here persons to represent Him in power. They can be trusted, and so it is the side of the man.
Now, chapter 8 taken by itself gives us the three features of the composition of an assembly -- the man, the woman and the child. I have already spoken about the woman, and I only wish to speak about the man now. It is a word for every one of us, for the idea of the representation of God is of immense importance, and it is to be in those where sin abounded. The great apostle Paul is the great example of it after Christ went up into heaven. He is rescued from the power of Satan and made a mighty instrument of the power of God. That is what is needed, and if we are to continue in the service of God in the gospel, there must be on the one hand lovers of Jesus on account of forgiveness, and on the other hand persons who are intelligent and who understand how the kingdom of God has come in His Person, and how in heaven He is made Lord and Christ and has all power, and that power is operating down here and overthrowing the power of evil in me and setting me up in the power of grace. So they came out to see what had happened to this man, and they found him sitting and clothed and in his right mind. Now that is important. Sitting would suggest the Lord's day, sitting at the feet of Jesus -- the Bible-reading. Clothed, he has on the robe of righteousness; "Let thy priests be clothed with
{247}
righteousness", @Psalm 132: 9. There can be no testimony without it. We are living in very dangerous times. The great depression is exposing the people of God to unrighteousness in spite of themselves, and we can never claim immunity. Unrighteousness is unrighteousness, and there can be no testimony without righteousness. This man is sitting and clothed, and he is in his right mind. He has balance; he is going to be in the care meeting to look after the people of God; he will look after the interests of Christ; he has a balanced mind. The word is, "God has not given us the spirit of cowardice; but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion", @2 Timothy 1: 7, so much needed at the present time.
So they came out, and this is what they saw. Now, where is he to serve? He wants to be with Jesus. It does not say the woman did. I do not doubt but what she would be represented in the woman in this chapter, but that is not the point of view. She is told to go with no responsibility placed upon her; she is a lover and love will never fail. She had anointed His feet; she had washed His feet with tears and wiped them with the hairs of her head, and anointed them with ointment. She can be trusted; she will show the thing without being told to do it. What an asset for Christ in this world! Now, what is this man to do? He wants to be with Jesus. The Lord values that, but He says, "Return to thine house". Where was his house? It was in the city. This event is in the land of cities -- Decapolis. Although Luke does not mention the word, it is said elsewhere and it means ten cities. It points to the present time, the time of cities, and the more the cities the more the wickedness, you may depend on that. The whole drift of the world today is to the cities. We are told in Revelation that all the cities fell, and they will all fall -- even the great cities will fall. The world's city is characteristically Sodom -- think of Sodom! -- and Egypt -- think what Egypt means in scripture, "Where also their Lord was crucified". Can we
{248}
go in there and build ourselves up in it? That is what the world's city is; it is Sodom; that is, it represents the supreme wickedness of man. The cry of it had gone up to heaven, and God Himself came down to see what the state of Sodom was, and He found it was just what He heard it to be. It is the corruption of man. This man came out of the city we are told. He had no clothes, and was utterly shameless, and he dwelt in the tombs too, a terrible existence, driven by the demons into the desert where there were no springs of God. Such was his terrible state. That is the land of cities -- Decapolis -- and we are to be warned about them. Young people long to get into the cities. What for? Because of the wickedness, but "He knoweth not that the dead are there; and that her guests are in the depths of Sheol", @Proverbs 9: 18. That is where this man had been. A legion of demons had been there; not seven as in the case of Mary Magdalene, but a legion, and so were they possessed of him that they caused him to speak for them. But the Lord cast them out. His grace abounded, and not only abounded, but acted in power. The Lord had power to do it, and He did it, and now the man is sitting and clothed and in his right mind.
But where is he to go and bear testimony? Is he to go off with Jesus to a less wicked place? No, "Where sin abounded grace has overabounded". Where I have been converted, where I have lived a godless life, there I am to live a godly life. That is the principle. You say, he has no fellowship, there is no meeting in this place. Never mind. It is a great test. The Lord left him there with no christian fellowship. What do you think it means? It means what the power of the kingdom means. There is enough in the power of the Spirit of God to set me up here so that I can overcome evil with good. That is the thing. It is the greatness of the kingdom as developed in persons, that the person dominated by evil becomes the expression of God; he overcomes evil with
{249}
good, and that is what this man is to do. There is nothing said about fellowship. The point is what the kingdom can make one person for God in this world. The Lord made no mistake. The man not only went to the house, but into his city and told them what Jesus had done for him. If they were to ask the woman, she would tell them what He had done for her. She loved because she was forgiven. And if they were to ask this man, he would tell them "how great things Jesus had done for him", and with intelligence in righteousness. He would not be guilty of unrighteousness; he would not frequent unlawful places; he would not take on any unlawful associations. He stood alone in the power of the kingdom. How important that is, each one of us standing up, where we had dishonoured God, in the power of the kingdom of God, witnessing to it and overcoming evil with good.
Well, the Lord has great need of those two features, and if the gospel is to be blessed in our hands they must be present with us. May God grant it.
{250}
LAYING DOWN OUR LIVES FOR THE BRETHREN
@1 John 3: 16; @Esther 2: 5 - 8; @Esther 3: 8 - 10; @Esther 4: 1 - 16; @Esther 9: 29 - 32
I have read somewhat lengthily, but it is necessary in order to bring forward certain thoughts with reference to the brethren, as to whether they are regarded as worth while laying down our lives for. Their worth is obviously to be established, and John's epistle sets out the intrinsic value of the brethren: that is, they are born of God and so partakers of the divine nature; so much so that the writer of the epistle says that if one does not love his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen -- a simple statement, but of immense import as to the value of the brethren. They are products of the divine nature, and if one does not love *that* in a brother, he will not love it in God. So that a brother-hater is a God-hater.
That is what should be kept in mind in reading John's epistle. He is not dealing with externals, but with intrinsic worth, going so far as to say, "Even as *he* is, *we* also are in this world". The saints are thus peculiarly precious to God. In the midst of this world, marked as it is by hideous corruption, the saints, as manifesting His holy nature, are like refreshing green in His eye. There may be those who are merely called brethren, but that is another matter. There are those who cast stones at the real ones. And so the idea of the *Jew* enters into this, and I desire to work out that thought in Esther, linking it with the significance of the name of Jew as seen in the New Testament.
If we take the gospel of John, it is a term that denotes religious opposition. But then the apostle Paul has clarified the name, so that it has real worth. He says, "he is not a Jew who is one outwardly, ... but he is a Jew who is so inwardly; and circumcision, of the heart,
{251}
in spirit, not in letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God", @Romans 2: 28, 29. I am not speaking of literal Jews but rather of professed christians. For the Lord, in addressing Philadelphia, @Revelation 3, speaks of them as such, "Who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie".
Well, what I have said indicates the idea of the Jew in the mind of God and I wish to work it out through the book of Esther. It is exemplified in Mordecai, that is, one who lays down his life for the brethren; indeed, in this he is a leader. There are many senses in which we may be leaders, and Mordecai is a leader in laying down his life for the brethren. In a striking way he leads another; I refer to Esther, who, being a woman, represents more than herself; she represents the subjective principle, that is, the capability of being led; and led on to actual surrender of herself for the brethren. The youngest here can enter into this, for Hadassah is a young person as she is introduced to us, and one capable of being influenced by another in the right direction. We are all capable of being influenced in the wrong direction; it is a thing to be watched, even by older ones, that we may not come under influences that are inimical to fellowship, the peace of the brethren and the progress of our own souls; that we see to it that our companionship is wholesome, for if I company with a person who is stronger minded, and he or she has unwholesome proclivities, I shall certainly be damaged, for "evil communications corrupt good manners", @1 Corinthians 15: 33.
Now, Mordecai was a Jew. That is how he is introduced to us; and, so that there should be no mistake as to his genuineness, we get his pedigree. Pedigree has a great place in Scripture. It has a considerable place among men, too, but in Scripture it has a spiritual significance; it means that I establish my genuineness as a believer. I must do that, or the brethren are sure to be chary of me. It is extremely difficult to determine some,
{252}
and so the apostle Peter stands out in @Acts 8 in his discernment, which is one of the scarcest things among the people of God; the discerning of good and evil is rare, and especially when we have to do with persons of 'education'; they may elude our sensibility unless we are much with God in prayer. Simon was detected by Peter, who says, "Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter". What those who seek to keep the Lord's commandments are going on with is very great, whatever the opinion of men may be. Nehemiah said, "I am doing a great work", and it is a sorrowful thing if anyone is found with neither part nor lot in it.
And so the Holy Spirit gives us the genealogy of this man: he is a real Jew, and would measure up with the apostle's requirements. He was a Jew inwardly, and the first feature is that he looks after his relative, a cousin. Not that our brethren who are not walking with us are only our cousins; although in a *practical* way, many among them are such and removed even five or six times! Esther was Mordecai's near cousin, and her father and mother had died. It refers to spiritual condition: a person bereft of protection. She was left fatherless and motherless, but she had a cousin, and he proved to be "a brother ... born for adversity", @Proverbs 17: 17. He behaves himself towards this relative becomingly, which is an important matter, indeed it is a feature of the book of Esther, that all things are done in a seemly way. The book teaches us spiritual seemliness, so that we may know how to behave ourselves in certain circumstances. External circumstances are constantly varying, so we must know how to act.
The name of God is not mentioned in this book, indicating that certain conditions among the people of God necessitate that He cannot openly identify Himself with them. As we shall see, Mordecai and Esther recognise this and behave accordingly. Things are to be done in a seemly way, as determined by the attitude
{253}
of God toward His people. Mordecai is all the time the brother, and he has in view that which signifies that he is ready to lay down his life for the brethren. It is well to inquire as to how we regard our spiritual relations. This passage puts us under obligations to *all* our brethren. That is our position. How are we acting toward them? Mordecai brought Esther up as his own daughter, and looked after her with tenderness. This is a very practical matter, if we qualify here, we begin with the establishment of our identity as Jews, that is, as genuine christians. And then the affections that become us flow, as God gives us opportunity in relation to all those that are His.
I want now to shew how the brethren are regarded in this world. It is seen in Haman's representation to the king. Such a man as Haman, of course, will only say what suits himself. He is an aspiring politician, and will go to any length to get this hated people out of the way. He is representative of the devil and hates the name of the people of God. His ire is raised by the faithfulness of Mordecai, the leader in this great principle of laying down our lives for the brethren, "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us; and we ought for the brethren to lay down our lives". Mordecai is moving in the lead the Lord has given, and he is leading another in it, as we shall see. To aspire to leadership in this sense is right, therefore; not that it gives me prominence, but it helps others. As seen here it is a reflection of Jesus: He laid down His life. It is a question of love, and it is portrayed in Mordecai, under the most distressing circumstances.
Let us just picture ourselves in Haman's speech. It is humbling and hence sobering to see ourselves thus; but how different to see ourselves as God sees us! To get a real view, as in John's epistle, of the saints viewed as born of Him. But it is a wholesome thing to hear what the enemy says about us, about those who are real Jews;
{254}
who are not simply saying that they are real, but are circumcised in the heart and spirit, whose praise is of God. How great a thing it is to be praised of God! God may *not* praise us. Paul says, "I do not praise". The real Jews are praised of God. Haman says, "There is a people scattered abroad and dispersed among the peoples in all the provinces of thy kingdom; and their laws are diverse from those of every people, and they keep not the king's laws; and it is not for the king's profit to suffer them. If it please the king, let it be written that they may be destroyed", @Esther 3: 8. How the enemy regards us is a heart-searching matter, and it comes out in one way or another. I may be a mouthpiece of the enemy in this respect, speaking against the Lord's people, speaking of them rashly and loosely, speaking of their conduct with unmeasured terms. Let us be fair with the brethren; let us not be their accusers *characteristically*, or we shall be on the side of Satan. If we have to deal with their sins, let us, as the Lord says, "judge righteous judgment".
Although this speech of Haman's was in the main false, it was sufficient to influence the king, and all such false accusations are damaging. They are sure to damage the minds of certain persons, even some who are not disposed against the brethren. It is a terrible thing to influence others against the people of God. That is what Haman did; to the end, indeed, that the king ordered a decree to go forth that they should be destroyed. Haman had ten sons, and he and his sons were hanged. The government of God goes on. It may take days or weeks or years; but the government of God will overtake its object; and as surely as the sun rose. Haman was hanged on his own gallows, also his ten sons. Let us be on our guard not to be on the side of false accusations. Every matter that has to be adjudicated among the people of God has to be done rightly. Is it true or only partially true? It is our salvation that this spirit of judgment should be amongst us, otherwise the position would
{255}
become so that the Lord would not go with us, and that is what the enemy is aiming at.
We are told here that Mordecai knew all that was done. A terrible position had come about for the brethren, scattered throughout one hundred and twenty-seven provinces. The king and Haman were careless, sitting down to drink, but the city was in consternation. God was moving. God always moves at the right time, although He may not shew His face. The consternation of the city of Shushan was due to Him! I am thinking of Mordecai. What will he do now? Will he continue to be a true brother? Jesus said, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go away". He stood out: ready to lay down His life for His own. It is for us to perceive the love and let it have its reflection in us. Mordecai is equal to this: he comes into the public position, clothed in sackcloth. He is a true Jew and he is not concealing it: he is identifying himself with his brethren, as appointed to destruction.
But then, what will Esther do? That is the next question. What will you young people here do? Will you shrink backward or will you take your place openly with the brethren, as in affliction? You need grace to be definite, especially if you have any little status in this world. Esther had a great position, she was the queen. The influence of a wife or a son or daughter may modify one's stand with the brethren. If we are not to be influenced by our wives, or sons, or daughters, we must take a firm stand and keep on the sackcloth. She sent other raiment to Mordecai, as if to modify the position, but he directs Hatach to go to Esther and tell her that it is imperative that she should intercede with the king. The salvation of the brethren hinges on it. He sent her word in effect 'Do not think that you will escape if the enemy gets the advantage. You and your father's house will suffer, too. We are bound up together. The Jews are proscribed, and although you are in the palace, you will not escape'.
{256}
So he influenced Esther to take her stand with the brethren. It is a triumph indeed to influence a brother or sister, young or old, who is disposed to go in the wrong direction, to take a stand for what is of God. To deliver souls we must stand firmly. Mordecai brought Esther round. She says, 'Let us fast!' In the book of Daniel it would be, 'Let us pray!' Daniel and the three with him prayed to God and God heard them. It was prayer; Daniel is marked by that. But here God is hiding His face, and so Esther and Mordecai are acting in a comely manner. So she says, "Fast for me, ... I also and my maidens will fast likewise". We need this if we are going to stand in a crisis. And when I say a crisis, I mean that a position in the testimony of God is a crisis from beginning to end. Issues constantly arise. It is constant conflict. How are we going to stand? By fasting.
Esther says, "If I perish, I perish". That is a fine speech, but Mordecai brought her to it. She is brought to it by *leadership*. The Lord is calling for leaders, those who will go before and expose themselves, like Mordecai, in the open and like Esther in the king's palace. She has her life in her hands, as had Mordecai, but victory was granted them. The story of Esther is well known, but this is the point, "If I perish, I perish". Satan said of Job, "Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life". But the Lord Jesus gave His life. He laid it down. So we are to lay down our lives for the brethren -- this scattered and feeble people, whose very name is a reproach. As the name "Hebrew" in the days of Moses, so the name "Jew" was a reproach in the days of Mordecai. But he and Esther regard the Jews as their brethren, and they take their lives in their hands, to lay them down for them. God will honour the spirit of laying down our lives for the brethren.
The closing verses are to show how persons who lead in this way are epoch makers, landmark makers. The feast of Purim became a fixed one, as if to honour the devotedness
{257}
of these two persons. And I believe everyone in the history of the church who has in like manner come forward as a leader has this distinction in some sense. We are not to move the landmarks our fathers have set up. These verses indicate that Esther and Mordecai would be regarded as landmark makers, "And queen Esther the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all authority to confirm this second letter of Purim. And he sent letters to all the Jews ... words of peace and truth, to confirm these days of Purim in their fixed times, ... and as they had decreed for themselves and for their seed ... And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim: and it was written in the book". Heaven is interested in the doings of the saints. Accounts are kept of the exploits of the saints, as were the exploits of David's mighty men, and amongst them will be those landmark makers who have turned the tide in the favour of the people of God. The divine stamp was on their work. Through these two, the people are overwhelmingly delivered, the victory over their enemies being great. This may come about with any of us who resolves to take his life in his hands on behalf of the brethren. Mordecai and Esther taking this ground, the victory was secured, the feast established, and the landmark made.
May God lay these things on our hearts! God speaks to us and puts things upon us. These scriptures have a voice to us: "for the brethren to lay down their lives". They are *worth* dying for!
{258}
SPIRITUAL FEELINGS
@John 12: 27 - 32; @John 13: 21 - 26; @John 11: 33 - 38
The word 'trouble' occurs in each of these scriptures, calling attention to the Lord's feelings in respect of the circumstances given. I wish to speak of these, not merely in their abstract character, but as having a bearing on us. Scripture always has a current bearing, and while these scriptures afford food for the deepest and holiest contemplation of our Lord Himself, they bear on like circumstances now, so that Christ becomes expressed in a relative way in those who, like Him, feel such circumstances, as they may be in them. I may add here that the understanding of any scripture requires that we must be in some sense in the circumstances to which it applies. The things of God are never taken up in a merely academic way, but as one is in the circumstances, either in spirit or actually, to which any scripture applies, one understands it. We are certainly in circumstances corresponding with these three scriptures, at least in some sense; whether we have weighed them, whether we have measured them, whether indeed we have taken account of them at all, is the question for each heart. As soon as we take account of what is current in relation to Christ and His people, we shall find occasions of deep feeling. Occasions of joy, thank God, are not wanting, but also occasions of sorrow. As we begin to weigh things as they bear on Christ and His people, placing ourselves in the circumstances as He would, or as He did, we shall begin to find movements of feelings such as are depicted as in Him.
It is a poor thing, dear brethren, if we should be behind the saints of Old Testament times. In the Old Testament we have a whole book devoted to the expression of feelings of sorrow. I do not refer to the Psalms; they indeed afford wonderful evidence of the deepest feeling, the Spirit of Christ taking account of
{259}
circumstances, whether existing actually or anticipatively, and expressing feelings correspondingly. I refer to the book of Lamentations. We have no book exactly like it in the New Testament, but that does not mean that there is not that which corresponds with it in our times, for there is. No dispensation is equal to this, and the richness of feeling that properly belongs to the assembly exceeds all feelings found in others. It must be so, for the assembly is no less than the body of Christ, and as His body has His own feelings worked out in it, and that on the highest level. So that normally saints of the assembly, as placing themselves in relation to Christ, will not fail to express these feelings. The book of Lamentations indeed points to assembly feelings. The first allusion in the book is to the city -- the city that had been full of people -- made desolate. We cannot quite say that now; we cannot speak, thank God, of absolute desolation; yet there is something that corresponds. There was a time in which this suggestion applied, when hardly any assembly feature was apparent; such was the desolation. Jeremiah alludes to the captivity, not only of the ten tribes, but of Judah; that is to say, complete desolation; and that rightly measured, not by merely natural sorrow, but by the Spirit of Christ in an intelligent man like Jeremiah who weighed things in relation to God. It was not simply that the nations had come up in their ferocity and destroyed Israel; no, it was a question of the judgment of God, "Is it nothing to you ... ?" says the Spirit of Christ in the prophet, "Behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow". But who caused it? It was that which Jehovah caused in the day of His wrath. Such is the kind of sorrow, beloved, that God values, the sorrow that takes account of the righteous, governmental action of God. There was no sorrow then like it. It was the Spirit of Christ in the prophet. So today, surely, we are not to be behind Jeremiah in the feelings of Christ as regards is
{260}
what is dear to His heart -- the public condition that marks the assembly.
Now. I want to show how these three scriptures set out three particular occasions of sorrow: first, in regard to the judgment of God, an element that is never to be at a distance from us. Those who love God respect His judgment; they never keep it out of view; they never hide it; they never forget that "*our God* is a consuming fire". The first scripture has reference to that. The second scripture has reference to the failure of a brother -- the betrayer, indeed, in this case; for while I am speaking of Judas as a brother, which he was ostensibly, he was at the same time the son of perdition. Here he is viewed as one of the twelve. Then the third scripture refers to the consequences of the government of God *on others*. The bearing of the first two is on oneself, how oneself may be affected; the bearing of the third is on others, how others are affected.
Now I refer to the first scripture -- perhaps one of the most solemn -- the nearest we get in John to the forsaking. My object is not to dwell on the forsaking or the work of atonement so much as to call attention to Christ in these circumstances, that we in our respective little measures may know how to hold ourselves, and how to move and act in circumstances similar, however small the measure may be -- circumstances which occasion the direct dealings of God; not, indeed, in our case as retribution, but as discipline. No one who has to do with the assembly will fail to recognise that such circumstances constantly arise. We have to learn everything from Christ, not only by what He says, but by what He does, and by what He is, in any given circumstances. This wonderful chapter is full of precious testimony, corresponding with the last days, for they were the last moments of His life in public testimony.
We do well to put ourselves in the circumstances of chapter 12, beginning with Bethany, the place of love.
{261}
There is a ray of glory centring in that village; and when I speak of Bethany it is not to speak of something at a distance, but rather to show the place of love. Bethany is that; it is the place of sorrow, indeed, but it is the place of love; and wherever there is such a place we shall find a ray of glory shining out. God would take advantage of what there might be in our gatherings to cause His glory to shine. We see the Lord moving into Jerusalem on an ass of His own selection, His own finding. Each of us surely would place himself so that the Lord might find him, and through him ride into His capital, as it were. It is not a question of bringing the believer into the assembly, but of bringing Christ in, and of bringing Him in gloriously, involving that one is wholly at His bidding, wholly available for His finding; for He makes use of no one in this gospel to find the ass; He finds it Himself. Let no one think that he is hidden from the eyes of those who might push him forward and give him a place. You are not hidden away from the eyes of Jesus, and He will not fail to find you, if you are available, and He will use you for this very purpose. As He rides into His capital upon the ass they acclaim Him. How glorious is the honour involved in the figure of being used of Christ in this way to enter into His capital. His own city! The incident according to John was to be understood when He arose from the dead, and entered into heaven; we are told explicitly that the disciples did not understand it then; they did not understand it until Jesus was glorified. Jesus *is* glorified, beloved; we are in the time of understanding all things. There is nothing outside of our range now of what God would have His people to know. Jesus is glorified, the Holy Spirit is here, and every occurrence among us is to be understood.
The Greeks come up, and when Andrew and Philip serve in relation to them, the Lord says, "The hour is come that the Son of man *should* be glorified". But how?
{262}
What questions arise in this glorious chapter! *How* is the Son of man to be glorified? He must fall into the ground and die; so that the Greeks are to be had by Him, not on their own terms, but on His. Naturally, they would make their terms, for they had much to their credit according to man; but the Lord is to have them on His own terms. Let no one work on national lines; it is all coming to nothing, and all that goes with it. All the national glory of today is coming to nothing. "He that loves his life shall lose it; and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life eternal", verse 25. Then the Lord says, "Now is my soul troubled"; that is to say, with regard to all that had come into view; the riding into Jerusalem and the Greeks. In spite of outward appearances the judgment of God rested on it all. Was that nothing? What did Jesus think of it? Why was His soul troubled? He was facing all that. There was the judgment of God; no one could weigh it as He did, and so He says, "Father, save me from this hour". I mean to convey to you, dear brethren, that in a like circumstance, however little it may be like it, the question arises, what is one to think? One *cannot* but recoil from the judgment of God, even though it be discipline. One cannot but feel the hand of God; it is right to feel it; it is right to be troubled about it. It is the troubled brother that will get the relief; it is the troubled brother who will become the leader out of it, and will glorify God in it. Is God to gain any glory out of it? Is this a mere incident? No, dear brethren; nothing happens incidentally or accidentally in the assembly. It is a question of the house of God and the glory of God. But who is to feel these things? How is God to be glorified in a circumstance save by my feeling it and being troubled about it; not because it affects me exactly, but because of its general bearing. Things do affect me, even though I have not had a hand in the occasion, and I cannot but feel their effect. If I feel it, I am troubled;
{263}
and if I am troubled I speak to God; and if I am in the presence of God I say to Him: I am *here* because of this. I do not wish I were somewhere else. If I am in the midst of the trouble, I am here because of it, so as to glorify God in it. That is how the Lord felt in regard of it: He said, "Father, glorify thy name"; and immediately the answer from heaven is, "I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again". Is that not encouraging? It is God's habit to glorify His name; He has done it a thousand times. How great it is to have any little part in the glorification of the name of God. Jesus had part in this supremely. How could God be glorified on earth without Jesus? But now the Spirit of Jesus is here, for that is the great thought as corresponding to Old Testament times. It was the Spirit of Christ, then going backwards, now going forwards. But much greater is the thought now that the Spirit of Christ is here, even the Holy Spirit Himself is here indwelling us. How great a thing it is to be in any little circumstance, however small, into which the glory of God enters -- the government of God, the discipline, and then the glory of God, and the assurance that God has glorified His name, and will do it, and will keep on doing it.
Let us have ears to hear that voice from heaven. I am not over-straining the passage, dear brethren. There is the voice from heaven; the Holy Spirit is here, and He is constantly speaking. There were those who said it was thundering; they had the natural ear, an ear untrained in the things of God. It is a very important matter that we should know how to try words and sounds. The natural ear is untrained. Some said it thundered, speaking of the Father's voice. Was it thunder to Jesus? No, it was the Father's voice to Jesus. Others said, An angel spoke. They were nearer the mark, but it was the Father's voice. The Lord said, "Not on my account has this voice come, but on
{264}
yours". What happened was for a testimony, for an example; it is for us. In what precedes, there is the suggestion that God will bring us all into it; it is the idea of bringing people into it. The testimony is going on, and the passage would bring us into it; and this involves a trained ear, so that we discern the voice. Then the Lord adds, "Now is the judgment of this world". He was troubled, not indeed because of that, but because of His part in it; He was to go through the thing vicariously. He bore the full weight of divine wrath; He had that in His mind. But that did not set aside the judgment of the world. The vicarious sufferings are for faith; only those who have faith come into the good of them -- no others. The world remains, although it be regarded as reconciled for the moment. The judgment exists, although not at present applied; but we see the relation of the judgment of God to the current developments of this world. Take it as it stands: "Now is the judgment of this world", and apply it to any given circumstance among us, dear brethren; it means that God passes over nothing. Moses says, "blot me ... out of thy book", @Exodus 32: 32. No, God says, the man that sins shall be blotted out of My book. Let no one think he will escape; the sins will be written there, and if not judged now, he will come under the hand of God; and God's judgment is inexorable. He will find out the sinner; nothing will be left unsettled in all these matters; we may be sure of that.
"Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince if this world be cast out". The prince is to be judged. How comforting that is to faith! What an incentive to us to take each his place in the circumstance, and go through it with God; and we shall become vessels of divine glory. "I both have glorified it, and will glorify it again". The sin will be dealt with, and the author of the sin will be dealt with, for God will leave nothing unsettled.
{265}
The next passage is a question of the defaulting of a brother. No one can be in Judas's place exactly now; not that there is not such a thing in the history of the assembly as betrayal; I think there is, but it is more a question of a system. God would have us to discern the Judas feature in the history of the assembly. He would have us discern the denial, too -- the denial of Peter, for that also applies to the history of the assembly. I am now speaking of incidents in which we find defaulting brethren. How are we to act? One great feature in chapter 13 is to bring out what the brethren are to be to one another. My soul is troubled at the activity against me. I am sorry for the person, too; the person who offends is a greater object of pity than the person offended; you may be certain of that. The more spiritual I am, the more I shall regret any offence offered to me, not because it affects me, but because it damages the offender. The Lord was on this line. How He would have Judas! His heart is unchanged; He gave Him the sop. But He says, "one of *you*". How searching that is! That is to say, the principle applies at any time in regard of the capability of our hearts to betray; the more spiritual we are, the more we shall discern the meanness of our natural hearts, and how easily one may come under the influence of the devil without the least thought of so doing. Moses was told to cast his rod on the earth and let it go; and as soon as it was released from the hand of God, as it were, the rod became a serpent. How solemn that is! How important it is to search our hearts, and hold ourselves in relation to God! If I seek to extricate myself from the hand of God I come under the influence of the devil immediately -- a most solemn matter. Then I put my hand in my bosom, and it comes out leprous, showing what is there. It is that we might judge what is there, and not trust it for a moment. That is the principle of @John 13, "One of you", the Lord says -- one of such persons. The most honoured men who ever
{266}
trod the earth were these twelve men. One of such men, the Lord says, shall betray me. How am I to act in circumstances like that? The Lord gave Judas the sop. There is nothing in the way of hardness with Christ in these circumstances; He would bring out how unchanged He was, that He was not going to allow Himself to be affected by the terrible situation. He remained Himself; that is the thing, that one is sober and balanced, and holds oneself in that spirit, keeping oneself in the love of God by praying in the Holy Spirit.
The third thing is how a thing affects the brethren. Trouble or sorrow arising amongst us is like a pebble cast into a pond; the circle widens, and widens, and widens. In chapter 11 it is the Lord's feelings in regard of the effect of sin on others. It is not sin or judgment in which He had His own part vicariously; that is chapter 12. In chapter 11 all this trouble arises from what He saw in others. He saw Mary weeping, and He saw the Jews weeping, and He was troubled. Am I callous, or am I tender in my affections and feelings in regard to what I see in others? Others are feeling things. Jesus was troubled because of the effect of the incident on Mary and on the Jews. How much of that we see now!
How the dear brethren are troubled by certain things that happen! Is it nothing to me -- am I a mere passer-by? "Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by?" @Lamentations 1: 12. I cannot be like that; Jesus was not like that. It *was* His matter, but the feelings that arose in His blessed heart and mind were occasioned by what He saw in *others*, by what He saw in Mary and in the Jews. It is to bring out the wonderful character of His humanity, and the depth of feeling that belonged to it. He was troubled; He groaned in spirit; and then, beloved -- how it touches the heart -- *Jesus wept*. He was just like the others in that respect, though the word for weeping here, as applied to Jesus, is not 'wailing'; it is nothing forced or determined in the way of emotion. It is just
{267}
tears -- tears coming up spontaneously, from the very depths of His being. Such is Jesus! The others wailed, rightly so, but He wept. He was brought into what existed feelingly.
The Lord was moved by the feelings of others; and that surely should affect me, so that I cannot be callous as to the suffering of others. If I can help in regard to the removal of what is troubling them, I am prepared to do it, "Where have ye put him?" says the Lord. He came to the tomb; and they said that Lazarus was four days dead already; corruption had begun. It was a hard matter in their minds; but Jesus came to the tomb, and He groaned at the tomb. He was not indifferent to the hardness of the matter. He knew how hard it was; but it was not too hard. He was equal to it; and so, beloved, if we face things, He will make us equal to them. He did what others could not do; but what others *could* do in this incident, He let them do. He said, "Lazarus, come forth". He left it to others to take off the graveclothes. I suppose if the Lord is acting, one has little more to do than to remove the grave-clothes; and the first thing is to remove the handkerchief that is around his face. Let us look at the brother; let us see his face; let us see him as he is! It was the handkerchief that was "bound round" his face; it was not on his head, as in the Lord's own case. In chapter 20 it is "the handkerchief which was upon his head", not about His face, as in chapter 11. It is a question, not of headship, but of the value of a brother, what he is like to look at; he is worth looking at. We cannot afford to lose the brother, he is so valuable; that is the idea.
The Lord would have us to be a feeling people; and if we feel things as He did, we shall have victory after victory, and God will glorify His name, and will glorify it again and again.
{268}
THE WATER OF PURIFICATION
@Numbers 19; @1 Kings 7: 23 - 39
Comparison of the thoughts of the sea and the laver in 1 Kings, with what we find in @Numbers 19, brings out the difference between what exists in the assembly viewed in its heavenly relations and what is provided for its members in the wilderness. In the former we have volume -- the sea "held two thousand baths", and the ten lavers each "contained forty baths;" the sea is stationary, the lavers are movable. Both the sea and the bases which sustain the lavers convey the thought of great ornamentation -- richness of thought and feeling, love in the administration of cleansing; whereas in Numbers, instead of quantity we have running water; it is living, active, and we have ashes; the running water is put upon them for cleansing.
Consideration of these matters will perhaps help us, especially in seaside resorts such as this where we are now. Numbers has to do with our external movements, so we have much made of *death* -- a dead man, a dead bone -- and the need for cleanness because of defilement from these -- not so much holiness as cleanness; we cannot have holiness without cleanness, but cleanness is not such a strong thought as holiness, but it precedes holiness. The latter stands in connection with our inward state and the other with our outward actions. The ashes are not said to be in a holy place, but in a clean place. A clean man looks after the ashes: "they shall take of the ashes of the burnt heifer of purification for sin, and running water shall be put thereto in a vessel", verse 17. The priestly side is recognised in the beginning. The teaching here generally applies to the believer in his outward relations, and our outward movements should be kept clean enough not to interfere with our enjoyment in the place of privilege. It does not call so much for special spirituality; it is teaching intended to be
{269}
intelligible to the youngest believer, so that each one should be *clean*. A clean person can serve God. Running water is suggestive of the Spirit -- we must not grieve Him.
The ashes are the testimony to the death of Christ, in which He endured the wrath of God for us. The heifer was *burnt* outside the camp. It was a sin-offering. Eleazar was the acting priest, "And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger, and sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacle of the congregation seven times: and one shall burn the heifer in his sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall he burn: and the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer".
These three things represent the world in its bigness, its littleness, and its glory. This is a special view of the death of Christ; it is for cleansing in the wilderness. It stands by itself. Aaron being still alive, Eleazar here represents the great spiritual element in the saints. The very colour of the heifer is peculiar -- it is all a question of God maintaining the saints in affection for Himself in spite of defiling conditions of the wilderness through which we pass. The female here denotes that love in relation to the sanctuary is to be maintained in the saints.
Why is it a *red* heifer? Red is a *noticeable* colour -- it is not so dazzling as scarlet, but it attracts the eye; it alludes to Christ's *distinctiveness* as in this world. The Lord was distinctive here. Whether you are on the beach or in the water, you must be different from other people. The Lord was always different.
We should note particularly the distinction between @Numbers 19 and 1 Kings; in the latter we have the greatness of the volume of the means of cleansing. The ornamentation is on the *bases* of the lavers -- what wealth is provided for the saints in the assembly in its heavenly relations!
We get in 2 Corinthians the saints espoused as a
{270}
chaste virgin to Christ; so it says, in 1 Corinthians, "such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified", chapter 6: 11. In Ephesians it is the washing of the assembly as the object of Christ's love -- that is the heavenly side. What thoughts Christ would have of the assembly in thus serving her! All these are denoted in the ornamentation of the sea. The Lord would flood our souls with these great thoughts of what He thinks of us, as He cleanses us.
"Upon which never came yoke", @Numbers 19, illustrates that the assembly is completely for another. We are delivered from the law by the body of Christ -- He never came under the yoke. The assembly viewed abstractly has not come under the yoke, but severally we *have* come under it. How thoroughly different from all others the Lord was in this world! How easily we come under worldly influence! The gracious provisions for cleansing are most encouraging.
You have not to go to a specially spiritual brother. Of course the priest must be there, but if anything happens to you the ashes are available to yourself. Any christian who has the Spirit can apply the means of cleansing seen here, "A clean man shall take hyssop, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle it on ... him that hath touched the bone". It is just a clean person who serves, not one of the sons of Aaron here. This makes the means of cleansing more available.
Peter appropriated this means of cleansing in his own experience -- when he remembered the word of the Lord he went out and wept bitterly. Mark tells us this. The Lord did not look on Peter in Mark. The *word* affected him. Any of us should be able to remember the word when we get defiled. In this chapter God graciously makes things convenient for a low state of spirituality. You can act for yourself and judge yourself at once even when there is no priest available. Thus the ashes are just in a clean place, not in the tabernacle.
{271}
A meeting like this is more than a clean place -- two or three brothers or sisters speaking together in a holy way create a clean place. In this way it is possible to establish in the most ordinary circumstances conditions in the wilderness which make us superior to it.
The ashes witnessed that the fire had been effective; the scarlet and hyssop and cedar wood had all been consumed in the burning of the heifer. It is a sin-offering; it is burnt outside the camp. I am liable to act as others around me if I do not observe these principles.
The name Eleazar fits peculiarly here: it means "the help of God".
As springing from the priestly stock, spiritually we can shed this influence, compare @Galatians 6: 1. Saints coming in contact with one another can create a clean atmosphere. We can be in places and do things that others are doing, but we can do them *differently*, that is, after the pattern of Christ, and hence be a testimony.
"Be not conformed to this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind", @Romans 12: 2. The difference works out from the mind. What is depicted here is for the mind to contemplate -- the way the Lord went into death to close up for the glory of God man's world.
The cedar wood, the scarlet and the hyssop all have to be burnt -- they mark what I am naturally. Even the priest is defiled by the burning of the heifer -- it is to stress that sin is *so* bad -- and the Lord Jesus was *made* sin for us. So I am not to find five minutes self-gratification in what put Jesus on the cross.
The contagion of sin is emphasised here; but the water of purification is ever available for us, and we find it practically among the saints -- it is the superior thing -- the testimony of the death of Christ that God has established in us by the Spirit.
A day is mentioned here, and three days and seven
{272}
days. There is a thought of a penalty. Scripture does not dwell on penalty in this sense, but you cannot shake off defilement in a second. You have to go through the needed exercise.
There is however a death penalty attached to the disregard of this cleansing, verse 13. It is not on account of getting unclean, but on account of *neglecting* to use the means of cleansing. It is judging yourself, but it is more than that -- there is a process to go through. Peter went out and wept bitterly, but he was not really cleansed till the incident in @John 21.
A defiled person not only affects himself but also those he comes in contact with. It is the contagion of the thing that is emphasised. How very strong the judgment is! "He shall bring it outside the camp, and one shall *slaughter* it before him".
The blood is not taken into the sanctuary, but sprinkled before the tent of meeting. It refers to that side of the sin-offering that is within the range of my apprehension in these circumstances. The further into the sanctuary I go the deeper my apprehension of the death of Christ is, but what is done outside is seen by all -- God graciously comes down to a low state of soul. It is not dependent on my depth of knowledge; by faith I see the blood has been applied. I am fit for approach though my stature may be small. Therefore there may be things we go on with for years and have never understood their character, but they may be dealt with before God when it is perceived. A sin of ignorance is a sin nevertheless, and must be judged when it is perceived.
As one gets older and reviews one's past actions one realises that they were more offensive to God than the believer judged them to be at the time of committal. As we walk with God our sense of holiness and corresponding judgment of sin increases.
The sense of divine forgiveness makes you feel that you will never forgive yourself, and the more you have
{273}
been forgiven the more you love Christ. The woman in @Luke 7 had a terrible history, but she loved much because she was forgiven much. We may say she took account of the red heifer; she saw that Christ was different from everyone else, and said, 'I would like to be like Him'.
We should notice here the remarkable place that deadness has -- "the dead body of a man that is dead". Coming in contact with a dead bone, we might say, is unavoidable; but what does it mean spiritually? Why should I be in the place of the dead? Christians do not die, compare @John 11: 25, 26. Why should I be among those who do?
The heifer would bring in the thought of tender sensibilities with us, and if I have been in association with a man who is overtaken by the judgment of God, I have not had those sensibilities. "He knoweth not that the dead are there", @Proverbs 9: 18. Who *are* the people who are liable to death? Not christians -- we belong to the living.
The man slain in the open field suggests a wide thought. The christian can find no excuse for contact with him. Why should I be there? He has died by violence. I belong to the realm of peace.
The general thought of female creatures for offerings is of affection. All here has to go: from the great thing, the cedar, to the small thing, the hyssop; both are objectionable.
The other side of the truth, in Kings, is glorious. You are in the realm of the heavenly order of things. Its greatness is even an incentive to keep you clean. 1 Kings promotes a moral elevation.
@John 13 accords with this line: "part with me".
The sea, according to Chronicles, held three thousand baths; it is the thought of its capacity; but we see from Kings there were at least two thousand *all* the time -- there is plenty of water.
{274}
There are ten verses of description of the bases of the lavers, stressing their beautification. Then they have wheels -- love uses this convenience to bring them to you -- they are moveable. God is so concerned about the matter of cleansing that He has provided all this. The oxen under the sea speak of the patience of Christ in maintaining the means of cleansing.
The *ten* lavers suggest the sense of the responsibility which love would maintain. While there is plenty of water there, some may neglect it. So the laver must be wheeled to such, "If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet". He would go round to the disciples and wash their feet (@John 13: 14) -- love was acting. The lily blossoms suggest purity and life. The colocynths suggest beautification. This glorious heavenly system is full of holy dignifying thoughts. The very thought of coming to a meeting like this makes one feel differently -- the thought of belonging to a system like this in Kings is in itself purifying. These ornamental features are to promote holy, heavenly sentiments in the saints. The whole system of things under Solomon in Kings is intended to promote spiritual elevation and refined sentiments. The sea is on the right side. This may suggest fortification against special pressure. The right side was the north.
One great thing in ministry is to bring the saints into an understanding of their calling. It has a very purifying and dignifying and refining effect. The bases of the ten lavers are in keeping with the magnificence of the place -- the *setting* of the water of purification. You do not take the laver and carry it away from the bases; you will affect the man you would serve if you take all these beautiful things to him. This is the grand system of things we are connected with. Peter and John say, "Look on us" -- the ornamentation was there. The person who takes the water is to enhance the thing; he
{275}
suggests the greatness of the system. Wheels suggest power to travel easily in love; there is no fuss religiously.
The Lord's movements in @John 13 exemplify what we are saying, "He ... laid aside his garments". He is not standing over His own as an official, but as one lower than they are. He is serving in holy moral dignity. The height of a wheel is a cubit and a half; it corresponds with one of the measurements of the ark; the half means that there is always *more*. If you are going to help a soul, whatever you may take there is always more than that, for love *never* fails.
The wheels would be well oiled -- there would be no creaking! You would not seek to make out that it has cost you a great deal to come to a man to help him.
We should weigh over the apparently complicated description of the bases. I do not suppose we shall ever understand them until we correspond with them.
{276}
THE TRUE LIGHT
@John 1: 4 - 8; @John 8: 12 - 14; @1 John 2: 8
I have been thinking of light, the true light, which is said to lighten every man. However much is said of light in the Scriptures and however important it may be, in the divine thought men are in view. God ever worked in the light in what He did. So that at the outset the first need was that there should be light. God begins there, "Let there be light: and there was light". The operations which followed, proceeded in the light; they were seen in relation to one another. As day after day developed, the divine thoughts became clearer, and were obviously coordinated -- always in the light.
When we come to John's gospel, we have the divine mind as to light. It had man in view; every man, not simply as a race, but each member of the race, whatever his nationality or antecedents. Every race was in the divine mind in regard to the light, that all might come unto it. God never operated in the dark, hence we find that when God laid the foundations of the earth, those present, as I may say, knew what He was doing, although God does not always give account of His matters, yet in the laying of the foundations, intelligent beings were cognisant of what was proceeding. He has not been pleased to give account of many of the things which are visible, the physical phenomena; that is kept within His prerogative. At the same time, all has been done in the light. Those present understood, so that we are told that "the morning stars sang together", @Job 38: 7. Blessed unity is seen even then. You may be sure that whatever is alluded to, they were engaged with the same thing, they sang together with understanding also. They knew something of what God was doing, and then it adds, "all the sons of God shouted for joy", alluding surely to mature beings, persons of intelligence -- they were all
{277}
interested, and so much so that they "shouted for joy". They understood. It was all in the light.
In the eighth chapter of Proverbs where God's operations are enlarged on, it says wisdom was there. The morning stars and the sons of God say nothing about man. Wisdom does. Wisdom carries the thought on and speaks anticipatively of the actual realisation of the divine thought, in that it says my "delights were with the sons of men". You see, dear brethren, what a note of intelligent jubilance runs through. Wisdom was occupied particularly with the habitable parts of the earth. It was speaking anticipatively, showing that it was in the divine mind to have intelligent beings in the habitable parts of God's earth, and that its delights were with the *sons* of men.
You can see, therefore, beloved brethren, how John's gospel fits in with all that. It is stated there that by Him who was in the beginning, all things were made that were made, and that without Him not one thing was made; all had being through the Word, and whilst that is asserted, what is in view immediately is man, and hence the statement, "In him was life; and the life was the light of men". That is to say, the true Light. Not that the light previously referred to is not true of its kind. Physical light, of course, is true -- the sun and whatever other light there may be in the physical system -- but it refers here to the true or perfect light for men, that it was something that should become substantive; not merely an abstract thought, but something here within man's range; something that men could touch, and so it says, "In him was life; and the life was the light of men". So as to prepare our minds for the thought, we have to dismiss all earlier conceptions of light, for hitherto light had dispelled darkness, so that darkness was driven by it into its own area, and a name given to it. The light He called day, the darkness was dispelled by it.
{278}
Here, however, we have introduced to our minds an entirely new thought, that the true light appears in darkness and the darkness comprehends it not; that moreover witness has to be made to it, in the person of John the Baptist. No one needs to call attention to the sun as it shines in the heavens. It is there; nothing is hidden from its heat. Its light goes out throughout all the earth, and its rays negative the darkness, so that in its presence, darkness ceases. Now a new thought has to be apprehended, and we are told the light shines "in darkness", and that the darkness does not comprehend it. Attention has been called to it. We are told immediately, "There was a man sent from God". This is not historical, it is moral. It is a man that was with God, for he was with Him, and was sent as from "with him". He came for a witness to the light. He was not it, the Spirit tells us, although the Lord later pays such a beautiful tribute to John in saying that he was a burning and a shining light or lamp, which is more local and limited in thought. He burned and he shone. You can see that as those Pharisees came to him to be baptised, how he burned, as he called them a generation of vipers. He would wither them up. But the light was there. They rejoiced for a season in his light, it says, but it was local and national, for after all, John was for the sons of Israel.
The apostle tells us that John the Baptist cried, "A man comes after me who takes a place before me, because he *was* before me", and again there stands among you Him "whom ye know not". You see the beautiful witness to this Light. He was in their midst. May it not be, beloved, that there is that of God, standing in our midst, whom we know not. We are always under test by reason of what is of God in our midst. The Lord here is not acting, He is not preaching, nor working; He is standing, and yet the great Creator of the universe, "whom ye know not". What is of God amongst us, standing possibly inactive because of ourselves, becomes
{279}
a test "whom ye know not". John goes on and says, "*I* knew him not". The thing is to be on the look-out for what is of God, for God is never inactive, as the Lord Himself says later, "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work". John the Baptist says, "he who sent me to baptise with water, *he* said to me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit". That was what God said to him. But that is not all, for the same day John sees Jesus coming *to him*. When John saw the Lord moving -- not standing, but moving towards him -- he discerns Him. It was not the Lord's preaching or miracles, it was His moving. When he saw Him coming to him he says, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world".
Before the Spirit comes upon the Lord, John had eyes to see, and that is what this gospel would call attention to -- the importance of being able to see the light, whatever it might be. The principle is radiation, but you have the substance first. The thing is there in a living way, the life is there; it is not a question of words or sermons or even miracles, it is the substance. I am not now speaking of the deity of our Lord, which is so emphasised in this chapter, but the life. The life was there, you see, that which was intended to be light, the light of men, and as it moves, it radiates. I cannot undertake to define it, and as the Lord moves towards John it was radiating. But then who saw it? Multitudes were there. I suppose it was one of the most extraordinary days in the history of the nation. The light of life was radiating in the simple movements of Christ to John.
Thousands were moving towards John, some of them "vipers". They were doing what the Lord was physically, but how differently. Why did Jesus go to John? Jesus had never sinned; that holy life had been delightful under God's eye, never a blemish in it. It was perfect. Why should He come to John? You see John had spiritual
{280}
discernment. He had eyes to see. God alone can give that, and if you have not eyes to see this light, I would counsel you to turn to God to give you this vision. It is shining, the true light now shines. Here it is, "In him *was* life; and the life *was* the light of men", but the epistle says, "the true light *now* shineth". He is coming to John, and the anointed eye of one who had the Holy Spirit from his birth, discerns in that movement the Taker-away of the sin of the world.
Marvellous light! Never shone light like that: the light of the taking away of the sin of the world. That was what it was. The true light -- how much needed. Every soul of man needs it if he is to be with God. He has to get that light, the light of the taking away of the sin of the world. John was baptising; he was administering death figuratively. Jesus comes to him and John names Him. Not a word is said as to his having light from God, but what God had said to him was that "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit". But John discerns Him before that. The light was radiating, as I have said: the light of the taking away of the sin of the world.
Then John says, "I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God". Now you see there is another point, and I stress it, because without it we are not prepared for a new commandment. The new commandment is the thing, the true light, that is shining now. The next day, John was standing and two of his disciples; that is to say, the two disciples were evidently under his teaching and personal control. Standing -- a very suitable attitude, particularly in view of what was happening, because the light was beginning to radiate, and it is a good thing to stand and see all that emanates from this wondrous light. It is the true thing -- we want to get hold of that point -- that which radiates for every man. And so the Light is seen walking; we are not told where He was going, but
{281}
it was consequent, obviously, upon the previous movement. He is walking, for it is He who is the Taker-away of the sin of the world. He is walking to be called attention to. Well, you say, I can see that. Yes, but can you? Look at those two men standing by John. One of them is Andrew, a trained man, and the other is not named. They had seen John ministering, they had been under his ministry. Surely they will see now? But do they see? No. John looks on the Lord, and he says, "Behold the Lamb of God". He calls attention. That is the principle of it. Attention has to be called to things. But you say, why did I not see that before? Well, why did you not? It may be you have been cavilling about it. It may be you have been saying, I have been going on these lines all my life. But here is something you have never seen. Why have you not seen it? Their attention is called to the light, and then they do not quarrel about it. On the contrary they moved towards the light.
Now that movement is life, for light is not in itself power for movement. Life is that. The principle is that, as the true light shines into your soul it becomes life there; it becomes, as I may call it, substantive. So that it radiates from you. The true light shines from you. But the Lord emphasises the fact that life was there, for He turns and sees them moving and following, for that is the direction the light would move us. All is governed by one great principle. There is no room for lawlessness in this life. It is true to itself. It is true to Christ. So they move towards the Christ and they follow. While the light is ever shining, so long as you cavil or quarrel with the thing, you are in darkness in regard to it. If the thing is there to be seen, move in regard to it. The movement is life, and it will be light to others. So that Andrew, one of the two that abode with the Lord that day, goes after his brother. That is the way it works. The brethren need to be brought together. Andrew went and "brought him to Jesus", and the Lord looks upon
{282}
him. He gives him a name which means "a stone". Not indeed that the name could be applied yet, it was potential. Peter would be a stone. The Lord knew that when He looked upon him. It is a question of what you are, by this light shining into your soul. It becomes life in the soul, and the light that shines from that is the true light. "The true light now shineth".
What I would desire to say now, is that material for the assembly which Peter represents, is seen in an ability to take in new things which the Lord may call attention to. We are told in this passage, for instance, what the word "Cephas" means. We are told what the word "Rabbi" means. That is to say, the interpretation of words is given in order that we may apprehend the idea. When He gives the interpretation of it, He wants you to know the meaning or the idea. Now with the two disciples, what came out was that they had known discipleship before, but now they had transferred to another Master; they were willing to leave one for another, on account of the superiority of the other. And so it is that Peter comes in, I think, as assembly material.
In the corresponding passage in @Matthew 16, the Lord says, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona". That word "blessed" refers I apprehend to the believer as in Romans. The responsible man Simon Bar-jona is blessed. But here it is simply "Cephas", which corresponds to the other part of the verse in Matthew, which says, "And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter". That is a spiritual thing. It is connected with the nineteenth chapter of Acts, where you get the great structure which Paul reared up in a spiritual way through the twelve men there. Paul asks the men at Ephesus, "Have ye received the Holy Spirit since ye believed?" It is a question of the Holy Spirit when you come to the assembly. They say they had not even heard of Him. And they relate what they had believed. They were
{283}
walking up to the light they had, which is a very fine thing; but then the question is, What will they do with fresh thoughts? Are they able to take in new thoughts from God? The apostle goes on to speak to them of Jesus and the gospel of their salvation. You will notice that Paul made full allowance for the ministry of John. It was a blessed ministry, but it was not the true light. What we want is the full, the true, light, or we shall not be ready for further thoughts from God; we shall miss them. Many are missing them; unprepared to receive fresh things from God. Some say, there is nothing new now. There has been no fresh light these many years. Fancy those known to be christians thinking that; as if God had ceased working; as if the Holy Spirit had finished; as if the temple of God ceased to exist. It reminds one of what the scoffers say, "since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning". Is there no fresh light shining? There is, thank God. The true light is *now* shining. The Holy Spirit is down here, operating in the saints. There is life in the saints, and the true light is shining in them. Also "the darkness is passing". What a thing to be assured of!
These Ephesian believers gladly committed themselves to Paul, who laid his hands on them (complete identification with them) and they received the Holy Spirit; twelve men at once. Prepared assembly material, as I may call it, as being marked by readiness to receive the message, they get the Spirit who seals the great structure spoken of in the epistle as "a habitation of God in the Spirit".
All this fits in with the passages in the gospel and the epistle of John. In following the Lord, you see how He is moving. He says, "He that follows me ... shall have the light of life". You say, such and such an one has light. You refer to his ministry, but that is not the idea. I am not leaving that out, because ministry should be
{284}
in life. John's ministry was living -- full of Christ. He said, "Behold the Lamb of God". But what the Lord says here is not that. It is not His ministry, it is a question of life. "In him was life". That is the idea, so that He says, "he that follows me ... shall have the light of life", that is, light of that kind, the light coming out from the substance; that is the kind of thing, the light of life. Such "shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life". The presence of the Spirit here, and all that preceded in this gospel, is necessarily in view. The food in the sixth chapter, the coming down of the Spirit as from a glorified Christ in the seventh, these are in view if there is to be the light of life. It is what is here, you see; the constitution built up by the living bread; the bread that came down from heaven, the flesh and blood of Christ. Then the reception of the Spirit is from Him glorified.
Now that is what I understand to be the application of this passage. You are following the Lord; having moved out of the world, and in moving with Him you have "the light of life". A living state of things exists in your soul. One has often pictured pioneers in the Western Continent. They are concerned about "the light of life" in a material way. They avoid the deserts and seek the rivers. They have colonised on the St. Lawrence, the Potomac, the St. James, and so forth, and as they went westward the question of how they should live was ever before them. So in every new country. It is a question of life. Vegetable life in this sense, I need hardly say, is of all moment to such men. So it is now. What lines am I pursuing? I do not go into the desert to live. I may be there in the government of God, to bring me down to nothing. My affections, my needs lead me to where the people of God are. How may I find them? Where the life is? Wherever the Spirit is there is life; "the Spirit is life", we are told. You see the fruits of it there among the saints. Oh, you
{285}
say, you are occupying us with the saints. As following the Lord, directly you are with Him and He has His own way, you find that He is thinking of the habitable parts of the earth. He is occupied with men. And He leads in a right way that you may "go to a city of habitation". That is the idea. There are men and women living in a spiritual sense. That is what I understand by the light of life. Wherever that is true, God operates in relation to it, and souls are being brought into relation with it. It cannot be denied. The Spirit's work is there to be observed by any. Hence it is not merely that we have the Bible rightly interpreted and understand its principles, but we are to have life.
I want to show in closing that all this is involved in the new commandment. In John's epistle, the apostle deals with life; something very tangible, as you will observe in the beginning. It was what his hands had handled, what he had seen and heard. It was no abstract thing of which John was speaking. It was substantive; to be seen and felt in a living Person. If this Person who was the Light went and dwelt in Capernaum, what a thing it would be to live next door to Him, He was light there. John is dealing with that. Now he says, "I write no new commandment unto you, but an old". It was lest anyone should think that the old was being discarded. The old surely was as much of God as the new; whatever ministry has been received earlier, it could not possibly be displaced by new. John's ministry was of God. The Lord challenges the Jews as to it. It was of God, but it was not the true light. No ministry that is of God can be discarded, however ancient. It has its own value; it stands, but then it may not be everything, "I write no new commandment unto you, but an old", so as to emphasise that the old stood. What was the old? The word which they had heard, which was from the beginning; no doubt, the ministry of Christ from the outset, the word which they had heard. It was not to
{286}
be displaced. It was the gospel as presented to the twelve, which they had heard; the objective side -- what is presented in the gospel -- that stood. Do not be afraid of anything that God has presented to you, or that you have received as from God; it stands. No new commandment will displace it. It will enhance it.
Then he says in the next verse, "Again, a new commandment I write unto you". What is this? Why! it is a new one. That is the whole point. The new commandment, it says, is true in Him and in you. Are you afraid of being occupied with that? Do not be afraid. If you have not this verse, you have not the true light. The new commandment is what is true in Him and in you, that is in Christ and in us. And then he says "because". That word "because" is confirmatory. What he is going to say proves it, "The true light now shineth". It was shining, and it was obvious therefore that the true light, true in Christ, had expelled the darkness by becoming true in the saints by the Spirit. Marvellous fact! Is that going to end? Not at all. That is going on. What has become true in us has come into this world, and has come to stay. The true light is shining, and the darkness is passing. This verse is simple christianity, and anyone who does not accustom himself to the new commandment, to the principle of the new commandment, must miss it.
The Holy Spirit maintains everything here, and there is never anything old with Him, so that the word addressed to the assemblies is not, he that hath an ear let him hear what the Lord says to the churches. No; for what He says is written down in every case. But "let him hear what the Spirit says". We are not told what the Spirit says; it is characteristically something new, in the sense of something fresh. We must all face it; we must be sure that we are not quarrelling with it, because if we quarrel with that, we shall be in the dark as to it, and that will affect us generally. It is readiness
{287}
to receive what God gives as something fresh which indicates that we are characteristically assembly material, and thus the true light can shine through us.
{288}
"THE INHABITANTS OF JERUSALEM"
@Hebrews 10: 25; @Nehemiah 7: 1 - 4; @Nehemiah 11: 1 - 3 @Zechariah 12: 8
I read this passage in Hebrews hoping to amplify it and make it applicable at the present time in a forceful way from the passages in Nehemiah and Zechariah. The fact that the writer to the Hebrews is obliged to enjoin that the saints should not forsake the assembling of themselves together reminds us of the tendency to do so. The date of the epistle was comparatively near the brightest period of the church's history. The Jewish christians had the greatest ministry -- that of those who had been the immediate companions of the Lord, who were "eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word", the Holy Spirit as having just come actuating them. They were the immediate handiwork of the Lord, having been with Him before His death and after He rose, especially the period of His sojourn of forty days down here in which they had most marvellous experiences; and then the incoming of the Spirit from heaven -- all occasioned a ministry of peculiar excellence and freshness. The christians addressed in the epistle to the Hebrews were the product of that ministry; so that they are enjoined to remember their leaders that spoke the word of the Lord. Others were still alive amongst them, whom they were to obey; yet they had to be enjoined not to forsake the assembling of themselves together.
Now, I have this in mind because of the prevalence of absenteeism from our gatherings. The Lord would convey to us that He has given us to each other. He has selected us for Himself. The assembly is for Christ and for God, but we are also for each other; and that should be a powerful incentive to our assembling ourselves together. The Lord assembles us, too, for the assembly is His. But there is the assembling of ourselves together; the Lord has given the saints to each other and we are
{289}
to be respected mutually. The saints are worthy of respect. Were heaven to call attention to us, it would say something distinctive about each of us, and that would be an incentive for mutual respect and affection among us. There is great variety resulting from the work of God, and this is calculated to draw us together. It will be a feature in heaven. Some of you may recall that when Abraham was shown the land of promise, there were no saints named. He saw it from the level -- north, south, east, and west; but Moses was shown it from mount Pisgah, and what he was shown was the territory of the saints -- where the saints should be, the positions of certain of the tribes being mentioned. Heaven with God, heaven with Christ, heaven with the angels, heaven with the Holy Spirit, of course, but *heaven with the saints*. So that the gathering of the saints implies that we love each other and hence there is enjoyment; enjoyment not to be found elsewhere.
Now I want to show from Nehemiah how this worked out in a remnant period, corresponding to the one we are in. We are in remnant times, and this book is intended to instruct us, both by direct teaching and by example, how to avail ourselves of what is available, however small and despicable outwardly; to avail ourselves of it and make the most of it. And so that the thought should be stressed, Nehemiah makes much in his opening words of *Jerusalem*. It caused him tears. I speak of Jerusalem as representing the assembly. That is how it should be regarded. The gospel of Matthew treats of the assembly transitionally. It shows how the testimony and all the interests of God merged from Jerusalem into the assembly. In that gospel Jerusalem is called the city of the great King -- the Holy City, but it is the gospel that presents the assembly; the only gospel in which the assembly is directly mentioned, and the first mention of it is the well-known passage from the Lord's mouth, "on this rock I will build my
{290}
assembly". *My* assembly. Now every lover of Christ must think of that -- what the Lord stressed in that way -- *My* assembly. And as I learn what it means in any little way, then I see that I am of it, for every true christian, every one who has the Spirit of God is a member of it. How then am I found? How do I regard it? If it has passed out of view in its original pristine glory here, how am I to regard it today? Does it exist concretely at all? Is it reachable? These are the questions that normally arise in every heart that loves Christ.
Now, as I said, Jerusalem in this book answers to the assembly. I may say, prefigures it, and Nehemiah may be taken as representative of every heart that is loyal to God and to Christ as regards His assembly. In Nehemiah's day Jerusalem was in ruins, causing him the profoundest sorrow. So he visits Jerusalem, "the city", he says, "of my father's sepulchres". We are not occupied with sepulchres now, but with what is living. The assembly represents what is living; it is "the assembly of the living God".
Nehemiah arrives at Jerusalem and he tells us what God had put into his heart to do there. A person into whose heart God has put things is most interesting. He puts His love in our hearts by the Spirit, and this leads normally to the assembly. Nehemiah speaks of what God had put in his heart, to do for Jerusalem. What am I doing for Jerusalem? If you read the book you will find that Jerusalem is the great thought. What is there in my heart to do for it? Men who challenge themselves thus, God will take up and make useful. See what Nehemiah did. In the first passage he says, "the wall was *built*"; that is, there is a man that undertakes to do something and *finishes* it. And it was done under great pressure; the enemy attacked the workers, so that they had to hold the sword in one hand and the trowel in the other. But the passage read in chapter 7 says the wall was built. It says, "when the wall was built, and I had
{291}
set up the doors, that the doorkeepers and the singers and the Levites were appointed". I speak thus of Nehemiah because he is a model for us in our time -- a man who takes things up of himself. You say, I have no gift, but there is not a word about Nehemiah having a gift, nor is he said to be sent. He came to Jerusalem -- his heart being pressed because of its condition; and the walls were built. It is a question of what each of us is doing. Am I feeling the state of the assembly? And when I undertake to do something, do I finish it? Here the wall was built.
Then the next thing is that the doorkeepers and the singers and the Levites were appointed. Now we have an order of things involving security. We have men that will watch so that no false brother will get in unawares to spy out our liberty. Those are the porters. And we have the singers -- those who praise God in song and will also entertain us; men that will make the place attractive, men and women that will sing the songs of Zion *in Zion* -- not in a foreign land. And then we have the Levites -- burden bearers, men who are there to serve us. That is their business -- united to the priest to serve with him. Is all this going to be attractive? Or is it an order of things that is so little in my eyes that because it rains I will sit in my house rather than walk half a mile to have part in it? That is how this book tests us.
Nehemiah goes on: "I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the palace, charge over Jerusalem; for he was a faithful man, and feared God above many". Now, these are men that you can count upon. Would you not like to meet these two men, Hanani (he is Nehemiah's brother) and Hananiah? Where you get the brother of a man that typifies Christ in any way you have the idea of brethren presented in an attractive way. Aaron was Moses brother; he was glad in his heart when he saw his brother. He is one of the brethren. Thus the brethren would be represented in these two men,
{292}
especially in Hanani, the brother of Nehemiah. He is a man that feared God above many; he is the ruler of the citadel; and he is now in charge of Jerusalem. Jerusalem thus is under the hand of the brethren; brotherly love is there. Hanani is not an Edomite. He will do a brother's part. It is imperative that believers should get acquainted with such men as these two. Paul went up to Jerusalem "to make acquaintance with Peter". He had heard of Peter, and saw the immense importance of becoming acquainted with him. And there are brothers today whom young saints should seek out and become acquainted with -- not Peters, of course, but such as are faithful and care for the welfare of the Lord's people. By such the assembly is made attractive, as recovered in the small way in which it is known now. It is made secure, protected by the porters. And as we have seen, it has also singers and Levites. We shall lack nothing if we come. A brother of Nehemiah, the ruler of the citadel, is over the city, as we have seen. How different from the man-made system of things where some unconverted person may be ruler!
Nehemiah further says: "I said unto them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them shut the doors, and bar them, and appoint watches of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his watch, and every one to be over against his house". Surely with all this care and provision generally. Jerusalem is going to be full of people! The apostle Paul for instance was the great servant of Christ, yet he stresses the fact that *one* man came to Rome and sought him out diligently and found him, @2 Timothy 1: 16 - 18. You would think every saint who had opportunity would go to see him, but his warm appreciation of the visit of Onesiphorus indicates that very few did it. And so Nehemiah has to say here mournfully, "Now the city was large and great: but the people were few therein, and the houses were not
{293}
builded". Is that not a heart searcher? I think it is. Those that value these things are few. Why is it that such an attractive place, spiritually, is not full of people? It is because the people of God are largely governed by earthly principles, fleshly motives, etc., and this spiritual order of things so wonderfully protected and furnished spiritually is not attractive.
Is there any one here who has not any heart for Jerusalem? It is the city of the great King, as I was saying. The Scriptures are full of it. The great culmination of what I am saying is in that one glorious city spoken of in @Revelation 21. There is no thought of lack of inhabitants *there*. It is, as it says in Zechariah, "In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David". God will reach His end. Even Jerusalem on earth "shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men". And of the city that comes down from God from heaven, it cannot be said that there are few people in it. There are no vacant spaces; the city is complete as it comes down from God. If you are to be there, the logical thing is to be an inhabitant of Jerusalem in a practical sense now. Those who wash their robes have a right to enter by the gates, @Revelation 22: 14. Christians must take up this right and as in it not forsake the assembling of ourselves together. In the future, I shall be ashamed if I had not been in it characteristically while I was here, Jerusalem was a small city from the human point of view. The physical site of it would show that it was not large (like the world city Nineveh), even in Solomon's time. God did not intend things in the time of testimony to be large at all. God says that it was not because Israel were more in number than all the peoples that He chose them, "for ye are the fewest of all the peoples", @Deuteronomy 7: 7. It was never in His mind to make a big display in the time of testimony. Outward smallness in great moral quality
{294}
and consequent power in service and testimony has ever been in His mind. But the heavenly city is large and withal perfect in every way. These two thoughts -- smallness and reproach now and largeness and glory in the future -- are intended to govern us while here below.
Passing on to chapter 11, what you see is that there was a great reluctance on the part of the people to live in the city. In the light of the facts presented I cannot understand a godly man living in the country. A spiritual man would want to be at Jerusalem. That is where the divine interests are. And a spiritual man today lives, as it were, in the assembly. He is an 'inhabitant' of it. If through forgetfulness he sits at his fireside on a cold night, reading it may be a good book, while the saints are gathered in the light of the assembly in the meeting-room in his locality, he would feel unhappy as the fact came to his mind; he would say, *I should be there*; I should be with the saints. The elements of Jerusalem are not here at my fireside, they are where the saints are met; Hanani is there and Hananiah is there; Nehemiah is there; the doorkeepers are there; the Levites are there; the singers are there; and, more than all, God is there. Thus no christian can afford to be absent as the saints are assembled together. The brother I have spoken of puts away his book and puts on his boots, and wends his way like one of the flock to the place where his brethren are assembled; and God would watch every footstep he made. They are all precious. The Lord has pleasure in "the footsteps of the flock".
Now chapter 11 says, "the princes of the people dwelt in Jerusalem". That is to their credit. And "the rest of the people cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem"; to *bring* them: there was reluctance. You get one out of ten, I may picture a large family of today: the meeting time is arriving and one says, I was present at the last meeting, that is enough for this week. Another thinks the same way, and another satisfies himself with a
{295}
different excuse, and so they influence each other, and but few go. What does heaven think of that? Our chapter says, "And the people blessed all the men that willingly offered themselves to dwell in Jerusalem". That is to say, the assembly is everything to them. The assembly is the great object of interest to God. We all should be there *characteristically*. The men that willingly offer themselves to dwell in Jerusalem are blessed. These men were thoroughly in fellowship, as we say. They were not occasional visitors. Then we read: "these are the chiefs of the province that dwelt in Jerusalem", verse 3, and we have a list of them in this chapter. I would like to know them all. Heaven lists those who are characteristically of the assembly today. You do not want to be left out of that list. Many, alas! are nominally in fellowship who are *not* on that list. The Lord would stir us all up as to this solemn matter.
Now I go on to Zechariah. Zechariah, Haggai, and Malachi are prophets who served after the return from Babylon; they are peculiarly remnant prophets, and especially Zechariah. I want to show briefly what "the inhabitants of Jerusalem" come in for, (I wish you to note that expression: "the inhabitants of Jerusalem".) This verse says, "In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them", verse 8. Now I want you to think of what I have said and to bring yourselves in amongst the inhabitants of Jerusalem. See what is said of them here. God will defend them. Those who recognise and support the assembly shall have protection; I speak more of spiritual protection; but God looks after us as regards material things also, for the angels are sent out as ministers in this respect on account of those who are the heirs of salvation. There is also His Spirit, the Comforter, who remains with us and in us, and Scripture says, "Greater
{296}
is he that is in you than he that is in the world", @1 John 4: 4. Thus we hold our heads erect and give a clear, firm answer when inquiry is made as to our associations and customs. Why do you attend that little meeting? I may be asked. I do not merely say it is a meeting of brethren. There is not any light in that. I must make the *principles* that are in it clear; and to do this I must become conversant with them. Our chapter says, "he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David". Think of that! Think of the youngest of us, the most tottering of us, like mighty David! It is true of every Christian characteristically, that he has greater power than David exercised. He had the Spirit in a certain way, but the peculiar way in which the saints who form the assembly have the Holy Spirit, David did not know. He did not have an indwelling Spirit, whereas we have -- the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven by Christ as having accomplished redemption. The Lord says the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than John the Baptist. So one of the assembly is "as David". But then David must not be minimised, because the passage further says, "and the house of David shall be as God". I suppose we can apply that to those who are related to Christ now. The house of David here refers to the royalty of the future, and we may apply this to the assembly now. The assembly is characteristically representative of God. God said to Moses that he should be God to Pharaoh in the sense of representation; here it is said, "the house of David shall be as God". Think of a company of saints as God! It embraces all the saints in that sense. We are kings and priests; a holy priesthood and a royal priesthood.
I speak of these great things to encourage us to assemble ourselves together; that none of us should be found neglecting to assemble together with the brethren.
{297}
THE WORD OF GOD AS AFFECTING OUR MINDS
@Acts 18: 11; @1 Corinthians 1: 18; @Genesis 15: 8 - 18
My remarks will bear on the human mind, how it is affected for good or for evil, particularly for good, and how the word of God is intended to affect it. The word of God as such is specially stressed in the ministry at Corinth, whether orally or in the written form. The soil there was divinely selected for the divine sowing; it was no accident, for Corinth represents mankind in its cultivation, and, corresponding with this, secret wickedness, for education tends to wickedness, skilfully concealed. In the Lord's service, no one should assume that public conditions must of necessity forbid the work of God; the work of God goes on and He selects His own soil for His sowing, as well as His own battleground. In @Acts 18: 11 stress is laid upon the word of God, not simply that it was preached, but that it was *taught*. Now I refer to this because of the current operations of the enemy through our minds, and especially the youth amongst us. He selects the mind, knowing that if the mind is secured the will may act and continue acting, but carefully veiled.
The apostle, having heard what the Lord said to him, "I have much people in this city", laid hold on what was in the Lord's mind and settled down to a piece of work that he knew from experience and from observation must be difficult. So the apostle settled down in the city of Corinth for eighteen months, teaching the word of God. Not that he did not preach or pray or visit or exhort; not even that he did not work with his hands -- for he did -- but the governing thing in these eighteen months was to teach the word of God; not simply to set it before the saints, but to *teach* it. Teaching involves not only the ability to open up the mind of God, but to
{298}
enforce it, to bring it home logically to the mind, and to show it thus to be superior to anything man did or could bring forth.
Before proceeding in regard of Corinthians, I desire to illustrate this from Genesis. In this chapter in Genesis we are in the presence of the believer representing all believers, for Abraham is called the father of us all, that is, all who believe; and it is in this chapter that he is specifically said to have believed God. The apostle Paul cites it, saying, "Abraham believed God" -- a very great matter for young christians to face, because, in principle, this is the young christians chapter; not indeed as called out, but as progressing and standing out against the temptations of the world. The world, in the king of Sodom, was ready to honour and enrich Abraham, but he refused. So you find in this chapter the first reference in the Scriptures to the word of God. Not that the word of God had not been spoken, but it is here in its formal statement twice over for the first time in the Scriptures, corresponding with Corinthians. "After these things", we read in the first verse of @Genesis 15, that is, after the chapter in which Christ comes in to support the believer in his conflicts and to furnish him against the seductions of the world. Abram triumphed in these two settings, and "after these things" God proceeded with his education. We find in this chapter that very important formula, "the word of Jehovah". God was now dealing with Abram the believer on the principle that there was such a thing as the word of Jehovah. Not that it began at this time, for it began much earlier than man, much earlier than @Genesis 1; it began formally, as we are told, in the creation, in the beginning, "By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God", @Hebrews 11: 3.
There can be no doubt that John's ministry, so applicable in our times, has this in mind, so he begins with "the Word", applying it to Christ personally.
{299}
There was a Person here who was equal to opening up all that was in the mind of God, able also to unfold it, to make it intelligible to His disciples. Hence the importance of John's ministry in this sense, that we might understand that there is such a thing as that, not merely as an abstract thought, but in a Person, so that concurrently with our knowledge of the Lord Jesus in His Person He unfolds the mind of God. How wonderful that there is in the world at the present time the methodical unfolding of the mind of God in the power of the Spirit. What a range of things is opened up for us to enter into, and the Lord in His grace ready to help us at every point! As we consider what is said, the Lord gives us understanding in all things. This ought to have the greatest attraction for us, for in it there is an escape from current importations of knowledge, which indeed, in very great measure, is "false-named knowledge". Everything that is disclosed is coloured by what is false in the importations of knowledge amongst men, the world of human wisdom.
This chapter is a chapter of new things; almost everything in it is introduced for the first time, and this makes the mind ask, What is this? God would challenge us by the presentation of new thoughts as to where we are -- are we interested? So the Lord said to Abram, "I am thy shield, thy exceeding great reward". Mark, it is not a mere statement; it is the word of Jehovah, that unique kind of thing; it has its own force and power in our minds. I began with Abram's inquiry, "how shall I know?" -- a very fine question! He had already asked another question, "what wilt thou give me?" God spoke to him in vision; it is not only an appearing, as earlier; it is the word of Jehovah in vision. That is, God would appear to us to draw us aside for Himself so that He can speak fully and freely and forcefully to us. He asked what God would give him, and God opens up to him what He would give him. God showed him the stars. No
{300}
astronomer ever saw such a sight as that. I am persuaded; no one could ever see such a sight of the stars as one who is shown them by God. They present a living state of things typically; they are called by name. He is acquainting Abram with the greatness of his calling, and the wealth of things that is ahead of him. Then it says that Abram believed God; he stands out here as characteristically believing God. It is not here simply believing a statement God makes, it is a question of *believing God*. He stands out as our great parent in this sense -- "he believed Jehovah; and he reckoned it to him as righteousness". God, taking account of this kind of evidence, reckons it to us as righteousness. But now Abram says, "how shall I know?" Many have come to the point of faith in God and righteousness according to Romans -- a very fine point to reach, but we need confirmation. The enemy is busy, and young people are being diverted and some turned aside entirely by the enemy's activities *through the mind*. Abram says to Jehovah, "how shall I know?"
I am concerned that those who are young may see how they may know, how they may be conscious, how they may come into the things veritably. John speaks much in this sense -- "*we know*", he says, and "that ye may *know* that ye have eternal life". He "has given us an understanding that we should *know* him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life". It is thus that we are delivered out of the world of pride and of the natural mind. The apostle speaks of it in @Romans 1; what a practical thing it is, and how essential to what God manifests! He says, "from the world's creation the invisible things of him are perceived, being apprehended by the mind through the things that are made". They are manifest, he says, for "God has manifested it to them". It is not simply that there are certain things made, but, in the making of them, there is the manifestation
{301}
of the hidden things of God. Then he proceeds to say, they are "apprehended by the mind through the things that are made, both his eternal power and divinity". What an immense thought that is -- apprehended by the mind! The manifestation would be of no use aside from the mind. But he proceeds to show how their thoughts descended, became darkened, fell into folly. O dear young people, look out for your thoughts! Thoughts are isolated things, but there is a downward trend, unless we are on the level I am speaking of, that is to say, asking God how we may know. The heart being darkened, the thoughts first descended into folly. There is a sort of pride attaching to this, an assumption to know and understand -- "they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful". The idea of thanksgiving flees away when persons become sceptical and critical. They do not glorify God; they descend, and descend, and descend, until they honour and serve "the creature more than Him who had created it, who is blessed for ever". How the beloved apostle's heart welled up in the thought of the blessed God -- "blessed for ever"!
In answer to Abram's query, "how shall I know?", Jehovah says, "Take me a heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtle-dove, and a young pigeon". God is not going to proceed at once to answer your questions from Himself; He wants to bring you with Him. What has been your history? Have you been observing? Now these particular creatures are mentioned here for the first time in Scripture, but there is not a word as to what they mean spiritually. God is dealing with the believer in regard of his own history, and his history is unique, if he has had one at all in a spiritual sense. This extends back for three years. Abram has to go out to the large cattle and look about for a heifer, and he has to know its age. It takes time, no doubt; he must get one three years old. What an effect this would have on Abram!
{302}
He was a man who owned cattle. The believer surely owns something, he has had experience with something; and it is for Abram to tax his mind, his experience -- what does this heifer mean in the mind of God? Is there nothing in your history to assure you at all? Is there nothing to tell you that God has been dealing with you? Why are you becoming sceptical or uncertain or doubtful now? The God who has dealt with you earlier is the God you have to do with now. In all His dealings with me there is something in His invisible things that He would press home on me. Have I taken account of the dealings of God? It is a question of challenging me as to whether I have been impressed with what God has brought to my observation as to Himself. He has put something into that heifer, into that she-goat, into that ram, into that turtle-dove and that young pigeon. Every one of these creatures represents some thought of God, and as soon as I finish finding a three-year-old heifer and all these other things, my mind is at work, and I begin to think of what these creatures are. There is something in them of Christ; they are about to be offered. Abram is to know what to do with them, and he challenges himself. They represent what I perhaps have little of. If I have love, ardent affection -- which I believe a heifer represents -- I shall not be sceptical or doubtful; I shall be gratifying myself in regard to God and the brethren; I shall love the brethren in relation to God in a holy way. I shall love God. If it is a she-goat -- note the female, for it is a question of affection, what is wrought in the believer in a mature way -- it is as if God were to say, If you have just followed on in the things I have been presenting to you, you will be confident already. God graciously comes down to us, for He would have everyone confident as to the great things He has prepared for those who love Him.
The thought of affection is intended to keep us. Where there is love there is no scepticism, there is no unbelief.
{303}
"Love never fails", and the cultivation of love, the reciprocation of love, for God, for Christ and for the saints, is a sure antidote to complaint, to criticism, to unbelief of any kind. Where in the whole world can you get anything to be compared with the wisdom of the people of God? It is a challenge that cannot be overcome.
Then there is the thought of the ram, the strength of things. A ram has a great place in Scripture, entering into the death and resurrection of Christ. It is a question, I believe, of the strength of things, of the power for increase. If I had increase in mind I should be free of this criticism; I should be occupied with increase, with increase in love, increase of its own kind, for progenitiveness is of its own kind. I do not want any admixture, or to bring any extraneous matter amongst the saints.
Abram knows what to do. It is a question now of Abram's exercise of his intelligence, as to what he will do, and he knows what to do. He slays the creatures and sets the parts over against each other. The birds he did not divide. No doubt the birds have allusion to the Spirit here; it is no question of smallness, as it is elsewhere. These very birds are mentioned here for the first time. It is not any question with Abram of smallness; it is a question of this kind of thing coming in in a turtle-dove and a young pigeon, that these refer to the minds of the saints. The Scriptures are full of these things, and God would have us to have our minds flooded with these things, impregnated with them, so that we may grow. God loves to leave things to us, knowing we know what to do. I make bold to say that God has much more pleasure in a saint doing a thing than in doing it Himself. He loves to see us doing things with intelligence.
Abram not only knew what to do with the creatures, but he knew how to keep evil away -- that is another thing. Young people are damaged because they do not
{304}
keep evil away, they do not discern it. The enemy comes in to spoil these circumstances that are delightful among us; Abram drove away the evil birds. Not the turtledoves or pigeons, but those evil spirits coming down to interfere with this precious service of God in the growth of the saints. He drove them away and he shuts his mind against the enemy. Let us learn to do that. We read in Romans of some whose thoughts descended to folly. You may say, the devil prompted them; but the epistle to the Romans is dealing with our responsibility, what *we* are doing. The devil is only mentioned once in Romans, for the point is *our* responsibility; whatever happens *we* are responsible. God loves us too well to let us off. Abram says, I will not let those wretched thoughts in at all; they are not my thoughts, they are of the enemy. He scared them away. See what power he has! It is the power of the Spirit to shut the doors of the mind against evil suggestions -- a very important matter. People read novels even; they are just opening their minds to these evil creatures, these birds of prey. They must be shut out.
Then it says that a deep sleep fell upon Abram. That is, God is now taking you entirely away from your natural senses. You have shown you have control over them; now God is helping you. God is going to speak to him now unhindered by natural sensibilities, "As the sun was just going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and behold, a horror, a great darkness, fell upon him". There is the horror of great darkness, but God proceeds graciously; the deep sleep precedes it. Deep sleep is not suffering, although it may deprive us of natural sensibilities; but a horror of great darkness is suffering, and God will not let us off. As @Romans 7 shows, we must learn what is in us. God hates that more than we do, and He loves us too well to let us go on without hating it. Now he says, "thy seed will be a sojourner in a land that is not theirs, and they shall serve
{305}
them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years". That is to say, the future has to be anticipated. We are not always to be in a horror of great darkness, but God loves us too well to let us off. He would remind us of what is in us, and what a terrible thing the meanness of the natural progeny is; it is to be afflicted four hundred years, but God says, "that nation ... I will judge". He may in His government use things to lead us to this, but He will judge them and bring us out with great property, so that we can say, "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord". That is deliverance.
Then when the sun had gone down "there was a smoking furnace, and a flame of fire which passed between those pieces". We see now the intelligence of Abram, the spiritual understanding, that he placed the pieces so that there might be room for the power of God; there is a passage between the pieces. It means to me that I must make room for the power of God. I must not struggle myself. What did Abram do in the presence of what he saw? He was powerless; but he had set up the offering, he had given God an opening to come in in power. Disallowance of the flesh in one's own will, in one's own thoughts, in the full recognition of the sacrifice of Jesus, is the way room is made for the power of God. We may shut out the power of God in our own ways and thoughts. Abram made room for the power of God, and the power of God came in. He saw "a smoking furnace, and a flame of fire which passed between those pieces". They were moving; it was a question of the power of God in these circumstances. So it is with every christian in whatever crisis he may be in his soul; it is a question of making room for the power of God. Can He not come in in these circumstances? Is there any circumstance in which He cannot come? Make room for Him as He comes in. I have no doubt this smoking furnace speaks of substance. Who can enter into death and annul it and glorify God in respect of sin,
{306}
but a divine Person? He came into it Himself, He was raised by the power of God. Room was made for the power of God, and God came in, as He does in every circumstance of the saint; hence the importance of not shutting out the power of God. As the apostle says, "Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me", @2 Corinthians 12: 9. He accepted the thing, and he realised the power of God.
"On the same day", it says, "Jehovah made a covenant with Abram". What a glorious thing it is, this coming into known relations with God! God deals with a christian and gives him to understand that He is taking full notice of him and giving him a covenant, a fixed order of things, so that he will never doubt again -- I can say that as to myself. Time was with me, as with other young people, when there was doubt, but a time comes when you have fixed ground, when you know where you stand with God, and it is a present and eternal matter. It is a matter of the future here, a question of four hundred years hence; everything divinely promised made good, every promise yea and amen in Christ. God is faithful. Let the dear young people come into this -- it is open to you -- and shut the mind against these wretched things that are not of God and that make you think you know everything.
The word of the cross, the apostle says, is to us who are saved the power of God. It is not simply the fact of it, but it is the *word* of it. That is to say, the mind of God about it is made effective in my own soul; my mind is brought into it. It is the *word* of it, that I understand what a great thing the cross is. The apostle alludes to it in various ways: he says, "our old man is crucified". What a view he had of the old man, the wickedness of it, the organised wickedness, the developed wickedness, in man! Then he says, "the world is crucified to me, and I to the world"; that is to say, the cross has made me so
{307}
objectionable to the world. I am crucified to it. I know we do not like that; we like to court the world and to be in good favour with it, but the apostle says the cross crucified the world to me and crucified me to it. Oh, what deliverance and escape it means! What victories it means! I have done with the world; not only is it crucified to me, but it hates me as I am like Christ. I accept its judgment of me, I know it hates me. I am not speaking now of individual persons, but of the world in the principle of it; it despises christians who accept the cross. Finally the apostle says, "*I* am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me", @Galatians 2: 20 -- that is, he is looking into another world.
A vast range of thought is found in the ministry to the Corinthians in connection with the word of God, with that which overthrows darkness in the human mind and brings it into accord with God and the things of God, the great system of things He has before Him for us.
{308}
DIVINE TESTING
@Exodus 14: 1 - 3, 9 - 14; @Joshua 3: 1 - 4; @Judges 7: 1 - 7
The thought I have in mind relates to the circumstances ordered of God for our testing, especially as seen in these three scriptures. The circumstances are seen in connection with *water*: first a sea, then a river, and then a well. Water as a type has a very wide bearing in Scripture. Each mention has to be understood from the context, for we never really understand Scripture save as we look at it thus; particularly in any reference to water, because it may mean the opposite in one to what it means in another. For instance, "the wicked are like the troubled sea, which cannot rest, and whose waters cast up mire and dirt", @Isaiah 57: 20. A remarkable figure; the allusion would be to the incessant action of the masses of men, their unsteadiness and their liability to be affected by various influences. The world as a whole is constantly affected by one influence after another; terrible things are happening and newspapers are spreading it abroad, carrying defilement everywhere.
Then we have water as seen in the gospels, where it is perhaps more applicable to ourselves. For instance, in the passage which speaks of the Lord being in the boat and saying, "Let us go over to the other side", @Mark 4: 35. Such a movement always invites Satan's attack, "the other side" meaning another position, which the testimony or the development of the truth requires. Christendom, with its cathedrals, which has been stationary for a thousand years, never goes to the other side. It has no idea of making a change to the other side, whereas you find that the Lord is constantly moving from this point to that, not in the sense of unrest and sightseeing, as the word, "Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased", @Daniel 12: 4. The Lord's word is, "Let us go over to the other side"; and as the
{309}
movement began the enemy attacked. It is not here a question of mire and dirt, but *agitation*, and this may mark the saints. We are capable of being thus affected under these circumstances. Here are the two elements, wind and water -- it is the wind that causes waves.
We have to acknowledge that there is scarcely a christian, great as the name of christian is, who is not capable of being affected in this way. The sea became agitated in Matthew. Matthew gives one phraseology, Mark another, and Luke another. Luke says that "they were filled with water, and were in danger"; they were thus affected. If we apply this to ourselves, all agitation, useless talk, recrimination suggests that we are in danger. Sometimes a gust comes up and you scarcely know where it comes from; but it is Satan, who is said to be "the prince of the power of the air", @Ephesians 2: 2. The air moving as wind, agitates; disturbing things are spoken, at first it may not be known by whom, but they are spoken, they are passed on, and agitation ensues. Matthew says, "the ship was *covered* by the waves"; that was obscured in which Christ was. Mark says the ship was "already filled", and Luke that "they were filled with water" and that they "were in danger". There is preservation from all this in manhood according to God, in that maturity and stability that will refuse to be influenced by Satan's ways.
In the book of Exodus water has a great place, and the Red Sea stands out in this respect. Although inland, the Sea of Galilee corresponds to it in the New Testament; properly it is a lake, but the Red Sea *is* a sea. I read the passage, not to develop a gospel address out of it, although it is full of gospel matter, but what I have in mind is to bring out this thought of *testing*.
God as Creator has put all these things here in view of His testimony, and the Red Sea was to be a test to His people. It is a type of the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, there is nothing greater than that;
{310}
but before it became so in type, it was a test to the people of God. You will notice that it is stated that they were to "encamp *by the sea*", and then we read that they did so.
This test brought out a great deal of *complaining*, and other things too, of course. There was complaint against Moses -- Why did you bring us out of Egypt? They did not say a word about their bitter sufferings there, these are all ignored; it is the irritability of the flesh, and Moses must suffer. The irritability of the flesh without control, vents itself in attacking those who in serving God, serve His people. The christian is enjoined to be under self-control. Things happen over which I have no control, but I should have control over *myself*, and not cause others to suffer; otherwise Satan will ruffle me to attack those who serve God, and in this way I may sin against Him. That is what the children of Israel were doing here.
They had been wonderfully cared for, Jehovah Himself having come down to deliver them, and what evidence of His presence there was in the plagues, ten of them, one after another! There is no question that God is with them. And then comes the wonderful night of the passover! What a night they had, eating the passover inside, with the blood outside, and no destroyer coming in! We may picture in our minds the parents of a family; the elder boy there as an object of special affection. There he was, sitting at the table enjoying the passover, when elsewhere hundreds of poor Egyptian firstborns were lying dead under the judgment of God. It was known to be so, it was no imaginary thing.
What a sense they would have of divine care! And lest the thing should fail as to their understanding, Moses referred to the deliverance of 'our *houses*' in telling them what Jehovah had said to him. He gives in substance what Jehovah told him about the passover; he does not recite everything, he tells some things and leaves out others, according to the principle of ministry;
{311}
but in the end he says that they were to tell their children that Jehovah "delivered our houses"; not the firstborn only, but the *house*; the household is stressed. In many other ways they were cared for most marvellously, and now God tests them. He told them to "encamp by the sea", and "Pharaoh will say ... They are entangled in the land, the wilderness has hemmed them in". By this means God would draw out the enemy as by an ambush. Jehovah is a Man of war, He caused Pharaoh to be exposed by placing the people there by the sea, but alas! as in that position, they complained against Moses; they failed in the test. We are enjoined to obey our leaders and to be in subjection; instead of this they complained. The passage reads, "And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto the Lord. And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt? Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness", @Exodus 14: 10 - 12.
It is against Moses that they are complaining; later, in @Numbers 21, they spoke against God and against Moses, but here it is against Moses. Think of the man against whom they were speaking, what he had been to them! The people of Israel were agitated, the enemy was blowing upon them and the waves of complaint were rising. Moses answers in beautiful grace and is an example to all who are prominent amongst us. He does not call them rebels here; in verse 13 he says, "Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will shew to you today: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen today, ye shall see them again no more for
{312}
ever. The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace". What a beautiful reply! What a man! What a minister! He allayed their fear. What had they gained by all this agitation? Nothing. There was no cause for it; and what anguish they must have suffered, and that because of their *want of formation*, they were like children. We are to quit ourselves like men. In the presence of danger, let us face it as those who have grown in the knowledge of God, for He will be with us. If our position does not warrant the assumption that God is with us let us give it up, but if God *is* with us, there is nothing to fear.
So we read that "the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them: and it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near the other all the night", verses 19, 20. That is *God* dear brethren. Think of the angel going round from their front to a position behind them! That is divine love, He did not do that because of their murmurings. He did that because of Himself. That is God's way, He loves us; our agitation, such as appears here, does not turn God away from us. See the way they spoke about Moses! There was no cause for it. They were tested, and by that test they were exposed. It is written for our learning, these things happened as examples, and are recorded for us that we may not fall into the sin of unreasonable complaint. The end in view in all ministry and in every experience is to develop manhood amongst us, that we should be *men*.
Now in Joshua we have another instance of water. It says in chapter 3, "And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from Shittim, and came to Jordan". There is no complaining here at all; the people *have learned*. They are seen here, typically at least, as grown
{313}
men, and they "lodged"; the word "lodged" is noticeable here. They arrived at Jordan after forty years in the wilderness; Moses is gone, and Joshua is the leader. It is wholly a spiritual matter now: they are about to enter Canaan. Wonderful thought! They are not now coming out of Egypt; they are leaving the wilderness and entering into Canaan, so they leave Shittim and move to Jordan.
I wonder if we all understand this great movement. They *came* to the Jordan; that is, water in the form of a river overflowing its banks, suggestive of the power of death. Some of us may have to face it in sickness at any time; God may bring us to it physically unless we arrive at it spiritually. It is a great thing to reach it spiritually. Mary and Martha did so in the death of their brother, and when any one near to us is taken it always peculiarly affects us. Martha said to the Lord, "if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died".
So they came to the Jordan, and lodged there for three days. What are we to learn in this test? They are not complaining, they are men, there is not a word against Joshua; even the forty thousand of the tribes of Reuben and Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh were all subject to Joshua. We can have no assembly conditions without this; we are enjoined to be subject. All these chapters denote leadership according to God and the principle of subjection in each. Only persons under control themselves are able to give orders; "joying and beholding your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ" says Paul to the Colossians (@Colossians 2: 5). Thus he can propound to them the great thoughts of God.
So here there are great things for us to learn. We are to be two thousand cubits behind the ark, and as soon as we see it move we must go after *it*; we are not to go after this story and that story, but after the ark. Listening to this and that is sure to cause agitation: there is nothing of the kind in this beautiful passage; the great power of God in the ark is to deal with Jordan, symbolising
{314}
death, and the people are to follow in a respectful way. Two thousand cubits are equal to three thousand feet, and this is no little distance. As the ark was not large, it required good eyesight to see it clearly. So, typically, you get a view of Christ, as exercising the power of God when He entered into death and overthrew it -- in Gethsemane, on the cross, and in resurrection -- as recorded at the end of each gospel. But I am speaking for the moment of the faith order, and of the subjective spirit that is characteristic of believers seen here typically, and who understand that, through the death and resurrection of Christ, death is abolished.
So in the assembly we are brought into a deathless state of things; death does not belong to it, and this instruction is necessary if we are to understand it rightly. It is not here a question of the 'babe condition' as set forth in Corinthians, but a state like that spoken of in the epistles to the Colossians and Ephesians; not persons carried about with every wind, but men who know how to discriminate. They were told to keep their eye on the ark and they did so, and the ark remained in the Jordan until they all passed over. Those passing over into Canaan are men: we are not to be in heaven as babes but as full-grown men, spoken of in Ephesians.
The passage in Judges brings us to a *well*, a small subdivision of water. There is a remarkable correspondence in the movements of the people here with those at Jordan. They rise early and pitch "beside the well of Harod"; their position is beside the well. They numbered thirty-two thousand, quite an army, and it may be that Gideon was pleased with the number. It would be gratifying to any leader to be able to call forth so many; but God says, 'They may suit you, but they do not suit Me -- there are too many of them'. "Bring them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee *there*". He does not tell Gideon how He will do it.
Sometimes we have special meetings, and maybe a
{315}
week beforehand the brethren decide what they should consider. It is not always wise. God did not tell Gideon what He would do: generally we should leave it with Him. That is an important matter, even in regard to ministry and to subjects for consideration at readings; we should make room for God. The first test here is that those who are timid and afraid should be allowed to go home, and the number of twenty-two thousand cowardly souls took advantage of this: sorrowful indeed! They were not men, a spiritual man will not go back, he will not turn his back to the enemy; but these did so, they went home. It was God who tested them, and how distressing it would be to Gideon to see these men marching off! However, there were ten thousand who were not cowards, they were ready to go forth against the enemy. Are they going to fight with spiritual weapons? The point is -- spirituality, that everything in assembly service must be spiritual if it is to please God.
Now Jehovah says, "The people are yet too many; bring them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee there": the final test is to be at the water. It is drinking water, not the sea nor the water of Jordan, it is a *spring*. In a spiritual meeting there may be ministry from the Lord which is refreshing, but how do I take it in? How do I appropriate it? Do I sit like a scholar listening to a lecture? If I do, I am ruled out. Here there were nine thousand seven hundred of them rejected, as unable to answer to the divine test. How distressing! They are, as I said, like persons who sit and listen as if they were in school, they do not appropriate spiritually what is presented. Jehovah says to Ezekiel "thou art unto them as a lovely song, a pleasant voice, ... and they hear thy words, but they do them not", chapter 33: 32. So these nine thousand seven hundred men took the water just *naturally*, as ordinary men with natural thirst would do, for they bowed down on their knees to drink, but here the allusion to dogs is intended
{316}
to convey what God looks for in *His* warriors. Elsewhere we are told to "beware of dogs", here we have a trait that suggests spirituality and what is to be imitated. It would convey that I should not be in the things of God in any selfish way; I should be in God's things spiritually and hence unselfishly.
Jehovah says to Gideon, "that of whom I say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee, This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go", Thus the whole matter is to be settled at the water by Jehovah Himself. The test was *there*. In this striking incident God teaches us -- for it is recorded for us -- how carefully He watches over us as ostensibly in His service, so that the flesh in us should be disallowed and that it should be replaced by the Spirit and what the Spirit forms in us. There are nine thousand seven hundred men rejected. How humiliating! God has rejected them, as He rejected king Saul; He says, "I have rejected him". Paul says, "I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway", @1 Corinthians 9: 27.
God is looking for reality and spirituality in us; they go together. Possessing them I know how to appropriate, according to Him, the things He provides in mercy. What a great thing it is to be amongst Gideon's three hundred! They stand out in a unique way. God is calling for such that they may have part in the spiritual army -- and what glory awaits this army! The Midianitish hordes are routed by three hundred men! In an earlier battle there had been selected a thousand out of every tribe, but here there are only three hundred in all, to bring out the great thought of spiritual character, the thought of manhood not governed by natural feelings and selfish desires, but by thinking for God and for His interests, "Arise", says the Lord, "get thee down unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine hand".
{317}
SPEAKING
@Luke 1: 19 - 20; @Luke 11: 14; @Luke 7: 15; @Luke 24: 33 - 36
This gospel written by Luke is specially evangelical: the others are, too, but Luke is peculiarly so, and so the gospel is enhanced by the preachers given in Luke's account. The first evangeliser is Gabriel, a great heavenly dignitary; not that a lesser angel could not have communicated to Zacharias, but Gabriel was deputed. He says, "I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God". Angels are not lazy beings, they are ministering spirits; they are standing up, either serving, or ready to serve, and are sent out to minister. This great angel is sent down to Jerusalem to this priest Zacharias, to announce glad tidings to him. Then we find in the next chapter another angel visiting the shepherds who were out keeping their sheep; he said to them, "behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people". So throughout this gospel we have persons and circumstances which enhance what is presented -- as if you *must* believe, the tidings are so wonderful you cannot let them pass by as if they were nothing to you. In chapter 4, we find the great Preacher Himself, the Lord Jesus, and He is presented in the same way, as enhancing the testimony by His manner. His words; never were such words, words of grace.
Now in all this there is the thought in the mind of God of having speakers, and that at the present time. The speaking is to be in faith, for if it be not in faith it is valueless and worse. In the world it is a time of speaking, of oratory; the art of speaking is cultivated; and not only oratory, but conversational powers are cultivated. All this is outside of faith and is of no value in God's account. "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity (love). I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal", @1 Corinthians 13: 1. Yet God intends that there should be speakers; heaven
{318}
is to be filled with persons who can hold holy converse; we shall be speaking there -- those of us that are saved, that are elected in the counsels of God for a place in heaven -- we shall not be dumb there.
Well now, I want to work this out a little in relation to the gospel. Those who are saved speak now, and they speak acceptably to God. With this subject in view as connected with the gospel, we see that there is a penalty on unbelief, a penalty of dumbness. The angel says to Zacharias, "thou shalt be dumb". Why? "Because thou believest not my words". You see how a penalty is imposed, not only for committal of things, but also for non-committal of things -- what we do not do. It is quite true that the things that we commit, the sins committed, are all recorded; not one of them is omitted. I suppose there is nothing more accurate than the books of God. They are opened in due course, not now; God is not reading out of them now. If books are opened at all now, it is this book that I have before me, and the book of life, but the time will come when the opening of the books will take place, and the records will be as accurately brought forth as they have been written down. "The books were opened", we are told, @Revelation 20: 12, "and another book was opened, which is the book of life". We do not know how many or how large are the books, but the names of the wicked dead are all in them. The names of the saved are all in the book of life, one book. I should not like to be in any other. I love to think of being in that one book with all the redeemed, all the living; but there are "books", and God will open them according to the time on His calendar and there will be found the works of the wicked -- terrible word! God forbid that there should be any here amongst them! -- the works of the wicked will be unfolded, and the judgment of God shall be according to the books.
Here in the case of Zacharias it is that he did not believe; the penalty is on account of unbelief. Zacharias
{319}
was not a man that could be classified as a wicked man, he was a priest, and ministering as a priest; like many today, doing God's service ostensibly, and praying, too, and yet *unbelieving*. He prayed, and Gabriel says, "thy prayer is heard", but he did not believe it. God has no pleasure in prayers of unbelief. He has great pleasure in the prayer of faith, but a prayer of unbelief God hates. Zacharias was tested as God sent this great dignitary down from heaven to tell him that his prayers were heard, but he did not believe it.
It may be that there are those here who have prayed; you have been longing for things. You have seen others saved. Zacharias had seen others with families and he coveted a son. You have seen others saved by the grace of God, you have seen how happy they are, you wish to be like them; you have thought of being like them, but it is in vain without faith. Perhaps unbelief like that of Zacharias may be in your heart. The language of unbelief comes up, as he says, "I am an old man", and so forth. If you allow the language of unbelief to come up you may hinder the entrance of the word in your heart; it will be unmixed with faith and you may go out of the door unsaved, with a penalty upon you.
Every time you hear the gospel and you reject it or you fail to believe it you incur a penalty. The apostle Paul had been amongst the Thessalonians for three weeks, and a good many were converted. They believed the gospel, but the enemy began to work amongst them creating disturbance in their souls, as is often the case with young christians; the enemy would work through people who are unbelievers, persons who, it may be, attended the meetings with them. Paul in writing afterwards to these christians speaks of some that should be "punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power": why? -- Because they know not God and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. You see the penalty is
{320}
the result of not obeying the gospel; and so it was here. Gabriel brought the message. Can we doubt that *en route* he was concerned as to how he would deliver it? He comes to him with glad tidings and he does not believe. There was a penalty, not, indeed, everlasting destruction, for Zacharias was saved; but he was dumb for a season. Thus God would say to you now, that there is penalty attached to the refusal of the gospel.
In the second scripture I read Satan is hindering a person from speaking. In chapter 1 God hinders Zacharias as a penalty, a divine penalty, for unbelief. Unbelief is repugnant to God, in whomsoever it may be found. He abhors it, for it dishonours Him and it robs your soul of the blessing that He proffers in the gospel. Zacharias, as I said, was undoubtedly a true child of God, but he suffered from unbelief. The fact that I have been converted is no guarantee that I may not suffer and rob myself of the blessing of God through unbelief, but then Satan is also hindering people from speaking. The chapter is a remarkable one in that it speaks about God giving the Holy Spirit to those that ask Him. Well, if Satan can shut your mouth in the presence of such an opportunity he will do it. This verse comes in immediately after our Lord's words saying, "how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" Satan knows that God is a hearing God, and that He has the greatest things to give to those that ask, and if he can make you dumb, if he can silence your vocal powers, he has succeeded. This wonderful opportunity was offered to the man in @Luke 11; the very best gift of God is available to the one that asks. Satan says, If I can make that person dumb he will get nothing, he will miss it.
I want you to notice that it is not a mere historical fact that is recorded. It is what the Lord was doing; He was casting out a demon. Not that He *had* done it; He was doing it. That is the light in which we are here
{321}
today, that the Lord is doing things. Some preach the gospel as a mere matter of history. Surely it is a matter of history; the greatest happening in all history is the death of Jesus; the atoning suffering of Jesus is an historic fact, never to be repeated; it is the basis of the gospel; but it is not all the gospel. The gospel includes what Jesus *is* doing. He is working, from the east to the west all day long, saving souls. There was a prayer to the Lord here this afternoon, asking Him to make this day fruitful, a day of a harvest of souls, and one said Amen to that. We are not sufficiently believing as to what the Lord is doing. The gospel includes what He *is* doing, what He has done, and what He is doing, and what He will yet do. All these times are included in the gospel: What He has done -- He died on the cross; He is risen -- gone into heaven; the Holy Spirit has come down: all that is a past matter, but infinite in its bearing; without it there could be no gospel. Then there is what He is doing, and that is what Luke records here -- He was casting out a demon. Attention is called to the mode of procedure, *to what He was doing*, and then we are told that the demon was dumb: meaning that he caused the person in whom he was to be dumb. Now Satan is active on those lines *all the time*, he is unremitting in his activities to keep people from speaking when they should speak. Some of you here have been enlightened years ago and got a touch in your souls, and you have never confessed the Lord Jesus yet, you have never told people about Him, that He is your Saviour. Satan is doing that, he is keeping you from speaking. Now David would instruct you on that point. He says, "When I kept silence ... my moisture is turned into the drought of summer", @Psalm 32: 3, 4. Is it not so with you? You have kept silence. You refer back to the time when you got a little bit of light from a preacher, it may be; the Lord gave it to you, but you kept silence: you have not confessed the Lord; the enemy has been keeping you dumb
{322}
and you have not confessed the Lord. It may be you have not confessed your sins. David said, "I kept silence". God will have something said about this matter of sin and sins. *He* has said something about them, He has said, "all have sinned", but then the convicted one says something, too, and if he does not say anything his convictions make him miserable. Look at David's comments about his state of soul after he had sinned, but before he confessed. He said: "I acknowledged my sin unto thee". And then he got relief. All was cleared in his soul as he acknowledged, but the enemy would have kept him from acknowledging. Indeed, David kept silent until God sent His messenger to him, Nathan the prophet, and Nathan convicted him. We are here tonight in that same capacity -- to bring the word of God to your conscience, as Nathan brought it to the conscience of David, and to break the silence. Let me urge you to break the silence, first to God about your sins, and then to your nearest relative or friend about your Saviour. You do not need to tell *them* about your sins. Tell them about your Saviour. Tell God about your sins, as David did; he said, "I have sinned", and Nathan said, "The Lord also hath put away thy sin". That is the gospel.
To return to @Luke 11. The Lord was casting out the demon; He must have felt the inability of this man to speak, for it is not mentioned as a mere historical fact. It is a question of the work of God; there was something going on with the man, and Satan was hindering him, and the Lord felt it, and He was casting out the demon. What He did then He is doing still. Let us not assume for a moment that the Lord is not working. If you have hitherto kept silence and you are in misery of soul, the Lord would relieve you, so that you might speak. It says the man spoke: that is all that is said about it, and that is all that is necessary. He *was* dumb, but he *is* speaking.
{323}
Now in the case of the young man of Nain we have a dead man. It is well known, of course, that dead people do not speak. It is not now a question of Satan hindering it. It is a question of the state of the man -- he is dead, dead morally. There are many like that. There is no movement toward God. This man was dead literally -- I am not ignoring that fact: it is a very solemn fact, too, for any young people who are looking out on the world and calculating what place they may obtain in it that they may shine there, and make a name. The world is very deceptive, and Nain, I believe, stands for it. It is that which is pleasing and attractive; but there was a funeral coming out of it. The Lord was going into it, we are told, and He was not going into it alone. The Lord is sometimes presented alone and He evangelises alone and speaks to persons alone and saves them; but on this occasion He is going in with a goodly number of His disciples, just as we are here tonight. A goodly company of the Lord's people are here to meet you. I never have any difficulty about saints in the gospel meetings -- the more the better; they enhance the position. Moreover, there is not a saint on earth that does not need the gospel -- not one. I believe that the apostle Paul would be the best possible listener to a good gospel address. If he were near where Peter was preaching he would enjoy listening to Peter preach the gospel. If Peter were preaching the gospel he would not say he did not need it. There is not a saint on earth that does not need it; nor is there a true saint of God that does not *enjoy* it. It is not irksome to any saint to hear the gospel. We are thankful when preaching the gospel to have the saints with us; they are good listeners, they are sympathisers; they pray, and through them the gospel goes forth in power.
The Lord was going into Nain, and He was not going into it alone. The Lord is not alone now. He was alone on the cross; He bore the full weight of divine wrath on
{324}
the cross. He said, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" There was no other there. *He* worked out atonement. He was *alone* in that. The thieves were not in that. The Lord did not say anything about them. He said, "why hast thou forsaken *me*?" He is not alone now; He has myriads with Him. He enlists the sympathy of all His people in the gospel, and He has many tonight. So in entering Nain He had a goodly number with Him, but this funeral was coming out -- a very solemn fact. Not the funeral of an old man or an old woman, but of a young man. Some of you may not actually think that only old people die, but the thought lurks in your heart that you have a long stay in this world; it is a deception: you may not have a long stay. This young man is going out of the city dead and the Lord touched the bier. He said nothing, but touched the bier: and they all stood, the bearers stood. What a touch that was! Young people often think they can go hither and thither and do as they wish; but some day you will stand still in the presence of Jesus; these bearers stood still. It was well they did, it was the touch of the Creator.
What a moment it was at the gate of Nain! They stood still, and He spoke to the youth; He called him a youth. I do not know how old he was, but he was a youth. This is a text for young people, written down by the Spirit of God for young people so that the gospel should be enforced upon them, and the danger of rejecting it and the shortness of their lease of life in this world. The Lord says, "Youth, I say to thee". What an opportunity for you now, *tonight*! What an opportunity -- the Son of God, the Creator, speaking to *you*! "I say to thee", He says. It is reiterated in Scripture what He said to this and that one; has He never said anything to you? He has often spoken to me. Many others can say the same here; has He ever said anything to you? You remember the boy Samuel, how in the
{325}
house of God he lay down to sleep and Jehovah called to him. And the Lord came three times and said, "Samuel!" Samuel thought it was Eli; he could not discern between the voice of God and the voice of Eli. It may be that is the case with some of you, you have never discerned that the Lord has spoken. "I say unto *thee*". It is a question of you. Four times Jehovah came and stood by Samuel. What grace there is in that! The Lord would not do less for you; He would come and stand by you. I could cite instances in which He did. He stood by Samuel and He called his name twice, "Samuel, Samuel!" It is no more the voice of Eli. It is the voice of God. You would love to have Him in your heart tonight. It is the voice of God; not my voice simply, it is the voice of God. He would call you by name. When God calls a man's name twice He has something special in mind for him, and what could be more desirable in your soul than relief from the pressure of sin, or whatever the pressure may be. Relief from pressure is one of the greatest possible experiences, and the Lord is here to receive you. In the case of this young man, He says, "I say unto thee, Arise". "Wake up!" -- may I not repeat it? -- wake up, young man: young woman, wake up! You have been lying in the midst of the dead, "Wake up, thou that sleepest, and arise up from among the dead, and the Christ shall shine upon thee", @Ephesians 5: 14. Is it not worth while?
Now this young man woke up; and he *began to speak*. I do not suppose he will ever finish speaking. We are destined as believers to hold holy converse in heaven with Jesus and with one another, too. I should like to have heard what he said. There was not another in the town who had such an experience as he did. He began to speak. Some of you here have been in a like position, you have been wakened and have come into blessing, made some little progress, but you have been stunted, it may be. There has been no movement for some time
{326}
back. The Lord does not like that, He does not care for stunted growth in believers. This young man began to speak; it is not said that he ceased, it is just the fact that he began to speak. When the Spirit of God tells us about a beginning, it is not to be denied that it goes on according to God. The divine end is to be reached, and what could be more delightful to the ear of God than the voice of the young man risen from the dead speaking of his experience. If you were to ask him about things after the Lord delivered him over to his mother, you can understand that he would say: Jesus touched me, and spoke to me, and I can only speak well of Him! Jesus has spoken to his soul, and he has begun to speak. What could he speak of but Jesus? I am speaking of these things now normally. The Spirit of God puts these things down, and they are to be taken normally: he began to speak. If there was a meeting in the town of Nain later on, as we say, it is no stretch of imagination to say that this young man would be there. Would he speak? Would he pray? Would he give thanks? Can there be any doubt? It would have been delightful to have heard him, as I said, in his mother's house that night, speaking about the Lord. Have you ever spoken about the Lord? Have you begun to speak as one awakened from the dead? As having come into touch with Jesus, have you begun to speak well, to speak about Him? Nain had a person there the like of which they had never had before -- a risen man who began to speak, one who has come back from the dead.
I take him to be material for the assembly of God. Luke has that in view always. A young man who is converted and has not begun to speak in the assembly is depriving the Lord of His due, and is depriving the brethren, too, of their due; because the voice of the young convert, indwelt by the Spirit of God, is beautiful, is delightful to heaven. A young man saying "Abba, Father", by the Spirit of God -- there is freshness in that.
{327}
In chapter 24 we have the speaking of some who had strayed from the Lord, they had turned their backs on Jerusalem, and the Lord had gone after them, as the great Shepherd of the sheep. The day after the Lord arose was a very very busy day for Him in the activity of His love, and every day since has been busy; the Lord is constantly active, whether in converting souls or in going after the straying ones -- He is constantly active. It says, He went after two to Emmaus, and they came back. He did not come back with them; He went with them as they went in the wrong direction, which you might say is remarkable, but it is grace, it is Luke's way of presenting grace in the Lord's activities in recovering wandering ones.
Maybe there are some here who have turned their back on the assembly, which Jerusalem represents, and you have gone out "into the country", as Mark puts it; you have gone to Emmaus, a village. The Lord is here now to bring you back. They left that same hour, we are told, and they returned to Jerusalem. Oh, may God grant that some of you may just return, change your mind, as you sit there, and see how foolish you have been; you have been depriving yourself of the blessing of God.
The Lord would put it to you to *change* your mind. He would impress you with His grace. He is not charging you with anything. You know how beautifully Luke presents Him as the Shepherd going after the sheep, and when He finds it He does not reprove the sheep. He says nothing. He puts it on His shoulders and returns rejoicing. There is a marvellous setting out of grace in @Luke 15. It is illustrated in @Luke 24 in the most striking manner. The Lord went as far as He could, into their house, and sat down at their table, gave thanks for their meal, and broke the bread Himself. Wonderful grace! Then He left them, He vanished. Why did He not stay and go back with them? Because He is skilled in dealing
{328}
with souls. The idea of a shepherd is not only that he has affection for the sheep, but he has skill. It is a skilful profession, as I may say, dealing with sheep. So the Lord Jesus did not stay. He would rather see them go back themselves, and He did! He saw them act together themselves. It is very fine to see a believer who has strayed coming to himself like the prodigal, turning back the same hour. They might have waited until the morning; no, the work of God is ever true to itself; they returned that same hour, and went back to Jerusalem, which was a good distance, a good walk; and they found the eleven. Oh, you say, look at those few christians that meet down there; how small they are, how broken they are. How despicable they are! Those eleven in that little room, how small compared with the temple that Herod had built there, how despicable they were! Returning prodigals do not think like that. They know where the truth is; they know where the authority of Christ is, and where it is owned. They found the eleven; they were a broken company, but they loved the Lord and they respected His word, they kept His commandments -- that was characteristic of them; they are the greatest people on earth in God's mind, people who loved Jesus and in loving Him kept His commandments. I would urge you to find them, however few or many.
The returning ones found the eleven *and those* that were with them gathered together. What were they saying? "The Lord is indeed risen". What power there was in those words! Every word is power, especially the word "indeed". The Lord is risen *indeed*. That is glorious news. And then they say, "and has appeared to Simon". That means that grace reigned in that company, for Simon was a sinner. He was worse than the two that went to Emmaus; he denied the Lord Jesus with oaths and curses, but the Lord appeared to him in spite of that. That is grace. It is a question of what God can do in spite of our sins. That is the idea of grace; it
{329}
rises above our sins however black they are, and that is what they were saying, "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon". The whole atmosphere was victory and grace. If I were there with the blackest sins upon me I would say, There is hope for me: if He has appeared to Simon He will appear to me. So He would love to appear to you now to tell you that He has borne your sins in His own body on the tree; that you need never bear them, they are all put away, and that forgiveness and righteousness are yours *on the principle of faith*. Do not forget that. If anyone preaches the gospel without making it clear that it is on the principle of faith, he deceives you.
So the Lord appeared to Simon: that is what they were saying, and the Lord Jesus came in at that time and stood in the midst, as if to say, It is just what I want. I would urge young believers here not to deny to the Lord the speaking He is pleased with. Talk about His resurrection; talk about His glorification and His coming again; but talk about His present grace; what He is doing. He is casting out demons; He is appearing to Simons; He is restoring wanderers; He is building up His assembly in which the greatest possible speaking is to be heard, greater than that of angels, where the Holy Spirit is indwelling hearts and saying "Abba, Father". Angels do not say that; Jesus said it, and believers say it in the power of the Spirit of God.
{330}
COMPONENT PARTS OF A LOCAL ASSEMBLY
@Luke 8: 5 - 56; @Matthew 18: 15 - 20
J.T. In this chapter Luke groups what may be called the component parts of a local meeting -- the man, the woman, and the girl. They may be multiplied, of course, for a local company; more men, more women, and more young people, but it is easier to examine each of the features separately, as in one person. In Scripture we have examples of divine thoughts being exemplified in one person. All God's thoughts are exemplified in Jesus, and no one portrays these more beautifully than Luke. The assembly is of Christ, and in this chapter we have the elements divinely intended to compose it, at least in a local sense. What marked these three persons spiritually is of Christ. The Lord may help us, and use the chapter to give us a better understanding of what is His mind for our gatherings. Then we may see how Matthew supplies the *administrative* side, Mark the *ministerial* side, and John would fill us with *God*, as in Christ.
C.A.C. Could you give us briefly the thoughts connected with the three?
J.T. The first is the man. As possessed of the demons he represents the terrible condition into which man had fallen -- he is seen coming out of the city. Luke would show us the influence of cities especially on young people; we see the influence on this man, and his deliverance from the power of Satan in the city; his attitude, as delivered, is presented as what is *seen*. The passage says, "And they went out to see what had happened, and came to Jesus, and found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting, clothed and sensible, at the feet of Jesus", verse 35; the thing is seen. The man is not saying anything yet; his attitude is in view. They came to Jesus, but they found this man. It would suggest what is initial in a brother; he is sitting,
{331}
and clothed and sensible. A brother needs those three characteristics -- to be restful, learning, at the feet of Jesus, and clothed and sensible. The man represents what a brother should be initially; he is ready to learn; there is nothing obtrusive about him, nothing that will hurt anyone, but then, he wants to be *with* the Lord, wherever He is, and the Lord shows that He has confidence in him, that He can leave him alone in the place. No brother is of much value in a locality unless he can be relied on to stand himself. We are not much called upon to stand in this way, but still it is the divine thought, that each brother should learn to stand by himself, which this man does.
The woman has an internal trouble. It is one relieved of an old trouble, power having gone out of the Lord to effect this. He was conscious that power had gone out of Him, that is, there is something now in her that would work out in *subjection and transparency*; in the meantime she is endeavouring to conceal that she was cured. A great deal of trouble arises in our meetings because of the want of transparency. Here the Lord brought this woman to tell *all* the truth before *all*, and she is owned by the Lord as *daughter*, that is, she is in family relationship. Then the girl would be the potentiality of young people, and there we have the spiritual element stressed. The Lord orders out of the place those who derided Him, and detained only Peter and James and John, and the parents. So that this young person is revived into a very *spiritual environment*. We must not assume that young people are not capable of spiritual impressions; it is not wise to classify them by themselves; they will not get much help by themselves; the idea here is that they are brought into an atmosphere where they are impressed by what is spiritual.
C.A.C. That is very good. Is the thought that each of these three becomes a living exponent of the grace and power of Christ?
{332}
J.T. Yes, intelligence in the man, subjection and transparency in the woman, also family affections, and then a spiritual environment into which the girl is brought so that there may be spiritual development in her. It should never be assumed that young people are not capable of spiritual impressions. Segregating them by themselves for their education is damaging. This case would show that they ought to be as much as possible where there are spiritual persons.
H.H. Do they become a charge on the meeting generally?
J.T. Yes, three great apostolic leaders, Peter, James, and John, are there, and the Lord Himself; *great care* is suggested, and then parental responsibility is present, too.
E.J.McB. Then if you have the outward feature right in the man, and the inward right in the woman, it is fitting that the children should enjoy divine things with them.
J.T. I think that is how the matter stands. We have a remarkable group of persons -- seven in all, the Lord, the three disciples, the parents, and the child.
Ques. Do you take the father and the mother as representing the paternal and maternal influences in the meeting?
J.T. Paternal and maternal influence as in the household is not brought into the assembly, but the care and influence of parents over their children is intended to prepare them for the assembly. If you had asked those parents later as to this event, you would have had a difficulty to impress upon them the need of Sunday schools or children's meetings. I think they would furnish wise advice as to that. They would speak about their girl as she awoke and how she looked at the Lord, how she looked at Peter, at James, and at John. They watched her, you may be sure, and would note the effect of the presence of those persons upon her.
{333}
C.A.C. So that maturity was before her, and to bring *her* to this ultimately would be in view.
J.T. God presents the full thought to the young mind in order to bring such an one to it.
W.J.H. Would not the case of Samuel in the temple, living and growing *there*, confirm what you are saying? He was in the temple even before he knew the Lord personally.
J.T. Quite so. He was weaned before he was brought there. That is, he was not there under the influence of his mother. He was detached, but she kept an eye on him, and there is no evidence that that eye ever damaged him. You would always feel that she was looking after him, but he was in an environment where God was, which was also to be his objective; he was to be formed according to that. Hannah's little coat which she brought every year would mean that she was assuming he was growing spiritually; she would have no other thought. This bears on what is seen in the girl here; but we might begin with the man. God had said of old that "there was no man" and "there was none to answer", but the same chapter in Isaiah speaks prophetically about the Lord and how He came into manhood, how God opened His ear to hear as a learner, but it was to the end that He might speak a word to him that was weary, @Isaiah 50: 4. So that manhood in God's mind at the moment was to help others.
J.S. What is the thought in @Luke 8: 28, "seeing Jesus, he cried out"? He saw a Man.
J.T. There must have been something there in Jesus that brought out that cry. No ordinary man would have brought it out. This man was, we may say, a man of the city, and had come out of it. The city is an ordered place, where there are schools and so forth, but no man could affect him save Jesus. I believe that is what Luke has in mind. It is very initial, but there is something going on in his soul, and he is affected by Jesus.
{334}
Ques. Does it not indicate a subjective work of God in the soul that brings that cry to pass?
J.T. Quite so. Luke brings out that even such a man as this is affected by the presence of Jesus. It is the hardest kind of soil, and yet the presence of Jesus affects him.
H.H. Would those three marks, sitting and clothed and sensible, suggest a man suited for the assembly?
J.T. I thought we might see that, and how the chapter brings out that the hardest kind of man is affected by the presence of Jesus. There is no preaching; it is seeing Jesus, and that has to be in mind in ministry. It is what is of Christ that affects people. The fact even that we disturb people is good.
Ques. Would there be a difference between the man sitting at the feet of Jesus in his right mind, and the state secured as the outcome of that? There may be a right mind, but not yet a good state generally. Then, is there the further thought of spiritual affections formed?
J.T. Of course, this man would grow in the knowledge of God, but all that you mention was in him in principle. The mind has a great part in the make-up of a man. Romans works this out, "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law", says the writer in chapter 7. It is a great matter that the mind is divinely affected and that it acts accordingly. Then the man is *clothed*. We are not told who clothed him. He had been naked, and it must have been his own sensibility that led to the clothing. Then he is sitting -- he is restful. He must have been a very restless man, tossed about by evil inside, but now he is restful -- a very important thing in all of us in the meeting. All this is typical of the effect of the work of God in a believer; it is formation.
J.O.S. Why does the Lord ask the man his name?
J.T. To bring out who he is; one's name suggests what one is -- a man's history.
E.J.McB. Coming to Jesus and finding the man
{335}
would indicate an assembly element in a place. There may be more than one, but there is someone there who is an evidence of the work of Christ.
J.T. That is the idea. Worked out fully, it means an assembly in any town. The gospel presents Jesus "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved", @Acts 16: 31; but then when people come, what do they find? They find a man in this attitude. Thus the gospel brings in material for the assembly.
J.S. Would you say that 1 Corinthians shows that? It says, "For other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ", chapter 3: 11.
J.T. Yes. The Lord had intimated that He had much people in Corinth; but before the apostle began to preach he waited for Silas and Timotheus. When they came he was pressed because of the word, as if their presence afforded conditions of assembly character needed for the work. Those two men would be examples of what he preached. They had just been to Philippi and Thessalonica and Berea, and had had great opportunity of seeing the work of God. There are those who have no idea of concrete assembly testimony in gospel work, in the general thought it is simply what is said, but there is what is representative of the work of God, and that is what this man represents.
Ques. Do you get the thought in @Acts 3 where they saw the man who was healed?
J.T. That is right; the man was standing with them. He was not isolated; "he held Peter and John".
Ques. Would it hinder you from preaching the gospel if there is no assembly material in the place?
J.T. Well. I would not say you should not preach it, far otherwise, but it is a great matter to have the man. According to @John 11, many believed on Jesus because of Lazarus, and the more men representing the work of God the better. This man had to witness about God by himself. We are not told of any converts, but he
{336}
witnessed, and the remarkable thing is that he witnessed about Jesus. Jesus had told him to witness about God, but you must not think he was disobedient. He must have had some thought that Jesus was God; the gospel is what God has done through Jesus.
Ques. Why does it say they were afraid?
J.T. I suppose they were softened, but it seems a fear that marks unbelief. There is no indication that they were converted, but certainly there was a great testimony there to the gracious power of God. They ought to have been subdued and thankful for *such* a change in the man. Such a result of the work of God before their eyes will make their responsibility in the day of judgment greater.
Rem. There was really a great evidence of power there.
J.T. It is dreadful that they asked the Lord to leave, but still there was something there that caused fear. Evidently it was the man's condition that caused the fear, but why should a man sitting, clothed and in his right mind cause fear? The true fear of God is always right, but it does not draw us away from Him. Peter, convicted, asks the Lord to depart from him, but he fell at *His knees*. Here they ask the Lord to leave the country.
H.H. Would you say all this is reached in soul history in relation to the assembly, and that it might take time for these points to be covered by any particular individual?
J.T. Yes. We do not come into things quickly nowadays, but the work of God is usually a finished thought. In all the cases of healing in the gospels there is completeness. There may be filling out needed, but there is completeness.
C.A.C. I suppose the presence of the Spirit would necessarily bring the thought of completeness.
J.T. That is good. As God works in a person there is an indication of the full result. Whether in the gospels
{337}
or the Acts the same thing appears; there is completeness in the work done.
Ques. Would this be in view of the spread of the testimony? The man desired to be with Jesus, but He says, "Return to thine house and relate how great things God has done for thee".
J.T. Quite so; there is completeness in what had been done in the man: the Lord *trusts* him. There is completeness in each -- the man, the woman, and the child -- and then there is completeness collectively. You would like to be in a meeting with those three -- or rather the qualities they represent, in all present. It was the nucleus for the "large upper room", and the "large upper room", which only Luke speaks of, is to be filled with such people -- intelligence in the brothers, and transparency in the sisters, and interest in the young people; the latter do not consider spiritual meetings irksome.
Ques. Does the idea of "the works of God" being manifested, @John 9, include each complete feature of the work of God?
J.T. Yes. Note that the works should be *manifested*. The next case is the woman. The passage says, "And the woman, seeing that she was not hid, came trembling, and falling down before him declared before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was immediately healed". You can see the completeness of that work. She saw that she could not continue to conceal things.
H.H. Hers was not a matter of conduct, but of *state*, was it not?
J.T. Quite so. Her disease was of the same duration as the girl's age.
N.K.M. What is the cause of this lack of transparency so frequently found with us?
J.T. That is the point now. Of course, here it is a sister, but we must not make out that want of transparency
{338}
is confined to sisters. It is a question of that *element*, the element of unnecessary concealment of things that should be disclosed, for if the works of God are to be made manifest, it is a poor thing to be hiding them.
F.I. Do you think that efforts in regard of the young are often hindered because amongst the saints in their localities there is not this completeness and transparency?
J.T. If there is a spiritual state in a meeting the young people will be interested. As I observe, they are interested; normally coming out from spiritual parents, they are interested in what is spiritual. The book of Joshua contemplates that the children ask about the most spiritual things -- the twelve stones at Gilgal, for instance.
F.I. Do you think we should be more concerned as to the material inside than what is outside, in regard of the increase of the assembly composition?
J.T. That is what this chapter would bring out as to quality, and especially in the subjective side of things, that we are transparent. She fell down before Him and acknowledged before all: He would bring that about. In the other instances the Lord did not require this. It is a remarkable thing that He is conscious that power had gone out of Him. It was a secret touch, and power had gone out of Him and He is not going to let that be hidden. It is a question of the works of God, that they should be manifested, and how great a thing it is to see a woman made transparent and ready to acknowledge things openly, and falling down suitably too, in the presence of the Lord and all present. Children of a household in which there is a person like that, would be affected. The Lord directs her to be of good courage and to go in peace. *Her* faith had healed her. It is a question of the body of Christ, that is to say, what has gone out of Him, "The body is of Christ", @Colossians 2: 17, that which reflects Him, and I cannot reflect Christ unless I am
{339}
transparent. It is to bring about the body. The man is the intelligence, but the woman is the subjective side "we, being many, are ... one body", @1 Corinthians 10: 17, and it is the effect of something going out of Christ.
E.J.McB. Then in order to get this truth of the body in activity, there is a great need of coming into contact with Christ and confessing Him. All the virtue in the body has come from the Head.
J.T. Yes. The Lord said, "power has gone out from me". It is not here a question of His word or a command, but power silently going out of Him; thus in the healing there would be a result corresponding with Christ. Faith, owned by Him to be in her, and the relation of daughter amplify this.
Ques. How would the concealment of things affect the proper working of the body?
J.T. It hinders the operation of the Spirit. She was concealing the work of God in her, this is often concealed and hampered by other things. What a great conception it is! -- brothers and sisters coming together and sitting down as of the body, and there is not a thing that interferes with the working out of this great thought. How many things there are with us that interfere with the working out of the truth of the body! And the want of transparency is particularly to be judged.
W.C.G. The truth of the body, and Christ as our life, are brought together in the same epistle, "The body is of Christ", in @Colossians 2: 17, and "Christ ... who is our life", chapter 3: 4. So the body and life work out together. We can only come experimentally into life as healed of the issue.
J.T. Quite so. "The body is of Christ"; there is nothing in it morally that does not come out of Christ. That is how the truth in this respect works out in Romans, which is the epistle that helps us in it. From chapter 6 the great thought of life in the Spirit is in view, and chapter 7 comes in on the way. It is a remarkable
{340}
analysis, and anyone that goes through it has learned what is within and how to allow the automatic conditions inside to operate. There are organs that operate without the person's own direction, and chapter 7 helps us to make room for these, as purified, so that the Spirit of God can use them. Chapter 8 is that I am "not in flesh but in Spirit", room being made for Him. That chapter opens out what the Spirit is to us, working in each, which implies the body. Romans does not say that we are body of Christ, but that we are "one body in Christ", chapter 12: 5. It opens the way to the body, we reach it in the Spirit.
C.A.C. Is not the thought that true inwardness is to come out, not the flesh, but the true spiritual inwardness, what we are in the inward man?
J.T. That is what I think we may see in @Luke 8, that the whole matter is told out; the woman told out all the truth, and that is what @Romans 7 would help us to do. Is that your thought?
C.A.C. Yes, and in thinking of concealment we have often the thought of keeping from view what is of the flesh, but the important thing is that what is of God should come into view, that *that* should not be hidden. Is not that the real end of the transparency that you have in mind?
J.T. Exactly. I believe @Romans 8 is just that, that all that is not of God is discerned and seen to be dealt with judicially in the death of Christ. The believer says, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". The mind is thus released: "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law", @Romans 7: 25. That is a great point reached, and henceforth the Holy Spirit takes up the thread, and it is now what is of God in the christian. You see what he is; he stands up and speaks of God, and calls upon all that is within him to praise God. He is speaking of what is of God in him, and all *that* is now available in the service of God.
{341}
C.A.C. We have not come to be in our right mind until we come to that.
J.T. That is good. When the mind is released and dominates, the Spirit takes up the thread, and @Romans 8 is to bring out the liberty the believer has in the Spirit, and what there is for God in him. That makes room for Colossians, where we learn that all that is of the body comes out in Christ. @Romans 8 speaks a good deal about the Spirit, because it is to instruct us about Him, and the Spirit makes much of Christ. The believer's body is free now, so in chapter 12 he is to present it to God a living sacrifice. This woman's body is now free. In Colossians, Christ is Head of the body, the assembly; and in Ephesians He is Head over all things to it. Matthew has in mind that the assembly is here in relation to government; there must be control. The necessity for it comes out when a brother trespasses against another brother. If that happens, the necessity for control arises at once. Is there any thing, or any person or persons in authority that we can refer to? Have things to remain unsettled indefinitely? Is that the state of things in christianity? @Matthew 18 shows there is a way of adjustment according to God, and that there need be no delay.
C.A.C. Then you think that judges and officers and priests are still available for such matters?
J.T. That is what Deuteronomy brings out. When anything arises, there are judges; let them come forth and act as directed. Then by the gracious help of God you will have a settlement according to His mind. As we move in this way there will be light as we go; the assembly will come into evidence, at least in principle, and thus there will be authority for action, involving discipline.
C.A.C. The thought of gifts being set in the assembly will come in then.
J.T. Just so, 'Governments' are mentioned among the gifts, @1 Corinthians 12: 28. Such a gift is available
{342}
universally amongst the saints. It has the same general bearing as the other gifts.
F.I. Why is it that if these are always present they do not act?
J.T. Well, why is it? We have evidence that they do not act, that difficulties go on and there is no settlement, no end reached. It is foreign to christianity.
C.A.C. Gifts should not be local, they are available for any locality, and they would help in the carrying out of local responsibility.
J.T. You refer to the distinction made in @1 Corinthians 12 "God has set certain in the assembly", that is, the specific gifts are set *in the assembly*, and therefore are available *anywhere*, wherever the need is. That is what the gifts of government are for. There will not be any need of them in heaven; they are needed here.
C.A.C. Local responsibility in no way represents local independency.
J.T. Quite so; thus if there be a gift of government available, let it be used.
N.K.M. What would be the characteristics of a gift of government?
J.T. A gift of government would be a dweller in Jerusalem; he would understand Jerusalem; for there government is understood. In the future, light and government will issue from the heavenly city. But of course, gift implies more, for it is given by God and involves *power*. "Tell it to the assembly" implies that in which divine government is vested -- where discriminative judgment is exercised. How great a matter and how advantageous, that this exists, in the principle of it at least! The apostle complains as to the Corinthians; "there is not a wise person among you, ... able to decide between his brethren", @1 Corinthians 6: 5.
Rem. If there ought to have been wise persons at Corinth, we should look for them amongst ourselves.
J.T. It is impossible to work out the truth of the
{343}
assembly in any locality without wisdom, but a gift of government is one who understands government and has power to apply it. So the assembly seen in @Matthew 18 is possessed of such, and the knowledge of government is there.
J.O.S. Would the activity of Titus in Crete be on the line of the exercise of the gift of government?
J.T. Quite so. The Cretans were "always liars", and certainly they needed a man capable of rule; and elders were to be appointed by him.
G.C.S. In @Psalm 122 it says, "there are set thrones for judgment", that is in Jerusalem.
J.T. That is the thought of government. If we make room for the assembly, I believe the Lord will adjust everything for us. This means that we make room for all that He has provided for its order and maintenance.
J.O.S. Where what is presented in @Matthew 18 is not bowed to, does the government of God come in? I was thinking of the end of the chapter.
J.T. You mean that judgment came on the man, who although forgiven, failed to forgive his fellow-bondman. God hates the lack of the spirit of forgiveness. Luke would shew that the assembly began with grace. Matthew stresses the thought of government, but he requires grace, for it is grace reigning through righteousness. Luke would stress that the assembly began with grace: "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon", the great sinner, @Luke 24: 34. Well, that ought to impress you, if you have to do with a great sinner. If something serious happens amongst us, remember that the Lord appeared unto Simon. That is what they were saying in the first assembly meeting. Of course, Simon had wept bitterly because of his sin, and thus grace was reigning through righteousness in the assembly.
W.W. Sometimes grace is acted upon apart from righteousness.
{344}
J.T. Yes. Christ has made us a kingdom, and in that there must be righteousness, but it is grace reigning through righteousness through Jesus Christ our Lord.
C.A.C. I was wondering whether the thought of grace would lie in the fact that it is with the priests, the sons of Levi, that every stroke and controversy is to be determined. Does that imply the judgment of things according to the rule of grace?
J.T. You mean the priests represent that? Quite so. The priests are not, as a class, connected with a locality. They represent those who are spiritual, and, as loving God, have regard for all His interests. In the types they are the custodians of the law and keep the charge of Jehovah. This was in the tabernacle. Their responsibility was universal. In @Deuteronomy 21 the elders of the city nearest the slain man finally act as priests, interceding with Jehovah for *Israel*. They exhibit the spirit of priesthood and are thus, in principle, of the sons of Levi the priests, and like them have a universal outlook.
E.J.McB. Is the point rather stressed that in these matters it would be far better if it never got beyond the two, @Matthew 18: 15? You go to your brother and if you possibly can you save him, and so it goes no further, but if it goes further others may be involved, and then it may go far enough to involve the assembly, which is serious.
J.T. The way, according to this instruction, is to confine as much as possible any evil that arises, but that does not mean that the persons to whom it is confined are absolute in their authority, because the assembly as a whole is *always* in view. Leaving an eruption with the nearest meeting is a matter of wisdom, *depending on the facts*; that is, are priestly conditions there? We *must* have the priests, and they are to "come near". If they are in the nearest meeting, good and well, but if not, they must come from a greater distance. They cannot be limited by distance, their sphere of service being universal.
{345}
N.K.M. In @Psalm 82 it says, "God standeth in the assembly of God, he judgeth among the gods", verse 1.
J.T. Quite so. It is striking that the Spirit of God can refer to the assembly here without any explanation "tell it to the assembly". It is a great victory for heaven that there is such a company as that here on earth.
Ques. How does the assembly cause her voice to be heard? It says, "if he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly".
J.T. Well, the facts are presented to the assembly by accredited witnesses. The law of the assembly requires this; as in any court, facts are to be told in a suitable way. Court rules are usually wisely rigid, and things entering into any case should be told to the assembly in a sober, unbiased way. What is stated must be *known relevant facts*, for a court will rule out any others. We must have known facts, and they are presented to the conscience of the assembly. Then, room being made for the Lord, you will have a true judgment, and it is bound in heaven.
Rem. It is a place where true judgments are rendered and maintained.
J.T. It is, "Tell it to the assembly"; it is not the sanhedrim, but *the assembly*. The Lord had already spoken of "my assembly", and as we have that and present the case properly to it, we have results according to God.
C.A.C. That is also brought down to the "two or three?"
J.T. Yes; it will be noted that a change of conditions is suggested in verse 19, where the Lord says, "Again I say to you". He had mentioned what related to the assembly normally as in verse 18, saying, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on the earth shall be loosed in heaven"; heaven ratifies what is done in the assembly. After that He says, "Again I say to you, that if two of
{346}
you shall agree ..." that is, He brings the principle down to "two of you", and then to the "two or three", so that we have the means of settling matters of judicial action in our own times. Two "of you", two of the assembly who, as of one mind, pray; and two or three "gathered together unto my name", the Lord being "in the midst of them": there is *power* to do things, to maintain the mind of God in remnant times.
C.A.C. In connection with the two or the "two or three" prayer comes in, as if special dependence was called for in what might be called remnant conditions.
J.T. That is most important. "Two of you" would mean two of the assembly, "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens". *God* acts for us. It may be two sisters, God acts for them; but then, there is the coming together in His name, where His presence is felt, thus *they* can act *for* God; there is power. There is thus no reason why difficulties should be allowed to drag along and no result reached at all. It is a disgrace, a denial of these thoughts, if things are not settled.
Ques. Does "if two of you shall agree" suggest normal assembly conditions?
J.T. The allusion in @Matthew 18, as we have been saying, is to abnormal conditions, but nevertheless God acts for those who pray. What follows is that two or three gathered unto the Lord's name have the Lord in the midst of them, and hence *they* can act -- He supports them.
{347}
THE LORD JESUS PRESENTING HIMSELF
@Song of Songs 2: 9, 10; @Acts 1: 3; @Revelation 22: 16, 17
These verses speak of the Lord Jesus as presenting Himself to His people under the varied circumstances spoken of in these scriptures. There is a peculiar attractiveness in His presentation of Himself. The scriptures abound with presentations of Christ, in type and figure in the Old Testament, and direct statements in the New. The Lord speaks of this; He said that the Scriptures testified of Him, "They are they", He says, "which testify of me", @John 5: 39. If we read the scriptures aright and approach them as lovers of Jesus and as admirers of Jesus, we shall see wonderful things about Him. The Spirit of God loves the office of testifying in this way. One thing about the Spirit, dear brethren, is feeling: we are not devoid of feelings, of course, but often they are fleshly and mixed even in our service and praise. But the Spirit of God is marked by feelings and these feelings are expressed in those He uses. We read at the very beginning that "the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters". He was occupied with the conditions feelingly; and so it is that throughout scripture His feelings are expressed in persons He uses to present Christ in type and figure, and in direct statements, particularly in the Psalms where you get deep feelings in the writers -- they were affected by the Spirit. The assembly is to be affected by the Spirit, those of us who belong to it are to have spiritual feelings as well as intelligence, "I will sing with the spirit" (@1 Corinthians 14: 15), that is, feeling enters into the singing, controlled by the mind of course but nevertheless the feeling is there. The poetic books of the Old Testament afford most of this depth of feeling, and this song, which is called the Song of Songs which is Solomon's -- which is Christ's in
{348}
spirit -- is outstanding as expressive of feeling, a master-hand depicting it, whether in Himself or in those He would affect. The feminine figure represents the saints. The scriptures abound with presentations of Christ, and when He presents Himself we have what is particularly attractive, and it is so in these three passages.
The first passage has in mind believers who are somewhat at a distance from the Lord. No doubt the larger number of christians are content to move along somewhat at a distance, finding a certain amount of satisfaction even, without the immediate company of Christ. We readily allow things, saying they are legitimate, but they serve the enemy well, to hinder our view of Christ and our occupation with Him and to hinder Him getting near to us. He has His eye on every one of His own, however distant they may be from Him. He never loses sight of any of us, and the language here indicates that the Person spoken of is more than a mere creature. The remarkable kind of agility is more than creature agility, "He cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills". An ordinary creature would soon get tired of that. It denotes more than creature power, and the Lord would have us to understand that, as the Lover of our souls and the Seeker of our company, He has more than creature power. Not only can He skip on the hills, but He makes the hills themselves to skip. You remember in @Psalm 114, it says, "The mountains skipped like rams, the hills like lambs". That is in the presence of the ark -- in the presence of the Lord. Such is His power and influence that all has to give way to Him. Here it is not that; it is rather His power to move in spite of these obstacles. He does not remove them, but moves in spite of them. Sometimes we look to see things removed, but it is a greater thing to see the Lord moving in spite of them. So as the passage shows, "He cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills". He has an object in His mind,
{349}
and that object includes every christian however distant from Him. Where should we be were it not for His great solicitude and agility to reach us in spite of obstacles. So that He *comes*; it testifies that He cometh, not going, He is coming, a very different matter. He is coming and the bride tells us what He is like, "a roe or a young hart". The Lord is enhanced in her mind by the way He comes. Here it is not coming in love amongst us as in the gospels, but coming from a great distance and overcoming obstacles without any difficulty; it is a question of His divine power. He comes and He draws out this note as to what He is like. The Lord is acquiring a place in the heart of the speaker. She likens Him to a roe or a young hart. These figures denote agility and comeliness, because there is something very fine in His movements. And then, as the speaker says, "He standeth behind our wall" -- He is standing there. The Lord who comes with such energy and desire is now standing. It is a question now of reaching the person. This is all for a distant heart, for hearts that are distant from Christ and enclosed behind obstacles, obstacles that are between Him and them, and between them and Him -- He overcomes them. Love never fails and certainly in Christ it never fails. He stands behind "our wall", it denotes exclusiveness; we may have a wall to exclude Christ, we may settle down in something which we regard as legitimate and right, but it effectively keeps Him at a distance all the time. There is much of that, dear brethren. Brethren who profess the heavenly calling settle down in certain settings which really imply exclusion of Christ.
It goes on to say in the verse read, "He looketh in through the windows, glancing through the lattice". The windows or lattice or both are between, but He is overcoming all obstacles, that is the point. "Glancing through the lattice", it may read, "flourishing himself". It is some particular way in which the Lord calls
{350}
attention to Himself. He keeps on at it until you say, "It is the Lord". One might cite the instance of the seven brothers in @John 21 who went fishing and caught nothing. The Lord had obstacles to contend with to reach them, but He overcame the obstacles. He went round to get at them and He got at them. He says, "Children, have ye anything to eat?" That is a beautiful word -- Children -- it is grace to remind them that the relation stands whatever the distance, whatever the will, whatever the exercise of natural desire, the relation stands. "Children, have ye any meat?" Presently one of them says, "It is the Lord". That is the point. John said that. Here in the Song of Songs He is glancing through the lattice. There is some movement, I suppose it is the eye. There is no organ that conveys beauty and attractiveness more than that. It is designed to be that. Of David it is said that he was beautiful-eyed. We read in this book, of doves eyes. The Lord is endeavouring to attract you in those circumstances. He would have you in nearness to draw you away from the circumstances whatever they are; the Lord wants us in nearness. Love abhors distance; one has often said and heard that, but it cannot be repeated too often. It is most distressing when we build up legitimate things to shut Him out and yet the Lord continues to look at us and seeks to attract us. He has wonderful ability to get at His people; He wants all His people in nearness to Him. I am speaking in this practical way particularly for the young. The Lord does not remove the obstacles; He overcomes the obstacles and the inference He would convey is 'You can do it too'. We may ask the Lord to remove this or that obstacle or difficulty but He says, 'I want you to understand you can overcome these things'. They are to be overcome. It is a great principle in scripture that God acts in spite of difficulties, and faith can do the same thing. The word 'overcomer' denotes that. An overcomer is not a person before whom
{351}
God removes every difficulty; he is one who overcomes the difficulties. It brings out the energy of life.
This passage runs on so beautifully. The bride says, "My beloved spake and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away. For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone; the flowers appear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land; the fig tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender grape give a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away", verses 10 - 13. The circumstances are not right: "Come away", get out of them, come away. Added to the attractiveness of the speaker -- of Christ -- there is this energy of life as in spring time, because the Lord is moving in that connection, not making everything hinge upon Himself, although it does. In the new man Christ is everything and in all; 'in all' is the spring time, the energy of life. Christ in the saints would be the spring time -- Christ in the energy of life in the saints. The believer is drawn to Christ and all around is spring; that is how the work of God proceeds, Christ is everything as an Object and in all. That is like the spring time when all these beautiful things spring up in life; the winter is past, the rain is over, the time of the singing of birds is come -- all these things are the fruits of the Spirit. Is not that attractive? Do we not want to join in this fruitfulness that the Spirit of God is effecting?
That is the first thought I had. The second is that Christ is not only seeking to gain souls and attract them out of unsuitable circumstances, but to have them in life in Himself, the kind of life that is in the mind of God. How early life is as regards vegetation, we get it brought in in Genesis on the third day, then animal life, and then human life. The last is the divine thought, but not yet presented as in the counsels of God. Adam was only a figure; God breathed into him and he became a living
{352}
soul. He became that by the breathing of God, but he was only a figure of Him that was to come. Life now is presented in Christ; not in the days of His flesh did He present Himself thus. He did it after He suffered. "Having by the Holy Spirit charged the apostles whom he had chosen, he was taken up; to whom also he presented himself living, after he had suffered", @Acts 1: 3. The apostles were competent witnesses of this great matter. Sometimes the question is raised, Who were present when the supper was instituted? If we go by the scriptures we see that the twelve were with Him, the point being authentic testimony to what was there, and that is what we have here. Here we have them again, the twelve, that is the apostles, those He had chosen and to whom He had presented Himself. There is no doubt what is in mind. The thing is to be presented without question, "To whom he presented himself". It is the Lord's own way; no one but the Lord could do it as He did it; He presented a life that was in the mind of God for us, He presented Himself living after He had suffered. That is the kind of life. This is not merely for attractiveness to draw us out of unsuitable associations; it is to impress us for the assembly and for heaven. We are to be like Him even as to our bodies; "Who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory", @Philippians 3: 21. That is what we are to be like. God effects this through our feelings, our affections and intelligence, so He produces impressions. We are formed by impressions. It was said to Moses on the mount, "See that thou make them according to their pattern" (@Exodus 25: 40) that was so that he might be impressed by what he saw. No one could make the tabernacle according to the specification but Moses. Christianity is to be inaugurated with the clear impression in intelligent chosen men of the life God had in mind in His counsels. That life is personified livingly in Christ. He is "the
{353}
eternal life", @1 John 1. When we come to Acts there is the assembly and life according to the counsel of God, dear brethren. Christ is it, He is the eternal life, "that which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life; (and the life has been manifested, and we have seen, and bear witness, and report to you the eternal life, which was with the Father, and has been manifested to us)". The epistle of John is the great epistle on this point, it brings out the life that was manifest "concerning the word of life", not only the thing but the word that conveys it to us, that we might be impressed and know as we enter on it what it is -- this is what we should treasure. The epistle of John was written for that -- "These things have I written to you that ye may *know*", that is conscious knowledge. Again it says, "He is the true God and eternal life", @1 John 5: 20. I hope I am not saying what is beyond us; it is humbling if it is so. The Lord shows Himself to convey the idea of life; He presented Himself living after He had suffered. At the end of that verse it says, "Being seen of them forty days". A full period of time was given that the Lord should be seen in varied circumstances here after He suffered. It is not that He appeared to them, as elsewhere, but they saw Him -- they were competent witnesses. He was seen of them during that period of time -- forty days -- a full period is given so that there could be no question that the thing was seen by one and another of them; Christ out of death, Christ after He had suffered, Christ as He is; though we ought to make allowance for the word "glory". It is His body of glory. John says we do not know what we shall be -- "It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him", -- notice that. He was seen of them forty days, but then "we shall see him as he is".
{354}
My final thought is in @Revelation 22: 16. My first thought had reference to recovery, or saints being brought into nearness to Christ -- companionship to Christ. My second thought is that, as thus brought, as thus together, convened, called persons, we are to be impressed with what He is that we might understand life as in the counsel of God for us. Then thirdly and finally, I want to show how the Lord presents Himself to the assembly at the end of the dispensation in which we now are. "I Jesus", it says, "I" is the Person speaking; "Jesus" is the name by which He is known. It is Himself as we get it at the end of the gospels -- "It is I myself". It is Himself, dear brethren, and the assembly is to understand. I believe the Lord's supper is much before us, thank God, at the present time, and it is to help us in relation to Himself. One can understand the apostle saying to the best results of his ministry -- the Ephesians -- that he would have them to understand "my knowledge in the mystery" -- they did not understand it. It is perhaps what is least known, Christ's relation to the assembly and the assembly's relation to Him. Here He says, "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies". He says, as it were, 'it is Myself, I have taken account of the church and all the exigencies of the church's history here below, and I have sent Mine angel'. That is a representative, but it is "I Jesus" who is doing the matter and it is in relation to the assembly. He says, 'I have sent My angel to let you know I have thought of you'. The Lord would impress upon us how faithful He has been. Should we have any meetings like this, should we have any breaking of bread, were it not for His faithfulness? We should be where the great masses are, in worldly religious associations, or worse. Whatever we are, it is due to the faithfulness of Jesus. He has never lost sight of the assembly from the beginning; the seven assemblies is the whole thought.
{355}
He says, "*I* Jesus have sent mine angel to testify ..." He would say, as it were, 'You have got away from Me, and I have overcome it in regard to you, and have sent mine angel to testify to you in the assemblies. The whole assembly is mine'. Does that not appeal to us? All that we are and have today, individually or collectively, is directly due to the faithfulness of Jesus in sending His angel "to testify these things to you in the assemblies". It ought to affect our hearts and produce more loyalty. The Lord will be what He has been to the end. He will be what He has been right through; He knows what is ahead, He is prepared for it. He will not remove the difficulties, He will overcome them. Let us not be deceived as to what is coming; we are getting near the end of things, things that are quite unexpected will happen. The enemy is attacking the Lord's people, difficulties will come that we have not expected; the enemy is attacking the assembly, but the point is, the Lord has overcome and He looks for us to overcome. He will empower us to do so, that is how He met the enemy and does meet him.
I would speak now of the Lord's faithfulness in testifying and sending His angel, and then the response. Further He says, "*I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come". He is speaking now of what He is to the erring church. He sent His angel to testify, but He says, "*I* am the root and offspring of David". He is now appealing to a movement that He has brought about in some, however few. It is normal and characteristic of the assembly that the assembly knows who Christ is. The Lord has been challenging us in recent years as to who He is. He says, "I am the root ... of David", and "the offspring" too. It is as if He would say, Do you understand? He challenged some opposers as to David calling Him Lord -- "If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?" @Matthew 22: 45. They
{356}
could not understand that. The church can answer that, it is His deity, dear brethren. You know how the creed has cast a shade on the deity of Christ for about fifteen hundred years. The saints have been under a shade, their minds have been beclouded as to the deity of Christ by the accepted creed of christendom, saying that He was begotten of the Father before the foundation of the world. That has cast a shade on His glorious Person, but the church normally does not hold that; John did not hold that, his gospel contradicts it. There is no begetting in past eternity, it is here on earth -- "This day have *I* begotten thee" (@Hebrews 1: 5), that is in time as a Man below. The assembly understands that. John represents normally the understanding of the assembly, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". That is the statement, the enemy cannot get rid of that statement, it keeps Christ before the saints in His true dignity and deity, and we are to hold it fast; on the other hand, glorying in the fact that He has become a Man, which opens up the side for us to be His brethren for ever. "The root ... of David" -- and offspring, which is His humanity, His Person is unchanged and unchangeable. He has taken a new condition, but He has not changed His Person, He remains what He is. "Before Abraham was, I am", He says, @John 8: 58. He is the root of David, but He is the offspring, and moreover, the bright and morning star.
May the Lord move in our hearts as we think of it, as He presents Himself in this way, "The Spirit and the bride say, Come", the Spirit takes the lead. When the failure took place in Thyatira, when the candlestick was lost, the Lord addressed Himself to Sardis as One who "*has* the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars". What a great fact that He *has* the seven Spirits of God! The Spirit has asserted Himself in these last days, and in asserting Himself He has made everything of
{357}
Christ. As Christ presents Himself in this way, the Spirit says, Come, and the bride says Come -- there is a perfect lead. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", @Romans 8: 14.
That is what one had in mind to impress us with. Then there is the word John adds, thinking of the saints and the gospel, for the gospel was near to John's heart. In the main, he wrote to assert the deity of Christ, but you get statements in John that you get nowhere else about the gospel. So here, "Let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely". It is as if the coming of the Lord would suggest that. Every true lover of Christ would say, Let us tell everyone about Christ! "Let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely".
May the Lord bless His word.
{358}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD DOES NOT COME WITH OBSERVATION
@Luke 17: 20 - 37
This is a very solemn scripture, speaking of certain days, the days of the Son of man, the days of Noah, and the days of Lot. Days cover in these instances a period before judgment, and that is why they are read because our days are now just before judgment; the judgment has not yet come, but it is imminent. We have also here the thought of *the day* of the Son of man -- that has not yet come, it is immediate judgment as it comes: and the word 'night' is used too -- 'that night'. But what I have in mind is not to preach judgment but the gospel, and in order to do that I have read from verse 20, where we have the kingdom of God alluded to and certain persons asking about it. Maybe there are those here now who are asking in their minds about it. These Pharisees were asking the Lord about it, and, whilst there is no evidence that they profited by His answer, yet He did answer them. He is ready to answer any enquirer here, even although your enquiry may not evince much, or any, interest; He is ready to answer anyone who has any enquiry here at this time. And so He says, "The kingdom of God cometh not with observation", that is, it does not come with outward show, it is a matter of faith, when the Son of man comes. "As the lightning", He says, "that lighteneth out of the one part under heaven, shineth unto the other part under heaven; so shall also the Son of man be in his day". But what the Lord says about the kingdom of God here reminds us of our period: it is not a period of sight at all, it is a period of faith; there is no blessing now apart from faith, it is the principle on which the gospel is presented. It is on the principle of faith to faith; the first referring to me (to be simple about it now) that I am presenting it to you on that principle, that I believe it myself -- as
{359}
Paul said, "I believed, and therefore have I spoken", @2 Corinthians 4: 13. So that no unbeliever should preach the gospel, he has no right to preach the gospel, it is as one believes that he preaches; it is on the principle of faith in the preacher to the listener -- faith is supposed to be in him too -- it is on the principle of faith to faith. So that one hopes that faith will be active in every one; otherwise there is nothing for you. You may say, 'Well, where does that come from?' The Spirit of God says that "faith ... is the gift of God". You may say, 'Then I have to wait till I get the gift'. Yes; but it is a very solemn thing not to have it, it is a terrible thing not to have it. It is said, "All men have not faith" (@2 Thessalonians 3: 2) -- that is a terrible thing for them. So that it is for each of us to see about it, why it is I have not got it. Then we are told another thing, that "Faith cometh by hearing", @Romans 10: 17. I do not think that any one could really define faith; scripture speaks about it as to its effect in those who have it, what results from it, but to define it is another matter, as indeed with many things, they are indefinable, but very real. There are many many things in nature, even in our own selves, that we do not know of; it is well to admit our ignorance, but our ignorance does not disprove anything. We are conscious of many things we cannot define, but we know they are there, and so we are told that faith comes -- that it is an active thing -- it comes by a report. So that obviously, if you are to get it, you must have a good ear, you must use your ears. And then another thing that enters into this is, "He that cometh to God must believe that he is" -- @Hebrews 11: 6, not that He is a judge or that He frowns upon you, but that "he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him". That is the line to take, do not wait for a definition of faith, or put the responsibility upon any other person if you have not got it; it is moving, it is existing, and the scripture tells you how it comes to you and that it refers to certain organs
{360}
you have. Then use those organs, be simple about it; it comes by hearing, or by a report it says, and then hearing is by the word of God -- it is not hearing anything or everything, it is the word of God. Think of God speaking at the present time, stop to dwell upon the great fact that God is speaking, it is the time of God speaking, not about judgment -- He does speak about judgment, but in the gospel God is speaking about Jesus, it is worth listening to -- "The gospel of God", we are told, "... concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 1: 1 - 3. Some of us own Him as Lord, we know Him personally, He is our Lord. He is God's Son and God is speaking about Him; this meeting is to that very end that God should say a word about Jesus, and if you have an ear, do not fail to use it; if you have a conscience, do not stifle it, let it be active. The word of God is wonderful, it is "quick and powerful", we are told, "and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow", @Hebrews 4: 12. There is nothing like it in the universe in that sense; it is "a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do". You see how the word of God brings us to God, and that God is speaking.
Well now, that brings me back to the 20th verse where the Lord, as over against the days of the Son of man which are future, speaks about the kingdom of God, and the Lord says, it does not come with observation. If an archangel came with a trumpet throughout this town and announced something -- well, we would not need faith for that, we should pay attention to that. Presently, we are told, the everlasting gospel shall be preached by an angel and he will be flying in mid-heaven, it will be a quick matter and evidently open -- flying in mid-heaven. We are being accustomed now to flying in mid-heaven.
{361}
Daniel became accustomed to flying too; not like these things they call aeroplanes that make such a noise; the Spirit of God tells us that when Daniel was praying and making supplications to God, the angel Gabriel flew swiftly to him, @Daniel 9: 21. Angels are very agile, they represent executive power on God's part, they do things quickly, they do them well. If you look at the book of the Revelation, you will see their number is immense, and it says they are "all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation", @Hebrews 1: 14. They are always active on our behalf, but they are not visible, the natural eye does not see -- faith understands. But this angel Gabriel was a priestly angel, we understand, one that is very sympathetic, and, it says, he flew swiftly. Another allusion to angels is as seraphs. In the book of Isaiah a man is seen stricken. I wonder whether there is one here like that, smitten in his conscience because of his guilt; as soon as the word of God gets in and it searches out the depths of the being, the innermost part, we are told, then sin comes into view, it cannot help it. The spirit of man is said to be "the candle of the Lord", @Proverbs 20: 27. He goes round the crevices of your being, searching out the inner parts. Not that He needs to search out, but that you might be illuminated in your soul, and acknowledge the history. It is bad history -- I do not care what you say you are or have been. If the Spirit of God went round the crevices of your heart, what would He discover? The woman in the 4th of John said, "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did". The Lord told her, He searched her out; it was a question of the word of God. But then her own spirit was in the matter too. God would not deal with an animal like that, an animal has not a sense like that; but God's Spirit is to search out a *man's* heart. So that, if there is any one like the one I am speaking of here, the Lord is searching you. It may be it is fifty years since you were
{362}
first able to talk and walk. What will it disclose? It will disclose everything that is contrary to God; if there be anything that is according to the mind of God, that will come out too, and often young people are helped by being reminded that at one time they did believe. Maybe the world has choked that faith, but still it is a comfort that it was once there. But if there is anyone at all convicted, now is the time, and the Lord says here, "The kingdom of God cometh not with observation". That is, the authority of God is in mind, what God is is in mind, and it slips into your heart, you do not see it. Let any one here who is a christian look back on his history and see how the thing came in; maybe just a little bit of movement in your soul, but it got in. The kingdom of God is a moral thought here, as it generally is; it is a question of God, of what has come into the heart in the way of rule, of authority -- surely He has authority over you! The wise man says to the young people, "Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth", @Ecclesiastes 12: 1 -- "*thy Creator*", that means He has authority. He has some right in your heart. If you do, He will get in, He has a way of getting in quietly, silently, but surely. Elihu tells us a good deal in the book of Job, how, in a dream even, God speaks. One has heard of God creeping in, as it were, in a dream. You wake up and all is changed -- something has happened. God has done that, nobody has seen it, you did not even know it yourself, you could not give an account of it at the time; but there it is, a great change has come over you. The Lord says, it does not come with observation "Lo here, or, Lo there". There are various bodies of people who make a noise, in this country and in America, some bringing round bands, etc. Now all that sort of thing is not necessary, it is not the way at all; the kingdom of God comes in a moral sense, in a silent powerful way, so that something happens and you know it; nobody else perhaps knows it, but you know it. Has it happened
{363}
in your case? It has happened in mine, and I know in that of most of us, and heaven has taken account of the event. When God gets in in His divinely skilful way into a man's heart and being, that is recorded above, that is history in heaven. No historian on earth would take the slightest notice of it, but it is history in heaven -- God is keeping a record of that. Much is to follow that, you see. It cometh not with observation; it is the blessed rule of God coming into the being. But then, what a God! If He speaks to me, having got a footing, what will He say? Well, He will tell me about Jesus. The Holy Spirit is here for you, on your account, so that you might know about Jesus and about God. 'It is your blessing to know Me', God will say, 'Your blessing depends on what I am going to tell you'. That is the kingdom of God, and it is very remarkable that it is said of the Lord Jesus, as He arose from the dead, that He presented Himself alive to His disciples after He suffered, and then that He was seen of them forty days, and then that He spoke to them of the kingdom of God. That is the idea. One would like to hear what He said to them. Luke says He spoke to them about the kingdom of God. What He would convey was that God was coming in, not with observation. Not indeed that the gift of the Spirit at Pentecost was not noticed, it was necessary it should be noticed in the things that were used, but there was no flourish of trumpets, as you say. There were three thousand affected at the first preaching, Peter's preaching; one always feels like reading that sermon before one preaches; it was the first sermon after the Spirit of God came down. He refers to the Spirit sent down from heaven, or poured out, it is an imperative matter. It does not say Jesus is sent down. His Person is guarded in that way, but the Spirit is said to have been sent down and that is a priestly thought. The first preaching is wonderful, and the Spirit of God steals into hearts, three thousand hearts
{364}
were affected by the rule of God; that is the idea, that God has rights in your heart and He gets in there. What they very rightly said, and what every one says when he is convicted of sin, was, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" They say that to all the apostles; they saw those men represented that thought, the kingdom, the authority, of God, and they say, 'You are the ones to ask -- what shall we do?' And Peter told them what to do, he says, "Repent and be baptised *every one of you*" -- for it is not a collective matter, you know. If three thousand were saved at once, each one of them repented, and each one was baptised. And he says, "Ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit". It is the kingdom of God. What is the kingdom of God in full result? Righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. What a volume of blessing there is in the kingdom of God! And yet the Lord says there is no great show about it, it comes not with observation, and men are satisfied and women are satisfied -- righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.
Well now, having said that, which is the positive side of the truth. I just proceed to say a little about the days of the Son of man. That refers to the present time in a way, that is, the period immediately before judgment. The Lord likens them to the days of Noah and the days of Lot. The whole scripture is so useful as explanatory and as enlarging the truth so as to make it intelligible. Someone here perhaps is not saved, though he has heard preaching and preaching and preaching, as the antediluvians did. I do not suppose Noah had gospel meetings as we have them. I feel pretty sure he did not, but he preached nevertheless -- he is called a preacher of righteousness, and we have the remarkable statement in connection with his testimony that, "My spirit shall not always strive with man", @Genesis 6 :3. It was a striving time *on God's part*. The Lord said in His time, "The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it
{365}
by force" (@Matthew 11: 12); that is, there were some striving when the Lord was here. They saw what was available and they strove, they took the kingdom by violence -- perhaps most of us have done that. But in Noah's case the striving was all on God's part. Think of the grace of God in striving, for that is what is meant -- the Spirit of God is God Himself in all that He is feelingly and affectionately -- that is the idea in the Spirit. The Spirit hovering on the face of the deep -- that is like the Spirit of God hovering over this meeting. Suppose all were uncovered here, the Spirit of God would be hovering over us in the darkness waiting to get in; but we are, it may be, all christians and full of light. But the Spirit was hovering over the face of the deep, and the next mention we get of Him is striving with men in that antediluvian time, the days of Noah, not willing that any should perish. The days of man's life shall be a hundred and twenty years, that refers to the period of grace, not the longevity of the people at all, and God was striving with men in the preaching of Noah in those days. Nobody was affected, as far as we see. It is quite clear that Shem was a converted man, as we speak, and I suppose Japheth and Ham too, for all the sons of Noah were blessed. But, as regards all others, there is not a word of one being affected, and yet there was the blessed Spirit of God day in and day out striving with men. Is there anybody here that God is striving with? The Spirit of God striving with you, seeking your soul, as I am speaking to you? It often happens. God makes you feel that He is intensely interested in you and wills not the death of the wicked, nor that any one should perish; that is the feeling that comes into your soul in the striving of the Spirit of God. But there is not a sign of anything of that here, and so the Lord likens His days to the days of Noah. The kingdom, He says, is in the midst of you, that means it was in Himself. But, now He has gone to heaven and the Spirit of God
{366}
come down, the kingdom is still here in that sense. But now He is speaking of the days of the Son of man, that is the actual time of the judgment. What the Lord says about Noah here refers to the social side of human life, a side of human life that has great influence: He says, "They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage" -- that is all social. You may say eating and drinking is a business matter; no, it is a social matter; a domestic matter, of course, but it enters into the social side of human life. They married and gave in marriage, that also is social. Then it goes on to Lot, and it says they ate and drank in his days too and "they bought, they sold", -- that is business, "they planted, they builded". We have to eat and drink and do our business, but it is a question of enjoyment and fellowship, and that was how things went on in the days of Noah. I need not enlarge on how much social life keeps God out at the present time. I do not know anything perhaps that is more powerful amongst men than the social side, the tea-parties and the dances and the seaside excursions and the cricket playing and the tennis playing and the card playing, and the thousand things that have been invented to keep men going. Eating and drinking, the social side of things, the Lord says all that went on until the day that Noah entered into the ark. Now if there is one here who is specially interested in the social side of life and you are a Christ-rejecter up to this time, how solemn this is for you to listen to. The social side of the world is detaining you, and the Lord is warning you tonight that it is a question of the days of the Son of man, the days just preceding the day when He actually comes -- and then what? Well, the Lord says, "The flood came, and destroyed them all". There is hardly a book in scripture more attacked than Genesis and the flood is regarded as a myth by the clever people, the wiseacres of the world. But here is the Lord Jesus saying this. There are those
{367}
who would say the Lord Jesus is attested to be the Christ and the Saviour of the world, and yet they deny the book of Genesis; they put a lie in His mouth, for He cites the book of Genesis. The Lord says, things are going on as usual, men having a good time with their sport and all that, without Christ "until the day that Noah entered into the ark".
And then, as I was saying, there are those who are living in the business world. Many are kept from God through business: business is very attractive, one of the most attractive things to certain minds -- making money. So the Lord says here about Lot's days, they did eat and drink, etc. -- all business. I am not saying the social side was not there, of course it was, but the Lord is presenting the other side of the picture. Maybe you are having a house built and you are putting off your salvation until that is done. Maybe you intend to go into business, into partnership with some person, you say, That is all before me now, I must put off everything else. You have to make a garden beautiful, you might say; many do that -- shut out Christ by the garden. That is the thought -- they bought, they sold -- that is the commercial world; they builded, they planted -- that is the architectural world; but it is all money -- making, it is all business, and the Lord is left out, Christ is left out. That all went on until the day in which Lot went out of Sodom -- that is the day, and that day is always present. Some of you here may be putting Christ away from you, your salvation, your eternal welfare, because of some of these wretched things, but the day is coming when the Lord Jesus will come. We know from the Scriptures that the saints will be caught up before the public display of Christ, and of course that is included in the days when the Lord comes. And then He warns us as regards these matters; suppose you are on the housetop and your stuff in the house -- that is your business matters, your property -- do not go for that; He stresses the urgency of judgment,
{368}
how rapid it is, how sudden and how awful. It is individual judgment here, it is not the great white throne, the point is the immediate thing; the great white throne does not take place till a thousand years after this. What the Lord is pressing on you now is the immediate thing that may happen tonight. Two men shall be in one bed, two men shall be in the field -- it is the immediate thing, so that you must not flatter your soul with any thought of judgment being in the distance; it is the immediate thing if the day comes. "There shall be two men in one bed; the one shall be taken and the other shall be left. Two women shall be grinding together; the one shall be taken and the other left. Two men shall be in the field; the one shall be taken the other left". It seems as if the whole twenty-four hour day is in mind, day and night, it is all called "the day", the day of the Son of man, and it is the immediate effect if this happens. You are going on with your social and business matters and the judgment is immediate. They say, "Where, Lord?" and He says, "Wheresoever the body is, thither will the eagles be gathered together". It is a judgment that is silent, stealing into the bedroom, as it were, without any announcement, and one man is taken -- most solemn -- no one can go into the details of this -- it is God. A man is taken. You say, 'Where is he taken?' Well, he is seized, it is a violent thought; there is no assize, no sessional judgment, the judgment finds you; wherever the carcase is, there will be the eagles. It is a Jewish picture but we understand it. It is what happens on the earth that the person who is seized is taken away from the place of blessing, the one who is left is left for blessing. But the point the Lord is making is the quickness of the thing so as to impress us with the madness of putting off the question of salvation, "Now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation", @2 Corinthians 6: 2.
{369}
BLESSEDNESS IN THE BOOK OF REVELATION
@Revelation 1: 3; @Revelation 14: 13; @Revelation 16: 15; @Revelation 19: 9; @Revelation 20: 6; @Revelation 22: 7, 14
These scriptures speak of blessedness seven times. It is not the idea of ascription of praise, but of spiritual happiness, and it has peculiar significance in this book.
The book itself, although well known to be prophetic, is really directly written for us. It is addressed to the seven assemblies which were in Asia, symbolic of the assembly viewed in its responsible history here upon earth. The fact that the book is written for us makes these blessednesses all the more significant; especially as we arrive, in the ways of God, at the beginning of the time to which the prophecy alludes. This is a very solemn fact, even though the assembly will be kept "from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth", @Revelation 3: 10. The Lord makes that promise to the assembly which is specially commendable -- the assembly in Philadelphia.
The very name of the assembly to which the word is given signifies that there is love in it -- brotherly love; and the Lord's remarks fully bear out the meaning of the name. So He makes the promise that He will keep her from the hour of trial that will come upon all the earth. That is the promise which we are entitled to claim and to urge before the Lord in regard to present circumstances. He will keep us, but at the same time the circumstances are very pressing, and the Lord would have us to understand the comfort of this book to be in these features of blessedness, for they are available.
The first blessing is connected with reading -- "Blessed is he that reads". There is one who reads, and then there are those who hear and those who keep the words of the prophecy. I do not know, dear brethren,
{370}
how much we have come into this blessedness, but it is the first one mentioned. The book being directly addressed to us, as of the assemblies, this special blessing is indicated as available to him who reads, and to those who hear and who keep. It is a blessing-promise that should greatly stimulate our consideration of the book. Its intent is to detach us from what is current. If we read with that in view, we shall certainly come into the blessing immediately. Perhaps no book in Scripture requires more attention than this one, and hence the importance of reading it, "He that reads", I apprehend, is a matter of private study.
Then, "they that hear"; if there be reading, there should be hearing. He who reads and enters into the blessing will not fail to tell to others the result of his study. He has had a good time; his soul has been nourished, detached from the course of things; he has been enlightened, too, as to the end of things. As possessing love, which John represents, and which works out in Philadelphia, he will not fail to speak. Indeed, meetings like the present one, which are now so prevalent, are following on this principle. One reads, and gains; he speaks, and others hear.
It is not, of course, sufficient to rest content merely with what we hear. We are very apt to run away with what we hear, without weighing it over, without comparison, without proving it; but hearing from a reader of this book should lead to reading, so as to compare and to test what is heard, "Doth not the ear try words?" @Job 12: 11. I would urge the importance of what is heard. It is right that brethren should speak to one another, surely -- they that feared the Lord did it -- but that which is spoken should be tested. Do I compare what I hear with Holy Scripture, so as to be sure? We are told that the prophets are to speak, two or three, and that the others are to judge, but then they must have some means by which to judge.
{371}
I speak now of the blessing attendant upon the doing of the word. As I said, we are on the very verge of the things foretold in the prophecy, but, if we regard these merely as prophetic light we shall miss their moral bearing, and we shall miss what the assemblies are to gain by them. We should see that we keep in mind these seven blessednesses, in our reading, in our hearing, and in our doing, and that we do not fail to enter into the good of the promises.
There arose recently a widespread situation, a widespread pressure, of unparalleled intensity and extent. It was not a famine, or due to war or pestilence; it was an act of God which synchronized with current history. For God ever acts in moral rectitude in relation to what is happening in the world. His ways of moral government fit in with the history of the world. The people of God are to understand, and this book is to help them to understand, that they are taken care of. We speak together of the Good Shepherd, and how He takes care of His sheep. This book shows the spiritual way that they are taken care of, but then, there have been amongst the people of God worldly elements, the trimming of sails to the wind -- as if there would never come a contrary wind. The contrary wind has come. It is the government of God, but the book assures us that the Lord will see us through, and in righteousness. He means to reduce us. Reduction will be salvation to us, but He will see us through. The blessing lies in understanding how, and for this we must read, hear and do.
Another feature is presented in the next blessedness -- that of dying in the Lord. The Lord is bringing us face to face with stern realities. This world is not our place, and what is suggested here is going out of it. No christian should think of anything less than dying in the Lord; it is a most glorious matter. It is not simply falling asleep in Jesus, but it is that one is fully in the
{372}
spirit of this book. The setting of this second blessedness in chapter 14 is in relation to the beast and to those who bear his mark. Into this setting is introduced the thought of the blessedness of dying in the Lord. I speak feelingly, because there is not only the presence of death, there is the imminence of it to many of us who are advancing in years, but we do not want to miss dying in the Lord. It is a military matter. It is one thing to die in the midst of one's family, surrounded by affection; it is another thing to die on the field. We do not wish to die anywhere else than on the field. Not that we depreciate affection, surely; but it is a military time, and so the voice from heaven says, relative to the death of the saints, "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth". I speak of it in its present application, that we do not want to die anywhere else. Martyrdom is the thought. It is a military idea here.
Paul gives a beautiful touch as to the first martyr of our dispensation: he says, in speaking to the Lord, "thy martyr Stephen". Paul did not see the light which shone in the testimony of Stephen, for later he went into houses and dragged men and women before tribunals -- men and women who were "of the way". He found in those houses the spirit of Christ; he found Jesus there. So here, the voice from heaven speaks about such, about those who die in the Lord. Then the Holy Spirit on earth, as being in perfect unison with the mind of heaven, says, "Yea ... that they may rest from their labours; for their works follow with them".
What I understand by the Holy Spirit's voice is firsthand acquaintance with those who are dying in the Lord. He is fully acquainted in a first-hand way with all of them. The Holy Spirit here has first-hand knowledge of every one of us, and He knows those that die in the Lord. What a comfort! It is a question of what heaven thinks, and what the Spirit of God on earth thinks. If death comes, let us be on the battlefield; let no one repine.
{373}
The great apostle, in his second letter to Timothy, says, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith". Heaven is delighted with such, and the Holy Spirit on earth, confirming heaven's voice, says, "Yea ... that they may rest from their labours".
The next blessedness is very solemn; it is in relation to the kings of the east coming in. It is connected with the Eastern question which has troubled Europe for centuries. We see here that the great river Euphrates will be dried up, in order to prepare the way of the kings of the east, indicating that which is spoken of generally as the 'yellow peril'. It is only a little while since a kingdom was set up on the mainland of Asia, portending very likely some great domination, but this is not what we are concerned about. We are concerned about something much more serious than the Eastern question, though Europe may well tremble as she thinks about it. For us it is not a question of these hordes coming over the Euphrates. To saints who have garments defiled by the commercial world, by the social world, by the religious world, the Lord says, "I come as a thief". I speak to any who are careless about these things. You may follow closely the day's news; but just think there is One coming who has all power, "Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments, that he may not walk naked". It may be that someone here needs that warning. It may be that someone here has garments which flow out and are defiled; that carelessness has set in, and there is no watching. We are to be encouraged by the blessedness of watching. It completely changes the whole aspect of affairs. Political movements are of great account, of course, but the important point is that there is One coming as a thief. Are we watching? This is not a word for one who is dying in the Lord, though he would enjoy it; it is a word for one whose garments are flowing loosely, and who has forgotten that there is One coming "as a thief".
{374}
The next blessedness is regarding the marriage of Christ. That is a most delightful thing. Surely we who love Him think of that moment. "Blessed are they who are called to the supper of the marriage of the Lamb". What about the Lord's supper, dear brethren? Does it not accustom us to the idea of the supper of the Lamb? Now is the time of His rejection. The word for 'Lamb' in this book is diminutive; it signifies a little lamb -- one who is outwardly defenceless, but, though He is outwardly the Lamb, the book indicates His coming glory, with all power. People in the modern world say just what they like about Jesus; men are saying all kinds of derogatory things about Him. In such circumstances the Lord would say to us, "But *ye*, who do ye say that I am?" -- it is a question of testimony. Others are saying enough. What are we saying? We have to look into the matter of who He is, and when we have done so, the next thing is to say it. It is a matter of importance to say who He is. This book and, indeed, all John's writings testify abundantly as to who He is, but how blessed to be called to the supper of the marriage of the Lamb! Is there anyone here who is indifferent or callous as to that?
Following upon this, He comes out of heaven, with the armies of heaven following Him "upon white horses, clad in white, pure, fine linen. And out of his mouth goes a sharp two-edged sword, that with it he might smite the nations; and he shall shepherd them with an iron rod; and he treads the wine-press of the fury of the wrath of God the Almighty. And he has upon his garment, and upon his thigh, a name written, King of kings, and Lord of lords", @Revelation 19: 14 - 16. It will be seen then that He has power, when He takes up the reins of government, but here it is the marriage of the Lamb. He has a wife. This should appeal to every one of us. What is His wife like? It is not the idea of a bride coming down; it is a militant chapter; it is the 'Lamb' period.
{375}
She is His wife -- His confidante -- one who is trustworthy. Well, do we understand these things? -- the outward defencelessness of Christ, and how the world regards Him. It is important that the wife character should be seen in us -- the feature that He can trust; for even in christendom it appears today as if the Lord is utterly defenceless, yet He says to those He can trust, "I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee". What a glorious promise! How it should stimulate this feature of trustworthiness, that He can deposit His precious thoughts, and they will be held carefully and faithfully, and not cast as pearls before swine!
It may be that the Lord is saying to us today, 'Can I trust you with anything more?' What will we do with further light if the Lord gives it to us? That is the idea of the wife. The Lord has revived the idea. Whatever He says, we should hold it tenaciously, according to its value. It is like a precious stone, to be treasured. John says here that "it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure; for the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints". The plural word indicates the intensity of the thing, that there is a real quantity of righteousness wrought out in us. The Lord says, 'I will let you wear that on My marriage day'. At the marriage supper of the Lamb all is to be ready. Why should we not develop these things -- these righteousnesses -- now? I believe these blessednesses are cumulative, and that we shall find in them support for our souls. In the midst of pressure, there will be spiritual buoyancy and happiness.
"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection". Many of us are very much like Martha, all our thoughts of resurrection being limited to the last day. The Lord says, "I am the resurrection and the life" -- "*I am*". This book stresses who He is. He who is -- the present; who was -- the past; and who is to come.
{376}
Resurrection should be to us a known thing -- "raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", @Colossians 2: 12. The apostle Paul understood the thought of resurrection; he had a sense of what it was to be out of death. The resurrection will be no foreign thing to him; it was no historical feature to Paul, but a present reality. It is this blessedness of which I speak. You have now come to an advanced feature, to the holy realm, to the out-of-death realm. The Lord would accustom us to the thing as we understand the assembly -- what it is to be over Jordan.
You will understand that I am endeavouring to link these things together, and I would suggest, in passing, that it is *food* that enables you to taste the resurrection sphere. In the book of Joshua you have the word "victuals"; energy is necessary in order to obtain it; you get it by hunting. It is very essential to partake of that food if we are to cross the Jordan. It is not an act of mind, it is a question of power in the soul, and for that there must be food. The first resurrection, viewed in this way, is very interesting. It gives access to a holy realm, where we touch association with Christ, being risen with Him.
The next blessedness is somewhat a repetition of the first: "Blessed is he that keeps the words of the prophecy of this book". It is prefaced with the word, "Behold, I come quickly". The Lord is, in this last chapter, coming on to assembly ground, not as a thief, but speaking in the ordinary language proper to communicate His thoughts to the assembly. "I come quickly" -- it is the love that comes quickly. Though very many centuries have elapsed, love says "quickly". You may be sure it is perfectly evident why so many centuries have elapsed. However puzzling the application of the word "quickly" may be now, we may be sure that the Lord will be justified in His sayings. He does not need to tell us why
{377}
so many centuries have passed. There is a very potent reason for it -- the long-suffering of God enters into it.
There is blessedness in keeping the sayings of the prophecy. Sayings are detached things; they speak of the person who says them. He will be justified in them, but there is gain in keeping the sayings of Jesus. I have no doubt that if we had accompanied the Lord in His lifetime here we should have known many of His sayings. One of these sayings is quoted in @Acts 20: 35: "It is more blessed to give than to receive". I suppose the apostle Paul heard of this saying from some of the apostles who heard the Lord Himself say it. He wants us to keep and treasure in our hearts all His sayings. There is food in all this, and it gives us a buoyancy which keeps us above the pressure.
"Blessed are they that wash their robes" -- that is the proper rendering of chapter 22: 14. There is nothing more practical than this. No doubt most will have observed that washing is first ascribed to Christ in this book, chapter 1. Again, in chapter 7, there are those who have *washed* their robes -- in the past tense. Here it is "Blessed are they that *wash* their robes". That is, they are doing it. If it be one who seeks to walk with us, is it within our right to refuse? I doubt whether we have any right to refuse what is consistent with Christ -- only that which is inconsistent. This comes out in the washing, "that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city". I am not saying there are not to be doorkeepers; but if the persons prove their right, acquired by the washing of the robes, no true doorkeeper will keep such persons out. It is not simply that they are converted. That is an essential part, of course, but what are they doing now? The man who had his eyes opened by the Lord came immediately, seeing, but the next week the Pharisees talked to him, and he still says, "I see". The washing of the robes gives access to the tree of life, and
{378}
to go in by the gates into the city, even though there be angels at the gates. Those who wash can go in directly -- it is their right. It is very beautiful, the inherent dignity of one who washes. Let us not be devoid of it. The young people here may need this word. "Let us purify ourselves from every pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God's fear", @2 Corinthians 7: 1.
May the Lord grant us the blessedness of it, that we may be among those who have right to the tree of life, and enter by the gates into the city!
{379}
THE CHRISTIAN ECONOMY
@John 3: 35; @John 6: 32; @John 16: 27; @John 20: 17
I have in mind to speak about the Father in relation to the economy into which believers are introduced. I use this word 'economy' because it has special significance in this connection, and it has relation to the various dispensations of God. It is expressed in the baptismal formula at the end of Matthew's gospel; the Lord directs His disciples to go and make disciples, "baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". The idea of the economy is expressed thus, and involves the supreme privileges and blessings of God. Matthew, in recording the Lord's charge to His apostles, tells us they were directed to "make disciples", which implied that they were persons of moral persuasion -- moral power; for to make a disciple is not simply to enlighten a man so that he believes, but it involves that one has power with him. The Lord, in view of that, said that "all power" had been given to Him in heaven and on earth, and that He would be with them always, so that they would have resources enough. In their missionary service they were to "make disciples of all the nations" -- a very large commission, the magnitude of which is scarcely taken in by us. The persons accepting the baptism were to be introduced to such an economy as that "of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit": a realm in which the Persons of the Godhead would be active; and active, not in judgment, but in blessing.
This condition is a very great advance on the old economy under Moses. That was the first economy; before that, it was simply a question of man with God, without any official intermediary. Under Moses, the first economy was set up; then again under David, while including that of Moses, there was an increase in advantages and privileges; for God was known not only
{380}
in a mediator, but in a king, involving much in excess. But when we come to Matthew -- which gospel is an extension of the Old Testament, as I may say, for all that was of God in the Old is brought into the New -- we are introduced to this new economy of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The assembly stands in *that* relation. So when the Father is introduced in @Matthew 5, it is as *their* Father, the Father of believers. The economy comes in in chapter 3, by way of a voice, manifesting Christ as the Son of God; but in chapter 5 the disciples are brought immediately into relation with God as their Father -- it has that advantage at once.
Now in John we have a different view; and I want to point out the difference, and show that he leads on to something beyond Matthew for us. So he speaks of the Father first as Christ's Father -- "the Father", or "my Father" -- the Lord never says "your Father" to the disciples, until we arrive at chapter 20. It may be inquired why there is this difference. I believe that it involves a clear understanding of our privileges as John presents them, and that we shall thus come the better to know Him with whom we shall presently be associated, and our relations with the Father -- a very great matter. So the Lord at the present time is stressing John's ministry, so that we should understand who the Lord Jesus is, and who the Father is.
John begins his narrative with the "beginning" -- not the beginning of Israel's history, nor does he state of what it is the beginning -- he just says, "In the beginning was the Word". Then he goes on to say, "and the Word was with God" -- indicating thus the separate and distinct existence of His Person; and he adds, "the Word was God". Now that is to be known at the outset, if we are to understand John; He presents this as that which is to be laid hold of by us at once, and tenaciously held to. Then that One -- "the Word" -- has become flesh, verse 14, and was apprehended or seen by certain persons who
{381}
could say, "we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". It is in that relation with the Father that He is contemplated, a relationship which brings Him within the range of men. No creature could take in His relations in the Godhead as seen in verse 1; that He was "with God" is stated, but what the relations were is beyond us to name. Scripture does not name them. Suffice it for us to accept that the Person was there, and there in the "form of God" -- for He "*was* God". But now we come to His being apprehended by men in the light of relationship as "an only-begotten with a father" -- that is, as a Man with the Father. What the affections expressed were I do not attempt to say, but those who contemplated His glory had some conception of it. What an impression it must have made on those who saw the Lord in His relations with God! He was to be seen in other relations, too, of course -- in sufferings, in reproach; coming in and going out amongst them in His service to them; all this was educational for them, particularly His service to them seen in chapter 13 of this gospel. The view of Him I have called attention to has not reference to that, however, but to His relations with the Father -- that He is in the bosom of the Father. He *is* there according to verse 18; not He *was*, but *is*; "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". That is His position in christianity, as John presents it.
Then in chapter 3, John says, "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand". This is the economy; the Father hands everything over into the hand of One whom He loves -- One here designated "the Son". Think of the hand in which the Father has placed all things! Then chapter 5 is full of the relations of the Son to the Father; much is said as to the equality of the Son with the Father. "He who honours not the Son, honours not the Father who has sent him". Thus we gather light as to His Person. The Son, having
{382}
taken a subject place in regard of His service, is yet on an equality with the Father throughout John's gospel. Though He leaves the form He had and takes a bondman's form, the very act declares His dignity, His greatness! In @Philippians 2 we read that He "emptied himself, taking a bondman's form". He was not told to do it; it was His own act; He took a subject place. Now all that is in chapter 5; it is all nourishment for our souls, so that we might be built up in the divine system. He tells us, "The Son can do nothing of himself save whatever he sees the Father doing" -- indeed, much vital truth is contained in the intervening verses.
In chapter 6 there is hunger; it was so in the world then, as it is now; men disregard the great economy that God has set up. So the sign in chapter 6 is food -- He feeds the five thousand. Those who benefited by the sign would seek to make Him a king, because He could meet their temporal needs, but that puts Him on a very low level. God could feed men without the need of the Son coming down. The material creation supplies more than enough for all the men and women on earth; there is fish, flesh, and vegetables in plenty for all, "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof". But these here would make Him a king because of the loaves and fishes. Then there is the question as to Moses in the wilderness and the manna; that too, was a question of food. It supplies the Lord with the opportunity He wanted. He shows them that Moses did not give them the true bread; the bread which they ate was not that, but they ate the manna in the wilderness and died. It was rained down on them -- showing that there was plenty of it; the face of the wilderness, we are told, was covered with it; all they had to do was to go out and gather it. It was pure and white; spiritually it was Christ, but actually it was food to nourish flesh and blood, and was therefore not the true bread out of heaven. So Jesus immediately introduces the divine
{383}
economy in connection with the Father: He says, "my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven". The economy, as John presents it, is a wholly spiritual matter. You must dismiss for the moment the question of material things, even the thought of the kingdom in which the Lord will reign presently over the earth in relation to material things, and seek to lay hold of the spiritual realm where the Father and the Son and the Spirit are active, and in which the true bread from heaven is available -- bread, in connection with which a man lives, and moreover lives eternally.
In the synoptic gospels the Father is largely connected with material things; the Lord says, "your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things". He has made us and He knows us, and "like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him". It corresponds with the apostle's teaching in @2 Corinthians 6: "come out from among them, and be ye separate ... and I ... will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty". But the Lord is not stressing that in John; He is aiming at higher things, something that is altogether beyond temporal things. That is all settled in the synoptic gospels, which are rightly placed first. We are already believers in John, but He wants to make *true* believers of us. Hence in the first sign in John we are told that He manifested forth His glory, and "his disciples believed on him". That is what the Lord is doing here, so He says, "my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven", that is, the *Father* sent it. I would seek help to express what it is to come into this economy, where every feature of what God is is connected with the Father as known in grace. The Father is always connected in John's gospel with the thought of grace. "The Father judgeth no man". He is occupied with grace, and the bread He gives is the best in heaven! It is spiritually the true bread which comes down out of heaven and gives
{384}
life to the world. The Lord says, "my flesh is truly food and my blood is truly drink".
I pass on to chapter 16. Much intervenes in what follows, for John's gospel is full of precious meaning; every word is full of it; no gospel deserves such concentration of attention as John's. So we have these instances in chapter 16. Chapters 13 to 17 form one section; they refer to what the synoptic gospels record in a few words; all these chapters are spoken *within*, in the seclusion of love; so that we are now in the presence of the most precious communications of the Lord. He says, "the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God". That is a challenge to our hearts; we should be concerned as to whether we are in the right circle. John's ministry is bringing about a circle where love is known; these chapters unfold it. The Lord was in that circle where He was free to express all that was in His heart, all the Father's affection for them -- that they were the objects of the Father's affection. These four chapters unfold to us what He said to them about the Father, and about the Spirit, and about His own affections towards them; and so here He says, "the Father himself loveth you". That is the circle with which the Lord is delighted, the circle that the Father loves, loving them indeed, as He says, "because ye have loved me". He gives them credit for loving Him. Perhaps we might think we have but little love for Christ, but the Father gives you credit for much more than you would think of. Take Moses for an example. The Spirit speaks of his movements in Egypt: "By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; ... esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt". If you had asked Moses how he regarded Christ, he could not have told you; it is the comment of the Spirit upon his movements, when he came out openly and claimed the Hebrews as his
{385}
brethren. Identifying yourself with the people of God is esteemed as choosing the reproach of Christ. Not one of the worthies of the Old Testament would have said of themselves what the Holy Spirit says of them; they could not have the intelligence of persons who have the Holy Spirit, for they had their part in a different dispensation. So here the Lord says, "ye have had affection for me, and have believed that I came out from God". You see the platform they were on; they believed that He came out from God, that He was not an ordinary man such as David or Solomon. They believed in His Person, and they had affection for Him. I would that everyone could take that in.
In chapter 20 we have been drawn along by the ministry of love in those chapters; we have heard the blessed unfoldings of love in His utterances to His Father in chapter 17, and have witnessed His sufferings in chapters 18 and 19, and now we come to a risen Christ in chapter 20. To any true lover He will make Himself known: "he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him". He manifests Himself to love -- to Mary of Magdala; but she was not at first an intelligent lover. Mary of Bethany was an intelligent lover; she knew what to offer. Mary of Magdala had the affections but not the intelligence, and John's ministry would make us intelligent lovers. But she is adjusted; she turns herself round and says to the Lord, "Rabboni!" In chapter 1 they call Him "Rabbi" -- it is simply Teacher; but Mary says, *My* Teacher. She would say, 'I am instructed by Him, I learn from Him', and the Lord acknowledges it and says, Now you can take the message. She was adjusted; she was intelligent. The effect of ministry is not simply that I love Christ, but that I am intelligent. The point is that He is *my* Teacher -- there is no other in that sense. She says, "Rabboni", and Jesus says, "Touch me not". She would have resumed her relations
{386}
with Him after the flesh, but there are better things than that in store, as the signs have already indicated; the signs point on to something beyond. So it is a question here of being instructed, and Jesus says, "Touch me not". We might ask, Why should He forbid that? There are people today who talk of the life of Christ on earth; they assume that Jesus came in in relation to man here, and enhanced man's position, but that runs counter to this instruction, "Touch me not". He says, "I am not yet ascended" -- He is going to link us on there; the end of all this instruction is to lead us on to that, "Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father". It is not now a question of the economy here, but of privilege there. This wonderful message shows that He is going into heaven; He is ascending to the Father's realm of things, what He has established up there; He is ascending to His Father and ours. It is no longer a question of "*my* Father" or "*the* Father" only, but of *yours* -- "my Father, and your Father". That gives me a status up there, where He has ascended -- I am one of His brethren.
How wonderfully this works out! The working out of the economy in John leads on to the most exalted things, for we understand that Christ's Father has become our Father, and in relation to another scene. The Lord is seeking not only to prepare us for present service in the assembly, and then for public service corresponding to that *here*; but He is preparing us for ascension and for all that that involves, so that we shall not be strangers there, but persons who know the place and the relations proper to it -- a much greater thing!
May the Lord give us a greater sense of this in our souls!
{387}
ELDERSHIP
@Acts 14: 23; @Acts 20: 28 - 32; @Ephesians 4: 15, 16
J.T. What is in view is to show how the local assembly may function, being constituted for self-acting. The word 'assembly' applies in the full sense to the local gathering, as it does to the whole assembly, as for instance "the assembly of God which is in Corinth". Other features of it are mentioned characteristically and apply locally, such as the 'body of Christ' (without the article) and the 'temple' (without the article), but the local assembly by itself might serve as a prime thought in the scriptures, implying the economy as in administrative service, the assembly viewed as that in which the divine economy functions in localities. It is not seen functioning administratively as a whole; it will appear that way in the future in the millennium according to Revelation; but the present administrative function of the assembly is in localities. Hence it conveys a whole thought in any locality where it may function by itself, yet not ignoring other assemblies. These remarks are made in the hope that they may clarify what is before us. @Acts 13 and 14 furnish peculiarly the material needed for this, the Pauline feature of the assembly. The first great result of the missionary work of Paul and Barnabas, namely the deputy of Cyprus in the thirteenth chapter -- Sergius Paulus, "an intelligent man" he is called, gives a clue to what is in mind as to assembly function. In verse 12 it is said that "the proconsul, seeing what had happened, believed, being amazed at the teaching of the Lord". He recognises the peculiar character of the teaching of the Lord; and then we are told immediately of Paul's company -- "Paul and his company" -- as if that feature was coming into evidence, the Pauline side of the assembly. In these two chapters we have the material needed for the assembly viewed thus, first in this man, and then we read of the result of their
{388}
preaching at Antioch of Pisidia, the disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit -- another element needed for the working out of the assembly now; those composing it are to be filled with joy and the Holy Spirit. We are told of the man at Lystra that he was healed, that he had been lame from his mother's womb and that he had never walked. "This man heard Paul speaking, who, fixing his eyes on him, and seeing that he had faith to be healed, said with a loud voice, Rise up straight upon thy feet: and he sprang up and walked". The man, it is said, "heard Paul speaking" -- that is the thought to keep in mind, and Paul seeing him discerned that he had faith, and said "Rise up straight upon thy feet: and he sprang up and walked", that is, he represents that side that is needed in assembly service or administration, namely, balance. Then all these cumulative thoughts enter into the verse read in chapter 14: 23, the apostles Barnabas and Paul chose them elders in each assembly as if to set up the assemblies to qualify to act for God.
J.F. What would be the marks of those that were chosen as elders? What would the apostles look for especially?
J.T. Well, it gives us an outline of what is required in an elder in @1 Timothy 3, does it not? There it is anyone desiring to serve as an overseer or an elder, "If any one aspires to exercise oversight, he desires a good work. The overseer then must be irreproachable, husband of one wife, sober, discreet, decorous, hospitable, apt to teach ... that he may fall not into reproach and the snare of the devil". Is that not a good account of what is required?
A.H.S. You mentioned, as the first result, Sergius Paulus as an intelligent man; you stressed the importance of intelligence; had you in mind to develop that a little?
J.T. I thought we should look at it as leading up to what we have in mind, how brethren acting in a local
{389}
assembly need intelligence and a readiness to observe teaching in others. Elders themselves may teach, "apt to teach" it is said, but as set in any locality they are ready for any teaching that may come in through others and judge it according to its true value. Here it is that he was amazed at the teaching of the Lord, carrying authority with it. Every true local man will recognize and value it. If he receives that teaching he will be used of God to express it in a locality if he is apt to teach, although he may not have gift he will do that.
F.W.W. What would be involved in the teaching of the Lord?
J.T. I think it carries authority with it. He taught with authority in the days of His flesh, not as the scribes, not religious discourse, but authoritative as from God, so the apostles were marked by that, and all teaching should be, in measure, because if anyone speaks it should be as oracles of God.
F.W.W. Involving the great principle of subjection?
J.T. Exactly. You bow to the truth. At times you hear all sorts of cavilling remarks about what is said, but is it true? John says, I wrote something to the assembly but Diotrephes did not receive it, "babbling against us with wicked words". Where God is working in souls there will be submissiveness to the truth of God, so that we should avoid all fanciful things and be sure it is the truth.
F.W.W. I was wondering if anything can be done with us at all unless that feature is established with us?
J.T. Subjection is the thought with God to begin with, the gospel is announced for the obedience of faith, not bowing our heads as a bulrush -- and the Holy Spirit is given to those who obey God. It is in such there will be subjection to the teaching of God; it will be wonderful to us.
Ques. It is said previously he desired to hear the word of God. Would that be more general? The teaching
{390}
of the Lord is what is peculiarly authoritative for the moment.
J.T. Very good. The word of God is a great general thought; it is said in this book that the word of God spread itself. The teaching of the Lord would be more specific, and needed in young believers.
J.D.U. The teaching of the Lord seems to come in here very definitely in spite of the opposition and the hostility of the enemy. Does that come in in connection with His authority?
J.T. Quite so. You mean this other man that sought to turn away the deputy from the faith, Bar-jesus the magician. No doubt God ordered all that activity of the devil to bring out this striking feature of the ministry, namely, the teaching of the Lord, this authoritative teaching. The character of the material accruing from the ministry in Antioch is to be noted. It is said in verse 48, "And those of the nations, hearing it, rejoiced, and glorified the word of the Lord, and believed, as many as were ordained to eternal life"; that is a feature brought out in the work at Antioch, that those who believed were working out the counsels of God. The work of God takes on that character, meeting human need, but at the same time working out the counsels of God, "As many as were ordained to eternal life" believed. It says further, "And the word of the Lord was carried through the whole country. But the Jews" (which of course, were represented in Bar-jesus in the early part of the chapter) "excited the women of the upper classes who were worshippers, and the first people of the city, and raised a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and cast them out of their coasts. But they, having shaken off the dust of their feet against them, came to Iconium. And the disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit". I think it well to call attention to this because it enters into the local assembly. We are to come together not in a doleful way or spirit in our meetings for care, or with
{391}
personal feelings affected by the cares of the day. So this word ought to bear much weight, "The disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit". Our assembly meetings are often very sluggish because of our state, there may be a good deal of sanctimoniousness at the beginning, and it may be thought well of, but the Lord's supper is intended to promote good feeling and joy, so that He has us with Him in the service in His mind which is before Him. I think this verse is intended to fit in there to show how the local assembly functions, and it is to function in certain relations in joy and happiness.
J.F. Would that mark us when we come together first?
J.T. Well I think it ought to, it may be suppressed a little; a certain sobriety, decorum and order should mark us as in the anointing, but the Lord's supper is calculated to promote joy, especially the cup, involving the new covenant.
C.G. Is discipleship the underlying of the joy in the Holy Spirit with us in this place?
J.T. Well it is remarkable that that is the description we have of them -- two things -- those that believed were ordained unto eternal life, as if no other believers are of any value, that is we must recognise the sovereign counsels of God, the sovereign selection of God. Then they were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit. It seems to me that these are the two elements that have great place in the assembly and imply happy conditions.
J.D.U. Does that follow upon the recognition of the word of the Lord -- His authority? I was thinking of the principles of the kingdom -- righteousness, peace and joy.
J.T. Quite so. The word of the Lord is pervading throughout, it is mentioned here twice in the end of the chapter. The real difficulty, I believe, with many is want of subjection, having light as to the assembly in a way but want of subjection -- the state of subjection.
N.B.S. You mentioned Paul and his company as
{392}
being a feature marking the assembly. Would that mark those here who are the subject of Paul's ministry?
J.T. Well I think that is why it is mentioned just at that particular place, and John Mark left the company at that time as if he was not ready for Paul's line of things; perhaps it was too much for him that it should be Paul and his company; natural relationship affected him evidently at that point. Paul had no room for natural feelings in the assembly.
Rem. The disciples being filled with joy and the Holy Spirit stand in contrast to what may have been more or less expected through persecution.
J.T. Yes, they were above it, a word for us at the present time, the enemy would so depress us as to rob God of our service in the assembly.
J.B.S. Would you say a little more as to principles of subjection, seeing that the element of insubjection is ever present in our hearts?
J.T. Well, it is the way up to the divine appointment, that is, the assembly is said to be subjected to Christ, by divine appointment she is placed in that position, and each of us is to arrive at that position in self-judgment as to the exercise of our wills; hence the assembly is often sluggish because our wills are not held in check, the Spirit is grieved by the exercise of our wills. He is given to those who obey God, according to @Acts 5.
J.D.U. Should it not open the door for the joy that is spoken of here if we realise what it is to escape from the outside scene where there is so much sorrow, to where the Lord is supreme in the midst of those who love Him?
J.T. Quite so. It is a beautiful touch in @Genesis 7 as to Noah's setting in the ark. The human occupants are all full-grown -- no children -- Noah and his wife, and three other families, all under one head, for it is Noah and his house. It is to Noah in that relation that the creatures come into the ark, they come to Noah, a most happy state of things; Noah is attractive, they come
{393}
in of themselves, two by two to Noah into the ark. That is the point, the Lord as in the assembly is in a position to be approached, family relationships being there, and there in an intensified way, so that we should be ready for all the joys accruing from such a relationship; and it is obvious that the working of will is not in action, but attraction, they come to Noah into the ark.
H.G. Would such joy normally find expression in praise in the assembly?
J.T. It would. It is said of the Lord Himself that He rejoiced in spirit and said "I praise thee, Father". That is the point to be introduced in assembly service.
Ques. Is it presented as a characteristic setting rather than being arrived at by some specific occurrence?
J.T. It is a characteristic state, being filled with faith -- faith and the Holy Spirit; it is to be noted here -- filled with joy and the Holy Spirit.
Rem. Being filled with faith is sometimes presented as in relation to some specific service, but this would be more a characteristic thought to mark the assembly at all times.
J.T. I should think that saints are capable of this; in their ordinary everyday life they have trials; the Lord Himself was troubled in spirit and deeply depressed -- I speak reverently -- but ever ready to return to the joy, His own joy with God. It is the ability to come back to christian normalcy, characteristically a people of joy. Paul says, "Rejoice in the Lord always: again I will say, Rejoice", @Philippians 4: 4.
H.B. We should come together with joy in our hearts rather than come together to be warmed up.
J.T. You bring something into the assembly when you come in in that way.
To come now to our brother's question as to the persons mentioned in verse 23, "Having chosen them elders", I think the 'they' is the apostles, that is their choice; of course the bearing of it would be that they chose them for the assemblies.
{394}
J.F. Sometimes the word blameless has been questioned as to what it means, "being found blameless", what do you think that includes? It has been said, 'who is blameless?' -- there is no one blameless.
J.T. You are referring to @1 Timothy 3 -- this word is to be understood in its setting. It is characteristic; public blemish, no blame attaching to him. There are people who never get rid of certain conditions, governmentally they are attaching to them. So that a man who fails in business or the like cannot function as an elder.
Rem. He may recover, I suppose, by self-judgment, and win the confidence of the brethren again as God helps him.
J.T. Yes. But there are governmental things that attach to us; we may be happy with God and able to function as priests God-ward, but not to function publicly in the government of the assembly.
J.F. Would a bankrupt be included?
J.T. Yes, but there are many other such things that attach to us.
Rem. I was thinking of Peter. Paul says he was to be blamed, and yet as bowing to his judgment he can speak of himself as an elder.
J.T. But that is another matter. Peter denied the Lord and got clear of that, but then there are governmental things that cannot be liquidated, they must stand.
C.M. Do you mean they are sealed upon us?
J.T. Well, the Lord is very gracious, but the thing is there, and why is it there? God has right-of-way in His house. He speaks of putting leprosy there Himself. There must be some secret cause if a man has something like that attaching to him governmentally, but we just have to leave it, it cannot be removed down here in the sphere of God's government. Of course that is more solemn, because who is not exposed to that? One feels we may speak of these things but not feel them sufficiently.
{395}
J.D.U. Will that apply to other qualifications, for instance the house in order?
J.T. Quite so. Things that are within his own province to rectify, it is for him to see to these himself. The Lord will help in doing it, but it is all within his range to accomplish.
J.M. What you spoke of as being fixed on him on the line of righteousness, he may not be able to liquidate that. Is that a little different from what you are referring to? You spoke of one failing in business, he may never be able to make that matter right. You spoke of one having it in his power to alter matters.
J.T. He "must be irreproachable, husband of one wife", he would not have two wives as was possible in those days when people came in from heathendom -- "Sober, discreet, decorous ..." These are qualities within the range of anyone who has the Holy Spirit. "Not given to excesses" -- he is not a teetotaller but he does not take excess of wine. Every one of these are within his power if he has the Holy Spirit and if he has not got them he is disqualified.
Rem. It is what a man is in his responsible history before men.
J.T. Exactly, it is what a man might be from his own point of view, his side of the matter, not only what God makes him. I have the means of having these qualifications; if I aspire to eldership I must have them. I might like the glory of the office, but I must have the qualifications.
E.S.H. In @Leviticus 21 there were those who were not able to approach with the bread of their God, there were certain defects. Is there anything there that would link on with what you are saying?
J.T. These would be constitutional defects in @Leviticus 21. Persons who are christians in the systems are under bad teaching, they are constitutionally defective, and disqualify themselves, and they suffer for it.
{396}
E.S.H. It says "a blind man" first, would that fit in here?
F.W.W. You were drawing attention to the difference between this and priestly service in drawing near to God.
J.T. Yes, he may even speak to God according to Leviticus but not anything else, not to offer, not to function in the full sense of priesthood.
J.F. Are we to understand that if these things are true of an elder, that he is at perfect liberty to take up what is spiritual. Is that so?
J.T. Quite so, he is quite at liberty to rule in the house of God, he is aspiring to exercise oversight, a great need amongst the brethren.
J.F. I was thinking of the spiritual side, it does not seem to be stressed; but if the practical is there, do you think God has helped him in these things so that he is free for what is spiritual?
J.T. But he would be spiritual if he had these qualifications, these are public qualifications; the spiritual must underlie these things or they would not be there.
J.F. There are indications that the spiritual is present.
J.T. The spiritual is there supporting them, but the spiritual leads inwards to God which is not the point here, it is what he is publicly.
Rem. There is no suggestion in the Acts that these men were not available in each assembly.
J.T. Not at all! They seem to be in each assembly, and more than one; there is never an instance of one man being appointed an elder in one city, showing how wrong the episcopalian idea is, it is "elders".
Weir. If a brother's wife was unconverted and opposed, would that debar him from serving in eldership?
J.T. I think it would, especially in any public activity, not that he would not be allowed to speak about things, but we are dealing here with the public assembly,
{397}
that which represents God in this world, and God is particular as to those who rule.
J.M. Does the thought of the influence that a man has in a responsible sphere underlie what you are saying as giving the right and ability to carry things in the house of God?
J.T. That is what is mentioned -- "Having his children in subjection with all gravity; (but if one does not know how to conduct his own house, how shall he take care of the assembly of God?)" That comes into the apostle's mind in saying that it is obvious that such a man should not go into the assembly and rule there when he is unable to rule his own house.
G.McK. Why is such a strong warning given against a novice?
J.T. Does it not say "not a novice, that he may not, being inflated, fall into the fault of the devil"? A novice is likely to become inflated with his position, he is not equal to it, not balanced. "The fault of the devil" there is that he aspires to be as great as God. A young man coming into eldership may rival an older brother who knows better, who is more balanced and stable. He would fall into the fault of the devil. It is not exactly a young man but a novice, a person not versed in the things of God; a young man may overcome his years by gravity like Timothy himself, but a novice would be one not conversant with these things. Eldership would mean experience with God in the things of God.
F.W.W. Would that feature be seen in the man in Lystra?
J.T. That is what I thought, he was balanced. There is something of God in the man; what is brought to light in this man is constitutional. The thing was there; he heard Paul speaking. It was not what Paul was saying, but the kind of speaking, and that attracted him; as with Lydia, it was Paul speaking. Paul saw there was something in the man, so there is a remarkable connection
{398}
between the apostle and the convert. Paul said in a loud voice, "Rise up straight upon thy feet" as if this was an urgent case. That is the kind of thing that underlies eldership.
F.W.W. He was a novice hitherto because he was the same as he was when he was born. Is that so?
J.T. He certainly never had any experience in walking, and therefore he could have had no experience spiritually; but there was something in the man already evidenced before Paul discerned him, that is, he was listening to Paul, he was there ready to listen. People who are ready to listen to what is distinctly Pauline are marked by assembly features. Paul saw it, he cried with a loud voice "Rise up straight upon thy feet" as if to say, this is the kind of material; and I believe what is seen in this man underlies eldership, a balanced man.
Ques. So this is particularly in view of the testimony. Uprightness has a large part in it, has it not?
J.T. You see how Satan immediately comes forward here; they lifted up their voices in Lycaonian, "The gods, having made themselves like men, are come down to us" -- the whole paraphernalia of the devil was ready to meet this wonderful thing that God had brought about through Paul's ministry.
C.M. Would you make a difference between a man who never walked and a novice?
J.T. Quite so, he never walked, he could have no experience. A novice means that you have some experience in a thing but you are not properly experienced; but this man would be ready for that; because he has the thing in him, Paul could see the thing in him.
E.A.K. Was it a satanic feature that they singled out Paul as the speaker when that which was pleasing to heaven had engaged the attention of the man of Lystra?
J.T. It was the leading thing in this chapter; and Satan is taking the leading thing -- Paul speaking -- and could not set it aside by a frontal attack; he would
{399}
set it aside by bringing in ceremonialism, too, as in Colossians, to divide the work of God by that sort of thing: or as the damsel who had the spirit of Python, it is the devil's way of setting aside the real truth for the moment.
J.F. Did he not want to absorb what was of God by associating him with what was current?
J.T. That is it; it is remarkable that the priest of Jupiter was there ready, all ready for the moment, in the crowds. It is Satan's work, and the casual observer would think it is taking on great proportions, but the devil is giving it those proportions; it is what appeals; we have to watch for that.
Ques. The man standing straight upon his feet would not lose his balance in the turmoil?
J.T. He would not be carried off his feet in the crowd.
The twentieth chapter brings out the eldership at Ephesus. The apostle had sent to Ephesus for them; he called over to him the elders of the assembly, men already functioning in it. No doubt those elders had done their work, or the assembly at Ephesus would not have been so prosperous, but he says to them in verse 28 "Take heed therefore to yourselves, and to all the flock, wherein the Holy Spirit has set you as overseers, to shepherd the assembly of God, which he has purchased with the blood of his own" -- a remarkable statement. The Holy Spirit had made them elders, not simply Paul's delegate, although Timothy might have had to do with it; but the Spirit had made them elders, that is to say, the action of the Spirit in this book peculiarly brings out first hand knowledge; there is nothing unknown in any of us to the Holy Spirit, so that although we may have outward qualifications, the Holy Spirit is cognisant of what underlies all this, and if He sets us in the assembly to serve in any way it is because He knows we are suited to it. This gives the service of elders great distinction
{400}
in Ephesus; they were set by the Holy Spirit as overseers, and they were to shepherd the assembly of God.
C.M. Is that the reason why, in connection with Abraham, that God let him into the secret, because he was bringing his household up rightly?
J.T. That enters into what we have been saying as to outward qualifications of elders. Abraham would order his house after him.
A.H.S. In the previous scripture it was "having chosen them elders in each assembly", and here is this wonderful expression "the assembly of God, which he has purchased with the blood of his own". Is that a more universal thought, although said to the local elders?
J.T. It is the assembly at Ephesus that is in mind; it is employed to represent the mind of God in the whole assembly. So you do not get administration much in Ephesus; it is more what they were capable of in the way of intelligence, taking in divine counsels.
A.H.S. That would no doubt give the local exercises wonderful dignity.
J.T. Quite so, "purchased with the blood of his own". The Authorised Version makes it the "blood of God", but it is not God; it is the "blood of his own", "His own" is used as referring to Christ.
J.D.U. Undoubtedly the object of very great love on the part of divine Persons -- the 'Holy Spirit', 'God', and 'His own' are all mentioned in this wonderful transaction in regard to the assembly.
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Does the "wherein" show how the elders would function as part of the assembly, not as detached in any sense from it?
J.T. Very good; the "wherein", that is the flock. They would function as of it, but still as having their distinction as overseers. So the king of old was to be one of the brethren. It is a great matter to be able, however distinctive or distinguished one may be, whether in
{401}
ministry or ruling, to merge with the brethren, to be one of them. That is our safety to know how to do that.
Ques. The overseers would not necessarily be gifted men as we speak in ministry?
J.T. No, "apt to teach", a readiness to teach.
C.S.S. Would "conducting his own house well" be something more than rule?
J.T. "Conducting" conveys the thought of rule; he would be the thing he intended his house to be. One that conducts is one that knows the thing that he would conduct in. He would exemplify divine thoughts.
Rem. So that the rule would take the form of influence by example rather than by laying down precedents or principles.
J.T. Quite so. You can see that love has been in the house, that is how the truth develops; conducting involves ruling, there is authority in the head of the house.
C.S.S. Taking up details before God as connected with the assembly.
J.T. You mean as in the assembly, or in his own house?
C.S.S. Both.
J.T. Well, quite so.
C.G.G. Eldership in the Acts seems to be by apostolic appointment, but in Timothy it seems to be on the line of desire; would you open that out?
J.T. It is on the line of desire, but still coming under appointment. This instruction was for Timothy, the apostolic delegate, and the apostle instructs him as to what is required, and Timothy would insist on that because he had the apostle's authority in appointing the elders.
Ques. Is it to be noted "if any one aspires to exercise oversight, he desires a good work"? The office is not exactly presented as a desire.
J.T. This work is not an office. The archbishops, such as the Archbishop of York, have palaces and thrones. The throne is not the idea, the work is the point, it is the
{402}
work of an overseer to "shepherd the assembly of God", as we have it here "take heed ..."
A.B.J. Would that last clause of verse 28 give the overseer God's estimate of His assembly, and strike the chord in his heart?
J.T. Very good -- "The blood of his own". It is a very strong expression of God's love for Christ, what it was to Him when Christ had to die to secure the assembly. This is the public assembly, not the assembly viewed as the Eve type; it is a question of purchase.
Ques. Why is the word "shepherd" used instead of "feed"?
J.T. It is the word in the original; he would have you not only to feed the sheep but to see that they are all there. The Lord set the example on the first day of the week; He went out after the two stray ones and got them together, and then came in among them to feed them, but Peter was to do both, he was to shepherd and to feed.
J.F. Is shepherding in view of the wolf, the wolf coming in?
J.T. That is right, the Lord opened that up in @John 10.
{403}
THE LAMB
@John 1: 19 - 42
J.T. I am thinking of the word 'Lamb' as expressive of sacrifice, and how the Lord is seen at the outset of John's gospel in this way as "the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world", and how John met the overtures of the men from Jerusalem, verse 19. It is a question now of our witness; what we testify to. I thought this paragraph, verse 19 - 28, would help us as to calling attention to Christ. This is incumbent upon us in our ministry and service as to what we confess. It says, "And he acknowledged and denied not" and then a second time, "and acknowledged, *I* am not the Christ". In all their inquiries he is negative. He said he was not the Christ, not Elias, not the prophet. Then they say, "What sayest thou of thyself?" That will come up in our service in testimony. He says, "*I* am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the path of the Lord, as said Esaias the prophet". We are told they asked him why he is serving as he is: "Why baptisest thou then if *thou* art not the Christ, nor Elias, nor the prophet?" John's answer is "*I* baptise with water. In the midst of you stands, whom *ye* do not know, he who comes after me, the thong of whose sandal *I* am not worthy to unloose. These things took place in Bethany, across the Jordan where John was baptising".
I am thinking of the example we have at the outset of John's gospel of witness, and how sacrifice is involved in it, and of the sense of refusing to seize any opportunity that is granted us of asserting ourselves. John is negative, saying first what he is not. Then they question him to tell the truth as to his service. We may say, "less than the least" but we are something. Paul says, "I am what I am". That is the way. In order to assert what one is, it is a question of what God has made one; therefore John's identity is an account of what he is, but
{404}
he repudiates all opportunity to assert himself, and he becomes a suitable vessel to call attention to Christ in His sacrificial character. John's gospel bears on us so directly as to whether we are suitable in a sacrificial way to call attention to Christ in this light.
Isaac is a type of Christ. God said to Abraham, "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and there offer him up for a burnt offering on one of the mountains which I will tell thee of", @Genesis 22: 2. Abraham was ready for it. He is tested as to the lamb. He says to Isaac, "God will provide Himself with the sheep for a burnt offering". Abraham is well instructed as to the position. The Lord was to be led as a lamb to the slaughter. It was a good journey, about three days, and what was found was a ram caught in the thicket. God had the progenitive thought in mind, and this gospel would provide for that, for the thought of children. It is the male side that is in mind. John shows how that comes about; it is in children, those who take on character from God through Christ. It is as receiving Him, "As many as received him, to them he gave the right to be children of God, to those that believe on his name; who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God". They believe on His name, so that I think John links on with Abraham and Isaac in this way, and John the evangelist pictures his ideal of one who makes way for Christ, one who is characterised by sacrifice. How he alludes to Christ in a sacrificial character!
This is not the burnt-offering; it is the sin offering -- "Takes away the sin of the world". The patriarchs of old were acquainted with the burnt-offering, working out what was pleasing to God. Abel, Enoch, Abraham pleased God. That is the character of the burnt-offering in the main, but this goes further. It leads us into Exodus where sin is brought into evidence. The lamb in the character of sin offering is roast with fire.
{405}
It was a question of Israel's state and how it was to be met; so that Christ our passover has been sacrificed: that is having to do with sin according to Corinthians. The sacrifice goes the whole length here, the fulfilled length to which God intended it to go. "The Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world". It would be well for us to ponder this a little. The testimony is continued on the line of sacrifice.
J.D. I was wondering if you thought the testimony they were rendering or any service rendered, to be accepted by God, is based on the appreciation of Christ -- evidently here Christ sacrificially as known in John's gospel.
J.T. Attention is called to "The Word became flesh", verse 14. These verses are introductory until Christ began to manifest His glory, for the marriage in Cana of Galilee leads to the manifestation of His glory. When faith has begun the disciples believe on Him. But in the 14th verse it says, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth" -- a gracious statement as to the Lord! It denotes family relationship to God. Then John bears witness of Him saying, "This was he of whom I said, He that comes after me is preferred before me", as if John the evangelist could hardly wait for verse 19, where he spoke about John the Baptist's testimony by the Spirit.
These books are written according to plan. We learn that from the Lord saying to John in the book of Revelation, "Write therefore what thou hast seen, and the things that are, and the things that are about to be after these". He told him how to plan the book. No doubt all the books are written on that principle. The whole book is written according to plan; therefore we may say verse 15 belongs to verse 19. He seems to have John the Baptist in mind in this chapter several times and right on to chapter 3. We get him in verse 6, "a
{406}
man sent from God, his name John". The word 'from' is 'from with' as we shall see. It carries the idea of 'sent out to serve'. It is so with Christ. Therefore John has a great place in John the evangelist's mind. In mentioning the incarnation he says, "John bears witness of him, and he has cried, saying, This was he of whom I said, He that comes after me is preferred before me, for he was before me", verse 15. It is abnegation itself, setting himself aside completely.
L.E.S. Do you think the legality of the position involved in incarnation is witnessed by the spirit of sacrifice?
J.T. I think that is the way. A tested one in accord with that is John the Baptist. He is the best example the Spirit of God could select. The gospel was written long after he testified, but his earliest witness of Christ is brought in in this way, as sacrificial. It was a great opportunity to be something, but he deliberately renounces it -- will not be anything at all. John the evangelist keeps John the Baptist in mind, and we are to keep him in mind in these early chapters.
L.E.S. Chapters 3 and 4 will fill out his testimony in relation to John the Baptist.
J.T. That is the way it is. It is not easy to find where his testimony finishes in chapter 3. He is almost on Christian ground at that juncture. It is said, "God gives not the Spirit by measure", and then, "The Father loves the Son and has given all things to be in his hand"; and He says to the woman in @John 4, "If thou knewest the gift of God and who it is that says to thee. Give me to drink ..." 'I am asking a drink of you, poor creature that you are; if you knew that, you would ask for it'. The minister is in the lowly position; the people ask and you go low to meet their needs.
J.D. Do you think in the use of the word "preferred" there is any thought of the personality of the Lord Jesus in deity?
{407}
J.T. That is the point. John was looking at Jesus. That is the way he put the truth about the incarnation. John the Baptist is six months older; they are together. The Lord says, "This is he of whom it is written, Behold *I* send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee. Verily I say to you, that there is not arisen among the born of women a greater than John the baptist", @Matthew 11: 10, 11. God had that man and this Man before Him. He selected this Man. John says, 'I know that' and he tells how he knows it. He sees Jesus coming to him and says, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world. He it is of whom I said, A man comes after me who takes a place before me, because he *was* before me; and I knew him not; but that he might be manifested to Israel, therefore have I come baptising with water. And John bore witness, saying, I beheld the Spirit descending as a dove from heaven, and it abode upon him. And I knew him not; but he who sent me to baptise with water, *he* said to me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit". That is when God made His preference. It alludes to the very time God's voice was heard. He was a divine Person, God Himself. But in the matter of the preference of these two men, Christ here below is preferred.
J.D. Christ here below is God's preference coming out. John says, 'It is not I'. He is a great man, but John the evangelist tells why he is sent; he came for a witness.
J.T. You might say that is the preface of the book. Then in the book you get what he sees, 'No wonder he is preferred', we might say, but scripture does not put it that way. Heaven does not open on a Babe to say, "This is My beloved Son". We are safe only in taking the divine record which gives a real Man before us, who walked thirty years before God, and God says
{408}
'This is My Lamb'. That is the One selected. The other had the opportunity but this One is selected, John is next. You might say, 'No one greater born of women' of John, but John says, 'I was not selected, I want you to know that'. He cried so that no mistake would be made. He avoided the thought of self-aggrandisement.
J.D. It is a wholesome thing for ministers of God to get hold of the fact that any testimony they have is to Another. It would greatly grieve you to think you took a greater place in the saints mind than Christ does.
J.T. That is the idea. Christendom is becoming just like the world; titles, rank and the like, whereas true ministers are nothing; they take no place even though offered one.
Rem. John says in chapter 3, "He must increase, but I must decrease".
J.T. Further on you see how thoroughly John was in accord with the service God gave him to carry out. He tells us here what the service is. He says, "I baptise with water" -- a negative thing; but he brings in the Lord. He says, "He it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit". Only a divine Person can do that. John is showing the greatness of Christ.
J.D. There is a beautiful footnote to the word "Stands". J.N.D. refers to @Genesis 18: 2; 'has taken his place and stands'.
J.T. He stood amongst them, as it were, ready to serve them. It was a reproach to them that they knew Him not.
L.E.S. "I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness", then "Behold your God", then linking it with the thought of the Lamb in @Isaiah 53, is all to bring forth Christ in His sacrificial character.
J.T. That runs in many of these chapters.
J.L. Would the apprehension of who Christ was in John's mind bring about a sacrificial spirit?
{409}
J.T. I think it does. If we are to be of service today we are to be on this line. It is what God has made you, you are what you are; Christ is what He is, as He says, "Altogether that which I also say to you", @John 8: 25.
L.E.S. What is the force of the word "Lamb?"
J.T. It is not diminutive. The word denotes maturity. It is not a little lamb as in Revelation. This is more mature, leading on to the ram which is mature and progenitive. John's gospel has that in mind. Children of God start in John's gospel.
J.D. Would it be an affectionate term?
J.T. I think so.
A.D. Would the attitude of the Lord today in christendom as standing outside be similar? None received Him.
J.T. In the sense of Lamb of God. He is God's sacrificial idea. That must attach to us. If we are not in the sense of the burnt-offering we will not be fit for service. Young men are apt not to have that in mind. John the Baptist represents it to the full. It is a question of bringing Christ in.
J.L. In this expression of John's as to Jesus, would it show an increased sense of the spirit of sacrifice?
J.T. In sacrificing yourself you are ready to see it in Christ because, whatever God would help you to be, He would lead you to see it in Christ. Everything is there. That is why John is distinguished here. He sees it in Christ. It is not a question of God telling him of this Person. The Spirit coming down marks Him off -- "Upon whom"; but it was not done yet. He had eyes for that.
D.R. John was a voice. He had the faculty to express himself. John carried that out.
J.T. It is the voice that cried, he articulated well. The word "cry" is remarkable. The Lord cried in chapter 7, but He cries in regard to the Spirit. He could give the Holy Spirit to those that came. If the Lord cries that
{410}
way it is worth while hearing. In verse 15 John cried "This was he". He wanted every one to know it.
J.D. Are we effective only so far as this principle of sacrifice is true?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. In the introduction of the book John the evangelist has John the baptist to begin with. If you have Christ in mind in your service you beget children as it were, if marked by sacrifice. You want to have the right idea. The Lord left the apostles the idea. All were to be like Himself.
J.D. I was wondering if the brethren knew that verse 29 and verse 35 is the same morrow.
J.T. "Again, on the morrow".
J.D. John's apprehension of Christ sacrificially has the power to beget children you spoke of.
J.T. Quite. "Again on the morrow". These days begin at chapter 1: 29. We have children; the idea of persons is brought in right down the chapter. The Lord named one of them and changed his name, and the disciples who heard John speak followed Jesus. John said, "Behold the Lamb of God"; but they did not call Him Lamb of God. They are not taught as John is. We need to be taught. What I learn by divine teaching enables me to speak to Him and to call Him by right names. Scripture had not furnished the names of Christ then. They do not say, "Lamb of God", they say, "Rabbi". It brings out their state. There is no use in using appellations of Christ if not understood. Only as I understand can I use them. John the Baptist saw these men were not parrots; if they had been they would have used the same word as John did. What they convey is that they need teaching. There is a lack of teaching; we need teaching in our own souls.
J.D. The woman in @John 4 says, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet" then she says to the men, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" She was true to what she knew.
{411}
J.T. Exactly. He had told her He was Christ, and she was the only one He did tell. She might have said, 'The Lord told me and nobody else'. She puts the question to them -- "He told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" If you analyse that you will conclude that He is. She wants them to be on moral lines.
A.Pe. Is it a further thought in verse 36 than in verse 26? He is not standing but walking.
J.T. Quite so. The dispensation is set out in walking. In principle you must have the walk of the Person. Proverbs speaks of things comely in their going. The principle is set out there, it is the way you go. This is the way to go. At first He is standing, then coming, then Christ sacrificially which is the idea in His walk. His vicarious sacrifice is already set out in coming to John, verse 29. He is known in the gospel as the sacrificial Lamb. We are to take that on. He is the Model for us. If John sets it out it is sacrificially carried out. That is what verse 29 means. The sacrificial work is still there, for John is speaking of death finished, but still carries the idea of sacrifice. The whole dispensation is impregnated with the thought of that. They do not say "Lamb of God" they say, 'We are not equal to that, we have to be taught that'. They say, "Rabbi".
J.L. Have you in mind that the teaching of John was before the witness of the Spirit as a dove from heaven?
J.T. Of John the Baptist. He was instructed wonderfully to be what he was. These two disciples do not pretend to know what he knew. I use terms I understand. When young my measure is that I need teaching. The eunuch says, 'I do not understand, how can I if somebody does not show me?'
J.D. Your thought is that the first impression the Spirit of God would put on the soul is the principle of sacrifice.
J.T. The 36th verse carries the idea best -- the actual
{412}
vicarious death of Christ carried down to us; teaching comes in there. The two disciples represent them all. To come into these things we must be taught; not by John the Baptist, but by Jesus.
J.D. The appreciation of Jesus as the Lamb of God fortified John.
J.T. He had some apprehension of Christ before the time, you might say; as it says of those in verse 13, "who have been born". All would have some apprehension of Christ, but he did not have it fully till he saw the Holy Spirit descending. Apprehension objectively is not enough. He must see the action of the Spirit which confirms, "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit".
J.D. It was a wonderful testimony of John to Christ.
J.T. See how thoroughly he was fitted. The two disciples do not pretend to know what he knew, only initially. They say, as interpreted, "Teacher" meaning 'this Man can teach us' for they needed to be taught. They did not say they were servants of John and so were instructed; they knew they were not.
J.H.C. If we serve in correspondence to the work in us we would be marked by personality.
J.T. If these two had been occupied with themselves they would say, 'We will just use the same title as our present teacher' and they would miss the whole point. They did not say "Lamb of God". They were not copyists; they say something of their own. They call Him "Rabbi". Not as Judas did which was in a religious sense, but in the sense of being Teacher. There are many rabbis, but they meant what the word means -- the only One who could teach them. They did not want the Lord to stand there to teach them, but they said, "Where abidest thou?" to get home teaching among the family.
J.D. Would you say that was important? In
{413}
listening to you your desire would be that, in listening, it would beget in us the desire for teaching from the Lord. You do what you can, but after all we are taught by the Lord.
J.T. You begin with yourself. These two men each had entity; though John was greater, they were going to have a place in the mind of God. But then how? By spiritual originality, which is your impression of Christ. He took account of these two men to make them great, so they have to be taught the curriculum of the truth. They say, "Rabbi" for He could teach them, "Where abidest thou?" The Lord says, "Come and see". He does not give the name of the house, but you follow up your thought. The Lord says, 'See where I am', You get the thought yourself; you have to be original.
J.D. To keep in touch you must be in living exercise. We could have you off at our finger tips, but that would not bring is to the Lord.
J.T. You start in a new system and you begin in the first grade. I bow and say, "Teacher" but I want to get it all. They say, 'Where do you abide?' They want to know where He lives and how He lives. Every servant ought to be looked at in that way. What marks him?
J.L. Being taught by Him would be greater than the walk.
J.T. Yes, it is not knowledge, but 'Where do you abide'? A lecturer in a college does not live in the college; he might be great in his lectures but be far away in managing his house. They want to know where He abides. He says, "Come and see". He does not say, 'I cannot ask you now'. This is the line of the gospel. The Lord says, "Come" -- you can go home with Him right away.
F.V. Would being taught be the result of any ministry? You have to go to the Lord as Teacher afterward.
J.T. Quite so. Go and see where He abides. You
{414}
have seen Him here by those who represent Him in any way. You see great things in meetings; you want to find out where these things are.
J.H.C. Is that principle seen in Paul speaking to Timothy, "Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience", @2 Timothy 3: 10.
J.D. We get things for ourselves.
J.T. We get them from the Lord.
J.D. We may pick up phrases.
J.T. Mary of Magdala in @John 20 is the other end of this thread. "Rabboni" is, so to speak, 'teach me'.
J.D. Taking it in a light way we do not get it.
J.T. We want to get it. Be original, not trying to bring in novelties. This word "Rabbi" with these two is original. John the Baptist had not used it, where did they get it? It is a common word, but in their mouths it is not an ordinary word, but, 'we need teaching from You'. "Rabboni" means, 'I have been taught by Him already'. These two cannot say that. Mary did.
L.E.S. Andrew filled up the matter as there was increase of light in his soul beyond the idea of "Rabbi" -- "We have found the Messias".
J.T. Would that not be that there had been some progress in their souls?
L.E.S. Teachability lays the foundation of spirituality. You feel brethren are seeking to take it on, but underlying that is being spiritual.
J.T. It is not simply taking up the word but expressing the sense of needing teaching. You need to be taught. Education is not simply the use of words, the spirit is attached to it. If you want to be sophisticated in the world you must be taught in it. Here it is the lowliness of John the Baptist in the presence of Jesus; and in the presence of this the two men say "Rabbi" and then, "Where abidest thou?" He sees what is in their hearts and He says, "Come and see".
{415}
J.D. The two disciples hear and follow, but Jesus having turned and seeing them following says, "What seek ye?" After a meeting like this, it may be we have not understood the sacrificial thought sufficiently and we get to the Lord. He sees us taking the matter up; do we gather that from this verse? We resolve to know God better. We have listened and made up our minds to follow; we come under the notice of the Lord.
J.T. Turning and following means they committed themselves to heaven; but not only that, I have to get into the thing. Mark says, "Repent and believe in the glad tidings". It is 'believe it in principle'. I must be ready to look into the thing, then I get the real thing. First believe, it is a principle. If I believe on Jesus, I have committed myself to that, believe in Him, my soul is brought into power.
L.E.S. The idea, "We have found the Messias" would involve that it would come in in power.
J.T. That is after they have been there. That is how it works out. They come and see where He abides and abide with Him that day, it is about the tenth hour. Andrew was one of the two, he first finds his own brother Simon and says, 'There is no doubt about it, He is the Christ'. That is to say they actually found Him. Follow the thing up! They do not say 'We have found the Son of God' or, 'We have found the Teacher', they say "We have found the Messias", but they found Him on those lines. "And he led him to Jesus. Jesus looking at him said, Thou art Simon, the son of Jonas; thou shalt be called Cephas". Peter does not doubt the matter as Nathanael did. Cephas interpreted is "stone". Now we have reached solid ground. Stone is a solid material; that is the idea. The knowledge of the Messias which interpreted is "Christ" brings us on to solid ground.
J.D. In verse 42, "Jesus looking at him" -- the footnote says, 'looking carefully' -- there is such a thing as
{416}
coming under the distinct scrutiny of the Lord. He is satisfied the matter is there. All come under that scrutiny.
J.T. We do not get off. We might pass muster among the brethren, but not with the Lord. You can hardly get this incorporated in the other gospels. This is to gather things up to show the initial feature of the dispensation where their gathering now is for the new order of things arrived at in a suitable manner.
J.L. Would what is spoken to Peter involve what the two disciples are taught?
J.T. It involves more. He does not call them 'Cephas'. He says, "Thou shalt be" not, "Thou art".
A.Pe. Is the thought of children addition?
J.T. This is gathering for the universe. He was not that yet, he was that potentially. You have the initial idea of stability. You are not carried away by every wind of doctrine.
J.D. This alludes to His deity. He can change names.
J.T. We are in the centre of things now. We have Simon called Cephas. He is potentially suitable. We are not washed away by every flood. It is going to stand.
{417}
ORIGINAL THOUGHTS DEVELOPED TO COMPLETION
@Genesis 2: 1 - 7; @Exodus 16: 22 - 31; @Exodus 31: 13 - 17
J.T. These scriptures are intended to be related directly and, taken together, they serve the purpose in mind, that is that we might see certain features of the truth from the beginning; and that whilst we only get in the book of Exodus the last statement that Jehovah was refreshed on the Sabbath day -- we only get that in Exodus -- it was there, one of the richest things too that was there, before it was disclosed. So that the idea is intended to run down in what we may have to say. No doubt much more was said, whether then or later, that is not disclosed; but the hope is that we shall see, by beginning at certain features of the truth, how terms run down and, where they are seen at the beginning, they give a clue to what is meant in them so that we do not use them wrongly. The divine thought is that everything should be named, known by its name, especially the persons, and there are the Scriptures, but then there are also the things that are found in the first chapter as well as in the second. Their names are given at the outset but they are enlarged later, only the enlargement does not set aside the root principles or ideas. So that if we are to follow on in any line of truth we are to pay attention to the names given so as to have intelligence as to them.
C.A.M. What things were you referring to in the second chapter?
J.T. In the first and the second. I spoke of the second just now; and another thing to be noted is that in the second chapter we have abstract ideas as to certain things; for instance the fourth verse -- "These are the histories of the heavens and the earth, when they were created, in the day that Jehovah Elohim made earth and heavens, and every shrub of the field before it was in the
{418}
earth, and every herb of the field before it grew". That is to say we have thoughts purely abstract but the meaning will come out in due time. So that we will not be misled in any further names applied either in the shrub world or the plants; and then man himself is formed, the details of which we do not find in the first chapter. We find it here.
C.A.M. Comparing verse 4 with verse 1 of chapter 2, the expression used in verse 1 is "the heavens and the earth and all their host were finished". The expression you use as to its being abstract seems to make it all very wonderful. But in the fourth verse it uses the word "histories". Do you think that there seems to be a need of an ability to put together the fact that they were finished and still they were histories?
J.T. The word is more clearly stated in the Authorised Version. The word "history" is supposed to clarify it, but the word alludes to origin. The word "histories" carries the idea of the origin of the things mentioned.
R.W.S. While moral conditions might come in to disrupt and dislocate the divine ordering -- as the Lord says in that section in @Matthew 19, "Moses, in view of your hardheartedness allowed you" -- are we coming to the time when things are finalised in the assembly?
J.T. That is not such a good word. The word 'completed' I suppose would be better. So that the word of God is said to be completed. And so here the word "finished" is used in verse 1. "The heavens and earth and all their host were finished". The Spirit of God is pleased to use another word which implies origin. I think the Authorised Version has "generations".
T.N.W. The footnote to that word in verse 4 of the New Translation gives it "Lit. 'generations:' the word implies 'origin'".
C.A.M. Would it set forth the idea that when God
{419}
originates something it is as good as finished? So that whatever comes in, nothing is going to defeat it.
J.T. That brings up the whole question of what is called objective truth, or statements, and subjective truth. What God says of a thing may indicate the general thought of it in the objective sense. But the enlargement or development of it may mean more, may require more, and that of course would appear here -- "every shrub of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew". Objectively they were there and in principle they were there; but growth, that is the application of life, the life principle, would bring out something more. This runs down to the whole matter of christianity, as well as Judaism, but especially christianity, the origin of which was in Christ, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men", @John 1: 4.
J.T.Jr. Peter uses the word "originator" in connection with the Lord, "The originator of life ye slew". The footnote says, "One who begins and sets a matter on".
J.T. Quite so. That is very important. That word is used four times in scripture, I think.
A.N.W. Are you suggesting the fourth verse really antedates verse 2? The 'history' goes back before the 'finish' -- before it grew. Does that really antedate verse 2?
J.T. Just so. From God's side the thing was done, at least as regards the shrubs and plants; but the application of life had to come in. And the same thing applied as to man himself, because he was formed of the dust. It is said "And Jehovah Elohim formed Man, dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life". That is to say the actual man is formed -- the framework, and no doubt flesh too in some sense, but anyway it was there before the breath was there, before the breathing took place.
C.A.M. You remember some years ago there was a very illuminating ministry as to God's sovereign purpose
{420}
illustrated in the place that Judah had, and the way that birth and the family of God worked out in Joseph who had the birthright. Those two ideas were put together and they were very interesting. Would these two thoughts in mind here be in any way parallel with that?
J.T. You set us thinking now; we will have to go back on that.
C.A.M. I just wondered whether it would be right to think of this matter of purpose in God's mind in bringing these things on to the scene in the actual development and working out of the thing.
J.T. That is much clearer, the working out of the thing which involves life. That is very illuminating. Again it may be said that what is in mind is to get at the ideal or primary thoughts in all these scriptures, and see how they run down; and to use them rightly in ministry, because ministry ought to take character from the beginning. We should see that what we are dealing with is really carried down intelligently in the terms we are using.
A.R. You mean from @Acts 2 and Ephesians particularly? I suppose that is the beginning of things, is it not in christianity?
J.T. That is good; in @Acts 1 and 2. @Acts 2 is the base really of all that we get later; because the Lord had come in; Luke brings Him in as to the things which Jesus began to do and to teach. Therefore the teaching would work up from the roots of things. The root must be there, and the teaching would enlarge on it and bring out the meaning of it so that we have intelligent terms, proper terminology, in ministry, that the terms really apply to any given ministry.
A.R. Is that why it says "They continued steadfastly in the apostles doctrine" and so on?
J.T. Just so. They were steadfast in it.
C.N. In the latter part of verse 5 it says, "Jehovah Elohim had not caused it to rain on the earth, and there
{421}
was no man to till the ground", that is connected with these shrubs and other things. You spoke of the necessity of life.
J.T. Yes, it says "Jehovah Elohim planted a garden in Eden eastward". That planting and that garden must bring out these shrubs. Of course we cannot spend much time, just to get an idea or two. We must go on now to the other two passages, only to get the thought that would help us in ministry and conversation with one another -- ministry that we have, right terminology, right words in the ministry, that the brethren will be formed by them.
A.P.T. "I have much people in this city". Would that link on with what you have said? The Lord could see the end from the beginning as to what would transpire in Corinth.
J.T. That comes up as soon as we touch on the Corinthian epistles. There were eighteen months of ministry through Paul himself in the city of Corinth. What terminology must have been used, and all to give understanding to the persons who had to be formed by it.
R.W.S. In Jotham's parable "the thorn-bush said to the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you, come, put confidence in my shadow", @Judges 9: 15. The truth is a thorn-bush has no shadow.
J.T. That is good. It had no shadow.
D.P. Is it within the power of the creature to originate anything?
J.T. It does not seem so. The Creator is the Author of everything, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". It does not seem as if we ought to bring in the creature thought in what we are now dealing with. There may be what is called a creation in what people do with their own hands, but primarily the idea of creation is with God.
F.N.W. You were alluding to the abstract idea in chapter 2. In chapter 1 it is the herb producing seed.
{422}
Does that indicate that it must flow from the abstract thought?
J.T. Just so. As we were remarking in verse 8, "And Jehovah Elohim planted a garden in Eden eastward, and there put Man whom he had formed. And out of the ground Jehovah Elohim made every tree grow that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food". Now we come to life. God does it. He "made every tree grow that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; and the tree of life, in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil". That is the setting, but it is as to the vegetable kingdom, Adam being the very centre of it to use it. But God is behind it all. God is using it. It is the great operative region in which He is moving.
A.B.P. Would it be right to say the Lord had this in mind when He said "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up?" @Matthew 15: 13.
J.T. Just so. They would hardly be creations of God but, I suppose, the plantings of the devil, because the devil can imitate. He sowed the darnel which is an imitation of wheat. We know the devil can do this, the creative idea is not really there.
S.F. Would planting "in the mountain of thine inheritance" follow on with this?
J.T. Quite so. That is a very good thought.
A.N.W. Is the epistle to the Ephesians built up on this basis, the finish at the outset and the working up to it by ministry in the latter part?
J.T. That is good, but there is so much which precedes that as regards Israel, both past and future, what even follows on christianity, so much that Ephesians does not touch at all because it really only touches what belongs to christianity. The gospels go over the wall; they touch on the millennial world, and that has to be kept in mind as to what God may do. But Ephesians only deals with christianity properly.
{423}
J.A.P. Nathanael illustrates the value of a man known by the Lord. He says 'He saw him before Philip called him'. Is that the idea of being formed, like the abstract idea?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord saw him before Philip called him. He says, "Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee", @John 1: 48. But then he was moving, and that is a good point to bring in here, especially in John, because it enters into the idea of life. Nathanael is moving. He was stationary before but "Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and says of him, Behold one truly an Israelite, in whom there is no guile". He is seen following. Now we are speaking of life, that Nathanael is not a witness of it until he follows Jesus, until he is seen moving, and moving under some good motive; and that is apparent now, and the Lord designates him "one truly an Israelite in whom there is no guile". So that there is fruit already there in a negative way, that guile was not active.
T.E.H. Is that the thought of seed? It is a matter of nurture and development which is in the assembly in view of fulness.
J.T. That is just so, because we want to get at names, and names of things that are positive -- positively of God, that will develop later. We have already alluded to Ephesians but must go wider for the roots found in Genesis.
R.W.S. It says later on in chapter 2 of Genesis, "And out of the ground Jehovah Elohim had formed every animal of the field and all fowl of the heavens, and brought them to Man, to see what he would call them". I was thinking of God just waiting on Adam to see what he would call them, "and whatever Man called each living soul, that was its name". Is that the matter of origin going through?
J.T. That is a fine suggestion because we are now touching on not simply mere thoughts of origin but of
{424}
specialties, because what God had in mind in Adam was a specialty. He formed the creatures and He would bring them to Adam to see what Adam would name them, as if God's mind is now active in the thing. What a pleasure it would be to Him to see what Adam would call them. The development now is on a higher level, as if God's own mind is considered and He is thinking of Adam, because he is the greatest creature so far, and of the qualities there were and how they were to be developed. And then the question of woman comes up and God would indicate that He has further thoughts. The actual person is new. God had another thought to bring out and another word by which to determine it, and that enters into what we are saying, the question of words that are being used in ministry, and how prolific they are too in important suggestions. And so what we are saying about Adam helps us as to how God's own mind is active and how specialities come into view almost immediately as God's mind is active. Now we have gone beyond the creational side; just as in the end of Luke we have one feature of christianity, but then there were other thoughts, second thoughts, and in @Acts 1 the second treatise is to bring out these thoughts.
J.S. Do you regard rain as a second thought, a fuller thought?
J.T. Quite so. It is essential to the whole matter.
R.S. Would you say a word as to "living soul". Here it seems to be an outcome of life.
J.T. It says here "Jehovah Elohim formed Man". The brethren will do well to note the word "Man", written with a capital, meaning "the Adam", so as to get in mind what is in God's mind, a great creature and his greatness is coming into evidence, especially now as he has a double, a woman, "Jehovah Elohim formed Man, dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and Man became a living soul". Now you have the word 'soul' in your mind. That
{425}
is a word to be followed, because it is not exactly the same as the word 'spirit' although they are synonyms sometimes, but the word 'soul' has to do with the lower affections. It is what God would look for immediately as needed, the compassionate affections, not so much on the higher level as the word "love" would denote. It is simply what is there in the sense of compassion -- what is needed now in Adam and Eve.
A.R. Is that why you get the river in chapter 2 of Genesis -- the lower affections -- and in @John 7 too in that sense.
J.T. That is good.
E.A.L. In verses 7 and 8 there is the word "formed" twice -- a double emphasis put on it. Would that be God's own word in connection with man without deifying him?
J.T. The highest order of creation is outside of Deity. Man is always the highest order, but outside of Deity, except when we come to the Person of the Lord Jesus. He is God, before He became Man He is God, and did not cease to be God when He became a Man.
E.A.L. The vegetable kingdom is not referred to as being formed.
J.T. You have growth which is a great word in the vegetable idea.
F.H.L. Would the apostle have this line in mind in writing to the Romans, "But we *do* know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to purpose. Because whom he has foreknown, he has also predestinated to be conformed to the image of his Son", @Romans 8: 28, 29. You were speaking of the thoughts of God in relation to these meetings.
J.T. Please enlarge on that.
F.H.L. I was thinking of what was prior to actual history, the abstract thought in the mind of God, and the completion of the thought in relation to those who
{426}
would be conformed to the image of His Son, and those whom He has glorified.
J.T. Just so, "We *do* know that all things work together for good to those who love God", therefore we are now in the realm of love for God, so that the great development of life is implied in that.
J.T.Jr. Would it be suggested also in the form of teaching. The Romans obeyed from the heart the form of teaching, which would be the ministry.
J.T. Quite so.
J.T.Jr. In @Romans 6 they obeyed from the heart, which would allude to the working out of life in us. The form of teaching would come through the ministers.
J.T. Quite so, that they persevered in the apostles teaching. We must add the authoritative side. Of course it was in Adam too, but when we come to Christ we get it too. But the abstract idea is authoritative, the thing must be so. The idea of commandment must be there or we cannot have christianity, and formation, which is largely by authority.
Rem. In @1 Corinthians 3 we get Paul planting and Apollos watering but God giving the increase.
J.T. Quite so, but we are on the line of ministry because we are dealing with apostolic service. Ministry must take form in right words, right terminology, otherwise we become dwarfed in our make-up, in our formation.
Rem. Peter speaks of the living and abiding word of God entering into birth.
J.T. Born again you mean. Quite so. It is a question of formation of persons, and if there is a defect in the birth there will be a defect all through. So that we need to see to it that the children are born aright; that is to say, the new birth must be in relation to right teaching.
D.M. In regard to ministry does @Ephesians 4 fit into what you are saying, "with a view to the work of the
{427}
ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ". Is that what ministry has in mind?
J.T. Quite so. The passage runs right into that, the edifying of the body. If the thing is not right at the start you will have difficulties. The gifts in @Ephesians 4 are intended to avoid any difficulties in the formation.
A.R. Forgiveness of sins does not go far enough, does it?
J.T. A certain class of people use the term 'born again' but in their minds they are thinking of full christianity in that, but full christianity is not in the simple term 'born again'. There is more than that needed.
C.A.M. In connection with the preaching of the gospel, it is a great exercise with us that we do not have a succession of addresses to christians every Lord's day. Should we not be concerned that we really reach men as such? Sometimes we listen Lord's day after Lord's day to an address that you have to be quite an advanced christian to understand what is being said. It does not deprive the gospel message of its spirituality to make it intelligible to men as such.
J.T. Just so, and if persons coming into the truth are to be developed rightly we must present the truth so that it is intelligible, so that on their side they will understand that God has given them minds and that they should be used rightly, "We have the mind of Christ" and should use it rightly. We ought not to have much difficulty if the speaking is accurate, if the young ones, the persons who are listening and learning, have the mind of Christ and understand that and use it, so that we carry away with us what is said and ruminate over it and grow in the truth.
R.W.S. They were young christians in Thessalonica when Paul writes the second letter to them. Were they not properly formed believers as coming into the testimony through Paul's preaching? Evidently something happened that they were shaken in mind.
{428}
J.T. Paul's preaching at Thessalonica is in chapter 17 of the Acts, "He went in among them, and on three sabbaths reasoned with them from the Scriptures, opening and laying down that the Christ must have suffered and risen up from among the dead, and that this is the Christ, Jesus whom *I* announce to you". That is, he opened up and laid down. You are coming to the affirmation of the thing, and the confirmation of the thing, in laying down the truth, so that the saints know what is meant, and that is what is understood in the 17th chapter of Acts at Thessalonica. Another thing is the Bereans come in immediately in that section. They come in, brethren who want to know what is said and whether it is so, so that they inquire daily to see if these things were so.
J.A.P. They only had Moses and the prophets and the Psalms.
J.T. Quite so. They did not have the New Testament.
A.P.T. "We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the law", @John 1: 45.
J.T. You are questioning whether Moses is made enough of in Paul's gospel.
A.P.T. He is made quite a little of in John. The Lord spoke of Moses lifting up the serpent in the wilderness, so that we must understand the scriptures and look into them.
J.T. Just so, "Ye search the scriptures, for ye think that in them ye have life eternal, and they it is which bear witness concerning me", @John 5: 39.
A.P.T. I was thinking of whether this would enter into your mind; in Mark He is referring to the marriage matter and says it was not so from the beginning; as to whether we look enough into Genesis and Exodus to help us in relation to the terminology and all that enters into it.
J.T. Quite so.
{429}
A.N.W. Does the apostle have that in mind when he says to Timothy, "Have an outline of sound words?"
J.T. Quite so.
E.T.P. Is that seen in the prefacing remarks of the writer in Hebrews, "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us in the person of the Son" -- that there is a finish?
J.T. What has been said fits in with that, that is the "sound words", and then the cutting in a straight line, which would I suppose stress accuracy in the light of that.
We might touch on the 16th chapter of Exodus as to the glory of the sabbath, how it is linked up with the manna in that passage and how the wilderness is brought into that passage, and it is said that Israel was complaining against Moses and Aaron, and Aaron spoke to the people. What comes in now into Exodus is the idea of the wilderness. There was not time to read much but the wilderness comes into the chapter in a very special way and it is said that Israel was murmuring. "And they journeyed from Elim, and the whole assembly of the children of Israel came into the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departure out of the land of Egypt. And the whole assembly of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron in the wilderness", @Exodus 16: 1, 2, showing what the influence of the wilderness is and how we are to meet it, and so it is said in the 9th verse, "And Moses spoke to Aaron, Say to all the assembly of the children of Israel, Come near into the presence of Jehovah; for he has heard your murmurings. And it came to pass, when Aaron spoke to the whole assembly of the children of Israel, that they turned toward the wilderness, and behold, the glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud". Before we proceed we might get that touch as to the wilderness that it is a place of testing, but at the same
{430}
time it is a place in which God shines, in which His glory shines, and especially in the speaking of Aaron, which I suppose would suggest a man. Aaron had a man's feelings as over against Moses. He would represent the thought of affection in man, as Jehovah said to Moses, "When he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart". He was a man of affection. And so here Moses says to Aaron, "Say to all the assembly of the children of Israel, Come near into the presence of Jehovah; for he has heard your murmurings. And it came to pass, when Aaron spoke to the whole assembly of the children of Israel, that they turned toward the wilderness, and behold the glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud". So that the wilderness is the place of testing, but it is the place in which God shines, and the manna comes into it, which is a question of Christ Himself come down from heaven to give bread to us. And then the sabbath comes into it, worked out from that, and so, "It came to pass on the sixth day, that they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one". That is to say, each person in the house had the same measure of manna. "And all the princes of the assembly came and told Moses. And he said to them, This is what Jehovah has said: Tomorrow is the rest, the holy sabbath, of Jehovah: bake what ye will bake, and cook what ye will cook; and lay up for yourselves all that remains over, to be kept for the morning". That is, the sabbath has to be kept clear. "And Moses said, Eat it today; for today is sabbath to Jehovah, today ye shall not find it in the field. Six days shall ye gather it; but on the seventh day is sabbath: on it there shall be none. And it came to pass on the seventh day that there went out some from the people to gather it, and they found none. And Jehovah said to Moses, How long do ye refuse to keep my commandments and my laws? See, for Jehovah hath given you the sabbath; therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread for two days.
{431}
Abide every man in his place: let no man go from his place on the seventh day. And the people rested on the seventh day". This brings us to what is particularly in mind, the glory of it, coming in first in Genesis, refreshment that God found on the sabbath, the keeping of the sabbath, that God Himself found refreshment in it; and now we have the second mention in this chapter in connection with the manna, the food that God gives us from heaven; and then the glory shining in the wilderness. So that we have a wonderful setting of things in this chapter by which we may go forward further in the 30th chapter.
A.R. Is the 16th chapter what Christ was here unofficially? Aaron was not an official priest yet.
J.T. That is right. He is not constituted an official priest until the 28th chapter, but he is here reflecting Christ in the fact that the glory is seen as Aaron speaks.
A.R. Does Aaron in some way correspond to the manna?
J.T. The manna is Christ. Of course it is a question of what the description is. We are told the manna was like coriander-seed. "Manna" means "What is it?" Every time you question it you will get more. There is plenty that will come. The question about it is to enlighten us, and the manna is set before the testimony. It is connected with the testimony of God. These are wonderful thoughts -- that is the glory shining in the man's voice, and then the man himself and the sabbath, and then finally the testimony of God is provided. It is a whole circle of glory.
J.H. Is there a link between the moisture in the garden and the dew here? The manna was there after the dew had gone up. Does that link up with the moisture in the garden?
J.T. Quite so. The moisture and then the river in the garden. And then when we come to Exodus we find the twelve wells of water and the seventy palm trees.
{432}
But God has already had His refreshment -- wonderful thought that God should have refreshment.
J.T.Jr. Do you think the glory coming into the cloud would have an answer today in the way He comes in in the ministry, lighting it up? He is in it Himself.
J.T. Do you mean the ministry meeting and the readings, that they are increasing? Even on a hot day like this they are here so that we may enjoy them. I believe this whole matter runs together, the glory and the refreshment in the ministry. What a part God has in the ministry! Because He has a part in it as well as what we have.
Ques. What does the glory of the ministry signify?
J.T. It is a question of the manna -- what Christ is, come down from heaven, "And it came to pass, when Aaron spoke to the whole assembly of the children of Israel, that they turned toward the wilderness, and behold, the glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud". But it is when Aaron spoke, that it is Aaron's voice that is in mind, another feature of Christ in the chapter -- "Never man spake like this man" (@John 7: 46) -- how the glory shone there.
S.F. Would you say something as to the use of the words "hallow" and "holy" -- a holy sabbath, and it was hallowed.
J.T. The word 'holy' is not found in Genesis at all. The nearest approach is that God rested on the seventh day, "And God had finished on the seventh day his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it". That is the only allusion to the thought you are using. But when we come to Exodus it is full of the thought.
S.F. I suppose "hallow" and "holy" are similar.
J.T. Quite so, only the hallowing of a day cannot be so essentially. It is hardly the idea of a person but simply God extending the idea of holiness to a day, and that is
{433}
what our first day of the week is now. It is not a sabbath but is carried through from the idea of sabbath in the Old Testament. It has taken the place of the sabbath on a higher plane.
S.F. We take up all these thoughts in the Lord Himself. He is our sabbath, is He not?
J.T. Quite so. But in some of the gospels it is the day after sabbath. In John's gospel it is the first day of the week. The idea of sabbath is submerged. The higher thing is the first day of the week. John says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day", @Revelation 1: 10.
F.H.L. In @Acts 16 Paul and his company went to the river side.
J.T. Very good; a place where prayer was wont to be made. You feel how appropriate it was in Philippi that there should be such a holy state of things by the river side, and Paul coming in to establish it. So that Philippi is in a certain sense on a higher level than Ephesus.
But the thought was to run through to the 31st chapter to show how the link is carried down as to the sabbath. So that it is said in the 16th verse, "And the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations -- it is an everlasting covenant. It shall be a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever; for in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed" -- one of the most remarkable passages we can get. "And was refreshed" -- a fact not spoken of at all in the beginning. It was there but now it is spoken, spoken by Moses.
C.A.M. It is remarkable that there is such potentiality in what God does that a spiritual person such as Moses coming on the scene adds to it. So the writer to the Hebrews gives it a wonderful meaning, so that it seems to suggest eternity in some sense.
J.T. Quite so. "There remains then a sabbatism to
{434}
the people of God", @Hebrews 4: 9. I suppose that will be our eternal portion.
C.A.M. Really if we increase in spirituality, these things that seem to be so simple on the face of them can be enlarged to be infinite.
J.T. Quite so. And in the 8th chapter of Genesis God says in His heart, "I will no more henceforth curse the ground on account of Man". He did not speak it openly, it was in His heart. How precious that is as to many other things that were there, such as the ministry, what had been in the heart of God, a reserve kept there in the wilderness!
C.A.M. Ministry might at first glance seem to be simple, but if you bring spirituality into it the thing develops as if it were a living page.
J.T.Jr. Do you think that God was looking for refreshment now in His people, having finished speaking at the end of the chapter? He is now looking for refreshment for Himself in regard to His people.
J.T. If we are rightly engaged in what is happening, the increase in these meetings, if we are rightly engaged in what we see -- that the increase indicates spirituality in the brethren -- it must be something to God. You cannot conceive of these meetings happening at all if there was not something for God. They are on the principle of the peace-offerings. The Lord says twice in @John 20, "Peace be to you". It means that God has part in what is proceeding, "And the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews. Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you", and all that followed. God was having His part in that too.
C.N. In @John 5 the Lord says, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work". Would that fit in with the thought of what God found after the completion of the seven days?
J.T. Quite so. God's mind has been enlarged in the
{435}
divine realm -- steady enlargement until the Holy Spirit came down and He gives a fulness to it that is infinite. The great result of all these matters is worked out in the presence of the Spirit of God here.
A.B.P. Is that typified in the beginning of the chapter, that there was certain work performed in gold, silver and copper. In chapter 31, referring to Bezaleel, there were basic elements in the creation now being formed and expanded.
J.T. Quite so. When you come to the 35th chapter you find great increase on that whole point in connection with the sabbath. "And Moses collected all the assembly of the children of Israel, and said to them, These are the things which Jehovah has commanded, to do them. Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a sabbath of rest to Jehovah: whoever does work on it shall be put to death. Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your dwellings upon the sabbath day. And Moses spoke to all the assembly of the children of Israel, saying, This is the word which Jehovah has commanded, saying, Take from among you a heave-offering to Jehovah, every one whose heart is willing, let him bring it. Jehovah's heave-offering -- gold, and silver, and copper, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and byssus, and goats hair, and rams skins dyed red, and badgers skins, and acacia-wood, and oil for the light, and spices for the anointing oil, and for the incense of fragrant drugs; and onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate. And all who are wise-hearted among you shall come and make all that Jehovah has commanded: the tabernacle, its tent, and its covering, its clasps, and its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its bases; the ark, and its staves; the mercy-seat, and the veil of separation; the table and its staves, and all its utensils, and the shewbread; and the lampstand for the light, and its utensils, and its lamps, and the oil for the light; and the altar of incense, and its
{436}
staves; and the anointing-oil, and the incense of fragrant drugs". So that the fulness of Israel's wealth is available now as God is in the presence of the sabbath and the dedication of the people for the building of the tabernacle. It is a wonderful opening up in Exodus in connection with @Genesis 1 and 2.
A.B.P. Would it link on with the thought of God's inheritance in the saints in Ephesians?
J.T. Just so -- what He has in us.
W.W.M. In @Psalm 90, the prayer of Moses, one of his words is, "So teach us to number our days, that we may acquire a wise heart". It is a wise heart that has these things.
J.T. Yes indeed -- everyone who is wise-hearted.
{437}
BRETHREN
@Genesis 27: 26 - 41; @Numbers 20: 14 - 21
J.T. These passages, the one in Genesis and the other in Numbers, are intended to fill out what came before us this morning as to ministry, especially in its dispensational bearing. What is thought now is that we should be engaged with the idea of brethren, an idea that has a great place in Scripture, working out into eternal relations too, according to @John 20. But it is hoped that we shall learn something as to the subject, not only in its local or immediate relation, but its dispensational bearing. Therefore, the passage in Numbers was read as working out what began in Genesis; relations between Jacob and Esau in Genesis were personal, family, purely family at first. But as we see the relation of brethren between Jacob and Esau in Numbers, we have already passed through, we might say, hundreds of years; at least, a considerable time, to require consideration of the relationship between them as of a dispensational character. And so Edom is in mind in Numbers, that is, Esau in Genesis is called Edom in Numbers, so that it has acquired not only a family relation but national, and dispensational. And it is hoped that we shall see how the relation of brethren may be just merely national or dispensational and pass out of the primary thought of brethren; whereas the thought really of brethren, the thought conveyed in the term, runs into eternity. And as in these two men, that is, in the anti-typical meaning or teaching of the passages, the idea runs on. So that the Lord is to have many brethren; Christ is to have many brethren; and all to be of one family.
Now, Genesis shows us how the thought arose as between these two men, and how it entered into their early lives, and how the thought of hatred was developed. It began first as just personal, but it soon entered into the national situation, and I might say, dispensation; and
{438}
the hope is that we shall learn from the subject in a practical way as to the whole matter; especially as to our personal relations with one another; that is to say, what actually exists today.
J.T.Jr. Do our local positions test us in this way especially, what we are in our local settings?
J.T. That is in mind. In Esau's history a questionable feature has to be noted, and what gave rise to the hatred, what we may call murderous hatred, which appeared in Esau.
F.H.L. What seemed to underlie the hatred, would you think, was Jacob's insistence on getting the blessing?
J.T. Well, quite, arising from the mind of God. The mind of God must have its place in all these matters; what God has in them; what God has in any such circumstances.
G.V.D. Is there involved in Esau's hatred the inability of the flesh to make way for the sovereignty of God?
J.T. Just so, and in that he had cultivated merely natural feelings. He did not get beyond the mere natural feature, at that moment, but it soon developed; it soon went beyond the circumstances; and therefore, we have the determination on the one hand to use violence. It says of Esau in chapter 27: 41, "Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his father had blessed him. And Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand, and I will slay my brother Jacob". There was determination to use violence to the extent of murder.
C.A.M. The prophet Amos says, "His anger did tear continually, and he kept his wrath for ever", @Amos 1: 11.
J.T. It is remarkable the place that Esau has in this respect in the prophets, and, of course, it is to teach us to be on our guard about this matter of hatred, that we might walk in love.
A.N.W. Would Malachi allow us to say that this
{439}
hating spirit brings back upon it governmental hatred? It is striking that it should be said of the blessed God Himself, that "Esau have I hated". Would it be right to say it is governmental in that way?
J.T. Just so. That was not stated at the outset -- that God hated Esau. In fact, Deuteronomy and Numbers, but especially Deuteronomy would show that God was caring for him, and forbad Israel to interfere with him. He is then called Esau.
E.A.K. Had Isaac any part in the matter in gravitating to what was natural and pandering to it, whereas Rebecca shows the greater spirituality?
J.T. Just so. That will help us -- that is, Rebecca coming into this matter. She had gone into the relations between these two brothers, more even than Isaac. She suffered, and had formed a judgment in her sufferings. Her mind was in accord with what ultimately was the mind of God.
R.W.S. Does 1 John bear on it? He writes, "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. He who does not love his brother abides in death. Every one that hates his brother is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him", chapter 3: 14, 15.
J.T. That is good; so that the thought of murder between brothers extends back further. It is seen even in Cain.
J.T.Jr. It is alluded to in Hebrews as a root of bitterness, "Lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and many be defiled by it;" @Hebrews 12: 15.
J.T. Therefore, we have to watch roots. We have the word 'root' attached to love too -- "rooted and grounded in love" -- but the root of bitterness is to be watched, and it will culminate in murder.
J.A.P. Does this feature have to be watched in cases of discipline amongst us? God took it up with Esau in Obadiah, that when Jacob was under discipline Esau
{440}
despised him. Should there be respect with us for those under discipline, right feelings amongst us?
J.T. That is, we are to take account of each other as under discipline, and not to take any advantage, is that your meaning?
J.A.P. Obadiah brings out just that, that right feelings should have marked Esau as a brother. He says, "Thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother in the day of his disaster", verse 12.
J.T. Quite so. If God sees the need of discipline in us, He would not encourage any advantage being taken of that between us, lest personal feeling might enter into it, and the discipline would be annulled in that sense; He would take away the feelings of enmity or pride that might lead to the discipline being aggravated and extended. It is clear that, if discipline has to be executed, it is to be left with God, because it is said in 1 Corinthians that the incestuous man that was put under discipline, put away, indeed -- what is said in that respect, what qualifies the whole matter is that his spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. He was to be delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh that his spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. The matter is to be kept unto the Lord and not to be used for natural feelings or vengeance.
G.A.T. Would that be why in connection with the two blessings, that heaven comes first in connection with Jacob and the earth first in connection with Esau?
J.T. "God give thee of the dew of heaven", and what is said in Esau's case is, "Behold, thy dwelling shall be of the fatness of the earth".
G.A.T. Heaven is referred to three times, I believe, before this -- in connection with the creation, and the flood, and Abraham returning from the slaughter. In "God possessor of heavens and earth;" he refers first to heaven, where love would originate. That
{441}
would fit in with what you were saying as to love, where love comes from.
J.T. Yes.
W.R.S. The dew of heaven is connected with the blessing of Esau too, is it not?
J.T. It is, but it is in the second place. I think that is what was meant. It comes in after the idea of the earth. James links up the earth with a sensual condition, "earthly, sensual, devilish". I mean we begin there.
T.E.H. Would Jephthah be a man who came to appreciate the brotherhood? He was expelled by his brethren and went and dwelt in a place, and then later on Israel took him back in an emergency, and in his outline of the history of the people of God, he speaks about how they dwelt at Kadesh and went by Edom because Edom would not let them go through. Do you think his appreciation of the brotherhood was a help to him in his own soul through his isolation from his brethren?
J.T. Quite so; very good; a man that had such a life too, an early experience; that he should outline the testimony of God at a certain stage of it is very striking, and that is what you get in that judge.
T.E.H. I thought, too, that the basis of his operations was due to his appreciation of the worth of a sacrifice. He may not have counted the full cost but he could see that the principle of sacrifice had to be carried along with the brotherly covenant.
J.T. Well, this matter of the brotherly spirit -- the endeavour now is to connect it with what is local both in time and in place; and then to see in Numbers how the thing is extended dispensationally. So that the time and the place are far removed from the beginning, showing that unless we watch our beginnings and keep off the spirit of revenge or enmity, we shall increase in hatefulness to God. We have to watch that, because when we
{442}
come to Numbers we have moved away from the beginning of the subject, and we just may get help, each and all of us, as to guarding ourselves from envy or hatred, and maintaining love, "walking in love", as it is said.
E.T.P. Would you say David was one who maintained suitable feelings throughout his relationships with Saul and at the time of Saul's death?
J.T. Well, quite. He did not allow his feelings to arise. He spoke as beautifully as he could, as graciously as one could in the circumstances when Saul died. How beautiful both he and Jonathan were! You marvel at the beautiful words he uses, and I think he may be taken as a typical person. David was a typical brother. His love for Jonathan was striking, and Jonathan's love for him too; but it continued to the end of their days, and that is what God would help us in: that our love should continue and increase more and more.
W.W.M. It says in the book of Proverbs, "Keep thy heart more than anything that is guarded; for out of it are the issues of life", chapter 4: 23. It says here, "And Esau said in his *heart*, The days of mourning for my father are at hand, and I will slay my brother Jacob". We have to watch our hearts.
J.T. Just so. He did not guard it. He allowed murder to come into it. It says, "Esau hated Jacob", and then, "Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand, and I will slay my brother Jacob". Terrible! All this is worked out really in the New Testament in John's epistle, as we have been reminded.
R.W.S. There seems a very choice allusion in Paul's letter to Philemon in regard to Onesimus -- in view of the possible rift which might come in with Onesimus coming back -- Paul in addressing Philemon says, "We have great thankfulness and encouragement through thy love, because the bowels of the saints are refreshed by thee, brother", verse 7. I thought of the way he
{443}
brings 'brother' in here alluding to Philemon, as if to say the local Colossian position must be kept up to the standard of love.
J.T. Yes; Philemon is a good example of how things may be kept locally, using the word 'locally' in a more extended way than a mere village or town. He was adjacent to Colosse, and was in fact, in principle a Colossian brother. Then he was adjacent to the last assembly that the Lord writes to: Laodicea. It is all a matter of immediate locality in that district, and Philemon and Onesimus, of course, enter into it; and I think, therefore, they would help us. And Paul's letter to Philemon would help us as to this matter of personal love to the brethren, to one another.
E.A.L. I would like help, please, with regard to what Esau says in verse 32. "And Isaac his father said to him, Who art thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn, Esau". That is the order in which he puts those two things, "I am thy son, thy firstborn, Esau". But when Jacob is speaking to his father in verse 18, it says, "And he came to his father, and said, My father! And he said, Here am I: who art thou, my son? And Jacob said to his father, I am Esau, thy firstborn". He puts the personality first, as if Esau would go more by the place he had and would not really recognize his place as a son.
J.T. It was the natural; the cultivation of the natural, the firstborn.
C.N. According to chapter 25, the sovereignty of God seemed to underlie this matter, and I am just wondering whether it is not true that most of the disruptions that happen amongst us as brethren, come because we do not recognise the sovereignty of God in the way He arranges our affairs in our localities. Does that help?
J.T. Yes; especially where not only two brothers, but two races come into touch in the testimony. We are tested in these matters.
{444}
C.N. That is what chapter 25, verses 22 - 24 bring in, two peoples.
J.T. Yes; if a racial divergence tends to promote feelings then we are at a great disadvantage, especially if there are a good number involved. I believe that is one point that should be before us; that love should prevail, arising from what God is, because that is the ground that is taken in John's epistle. He that loves is born of God. It is a question of God, and what flows out from God in those epistles.
S.F. The apostle Paul before his conversion was on the Esau line in persecuting the assembly, but then Ananias comes to him and says, "Saul, brother".
J.T. He gave him a good start; that is what I would say. What a thing it was to be able to develop the thought of the brother in those extraordinary circumstances -- Paul just converted in the extraordinary sense in which he was converted by the Lord, and then Ananias being able to say, "Saul, brother". I am sure that is an important point, the elements that tend to promote the brotherly spirit, and tend to prevent the unbrotherly spirit, that is, the Esau spirit.
J.T.Jr. Would @Romans 12 enter into what you are saying in this regard, that it is a question of presenting our bodies a living sacrifice, and then in the same chapter he speaks about brotherly love, "kindly affectioned towards one another". That is one of the features of the presentation of the body.
J.T. Very good. I think there is a word in Hebrews, "Let brotherly love continue". It is the continuance of the thing that tests us, because the dispensational and historic side is bound to work out in what we are saying. We begin with brotherly feelings between two brothers, but then the dispensation is involved, and it is sure to bring out certain things that are dispensational. So we have persons who are known as brethren. I had a call yesterday to find out what religious associations
{445}
I maintained, and immediately the question was asked as to whether I belonged to the Plymouth Brethren. If we get on to that line, we have moved off from the mere personal thought. It is a question of what has come up in the dispensation, in the sense of the differences of religion. The number of religions would probably exceed one hundred, and when we are on those lines we are just on that broad line of religious differentiation, and we are glorying in the differentiation. Maybe we have something to glory in, whereas the whole matter is wrong. The whole matter dispensationally, the whole use of the word 'brethren' and names attached to it, designations attached to it -- the whole matter is wrong. So that what we are to learn now is the thought of brethren. It is a thought that goes through to eternity, and we are to learn now how to maintain it.
D.P. In @Genesis 13 the issue between Abraham and Lot was on account of their cattle. But Abraham instructed him that there should be no strife between them. Would that bear on what you are speaking of?
J.T. Yes; they were brethren. Just so. How easily the matter would extend. And they separated one from the other. The brotherly spirit remained in Abraham, and of course, it was used of God to save Lot. But the difference that arose through the herdsmen is to be noted, because it worked out in separation between Lot and his uncle; that is to say, separation between two persons who should be actively engaged in brotherly love.
J.A.C. In Peter's 2nd epistle he says, "in godliness brotherly love", chapter 1: 7. Is that the practical working out of it?
J.T. That is it. There are certain things we are to have, and other things in them. That is the passage you are alluding to, and amongst these are, "In brotherly love love", which is a thing we have not come to.
{446}
We are so far only dealing with brotherly love, but there is such a thing as love to be added to that in the passage.
F.H.L. Did the apostle have this line in mind in addressing the Philippians? -- the unusual opening: "To all the saints ... with the overseers and ministers", and then in chapter 2, that beautiful opening there, "that ye may think the same thing, having the same love, joined in soul, thinking one thing;" the practical working out of love among old and young.
J.T. That leads up to one of the greatest things in the Scriptures, namely, the mind of Christ. "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus".
Ques. Would you say then that, Joseph as a type of Christ, had what was necessary for brotherly love when he had his brethren come in before him and he wept?
J.T. Quite so. He waited his time. That is another point that we ought to touch on too: the wisdom or skill that enters into brotherly love, the skill by which Joseph concealed himself until the time came, the proper time came, the time that he decided should come to reveal himself in his brethren. That is, we are to consider how things are going and await our time, await a given time, a needed time to approach, to bring out something in relation to the brethren.
Rem. It says the spirit of Cain was manifest in Esau.
J.T. Just so; the spirit of a murderer. We may as well just use that word because it is the word that scripture uses.
R.W.S. Is it fair to limit the word 'brother' to those walking in fellowship, or is that too narrow a view of the word 'brother'?
J.T. That is another important consideration. That is to say, as to vocabulary. If there is any place for the word it is among christians; the vocabulary that is
{447}
proper amongst christians. And I would say that if we are to work accurately and spiritually as to this matter of brethren we should consult John's writings, and particularly John's epistle. It is a better standard than any we can find, as far as I know, because the word is being let loose. It has got loose and has acquired too much place in christian language.
R.W.S. There is the word 'believer' -- such a person might be a believer, or a christian. But is there not, as you are presenting it, a certain holy dignity about the word 'brother'?
J.T. I think that is right; in view of the great place it has in the idea of religious profession, which is so extensive, it requires that we should be very careful as to how we use the word, what place it has in our vocabulary as to love, what relation brotherly love has with us.
Ques. I would like to get a little help on this locally before we go on to the universal aspect. In almost every instance in Scripture where a brother has hatred, it seems as though there is some qualification that one possesses that the other is envious of; whether it be in Cain and Abel, or Joseph and his brethren, or Jacob and Esau, or Abraham and Lot, or Christ and His brethren. There seems to be some qualification that one has that the other is envious of.
J.T. What we have been saying as to Genesis, I think, fits in there. We have to go back to the beginning as to what is proper between brothers or brethren. And then we may have to move further into the religious realm and see whether the word 'brother' has a place in mere profession; although the apostle says, "one called brother" is so-and-so. That is, the word is recognized in a religious relation, but it would seem even there that it is limited in the mind of the apostle to what is genuine; that the word 'brother' should refer to what is genuine. Anyone that is called a brother should be genuine, genuinely a brother in the Lord.
{448}
Ques. "Whosoever shall do the will of my Father", the Lord says, "is my brother, and sister and mother", @Matthew 12: 50. Would that help?
J.T. Exactly; so in the gospels the Lord develops His own relations with His disciples under that very head, whether it is birth or whether it is that he is doing the will of His Father. The Lord is excluding from the word 'brother' mere natural relations, and He is saying that one who does the will of His Father is His brother and sister and mother.
T.E.H. Would Judah be a brother that could be trusted because he draws near to Joseph? There seemed to be a link with the Lord that helps me in my relations with the brethren. I am seeking help as to how we may maintain the brotherly spirit. Judah seemed to have the qualifications. He draws near to Joseph, and what he secures is really ultimate blessing in the presence of Joseph.
J.T. I think Judah covers the whole matter in view of what we have already remarked as to Joseph making himself known to his brethren; that we have in Judah a brother, a man, who is wide in his view. One of the things that one constantly asks the Lord is for a mind, an extended mind, taking view of a thing and a deep view and a broad view, whatever a thing may be. And so it was that, I think, Judah was such a man as that. He was able to cope with the matter; the matter of the family of Jacob; how they were to become acquainted with one another, and how love was to have a place with them. Judah is the one that prevailed above his brethren; he prevailed amongst them or above them. He led them and influenced them all at a critical point, because he stated the truth in regard of Benjamin; not Joseph but Benjamin. He stated the truth to Joseph, but he enlarged on Benjamin, the little brother, the young brother. He enlarged on him, and how anything that affected Benjamin would affect his father. So that we
{449}
have to learn to have a wide view of a thing, which Judah did at the critical moment.
C.A.M. He understood a father's heart and a mother's heart, and you have stressed the great value of fatherhood, etc, being recognized among the brethren, and all this is really linked up with it, is it not?
J.T. I think it will help us to enter on the dispensational side. We have it in @Numbers 20. This chapter that we had this morning. It is said, "Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the king of Edom". That is, we have now emerged from the mere primary relation between Israel and Esau; it is the king of Edom. Verse 14 says, "Thus says thy brother Israel:" He approaches Edom on those lines and clearly to bring out love. "Thou knowest all the trouble that hath befallen us". That is to say, the brethren are always in affliction; more or less in affliction; constantly something comes up to affect us, and then the question is how we go through it. And so he says, "Thou knowest all the trouble that hath befallen us, how our fathers went down to Egypt, and we dwelt in Egypt a long time, and the Egyptians evil entreated us and our fathers; and when we cried to Jehovah, he heard our voice, and sent an angel, and brought us forth out of Egypt; and behold, we are at Kadesh". Now this speech shows that a brother is speaking to another, but it is a dispensational brother speaking to one in the same dispensation, and his address is that he is a brother, although it is long since they were actually brothers, yet he still retains the idea of a brother. And he says, "And the Egyptians evil entreated us and our fathers; and when we cried to Jehovah, he heard our voice, and sent an angel, and brought us forth out of Egypt; and behold, we are at Kadesh, a city at the extremity of thy border". So that now Esau is in a fixed place, but Israel is not. We are still afflicted. The real brethren are still afflicted, when those that may be professedly real brothers are
{450}
not. They are in a fixed position. They are kings. As Paul said, "Ye have reigned as kings without us", @1 Corinthians 4: 8. Esau is reigning as king; Edom is reigning as king without Israel.
A.R. Is it like a system in Numbers? In Genesis it is just two brothers.
J.T. We can see at the present time the word 'brethren' applies to a set of people who are known in christendom and have a status in christendom. They are known in the rules of the government. We cannot help that, because it is a question of the government. We did not do that. But at the same time, there are those who do that and think nothing of it. They want to be known as a religious body with certain characteristics and tenets, whereas the real brethren are on the way to heaven and their traits are derived from Christ, because we are His brethren.
G.H. John says in Revelation, "I John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation", chapter 1: 9.
J.T. Just so; that shows he is in tribulation. It is a question for each of us as to whether we are in tribulation, because if we are not it is time to wake up.
A.N.W. Is our lesson in it not to combat it, but the matter finally issues in Israel turning away from him. Is that what we have to do?
J.T. Well, Edom has to turn away from the brother. It is what he is doing. It is not what Israel is doing. Israel is maintaining the right standard; what was at the beginning; the same as Abraham. Abraham asserted that they were brethren.
S.F. Was it calculated to touch Edom? "When we cried to Jehovah, he heard our voice".
J.T. Quite so. The real brethren have all these features, all these traits, and, therefore, we can easily identify where our brethren are.
R.D.G. Is there a particular skill in the way the message is sent to the king of Edom; not that he is
{451}
addressed as a brother, but it is "thy brother. Israel". Now are *you* prepared to be a brother?
J.T. Well, as you say, Edom is addressed as a king; I mean to say, he is regarded as a king, but Israel has not that status and is content not to have it. He is in affliction, so that we have to avoid, it seems to me, as entering on this lesson now, all these features, features that have their place in the world as ordinary, and yet the word 'brother' may be used.
A.A.T. In regard to the word 'brother' is it not sometimes so that you could address a brother as a brother in the Lord, a brother in Christ, or simply as a brother? I mean these distinctions should have some meaning?
J.T. That brings up the whole point as to the use of the word. 'Brother' has a place in our vocabulary. Who can you call a brother? You say, 'a brother in the Lord'. Very well. The word 'Lord' should govern that word there; a brother in the Lord. A brother in Christ: in Christ should govern the position too.
W.W.M. Would you say in @Hebrews 2 it is made very clear? "For which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren", verse 11.
J.T. Just so. There is the test. There are people I was just referring to a moment ago. A person says you are a member of the Plymouth Brethren. Well, you have to say this and that about it to explain that, but then it discloses how the matter stands and that we have to guard the use of words, and ask people to let you explain what your position really is. You are obliged to do it, to set out the truth. You are obliged to ask people's pardon for time and words so that you can say things to explain the position.
A.N.W. Was it safe for Abraham to call Sarah his sister when he was denying that she was his wife?
J.T. Quite so. She was really his sister.
A.N.W. I only meant that the term 'brother' is very
{452}
freely used. Across the street we are hailed as brother, but what about the church position?
J.T. Of course, what we are aiming at is to get the truth of the assembly, to bring that in. We are obliged to ask people to give time, to give opportunity to say certain things so as to make it plain.
J.T.Jr. Does what the apostle says in @Romans 16 help? He says, "But I beseech you, brethren, to consider those who create divisions and occasions of falling, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learnt, and turn away from them", verse 17. He salutes them as brethren, that is, those at Rome, but he says "turn away from them".
J.T. Yes.
C.N. Does the message in verse 14 show the retention of the integrity of the brethren, whether the opposite side refuses it or not? The truth of brethren remains.
J.T. It does. It is Moses, of course, but it is Israel. Moses is on the true line. The element entering into the thought of brethren is the element that was there at the start. And so he says here in speaking about how God had come in for them, and where they were, "We are at Kadesh", meaning they were journeying. They were not stationary. They were going to a certain place. That is our position. We are going to a certain place. We are going to heaven really. So he says, "Let us pass", meaning we are not going to stay around here. We are not stationary; we are not set up in this world as of it, even although we are brethren. We use the word according to its original meaning. "Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country;" meaning that Esau had a country; he was settled here. "We will not pass through fields, or through vineyards, neither will we drink water out of the wells: we will go by the king's road"; meaning that they recognized the idea of a king, one in government. "We will not turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy border". But it says, "But Edom said to him, Thou shalt not pass by me".
{453}
So you can see that the spirit of opposition and, you might say, murder is there. You bring it out if you state the truth.
T.E.H. He still has the sword. He said, "Lest I come out against thee with the sword", verse 18. He has not got rid of the sword yet.
J.T. Quite.
Rem. Is what we have before us brought out in @Psalm 133 -- brethren dwelling together in unity, comparable to the dew of Hermon where the blessing is? God commanded the blessing.
J.T. That, of course, comes into what we are speaking of; what belonged to Israel. The twelve tribes belonged to Israel. They are journeying. They are not settling down in this world. So it says, as has already been remarked, "Thou shalt not pass by me, lest I come out against thee with the sword". He is exposed; a person assuming to be a brother is exposed if he has the sword and is going to use it. "And the children of Israel said to him, We will go by the high way;" now notice, it is the children of Israel; not simply the brother. That is dropped apparently. It is "the children of Israel said" now. And they said to him, "We will go by the high way; and if we drink of thy water, I and my cattle", the pronoun is brought in here as if there is a real sense of responsibility in this matter, and someone is accepting it. Then it says, "then I will pay for it". That is, we are honest people. I mean to say, the brethren characteristically are honest. They pay their debts. "I will only, without anything else, go through on my feet". That is another good point; "go through on my feet. And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand. Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his territory; and Israel turned away from him". So that we are forced away, if we are true to the Lord and the truth. We are
{454}
forced away by this spirit. Whatever the professions may be, we are forced to turn away. They will not allow a true christian a passage.
E.A.K. Is the spirit fully exposed in Amos where it says he pursued his brother with the sword and cast off all pity? Is not that feature of implacability seen today in those who take the place of brother, but do not show the character of it?
J.T. Quite so. One has often noticed that. You happen to know people personally in a business way; they are friendly. But when the truth comes up they dissemble and deceive. I am not accusing anyone but stating facts. The truth will not be accepted by the persons we are speaking of. They turned away, it says. At least, "Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his territory; and Israel turned away from him". That is, he had to do it, because he would not allow him to go through. It is to remind us that if we maintain christianity in its parts in the truth, we will not be allowed to go through.
F.S.C. When Moses records in Deuteronomy this introduction he does not speak of the wickedness of Edom at all. Why is that?
J.T. God recognises him. That is what I was thinking. We have to differentiate between the passages. Deuteronomy treats of mount Seir. "And we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea, as Jehovah had said unto me; and we went round mount Seir many days. And Jehovah spoke to me, saying, Ye have gone round this mountain long enough: turn you northward. And command the people, saying, Ye are to pass through the border of your brethren the children of Esau, who dwell in Seir; and they will be afraid of you", @Deuteronomy 2: 1 - 4. That is to say, they are weak at this point. They do not come out in strength against Israel here, "They will be afraid of you; and ye shall be very guarded, attack them
{455}
not; for I will not give you of their land, no, not so much as a foot-breadth; for I have given mount Seir as a possession unto Esau. Ye shall buy of them food for money, that ye may eat; and water shall ye also buy of them for money, that ye may drink; for Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee in all the work of thy hand. He hath known thy walking through this great wilderness: these forty years hath Jehovah thy God been with thee -- thou hast lacked nothing", verses 5 - 7. God is casting a favourable eye toward Esau; and He calls him Esau. So that we are not in the same position in Deuteronomy, and we have to learn these different positions and know how to act in them. At one time we have to regard them and say, 'We know these are brethren; we know they had the characteristics of brethren, even if they have not them now, and we must respect them because of that'.
A.N.W. Later on dealing with them governmentally God reminds them of it, does He not? It is all recalled then, this very incident.
J.T. Yes. I think we, perhaps, have come now to the point of critical importance at which we may, perhaps, rest. We have to consider such persons as we are treating of and know what to do when occasion arises; know what to do; what names to use; what terms to use; what actions or attitudes to assume.
F.W. Does the true brother hold the title in the dignity of the divine thought as going on himself towards the land, but he says to the other, 'I have come to the extremity of thy border'?
J.T. Quite so. We have to say that we know so-and-so is true; but then you are settling down here; you have a status in this world, and you have a name and a place, and we are going somewhere else. I mean to say the position of the saints, our position -- we do not need to hesitate to say it, our position is that we are in fellowship, and that fellowship is a protection, but it is a
{456}
provisional thing for the moment. We are not going to be in fellowship forever in that sense. We are going to be in family relations forever with our brethren; family relations forever. Whereas these Edomites even in Deuteronomy have a status, they have a place, and we have just come to where they are fixed, where they, as it were, meet and carry on and have principles that are inimical to christianity.
A.R. Is there anything in the fact that Esau's territory is in the wilderness?
J.T. Just so; whereas we are going to Canaan.
A.R. We are going to heaven.
C.A.M. They really do not want eternal life and they do not want sonship.
J.T. Very good. These are the two great features that have come to us in recent times.
J.S. Do the conditions of Moab seem to hold them entangled here?
J.T. Quite so. That was another matter. Of course, we are dealing with Esau now. They may soon settle down into Moabitish conditions.
F.N.W. Would Ahab indicate to us that if we do not discriminate as to this matter of the brother we may promote the spirit of murder? He succumbs when Ben-Hadad says, "Thy brother, Ben-Hadad", but in the next chapter he is in this matter of Naboth's killing -- a real brother.
J.T. Very solemn.
R.D.G. You emphasized that they were going through on their feet. Had you something more you intended saying about that?
J.T. I think that would raise the question of fellowship. We are not in a fixed position. We are going somewhere. As we have already said, we are going to heaven; we are going to the land. We are going to Canaan, and the principles of Canaan are gone into and we are constantly speaking about them, so as to be
{457}
characteristically what they convey. That is our position.
A.N.W. And in that sense independent?
J.T. We go through on our feet. We use our feet. We do not ask them for their feet; we are using our own. It is a question of walking through.
E.A.L. This morning you mentioned in prayer that the disciples were first called christians at Antioch. To deserve the name of christian would not one have to be a disciplined person as under God's hand?
J.T. Quite so. We are in principle, because Hebrews says, "Whom the Lord loves he chastens". We are under discipline; we are a disciplined people. That would recall the idea of Enoch. He was a disciplined man; but then we have in mind going through, and walking in fellowship with one another. If we walk in the light as God is in the light we have fellowship with one another. We are in fellowship and we are going by our own feet. Of course, what that would mean today would be the Spirit, "Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall no way fulfil flesh's lust", @Galatians 5: 16.
A.A.T. Do I understand there is no fellowship in heaven? I understood you to say that fellowship is a temporary thought and that the family thought is eternal.
J.T. That is right. We have in a hymn the expression 'fellowship divine' (270:3). That has to be read with intelligence, but fellowship is partnership. It belongs to our present position down here; so that 1 Corinthians, as we have already quoted today, says we are called into the fellowship of His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. The Lord's supper bears on that. It is used to develop the truth of fellowship in @1 Corinthians 10 and 11, but particularly chapter 10. The idea of fellowship is developed in that chapter, and it is centred in the Lord's supper. The cup is mentioned first in chapter 10: "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
{458}
blood of the Christ?" It is a question of fellowship. That is to say, we are moving in relation to one another in fellowship.
C.F.E. Is there something in the thought of the high way? They were very particular about which way they took.
J.T. We had that this morning, to show there was such a thing as that; and the idea of the way of God is treated of in 1 Corinthians and in the Acts too. There is a way and it suggests we are on that way. We are not stationary. Fellowship really is not stationary.
T.N.W. In @Acts 13 there is the foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch and other elements. Does that show there is room for such a brother, in a christian assembly?
J.T. Just so.
S.W. According to the scripture that we referred to in Deuteronomy it would appear that, as we draw nearer the land, the full force of the envy of the brother would diminish and in that way we are able to add to brotherly love, love.
J.T. Quite, the nearer we come to Canaan; and we have come very near to it. Now when I say, the nearer we come to Canaan, I am speaking dispensationally; that we have come to the end of the dispensation. There are two ways we can speak of a given thing, Canaan, for instance; we have access to Canaan, that is, to heaven, at any time, but that is because of the Spirit being here; but going to Canaan definitely is another matter. It is a question of the Lord coming for us. If we go into Canaan now -- we spoke of it this morning -- we have access to Canaan now, as the spies had, and got the fruit of the land. But what we are speaking of now is dispensational, that there is an end to this dispensation and the Lord comes down from heaven Himself to take us out of this place. That is to say, going to heaven then is a literal matter. The Spirit does not come for us; the Spirit does not take us there. The
{459}
Lord Himself takes us there, but in the interim and in regard of privilege the Spirit helps us. He enables us to enter into heavenly places; and so it is in other matters, that the Spirit serves us down here, whereas the Lord will serve us Himself when it comes to literality, and our going into heaven finally; the Lord comes for us.
A.P.T. Why is the blood of Jesus Christ connected with the fellowship in John's epistle?
J.T. I think just to preserve us in it. But if anything happens in the way of sin we can confess it so that the fellowship goes on. It is a provisional thing, that God has provided for us in the meantime in the wilderness. It is called "the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord" in @1 Corinthians 1. It is a dignified thought, but it is a provisional thought. It is needed while we are down here.
C.N. It is a protection for us. Hence we have in Revelation the city with the exceeding great and high wall.
J.T. Quite so. That is what it is. And so the idea of fellowship, as we already touched on it in @1 Corinthians 10, the cup in the Lord's supper is mentioned before the bread. That shows it is a special thing; fellowship is a special thing, because in the ordinary service of the Lord's supper, the ordinance as we call it, or should call it, the bread is the first part mentioned. The cup is mentioned second.
Ques. Can you give us a name for what we shall enjoy when we are in heaven with the Lord?
J.T. There will be no need of fellowship there.
Ques. What will it be?
J.T. Family relationship. Every family in heaven and on the earth is named of the Father. It is a question of family. For us it is not simply the ordinary thought down here; the family thought is in the Spirit; the Spirit of adoption; the Spirit of sonship. That is what enters into the family we are in.
{460}
A.P.T. You mentioned @John 20. The thought of fellowship hardly enters into that idea; when the Lord is in the midst and leading us on to the Father's presence, you hardly need the idea of fellowship, do you?
J.T. Well, we go beyond that, you know. It is a question of the Spirit, the power of the Spirit really lifting us into heavenly places. But that is possible even while we are down here. But when the literality of the thing, the actual permanent literality of the thing comes, then it is the Lord's doing; He comes for us.
{461}
THE LOVE OF GOD IN THREE RELATIONS
@Titus 3: 4 - 7; @John 3: 16; @1 John 3: 1
These scriptures speak of God's love, which is the greatest of subjects as involving Himself. I wish to speak of it as in relation to *man* as it is presented in this first scripture, in relation to the *world* as in the second scripture, and in relation to *christians* as in the third scripture.
The first, although very remarkable, is less in our minds than it deserves to be -- God's love to man as a race. He had mankind in mind, so the Lord Jesus became a Man. Scripture says, "In him was life; and the life was the light of men". That is, the range of the light was man, it was exclusive in that way. Angels had fallen and were in darkness, but light was not extended to them. And that light, being the effect of life, was a witness to God's *love to man*. It was *that kind* of love. It is one word in the original: "philanthropy", but much more than that word means as now used. Men are leaving God out and professing to rely upon themselves; modern philanthropic societies are professedly for the mutual assistance of man, and if we make full allowance for the result of these things, even if men could assist one another to the extent of retaining themselves here in life, the result would be entirely incomparable with what God proposes. If indeed from antediluvian times men had been allowed to live to this present time the conditions would be unspeakable; they are bad enough now. There would have been an ever-increasing power of sin, and its concurrent results in the way of what we have described here as "disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice, and envy, hateful, and hating one another". So, beloved friends, if all these modern things are even successful, their results are not to be compared with the blessing of God in the gospel. It is a question not merely of relief that men
{462}
might live in this world, but of *complete deliverance* from sin and its consequences. That is what God proposes. It is a question of the kindness and love of God for men, and that must be measured by what *He is*.
Now I appeal to all here as to the appearance of this kindness and love of God to man, and how it grapples with the root need of the race. You may say the results are very small, but we have to wait for full results, and when God is pleased to reveal them we shall see them to be adequate and according to His mind. The question for each to ask is, what is obtainable for *me* at this moment? For after all, what is the gain of occupation with dark Asia and Africa, unless each begins with himself? What is there obtainable for *me*? Is there any present relief? Is there anything that I can get tonight? These are the vital questions. The thing to be considered is, 'What is God pleased to be doing now?' In Genesis I see what He was pleased to do, that is, He worked six days to bring to pass the physical order of things around us, and on the seventh day He rested. Then He began to work again and the first thing He did was to make clothes for Adam and Eve -- a very different kind of work from what He had been engaged in. The material was skin, but what was the cut? These skins represent the great idea of clothing, because God made everything perfect in its place. Everything is just as it should be in what God does. He does not make an egg, He makes a bird, He makes a man and a woman; He makes everything perfect. If He makes clothes they must be perfect, there could be no improvement. And from that day to this, God has worked as it has pleased Him to do. He might dispense with the misery and sin of this world, and roll up death and send Satan to the lake of fire at any time, but it has not pleased Him to do this *yet*. It has pleased Him to do something else -- it has pleased Him to work in the souls of men; He has been pleased to work in my soul. It is His pleasure. Has He
{463}
worked in your soul? You say 'No'. I am sorry for you, and so is every christian here. You are to be pitied, and our souls go out to you. Why has God not been working with you? Have you been shutting the door on Him? The Lord Jesus said, "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me", @Revelation 3: 20. He is ready to do something for you. He has already done the greatest thing for you in giving Himself a ransom for you, now He is seeking to bring you into the blessed gain of this. If you are unaffected, get down upon your knees tonight and say to God, 'Why have you not worked in me? Why have you not knocked at my door?' It may be He will tell you that He has knocked but you have not opened, and He has had to turn away. We read of the Lord having to leave the country of the Gadarenes. They told Him to leave, but He left one man who had got the blessing, and He left that man behind so that others might get the blessing. I am speaking of God's work *now*, based on the great work of atonement accomplished on Calvary nineteen hundred years ago.
Nicodemus says to the Lord, "We know that thou art a teacher come from God". Do you ever think of Jesus in that way, "a teacher come from God?" It was a fine word from the teacher of Israel. University professors today do not generally speak thus, but if one of them becomes converted to God, he will say of Jesus, 'He is a teacher come from God'. That is what Nicodemus said. You may say that was not very much. He took a long time to come to it, but there was a work of God there, and that will abide throughout eternity; and in the end he comes out and identifies himself with Jesus as dead; a sure evidence of the work of God! He had been hidden away like many of you may be, as was also Joseph of Arimathaea. He had been a secret disciple. There are many secret disciples, but they are disciples,
{464}
and heaven knows them -- their names are there. Heaven knew Nicodemus name; when Jesus is to be buried he is present with his hundred pounds of spices. Where did he get them? If he had gone to some spicery merchant to procure these spices, what would he say if the man asked him what he wanted with such a large quantity of spices, for Nicodemus would be well known in Jerusalem, and on enquiry he would not tell a lie? You may be sure the work of God will assert itself and shine out according to God. Nicodemus would tell the merchant that he wanted these spices to anoint the Nazaraean, the Crucified. What would be in the mind of the merchant? He would say, 'That is a poor deluded disciple of Jesus'. Thank God, the work of God has triumphed in this disciple, and will triumph.
I am especially calling attention to what God is doing. The question for everyone here is, 'Has He done something in your soul, or has He left you alone, or have you hindered His work?' Have you been hindering? Have you been indifferent to the divine appeals? The kindness and love of God has appeared for every man and woman and child in the world. If it is for mankind, then it is for *you*. God has come in in that relation. He has come in in love for the whole race of mankind. It is not a secret thing. It has *appeared*. God has moved. His kindness and love to man has appeared, and the next move is yours. Have you moved? In the gospel of John the thought is that man draws near to God, and in Luke it is the thought that God draws near to man. It is for you, young and old, to decide whether there has been any move in your soul towards Him.
The apostle goes on to say here, "Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us"; that is, it is on His own principle. He is very jealous about His own principles, His own terms. They are the only right terms, they are the only effective terms, and the first one is mercy. Well, now,
{465}
it may be that you do not like that because it does not make enough of *you*. That is often the cause of people being stumbled; they want to have part in the thing, but God says, 'I am not going to deviate from My own principles'; not only because they are His, but because they are the only effective ones, and hence the thing for you to do is to cast yourself on His mercy -- accept salvation on *that* principle.
The next thing is the mode of operations. Here it is the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit, "which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour". God proposes to help you. If God is working with a man or a woman, conscience comes into action and there is a sense of unfitness for Him. Then one says, "God be merciful to me a sinner!" Not, for the moment, 'God be merciful to dark Africa or Asia', but 'God be merciful to *me*', as if there were not another person in the universe. You would say, 'I cannot afford to let this pass by, the thing must be settled'. "God be merciful to me a sinner". God *is* merciful, and merciful in such a way as to relieve you "by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit". The word "regeneration" is worth considering. You have the word "washing" attached to it. God would say, 'I am going to make you live, but I am going to make you without spot or blemish or any such thing'. What a proposal on the part of God! It is not simply washing, but the washing of regeneration -- that in making us to live, He washes us. It is a wonderful combination of the effect of the work of Christ on the cross and the effect of the power of the Spirit of God in a man's soul. That is, as you sit on your seat, God relieves your conscience of everything that would disturb it, and at the same time makes you to live, so that there are pulsations towards God and the brethren. And he adds, "renewing of the Holy Spirit; which he shed on us", or "has poured out". Take
{466}
notice of that word *poured*. At Pentecost there was poured out the Spirit of God, and the believer comes into this now. This all comes in through the Lord Jesus Christ. Is not that a witness to the kindness and love of God to man? What an expression the apostle was of it! I suppose no man trod this earth apart from the Lord Jesus who had such a heart for men. The apostle was a witness himself of what God can do and that is what every preacher should be. God has shed forth His Spirit abundantly on us, Paul says, through our Lord Jesus, so that being justified we might be heirs according to the hope of everlasting life. Where is there anything that could meet the condition of man like that -- everlasting life! It would be an unspeakable disaster if man should live on as he is. Death is a mercy! Think of men like Caesar, Nero, Napoleon living on. That is not what God intended! He brought in death to limit all that. He proposes everlasting life on His own terms through the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit. So there is to be a world presently in which men will live according to God. The proposal of the gospel is that we are to be like Jesus, to be raised and quickened and to be eternally with Him.
I want now to say a word about the love of God for the world. You may say the world is just the men that are in it. Does Scripture use words for nothing? Does the Spirit of God not know what He means if He uses special words in regard to the work of the six days in Genesis? Does He not mean something by it? God has something in His mind. The earth He formed was to be inhabited. He did not form it for a graveyard. It is a graveyard now, but the Lord knows where His people are in their graves. Sarah's is the first grave mentioned in Scripture, and she was a believer, a saint; so that God is pleased to have His graveyard. He knows where His people are and Jesus will come, so to speak, to the mouth
{467}
of every grave. He knows where the saints are, and we commit them to the grave with that knowledge. The graveyards are a solemn testimony, not to the creational wisdom and power of God, but a testimony to our guilt. Had not God ever in mind a world of life, of living persons, for He made the world to be inhabited? It is said in John that the Lord Jesus came into the world, and the world was made by Him. That does not mean the wicked men in it, it means the thing which is to subsist. He loves the thing itself. He is going to have what He loves. He is going to have a wonderful world. There is the world that now is, the world of the graveyards; but there is that which is to come, as the Lord Jesus said, "that world and the resurrection". "The world to come whereof we speak", or "the inhabitable world to come". You see all that the greatest statesman can do is to ameliorate things and improve existing conditions, perhaps check evil; and we thank God for all the efforts that are made to check evil, but it is just for the time until God comes in, and He is coming in, and He is going to have a world the like of which men have not dreamed of. It says, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". It does not say to be 'heir of it', but to *have* it. John does not put it off, it is for you tonight. Is it not worth thinking of? But then what is it for? God would have a people for His own world, and He is taking out a people now for His own world. "Whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". Where are we to spend that life? There is a world suitable to it, and God would bring every one of us into it. It will be a world teeming with life; but a life not such as we are accustomed to in this world, but a life according to God -- eternal life, which is the gift of God. You cannot afford to be without it. It is the testimony of God's love, and that is what I had in mind
{468}
to speak of, His love for the world. He is taking out this one and that one who believes in the Lord Jesus. They have eternal life, and hence shall have their part in that world and the resurrection.
The final thought that I had to speak of is God's love for His people, as in John's epistle. God has a love for man as such. God has a love for the world, and He has a love for His people. John says, "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us". It is the *kind* of love He has bestowed upon us. The manner of love that He has bestowed on men is set forth in Titus, the kind of love that He bestows on the world is seen in @John 3: 16, and the kind of love He bestows on His people is in John's epistle. Let our hearts open to it! "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God" -- the correct word is not "sons", but "children". How remarkable that we should be *called* the children of God! Have you cherished that name! What will not God in His love do for His children, the children of God the Father! The great thing that John would do is to bring God into this world, and His children are to express Him here. They are a testimony to Him. Now are we the children of God. Presently, as Christ appears, we shall be like Him.
The Holy Spirit witnesseth with our Spirit that we are the children of God, but the verse I read is that we should be *called* the children of God; that is the manner of His love. You can see how varied and extensive is the love of God. I would urge christians to value and to take up that name without fear. If we are that, then the world knows us not -- it involves reproach. For this cause the world knows us not, because it knew Him not. Men do not want to know us. Nevertheless the apostle Paul says, "As unknown, and yet well known". Which is the greater, think you -- to be well known and loved in heaven, or unknown there and loved on earth?
