{1}
Pages 1 - 129 -- "Divine Measure and Divine Pattern". Sweden, 1930 (Volume 189).
DIVINE MEASURE
@Ephesians 4: 13; @Romans 12: 3; @2 Corinthians 10: 12, 13; @Revelation 21: 15 - 17
These scriptures speak of measure, in the first place as regards Christ, and then as regards the assembly, the measure of which corresponds to Christ. The question of measure is first seen in connection with material things. The whole creation was formed according to divine measure and weight, but in these scriptures we find that measure is applied to persons. We may say in truth that all men come under divine measuring. In @Romans 3 it says: "For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God". God has in Christ brought in a standard, and all are measured according to this, and, according to their natural condition, all come short before this standard. In spite of this, God has determined to bring men into correspondence with this standard (see @Ephesians 4: 13). It is to this end that Christ, since He has gone up on high, has given gifts. "And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ".
We see thus that God has before Him a perfect or full-grown man; that is to say, a man who corresponds to His thoughts. It could never be said about Adam that he was full-grown, for there is nothing said about his growing. He was evidently created perfect, so that we have no thought of growth in Adam. Nor could we in a moral sense
{2}
speak of growth or development in Christ. In His Person, as represented here in testimony, He sets forth for us in a perfect way what man ought to be before God. The four gospels give us a fourfold and perfect presentation of Christ, and the epistles have in view to bring *us* to the same measure, so that growth has to do with *our* side. Therefore we find stressed in the epistles the need of growth. In @1 Peter 2 we are exhorted to desire earnestly the sincere milk of the word that we may grow. Like new-born babes we should be desirous of it, so that we by it might grow unto salvation. In all the epistles great stress is laid on the need of growth, and this is evidently because we commence as little children. We begin thus and grow up into manhood, and for this we need the service of the gifts, so that we together should reach the same measure of stature.
There ought in a spiritual sense be none undeveloped among the children of God. Christ as ascended into heaven has in view a perfect presentation of Himself in the saints as a whole. Therefore it says: "Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ". And in the same epistle it says that the assembly is the fulness of Christ, which we see coming out in @Revelation 21. It is no shame to be a little child to start with, since one has been born; that is to say, after our conversion, but it is a shame to be as little children when we have been converted a year. The secret of so much uncertainty and lack of satisfaction among the people of God is owing to the lack of growth.
When Abraham desired to get certainty regarding the fulfilment of the promises, God told him to present an offering, a heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years
{3}
old. He gave him to understand that if he desired to enjoy certainty, it was of moment to increase in growth. That these animals should be three years old implies that they were full-grown. This does not give the idea of a childish state in the believer. If we do not desire the sincere milk of the word, we shall remain little children. The Corinthians were babes and thus exposed to influences in this world; they were not in possession of the joy of salvation, because they had not grown to it. It says of some in @Hebrews 5 that they were babes, when for the time they ought to be teachers. I believe, dear brethren, that if we should take up this question in earnest, each one of us should say of himself, 'I have been a babe for a long time; it is high time for me to be able to present a lamb of a year old'. We read of a day of extreme weakness in Israel when Samuel sacrificed a sucking lamb. This indicated an acknowledgement before God that the people were just like sucking children. What is there in babes that can defend and promote the testimony? What is there in such to save us from the sleight of men and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive, as it says in @Ephesians 4?
The passover lamb was to be a year old, not a sucking lamb. This gives us the thought that when the Israelite left Egypt, or in other words, when a believer leaves the world behind him, he has grown somewhat. We ought to ask ourselves how much we have grown since we were converted. One has seen believers who have been converted twenty years, and who have not reached further in their souls than to a condition characterised by babyhood. We remember how Hannah every year when she went up to worship, brought with her a little coat for the boy Samuel. As the child grew he needed a larger coat. In a similar way as I draw near to God my sacrifice will be greater; that is to say, two or three
{4}
years old, as I increase in my soul. The bullock that Gideon sacrificed was to be seven years old, which shows that in a special case like that of Gideon, there was something more needed beyond ordinary maturity.
Now let us look at @Romans 12. The epistle to the Romans is an epistle for the little children. I do not mean that any of us could ever do without this epistle, but that it contains what the little children are in need of. It was written by the apostle through divine inspiration to instruct believers in the truth of the gospel. We sometimes think that the gospel is for the unconverted only. It is for the unconverted surely, but Romans was not written for them, but for believers. It was written to the saints in Rome, who were hardly more than little children, and to the end that they might be instructed in the fundamental principles of the gospel, in order that they should be no more babes, but should grow up to Christ "from whom the whole body, fitted together, and connected by every joint of supply ... works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love". The apostle desired that the saints in Rome should grow in the truth of the assembly, and that is why he wrote this wonderful epistle.
According to the gospel of Mark we see how the Lord Jesus in His first preaching said, "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel". I am to believe first, and then I discover how much there is found in it. When we receive the gospel it is as if we received the promise of an inheritance. Romans shows me how rich the inheritance is. Now we can understand what the Lord meant when He said, "Believe the gospel". I say that I believe it, but I wish to know all that it implies, what riches are found in it. I freely admit that little children are very lovable; we see in them a freshness of life, as
{5}
is evident in the Thessalonians when Paul wrote to them. While we all will admit that such young believers are lovable, we do not wish them to remain undeveloped. In a family undeveloped children are a cause of sorrow and anxiety; it is the same in the family of God, and those who have stopped growing are a cause of sorrow to God, and anxiety to His people.
In order to grow, we need the sincere milk of the word, and fresh air; that is, the atmosphere that is found among the people of God, where the Spirit of God is at liberty. I also need light. These things come out in Romans. Beside other things we find in Romans the thought of measure. "For ... through the grace given unto me, ... as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith", @Romans 12: 3. Although Christ is the subject of the gospel, we find in these scriptures that I begin to look at myself. I have listened to the gospel, but the question is, Have I grown in my soul? Have we ever measured ourselves with Christ? The gospel presents Christ to me. It is God's glad tidings about His Son. I have listened to the gospel, but have I grown in my soul? I am perhaps familiar with the truth of the gospel and its mode of expression, but it may be only an outward knowledge, in the same way as one knows history.
There are those who study the Bible in the same way as they study history. At the universities this study is considered as a science, but such a study is not the means by which we grow in our souls. Christ is the measure of the soul's growth, and when I look at Christ, this involves much more than a mere knowledge of the doctrine. I am thinking of all the precious moral features that shine forth in Christ as He is presented in the four gospels. The meaning here is that when I think of myself I ought to think soberly and be wise, as God has dealt to me the
{6}
measure of faith. God gives us faith, and this involves more than to have knowledge of certain doctrines. The thought of measure here is the measure of *faith*.
It is not a question of being converted on such and such a day, or that you go to the meetings regularly, but I ask, What is your measure of faith? God gives each one a measure. Have you had to do with God in order to get this measure of faith? In the same way as when God created all things according to measure, He even now works in our souls according to measure; it is therefore important that I should ask myself, Have I received this measure of faith? In Matthew's gospel the Lord speaks of a *little faith* and of a *great faith*, and even of those who had no faith at all. "Without faith it is impossible to please him". We do not wish to be characterised as those who have little faith, but we ought to desire faith which is according to the divine measure for us.
We have a scripture in Exodus which is of help for us in this. We read of the measure of manna that every Israelite gathered daily (@Exodus 16: 18). This is very practical, for the measure of what a man eats in a spiritual sense shows in a significant way what his or her growth is. God has dealt to each the measure of faith, and He deals the measure for us to eat. He has a measurement for us each one, and I believe that the measure of faith in @Romans 12 corresponds to the measure of manna that each one was to eat according to Exodus, the measure of what I can eat, what I can digest.
In @2 Corinthians 10 we see that the Corinthians were not characterised by this divine measure, for it says they were "measuring themselves by themselves"; we can understand how far they had departed from the divine principles which are given to us in @Romans 12. If I measure myself with my
{7}
brethren or they compare themselves with me, we all have a wrong measure, and this is what they did at Corinth. It was as if a brother should say, 'I know just as much as this brother, or I can speak better than he'. We can understand how such measuring only gives cause for jealousy and degrades the people of God to the level of the world, for that is what they do in the world, they measure themselves by themselves. Now the apostle had a measure, he shows how he served according to the measure God had given to him; he served "according to the measure of the rule which the God of measure has apportioned to us", @2 Corinthians 10: 13.
The last scripture we read from Revelation shows us how God reaches the end which is set before us in Ephesians. We find here that the reed was of gold; the measurement is wholly divine. God reaches here the result of the work which He has carried out during all these centuries. The reed was for measuring the city and its gates and wall. John goes on to say that "the city lies four-square, and its length is as much as the breadth". Looked upon from this point of view it was a quadrangle. That is to say, a measure which has length and breadth. So that from this point of view the city represents God in the universal attitude which He has taken up towards all men.
First of all the city is four-square; this is like the sheet that descended unto Peter and was knit at its four corners, indicating that the gospel is for all men, a thing that is true even of the assembly at this time. We ought in our minds to correspond to this measure which has length and breadth, the square measure. I believe God will help us to think of all men in an evangelical way and with compassion. We have length and breadth; this is the square measure. After having spoken of the length and breadth of the city, he now speaks of its height. We
{8}
have here the thought of a cube, or what we call cubic measure. It says -- "and he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs. The length and the breadth and the height of it are equal". We may, through grace, in our minds have reached so far as to the square measure, but when we come to think of the height we must feel ashamed. It is thus we find from the book of Revelation that the full result of the work of God includes the height; the city is a cube; that is to say, it has six sides which shows that it is a measure which contains something; it is not only universal in its bearing, but it is *filled* with that which is of God, and that which is of His nature. It is very encouraging for us to consider this wonderful result of all the work of God. It encourages us to always abound in the work of the Lord, as Paul says: "knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord". If I consider the city according to its cubic measure I find that my work is not in vain in the Lord, for every little bit I can do contributes to fill up the whole.
{9}
DIVINE PATTERN
@John 13: 13 - 15; @Exodus 21: 1 - 6; @Luke 7: 44 - 47
These passages present to us the idea of a model or pattern. In moral things God works on the principle of a model or pattern. We cannot say that He worked on the principle of a model primarily in the physical creation, although He necessarily had a plan in His own mind. The word in Proverbs would indicate that He was the Artificer or Architect of the universe, and as the foundation was laid, the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy, so that evidently what was in the mind of God was understood by intelligent beings even then. Then in accordance with this, it is said, "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God" (@Hebrews 11: 3), and further it is said, "He spake, and it was done" (@Psalm 33: 9); that is, His mind entered into it; all was done in divine wisdom.
When we come to moral things, we have a definite pattern indicated, and so in the book of Exodus the injunction is repeated, "See that thou make them according to their pattern ... shewn to thee in the mountain", @Exodus 25: 40. Hence no one but Moses really could construct the tabernacle. It was not simply a question of dimensions or measurements, but of the pattern, and the pattern was only seen by Moses. The dimensions were given, and the wise workmen that were employed knew what these measurements were, but measurements or dimensions are not a model or pattern. In the model or pattern of the tabernacle we have Christ personally indicated, and that, dear brethren, is what I wish we should have clearly before us in this meeting. Christianity is not simply a matter of doctrine or precepts; it includes all these things, but it contains what is substantial; that is, to say, what came out in the
{10}
Person of Christ here on earth. Hence in the epistle of John we have, "That which was from the beginning", @1 John 1: 1. What is alluded to is the manifestation of life in a Man down here in this world before men's eyes, and it is from that model or pattern that God is working with all of us. God has brought in in Christ what represents His own mind, what is called the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ (@Ephesians 4: 13).
I suggested the passage in @John 13 because it presents what I have been saying in the most concrete and touching manner. It is the Lord Jesus here in the character of the servant; the chapter presents Him in that way. He was sitting at table, and it was two days before the passover. He was not governed by ordinary religious customs in that which took place. In becoming Man He was to be a model, and so He was not restricted by current religious observances in what He was doing. God's thoughts, dear brethren, cannot be worked out in relation to humanly accepted religious customs. Judaism, indeed, had been ordained of God, but it had dropped to the level of an accepted worldly religion. So that in John the feasts are generally called the feasts of the Jews; they are not called 'feasts of Jehovah'. The Lord was not restricted by them, hence it is said in this chapter that it was before the passover, and what He does here is of Himself in the liberty of His own Person. In John He constantly speaks of Himself as coming into this world from God. He is here therefore in the liberty and dignity of His own Person as the Son of God, and all His works and services are in that liberty. Hence in this gospel He does not wait for John to be cast into prison before He begins to serve.
We have the Word become flesh -- the Son of God -- acting here in that dignity and liberty, God manifest in flesh. In a Man things are being worked
{11}
out according to God's eternal purpose, and according to His own nature. And so as sitting at table in the dignity of His Person, He lays aside His garments and takes a towel and girds Himself; He is taking on the attitude of a servant. Then He pours the water into a basin; He does it *Himself*, and moves around to wash the feet of His disciples. No high priest in Jerusalem, no Rabbi or Pharisee would do that. It was a new thing being introduced; it was an example or model. And so, having washed their feet He puts on His garments again and resumes His place at table. He thus takes on His dignity again so as to impress upon His disciples the lesson He intended to teach them. He says, "Ye call me the Teacher and the Lord, and ye say well, for I am so". He impresses upon them that whilst He did that wonderful act of devotedness, He was still the Teacher and the Lord, and they called Him these. Now then, He says (He transposes the words), "If I therefore, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet". He says further, "I have given you an example that, as I have done to you, ye should do also". You see dear brethren, He gives the example and then retires, as it were, into His own dignity and authority to enforce the lesson.
Authority may be irksome to a pupil, but at times it is most essential to the education of the pupil. That pupils or scholars should be allowed to learn as they please, or come and go to school as they please would be most disastrous as regards their education. Instruction requires authority in the teacher. It is really no hardship, but an element brought into the service which is most essential. Hence the Lord takes them up on their own profession; they called Him Teacher and Lord and He says, "I am so". That is, 'You call Me what you ought to call Me, what I am entitled to, but I am
{12}
not occupied with the dignity of it, but that you might learn your lesson'. He is the model and He is the Teacher; He uses Himself as the example, and He teaches us from that example. Nothing, dear brethren, is more detrimental to us as christians than the use of latitude and licence in the things of God. Many assume that our position in regard of the things of God is optional, but it is a vital mistake. God will never deal with us on optional lines; our God is said to be a consuming fire. It is not simply that God is that, but *our* God; that is to say, the God we know in Christ is a consuming fire, meaning that He will not tolerate our wills. So that it says, Let us have grace to serve God with reverence and godly fear (@Hebrews 12: 28). So here He says, 'Ye call Me Lord, and I am Lord, and what I say has the authority of the Lord'. So that He says, 'Ye ought, as I have washed your feet, to wash one another's feet'. That is to say, it is not that it is optional, that I may do it or I may not do it; I *must* do it. If I do not do it, I am disregarding the authority of the Lord, and yet I am calling Him Lord. As He says elsewhere, Why do ye call me Lord and do not the things that I say (@Luke 6: 46)?
Now I come to the well-known type in @Exodus 21 -- the Hebrew servant -- and what is to be observed is that the law had just been given. Chapter 20 contains the ten commandments, and the next chapter contains the model as to how these commandments are kept. You will remember how in the New Testament it is said that love is the fulness of the law -- of the whole law (@Romans 13: 10), so that as God gives the law, He gives in the type an example as to how it is to be fulfilled. I am not wishing to suggest that we are under law -- although its righteous requirements are fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit -- but I am only calling attention to this type as illustrating
{13}
the idea of a model. God commands love in the law, and in the type in @Exodus 21 we have one saying, "I love". God commands it, and we have Christ in type saying, "I love". And it is not simply *saying* it. He *plainly* says it, and He shows in the most positive way that He meant what He said. You see, the type means that Christ came in free, and He could have gone out free. As He came in from God, He could have gone out in the right of His own Person, but instead of that He plainly says, 'I love My master, My wife and My children'. Thus you see, dear brethren, alongside of law demanding love from man, God has set down a model of one who said, "I love", and who did love; He loved God, He loved His wife, and He loved His children; that is to say, you have ascending love, horizontal love, and descending love. You have thus the length, the breadth, the height and the depth in love; it is the perfect expression of love in Christ. He loved God; He would go down into death to fulfil the will of God. And so the wife, and so the children. He gave Himself for us; He loved the assembly and gave Himself for it, and also for the saints viewed as children. You see what a model we have here, and moreover we have the great principle I am seeking to emphasise, that if God brings in law demanding love, He shows you how the thing is answered to.
In the gospel of Luke I want to show how this may be seen in one christian in a locality. I want to show the importance of even one in a locality whom the Lord can call attention to as known in the locality. I do not know anything that one would covet more than to be a model that Christ can point to -- a model of the truth. You see, if things be not right locally, it is not simply that I am to *say* what is right, but to *show* what is right. Many can *say* what should be, but, you see, the principle is not in
{14}
*saying* what should be, but in *being* what should be. Hence the apostle Paul says to the Corinthians, "Yet shew I unto you a way of more surpassing excellence". Earlier he says, "For this reason I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ". Paul not only wrote the letter to tell them what to do, but he sent his child Timothy that he might exhibit in their very midst what was right. He says, "My child Timotheus", that is, the child was like the father; so that Paul, the father, representing Christ's authority, sent the child so that the Corinthians might see Paul's ways as they were in Christ.
If I were in Corinth at that time and had never seen Paul, and I went to enquire of some godly saint, What kind of a person is Paul? he would say to me, Well, the best illustration that I can give you of Paul is Timotheus. Then, if I wanted to know something of Paul, I would take good note of Timotheus. More than this, Christ is the image of God here; He brings God to us; we learn God in Christ. "No one has seen God at any time", but the Lord says, "He that has seen me has seen the Father". And so it is that the assembly is like Christ; it is the fulness of Christ. And in a smaller way, one saint who is in the power of the Spirit is like Christ. Hence, you see, in this woman in @Luke 7, the Lord is calling attention to one person. It says, "He turned to the woman". If things are not right in a meeting and there be one who is right -- one who is walking with God -- the Lord will draw attention to him. Paul, for instance, says, "Ye became followers of us" but then he adds, "and of the Lord", for Paul never wished to be a party leader. He represented Christ and souls would follow him, but as they learned Christ in Paul, he would direct them to Christ. And so, dear brethren, the true way
{15}
of recovery in localities is by a model; that is, some person to whom the Lord can point as representing Him in some way.
In this chapter 7 the Lord turns to the woman; He turns to her as if His heart rested there. But then He says to Simon, "Seest thou this woman?". He called Simon's attention to her, but He was turned to her Himself. And so He goes on to call Simon's attention to what he should have done, but did not do, and the point is, that what others are not doing, am *I* doing? If there is one person who is carrying out the will of God, God can help others through that model. Now let us dwell for a moment on what this woman did. She represents, as I may say, what Luke's gospel would produce in us in a subjective way. Every book in Scripture is intended to present some feature of the truth, and usually the women that are presented in the book convey what is to be effected in the book, so that this woman may be taken to represent what Luke would bring about in our souls. What it says is that she loved much; it is not simply that she loved, but she loved much. If I have not got love, I have not anything spiritually. That is what the apostle says about love; he says, if I have not that, I have nothing. But with this woman it was not simply that she loved, but she loved *much*. And what was the evidence of it? That she had feelings and tears! Perhaps the scarcest thing amongst us is tears. I do not mean natural emotions; we are all capable of that, but this woman's tears were the fruit not of natural emotion, but of deep spiritual feelings. In a word they were the fruit of true self-judgment. She was forgiven much and the grace that brought forgiveness to her affected her heart; hence her tears are used to wash the Lord's feet. One would love to be able to convey the depth of the spiritual feeling expressed
{16}
in this woman. I dwell on this because we are so extremely superficial.
In moving about in this world and noting what exists among the saints, what one observes -- and one includes oneself -- is that we are so unfeeling, and hence there are no tears that can be put into God's bottle. There are doubtless plenty of tears in the world, for it is a world of woe, but tears that are fit for God's bottle are rare. But these tears were such; they were such as could wash the feet of the Lord. And then her hair is used to wipe His feet; it is the complete devotedness of all that she might treasure for the refreshment of Christ. And so the Lord goes over the ground pointing out that what Simon failed in, this woman provided; Christ was supreme in her heart; He had won a place down there in the very depths of it. And so He could turn to her and call attention to her; He says, "She loved much". And why? Because she was forgiven much! Luke gives us the effect of grace.
Well, dear brethren, that was all I had to present. I am sure you will see the force of it in localities in which the people of God are, how, if there be only one who is right with God, God can use that person as an example; He would call the attention of all the others to him. Matthew speaks about *two* -- "two of you" he says. There you have the principle that if two of you agree on earth as touching anything, they shall ask and it shall be done unto them. Thus you see how one or two in a locality may become under God the means of complete recovery.
{17}
LIBERTY
@2 Corinthians 3: 17; @Mark 2: 23 - 27; @John 10: 9
The subject I had in mind in reading these scriptures was *liberty*, the liberty wherewith Christ sets us free; and in which He desires us to stand fast. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty", @2 Corinthians 3: 17. There is some difference in the expressions "the Spirit of the Lord", "the Spirit of Christ", and "the Spirit of Jesus". These expressions are all found in Scripture. The Spirit of Christ was active in the Old Testament times; Peter tells us this. It was the Spirit in which the Lord Jesus spoke to men before the flood. He spoke through Noah. Peter connects the Spirit of Christ with the testimony in the Old Testament. He says Christ was quickened by the Spirit by which also He went and preached to the disobedient when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah. He also mentions the prophets who spoke by the Spirit of Christ (@1 Peter 1: 11). These prophets inquired and searched "what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow", but he also says: "To whom it was revealed, that not to themselves but to you they ministered those things, which have now been announced to you by those who have declared to you the glad tidings by the Holy Spirit". The Spirit of Christ stands in relation to the testimony or ministry of the word, (@1 Peter 1: 12).
All ministry ought to be in the Spirit of Christ; it gives us the thought of the anointing, because Christ is the anointed One; He is God's Anointed. "The Spirit of Jesus" speaks of what the Lord was as Man on earth. We read of how the Spirit of Jesus forbad the apostle Paul to go from Asia into Bithynia (@Acts 16: 7).
{18}
The name of Jesus speaks of what He is for *all* men. The Lord desired the gospel to be preached in Europe and not to be limited to any special province. "Jesus" is His personal name and speaks of His interest in men. "The Spirit of Jesus" seems to be most prominent in the gospel of Luke, whereas "the Spirit of Christ" relates more to Mark's gospel and "the Spirit of the Lord" to Matthew, for there He is King. We have His generation in Matthew to show how He is King. The wise men from the East asked: "Where is he that is born King of the Jews?". In @Matthew 5, 6 and 7 the Lord often emphasises His words by: "I say unto you", pointing to His own authority, but I think the expression "The Spirit of the Lord" also indicates something very precious, namely what we find in @2 Corinthians 3: 17, where the word "the Spirit of the Lord" speaks of what is living; "The Lord is the Spirit". The Spirit of the Lord is the Spirit of christianity, and "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty".
We find here the authority, which brings the love of God into our hearts. In order to bring about this state in us the Lord Jesus uses His authority sometimes perhaps through severe discipline, but all is in view of us getting the love of God into our hearts. "For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth". Thus we find that through the *Spirit* of the *Lord* we have liberty now with unveiled face to behold the glory of the Lord. There exists no veil over His face at this time; the veil is on the hearts of the Jews now. But we behold the glory in the face of Christ; we have liberty to do so, and we love to do it as it is the most delightful face in the whole universe. We do not fear to look upon it, although He is God. In a day to come when He shall sit upon the great white throne, His face will be severe and dismissing, for then He shall judge all who have rejected Him.
{19}
John says, "I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled", @Revelation 20: 11. But how different His face appears now! How gentle and attractive! It shines with the glory and love of God, and we are changed into the same image while we are looking at it. This shows clearly that where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
In @Mark 2 we find how the believers come into this liberty in a practical way. There the Lord leads them into liberty, and we learn it from what He did when He went through the cornfield. It was not accidental. He went through on purpose. It does not say that the Lord Himself plucked the ears of corn, but He went that way so that the disciples should get the liberty to do so, although it was sabbath. The sabbath, as we all know, was a symbol of the old covenant, and many at that time insisted upon the sabbath being hallowed in order to keep the people in bondage. But the Lord would lead His disciples out of this bondage into the liberty that He had brought about. He could say: "The Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath". "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof". He had now in mind to lead His people into liberty by Himself going through the cornfields.
The same bondage exists now in the systems of men, but the Lord will show us a way out from them, the way of liberty. So the disciples do as the Lord does, but they do more than just follow Him; they pluck the ears of corn and eat. Is it not the Spirit of the Lord who is leading here? Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty, not liberty for the flesh, nor liberty to go into the world, but liberty to enjoy what God has provided for us. We are not bound by religious forms and ceremonies; the apostle says, "For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with
{20}
thanksgiving". And even far more than this, we are free to enjoy all that God gives us in Christ, apart from every human organisation. That is the reason why we do not keep the sabbath now, for we are not under law, but under grace. The Lord has Himself broken down these hindrances and barriers. If we knew and enjoyed this liberty more, our meetings would be more characterised by the Spirit of the Lord, and not by the spirit of the world.
The apostle reminds the Corinthians of what was theirs, saying, "All are yours; and *ye* are Christ's, and Christ is God's", @1 Corinthians 3: 22. We are now brought into a wonderful sphere of blessing. Human leaders would contradict these things. They would say we ought to acknowledge the laws and statutes of the different systems, but during more than a hundred years there has been strife between these people's decisions and the liberty which the Lord has brought about, and we ought to hold fast this liberty. Christ was Lord even of the sabbath, and when the Pharisees accused the disciples, He reminds them of what David did. The shewbread was solely for the priests to eat, but when David, the rightful king, fled before Saul, the king whom God had rejected, of what use were these things? Everything was in disorder and ruin. David acted here in the Spirit of the Lord, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. The Son of man is Lord of the sabbath. We see in the Old Testament why the sabbath was instituted. It stood as a symbol or seal on the old covenant; it was made for man, and not man for the sabbath. The Son of man is able to bring in the sabbath in a new way. God has first to show us its proper meaning. He will bring in the sabbath in an entirely new way in a day to come.
In @John 10 the Lord points to Himself as the good Shepherd and likewise as the door of the sheep. In @Mark 2 this liberty was brought in in view of helping
{21}
the disciples out of bondage, but here in @John 10 we are led *in* to Him. This liberty can only be reached through Christ, for He is the door, and He has pasture for the sheep; they "shall go in and out, and find pasture", @John 10: 9. It is a liberated soul whom the Lord describes here. He can depend upon such an one, and allow him to go in and go out and find pasture. How much has not the Lord Jesus done in order that we may find this liberty, enjoy it, and maintain it!
{22}
THE ABUNDANCE OF THE SEA, THE SPHERE FOR THE GOSPEL
@2 Chronicles 8: 17, 18; @Mark 1: 16 - 20; @Mark 2: 13, 14; @Mark 3: 7; @Mark 4: 1; @Mark 6: 47 - 51
We find the sea mentioned in these scriptures. The sea gives us the idea that there is much to be found beyond what we can see, and much that lies hidden in the deep. In @Psalm 104: 25 we read: "Yonder is the great and wide sea: therein are moving things innumerable, living creatures small and great". When we behold the sea, we are reminded of the immense resources which lie hidden in it. The Lord shows in His service that although the sea in its extent surpasses the knowledge of man, it does not surpass His, for He can bring to light the very fish that had a piece of money in its mouth. This speaks of how the riches of the sea are at the disposal of the Lord Jesus.
We read in @2 Chronicles 8 how Solomon went to Ezion-geber at the sea side to the east of the Red Sea, from whence the sea expanded into unknown, immense oceans. Hiram, king of Tyre, sent, for his help, servants that had knowledge of the sea. Hiram had these skilled servants at his disposal. All this speaks in type of Christ in glory with all the possibilities in His hand to fetch the treasures from the sea. I have read this in order to show the import of Christ's service according to Mark, where I believe we find Him more often working by the sea than in the other gospels. The sea in Scripture is used in type with several different meanings. I am speaking of it now as the great realm where there are resources and where Christ is active to gain the riches which He is seeking.
We find Him first walking by the sea. The believer knows who Christ is; the Creator of all things, as Jonah says: "The God of the heavens, who hath
{23}
made the sea and the dry land". Jonah mentions the sea first, it was in the sea that God then intended to work, and Jonah experienced in the sea what the Lord's discipline and instruction implied. The sea swarmed with living animals, both great and small, but Jehovah prepared a great fish, which was to swallow Jonah. This fish, which carried Jonah in its belly, testifies to the power of the will of God in *the heart of the sea*, for God commanded the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land, showing that if the power of man is limited, God's power is unlimited. His will is carried out in the deep. Jonah says he "went down to the bottoms of the mountains; the bars of the earth closed upon me for ever". But if the will of God brought him so low down, it also brought him back upon the dry land. The believer knows Jesus as the Creator of the sea. The sea is His, and He made it. How precious to see Him walking by the sea!
Simon and Andrew are casting out their nets in the sea, and as they do, so the Lord says: "Come after me, and I will make you become fishers of men". We find at the beginning of Mark's gospel that the thought of the sea connects itself with the fishing for men in all the wide world. It is no question of Jews, Greeks or Romans, but of men. And the sea reminds us that we must not be limited. God is not limited through the sea to any special nation. He has scattered men over the whole surface of the earth, and for that reason this fishing for men continues.
This instruction in connection with the sea liberates us from being limited to some special nation. As those who have received light, we do not wish that the dividing of the world into different nations should cease. It was God who at Babel divided up mankind into nations. As long as this condition of things exists, the world's power is weakened. The
{24}
more men are united, the greater is the power of evil. While we who believe acknowledge this, we do not wish to be governed by national feelings. God keeps the nations divided as long as mankind is away from Him, but God maintains unity amongst His people. In new creation there is neither Jew nor Greek; we are all one in Christ Jesus, for we are all God's sons through faith in Christ Jesus. As believers we are thinking of all men, not of special nations. Paul says, "For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus".
We see now how Simon and Andrew left their nets and followed Him. They left what seemed necessary for their subsistence and life here on earth. Later on the Lord proceeds and finds James and John; who were mending their nets. Even they had that which occupied them. We find thus, dear brethren, that when it is a question of being labourers for the Lord, we ought to know about the sea; we should be like Hiram's men, those who had knowledge of the sea. The thought is that we do something, and do it well. The Lord will not use those who are lazy, but such as are diligent, for we ought to be diligent in His service. These two, James and John, left their father Zebedee with the hired servants in the boat. That he had hired servants would suggest a higher position than Peter had, but they left their father with the hired servants and followed Jesus.
In the second chapter it says that the Lord went out again by the sea (verse 13). We have something more to learn in connection with the sea, we need constantly to be instructed as long as we are here. In Luke's gospel we see the Lord's patience in instructing us. The Lord went forth and saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting at the receipt of custom and said unto him, "Follow me". The Lord, no
{25}
doubt, passed by many, but He saw Levi. Levi was taken up with the things concerning the earth; he was not occupied with the sea. It is easy for us to become influenced by that with which we are occupied, our business and so on, but the Lord would make us interested in the sea, and will remind us of the greatness of the sphere wherein He is active. Our own little circle is too narrow, it may be our family circle, our business or our native country.
The Lord calls us away from every circle in order to link us together with the sea. And Levi follows Him; he leaves his place by the custom table, which all belongs to the earth, and follows the Lord. He even makes a feast for the Lord and invites such as the Lord would wish to meet. He invited many, as we find "there was a great crowd of tax-gatherers and others who were at table with them". We find that Levi had caught the Lord's thought. It was this kind of people the Lord had come to seek. Levi understood how the Lord, so to speak, was fishing for men, and Levi gathered them in his house. Thus we see that the Lord had won a valuable workman in Levi, for he had a house, and this house was at the disposal of the Lord. He had not invited his associates, but publicans and sinners, and they were many. In this incident we see how the Lord in Mark's gospel draws us to His side in connection with what He is doing. I need not say that the Lord even here will lay it to our hearts to gather souls to listen to the gospel. Not only I myself but also my house should be at the disposal of the Lord.
The third scripture I read is in chapter 3: 7. As we are thus evangelical and like Levi we open our houses, we have another lesson to learn; that is, to be separate. It says the Lord withdrew with His disciples to the sea. A condition of deadly opposition had arisen against Christ. In verse 6 it says "the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took
{26}
counsel with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him". When opposition arises the only thing to do is to withdraw. So that while we are evangelical and think of all men, we could not continue with a world that is at enmity with Christ. The Lord Jesus withdrew with His disciples to the sea, and it says that a great multitude followed Him from Galilee and from Judaea. Although the Lord withdrew with His disciples from the Pharisees, His place is continually by the sea. The abundance of the sea is in view. If some rejected Christ, others should receive Him. We need not fear that when we separate from evil, that the work of the Lord will cease.
At the end of chapter 4 the Lord exhorts His disciples to pass on to the other side. We all remember the passage and how a storm arose on the way. We are instructed here as to the power of Christ over the agitated sea. In chapter 3 we see the conspiracy of the Herodians against the Lord. The Herodians constituted a certain party amongst the people. In chapter 4 a great storm of wind arose. There is not only a certain class of people who withstood Christ, but men as a whole, driven by evil spirits. It is a very solemn consideration, that in spite of all men being in view in the gospel, they are all at the same time capable of being influenced by the power of Satan. In that way a general opposition to the truth may arise, not only from the religious leaders, but all men may be opposers. In chapter 4 we have the power of Christ over such a condition of things. He did not work any change in the Pharisees or the Herodians, but He rebuked the sea, so that its riches could afresh be fetched from it.
We find in the first part of chapter 4 that the Lord once more begins to teach by the sea. "And a great crowd was gathered together to him, so that going on board ship he sat in the sea". We find in this
{27}
teaching of His another deep instruction; that is, about the sower who went out to sow. Of all the different grounds where the word of God was sown, only one bore fruit, but this latter yielded much fruit, and for this reason was very encouraging. It brought forth some thirty, and some sixty, and some a hundredfold. In the gospel of Mark we find the result of sowing is increasing, and in spite of the opposition, God's work in souls bore fruit. In Mark's gospel we are drawn to the Lord's side in this wonderful service, and how great is its result!
In chapter 6 we find a last instruction. In verse 46 we see how He departed into a mountain to pray, and when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and He saw them being in trouble, but He was praying for them, and about the fourth watch of the night He comes to them walking on the sea. They were in distress on the journey, for the wind was contrary. This last instruction is that we are now on the sea alone, and the Lord is on the mount praying. They laboured hard in rowing, toiling to get along, for the wind was contrary. I believe that all who have something to do in the service of the Lord know about this labour, to work when the wind is contrary. It is not like what we have in the fourth chapter where a sudden storm of wind arose, but here the wind was contrary, and at the fourth watch of the night, the Lord came walking on the sea. He is a pattern for us. He shows how we might go on and be superior to existing opposition and reach the other side.
I believe that what we have considered together corresponds to Solomon's enterprises in the sea; we see what riches he fetched from it, and this will encourage us in the little service we might take on in connection with the sea in a sphere where everything is against us, so that the Lord might have gain through it. We either make progress, dear brethren,
{28}
or we go backward in our souls. Spiritual riches are the result of the brethren making progress in spite of hostile influences; they go on in the light of the present dispensation, which speaks of God having blessing for all men and that God's desire is that His house may be enriched by new material being brought in. If no new riches or new material are brought into the house, we shall decrease and die out. But the abundance of the sea is endless. In learning from the Lord how He worked by the sea, we should by His help gain riches for the house of God.
{29}
THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS SERVICE (1)
@Genesis 49: 22 - 24; @Exodus 2: 15 - 22
J.T. In this scripture we find Joseph as a type of Christ enthroned in heaven, as Peter says: "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear", @Acts 2: 33. He is, so to speak, "a fruitful bough by a well; his branches shoot over the wall". Peter says to those who were convicted, "For to you is the promise and to your children, and to all who are afar off, as many as the Lord our God may call". Thus the branches were to shoot over the wall. In @Exodus 2 we find Moses was to be used in connection with the administration in the kingdom of God. He sits by the well, like the great Meditator of whom we read later in @John 4: 6. His sitting by the well indicates how He would make the water available for the people of God. The Lord Jesus says: "The water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". Christ has made the source available, but He even works so that it springs up in the people of God. I have thought of this scripture in the light of what is said in Zechariah: "Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts", @Zechariah 4: 6. We understand from this that what characterised saints at the beginning ought to characterise them at the end. In Joseph we have a type of Christ as the one who bore fruit, and in Moses a type of Christ as the one who carries on administration.
Ques. Do we find in Moses one who removed the hindrances for God's people to obtain water?
J.T. Yes, this is what comes out in @Exodus 2. He is sitting at the well. He said in effect: There is no power in the flesh. In Egypt Moses had killed
{30}
the Egyptian, but now he is sitting at the well; he acknowledges that it is not through one's own power but by God's Spirit that deliverance is to be brought in.
Rem. The Lord sat by the well in @John 4 when He spoke about living water.
J.T. Yes, I was just thinking of that. Tell us something about this.
Rem. I thought that the Lord was then sitting by the well, but now He is sitting above and gives living water.
J.T. Yes, quite so. On the one hand He corresponds to Joseph, and on the other He answers to Moses as the one who carries on administration and gives the living water. In @John 4 He says: "The water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". This implies that the Holy Spirit which is given by Christ is to be the power which of itself is active in the believer. It is the Spirit's delivering power. The Spirit is even the power to enjoy, and the power for worship. In @John 7 it says: "If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink. He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". The Spirit is the power for testimony. He flows like rivers from the believer.
Ques. When it says: "Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the Lord of hosts", does this mean what the Spirit works subjectively in the believer?
J.T. You refer to @Zechariah 4, but there it has more to do with our activity and our service and corresponds more to @John 7 than @John 4. The prophet goes on to speak of how Zerubbabel was to lay the foundation and bring forth the headstone. Thus it is guidance for all who serve to understand that all service must be carried on in the power of the Spirit and not through our natural gifts.
{31}
Ques. Can this be so without a work first having taken place in the servant?
J.T. No, that is why we find in @John 4 the Spirit's work in the believer, and then in @John 7 the Spirit's work through the believer in connection with testimony.
Ques. What is the difference between the Spirit and the living water?
J.T. I believe that the living water is a type of the Spirit, looked upon as the power in the believer for deliverance and satisfaction.
Ques. Is it possible to have the Spirit without having the living water?
J.T. I believe it is possible to have the Spirit without comprehending what He is as the living water, as this type implies, that the Spirit has commenced to work in my soul. When the believer begins to understand how this power is working of itself within him, then it is that the living water is understood. As regards our natural bodies we know that we have such organs that work independently. If I wish to move my hand, it is the result of my will, but there are organs which work independently without the aid of the will, the heart for instance works automatically without co-operation of my will. Thus we have in our bodies what serves to illustrate the Spirit's activity in our souls.
Ques. Can we suppose that the Spirit is active without any desires on our side?
J.T. I believe the Spirit produces desires and works through these. The way in which He is active corresponds to what we see in our natural bodies when life finds its expression through the automatic organs of our bodies. As regards our natural bodies we cannot explain how life is active, but we are all the same conscious of its movements. It was in this way the Lord spoke about new birth in John's gospel. Without explaining it the Lord spoke about
{32}
it. He says: "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, or whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit". In chapter 4 the Lord sets forth something more when He speaks of what the Holy Spirit works in him who is born again, and He says that He shall be in him a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life. The Lord does not speak of what the believer does *through* the Spirit, but of what the Holy Spirit Himself works out *in* him.
Ques. But this implies that our state is good?
J.T. Yes, but we are speaking of the Spirit's work when everything is normal, but in the epistles to the Corinthians and the Galatians we find how we may begin in the Spirit and fall back to the level of the flesh, and then we are not much better than such who have never received the Spirit. True, the Spirit never leaves us, but we are not conscious of His work in us, and there is no springing up into everlasting life, neither does any testimony ensue.
Ques. Was this what characterised the children of Israel before they reached the brazen serpent?
J.T. Yes, for in spite of the Holy Spirit being in type with the people in @Exodus 17 it was not characteristic of them before they reached the springing well, where, as it says in @Numbers 21, they sang. In @Exodus 17 the rock was smitten and the water flowed, and there Amalek began warring against them. This corresponds to what we find in the epistle to the Galatians: "For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh". But in @Numbers 21 we find that they had to dig. It says, "The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by the direction of the lawgiver". It is under the lead and authority of the Lord Jesus in spiritual power that the sand in us is removed. The believer begins to realise that he must
{33}
not give place to the flesh; he must refuse to give it a place if he is to come into the good of what the Spirit is. Therefore it says, "Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it". The people now go forward, the murmuring ceases, and they go steadily towards the goal which God in His purpose had for them.
Ques. Does this correspond to the 'height measure' which we heard of yesterday in connection with a cube?
J.T. It leads on to it, that is to say to the height of the epistle to the Ephesians. The saints are looked upon there, not as babes, but as full-grown; they were men.
Ques. In which way did the Spirit work in the Israelites, was it in a subjective way in their souls, as the Spirit works now?
J.T. Of course it is the type which we are thinking of now. The children of Israel were brought up from Egypt through the wilderness to the land of Canaan by the power of angels; but at the same time as it was through the power of angels it was a type of the Spirit. The dispensation under law was mainly through the co-operation of angels, but as to our own dispensation it is the economy of the Spirit. There is a great difference, for we have not only the Spirit as power of life, but He is at the same time in us the Spirit of adoption.
Ques. Is it the same Spirit in connection with sonship as in connection with life?
J.T. It is the same Spirit, but looked upon from two different sides. It is remarkable that it says in @John 7: 39, "The Spirit was not yet". The Spirit was present when God garnished the heavens (@Job 6: 13). We read also that "the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters", @Genesis 1: 2. It was even through Him the prophets spake. We find that Othniel as well as Samson were moved by the Spirit of God. David prays in @Psalm 51, "Take not thy
{34}
holy spirit from me". The Spirit was, as we see, active in former times, although it says that "the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified". The thought is that the dispensation in which we live is something special: it is the Spirit's dispensation. It is not now a question of the Spirit coming upon a man and then leaving him, as we find in the Old Testament, but the Spirit sent down by Jesus in glory. It is the Spirit in a Man which has been given to men. We ought to know the import of this. The Holy Spirit is not only a Person in the Godhead. He is that, but He is in a Man in heaven, and as such He has been given to men down here.
Rem. He is more than an influence in us.
J.T. He is a divine Person, but in a Man, that is in Christ in heaven. He received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit which He has shed forth (@Acts 2: 33). When the Lord was thirty years old the heaven was opened over Him, and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily shape like a dove and remained upon Him. We see there how the Spirit came upon Jesus, in a bodily shape. The Spirit was there in His entirety, but He was on Jesus only. On account of redemption and of Jesus having gone up to heaven, the Holy Spirit has come down. The Holy Spirit, as He is in that Man, is the One who is now in the saints here. There is thus a difference between the presence of the Spirit in the saints of the Old Testament and the way in which He now indwells the believer. He is of course the same Person, but we see Him first in Christ, in Another of the Persons of the Godhead, and then He takes up His abode among men as sent down from Christ, the exalted Man in heaven.
Ques. Has the assembly received the Spirit in the same way as Christ received Him; that is, the Spirit in His entirety, or is it only that each one receives Him?
{35}
J.T. The Holy Spirit is now personally here on earth as He came bodily on Jesus. He came down at Pentecost in His entirety. That is the reason why the Lord speaks of Him as *another* Comforter; He is a divine Person down here. It is to be noted that He is here as the One who in His entirety was in the Lord Jesus when He was on earth. Therefore it says in @John 3: 34: "God giveth not the Spirit by measure". This points to His coming upon Jesus as well as His coming upon the saints.
Ques. What is the difference between the pouring out of the Spirit and His coming upon a believer?
J.T. These two things happened at one and the same time. It says that at the day of Pentecost they were all with one accord in one place. "And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, ... and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them". We see that He came in this way in His entirety. He came upon the whole company, but He sat upon each one of them.
Rem. I was thinking of @Titus 3: 6, "which he shed on us abundantly".
J.T. That refers to what happened at the day of Pentecost, and the continuation of it was in the house of Cornelius as we read in @Acts 10: 44, where it says that the Holy Spirit fell on all them which heard the word. This time He came not from heaven, for there is only *one* coming down of the Spirit, and that on the day of Pentecost. When He fell on the gentiles in the house of Cornelius, He was already here on earth. Therefore when the believer receives the Holy Spirit at the present time, he receives what is already here, and what has been here since the day of Pentecost.
Rem. It is therefore not right now to pray for the Spirit to be sent as the Spirit is already here?
{36}
J.T. Quite so, and that is why Paul says to the Corinthians: "And have been all made to drink into one Spirit". This last is what we ourselves do. Baptism is what another does, but the drinking is what I do myself. The Spirit of which I drink has been here all these hundreds of years.
Ques. What does this expression "a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life", mean? Does it allude to the assembly?
J.T. I believe it has its beginning in the assembly. It shows that eternal life is an objective thought. It is something into which we can enter. I believe we enjoy eternal life together with one another. The testimony is that God has given us eternal life. But then the question arises: *Where* is it? It is not in me, but in His Son. It is placed in the Son of God.
Ques. If it is in the Son of God, how can it be in the assembly?
J.T. Because the assembly at this time constitutes a sphere where eternal life can subsist. In the world there is no such condition found which is essential for life. In a coming day, in the millennium, there will be a state of things where eternal life can be enjoyed, but this state, which will be public in the world to come, is found already among the people of God.
Ques. If we enjoy it now in the assembly, can we not enjoy it individually in company with the Son of God?
J.T. I do not think that that is the thought. You may enjoy the light of it and know that it is found in the Son, where it is presented for faith. What the saints enjoy down here however is not only by faith, but in the power of the Spirit. Let us suppose that no other believers were found in the world, and that you were the only one that had received the Spirit; eternal life would still be found in God's Son, just as much as if there were ever so many
{37}
believers in the world. The Son of God, however, is no longer on earth, but He is in heaven, and I alone am not sufficient that eternal life should be found here. It needs a company large enough for the Spirit's presence, so that conditions for eternal life might be found; that is to say, practical righteousness, love, light, and personal intercourse. All these things constitute a condition in which life shall be found. Such a condition is not found in the world at this time, but in a day to come these things will be found here in the world. In the meantime we can find them here through the Spirit's presence and activity.
Ques. Must we not be two or three to have a condition where eternal life is found?
J.T. Yes, that is very important to see. I hope the brethren will get a clearer apprehension of this.
Rem. If believers do not walk in unity this will be a hindrance for the enjoyment of eternal life, however many they may be.
J.T. Yes, that is true, and that is why we find in @Psalm 133 a condition necessary for this, namely brethren dwelling together in unity. "For there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore". Life is in Christ, the Son of God, but we can only enjoy this here under certain conditions, and it is only in the assembly that these conditions are to be found now. The more we are found together in righteousness and love, the more we shall enjoy the reality of this life.
Ques. Is it a question of the local assemblies or the assembly as a whole?
J.T. It is where the saints are gathered. We are breathing the atmosphere of life in this room. To speak simply, there is in this room a spiritual atmosphere which is the opposite of what is found in the world. We may not perhaps be able to explain
{38}
it, but we know that we are breathing a holy atmosphere.
Ques. What is the difference between life and eternal life?
J.T. In John's epistle we hardly find any difference between these, but in Romans the difference is very obvious. In Romans eternal life is mentioned before the subject of life is presented. We find in @Romans 5, that eternal life has come through Jesus Christ, our Lord; in chapter 6 it says that it is *in* Christ Jesus, our Lord. Chapter 5 shows us how it has come to us, whereas chapter 6 shows *where it is found*. The gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus, our Lord. In chapter 8 we find the subject of life mentioned first, as in verse 10: "the Spirit is life". In this case the word *life* involves a power in the believer. It contemplates him walking in practical righteousness, and I believe, therefore, that Romans shows us the difference between life and eternal life. The fifth chapter of John is very much like John's epistle where these two ideas, life and eternal life, often have the same meaning. "Ye will not come to me that ye might have life". Life here means eternal life.
{39}
THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS SERVICE (2)
@Exodus 2: 15; @Exodus 3: 1 - 6; @Exodus 15: 27; @Numbers 21: 16 - 20
J.T. We have considered Joseph of whom it says in @Genesis 49: "Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well". He is a type of Christ as the One who sits at God's right hand having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit. Thus the Spirit is here in the assembly; but there is even a service which makes it possible that the Spirit and all that He is can be available and operative among the people of God. Only the Father or Christ can give the Holy Spirit. But we have the ministry of the word in order that the Holy Spirit might be enjoyed and be for refreshment and power in the souls of the people of God.
In Exodus we find Moses as a type of Christ, but at the same time he is a pattern for others who serve the people of God, or for one who has a place as a leader in the house of God. We see him in @Exodus 2 as an administrator. Every country, as we know, has its laws and its state system, but there is also a government for the country, an administration. It is through this administration that its resources are taken possession of and administered in a way that furthers the welfare of the country.
The principles on which the present marvellous dispensation is founded rest on Christ being in heaven after having completed the work of redemption, and on the Holy Spirit down here forming the assembly. But Christ as Lord, and the gifts and leaders which He has given, constitute an administration through which the people of God might come into the good of the kingdom. It is obvious that it is not sufficient to know about the Spirit's presence, we are to get the good of His presence among us here. We find Moses here sitting by the well; he is a type of a man who understands that there is power down
{40}
here, and he wishes this power to be of benefit. The seven daughters of Reuel came to the well to draw water for their father's sheep; and they fill the troughs. They could do so much, but it says that the shepherds drove them away. More than these women were needed to draw water for the sheep. We might consider Reuel's seven daughters as a type of the saints. They had brought their father's sheep there to water them, and they drew the water, but they were unable to water the sheep, for others came and drove them away. Then it was that Moses appeared. He helped these women to water the sheep. We see in this incident what God has provided for His people that His flock might drink of the well. God has such at the present time to whom He entrusts the administration.
Ques. How do you connect this with the thought of the presence of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. I wished first to show that there are those who administer. God's people need to be aware that Christ as the One who has ascended to heaven has given gifts to men. These gifts are true christians who themselves have received the Holy Spirit. There are men who have a place of reputation in the many systems of christendom, and who have not the Holy Spirit. Such a one is not sitting at the well, so to speak. No unconverted pastor or parson, educated or gifted as he may be, can help the people of God to get what is found in the well. Moses represents one who can help the people of God. It says he helped the women to water their sheep. Later on we find in @Exodus 3, that Moses led the sheep westward into the desert and came to the mountain of God, to Horeb. He did not lead them into the world, but he led them into the desert, to the mountain of God, the place where divine supplies were found.
Ques. How can the people of God be brought into the desert and have these supplies?
{41}
J.T. Every one who has learnt from Christ will, as far as he is able, lead the people of God to the place where divine supplies are found. In the gospel of Mark we find that when the opposition against Christ began to show itself, He withdrew with His disciples to the sea. This is the principle, to separate the disciples. Later it says that He went up into the mountain and called unto Him whom He would, and He ordained twelve that they should be with Him, and that He might send them forth to preach. These who had been with Christ on the mountain would know His way of carrying out service. Such servants would lead the flock far away from this world to the place where divine supplies are found. It was said in @Genesis 22, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided", and we find later that it was on the mountain of Jehovah where His wonderful instruction about the tabernacle was given. The mount of Jehovah is that which can make His people independent of the world. We do not need church buildings or schools for educating preachers for this service; all such things are part of this world and are quite unnecessary for the service of God. Moses, as sitting at the well, shows in type what this service implies that can lead the people of God into the good of all that which the Holy Spirit has for us.
Ques. Do we not see in the shepherds a contrary principle to what comes out in Moses?
J.T. That is important to see. We find in the gospels that which would correspond to these shepherds, those who prevented the women from watering their sheep. When the Lord healed the woman who had been bowed together eighteen years, we find that those who were looked up to in the synagogue withstood Him and criticised Him. We find the same thing many times in the gospels. The religious leaders were opposed to Christ, but the Lord was concerned about leading others into the good of
{42}
all that God had for man. Now after He has died and ascended to heaven He has sent down the Holy Spirit, and He has given gifts to men, so that the saints might come into the good of the Spirit's presence. There are at this present time religious leaders who would hinder the saints from entering into and enjoying God's things through the Spirit.
Rem. Paul was one who separated the disciples, disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus (@Acts 19).
J.T. This is a good application. This incident is mentioned after twelve men at the same time had received the Holy Spirit. They had been instructed through the baptism of John, but had not received the Holy Spirit. Then Paul preached the gospel about Christ to them, and laid his hands on them, and prayed, and they received the Spirit. Afterwards Paul enters the synagogue and was teaching them there during three months. But when the leading men in the synagogue were opposed he separated the disciples and taught them in the school of Tyrannus.
Rem. In @Exodus 3 where Moses came into the presence of God it says that Moses should draw off his shoes, but in @Luke 15 it was said to the servants that they should put shoes on the feet of the returning son.
J.T. I suppose that the Old Testament shows us that as redemption was then not completed the truth of sonship could not be known. Galatians shows us how God's people under the old covenant, were, so to speak, not of age, but that "when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law, ... that we might receive sonship". It says further: "But because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father. So thou art no longer bondman, but son; but if son, heir also through God". It is in the light of this that shoes may
{43}
be put on our feet. At the same time this scripture in @Exodus 3: 5 is a reminder, as long as we are here in the world, of the reverence that is due on our side. As a son I am in Christ and thus not in the flesh at all; but in reality we are still in a condition of flesh and blood, and it is wholesome to remember that "our God is a consuming fire", and therefore we ought to serve Him in holy fear and reverence. It is beautiful to see the spirit which came out in Moses; it says he consented to remain with the man, but it does not say that he received any wages. Moses stayed with Reuel forty years, and at the end of this time he led his father-in-law's sheep to the mountain of God; that is Horeb. This shows that Moses corresponds to God's thoughts of a servant who is faithful in his administration. He is unselfish and satisfied with his lot. The Lord Jesus says, "Now he who serves for wages flees because he serves for wages", @John 10: 13. It seems as if God honoured Moses by appearing to him in this way in the wilderness. If God reveals Himself to us in our service it means far more than any recognition from men.
Ques. To whom do these shepherds who drove away the women correspond?
J.T. Christianity has many such in these days. They want everything done according to men's thoughts and ways. There are those who have an official place as shepherds, but they have no real love for the sheep. In Moses we find the unselfish servant who will help the people to get water.
Rem. When Paul took leave of the elders of Ephesus, he said, "For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you", @Acts 20: 29.
J.T. Yes, and he says, "Not sparing the flock". Moses is thus a pattern for us in this respect. He is unselfish in his service, and he commences with
{44}
giving help; the flock was not his own. There are those who have the place of shepherds and who speak of *their* flock, but the flock belongs to God and Moses understood this. Here it was a question of Jethro's flock, and Moses did the best for it when he led it to Horeb, the mountain of God.
Rem. You said that we need to understand more what the assembly is in order to comprehend better the truth about the Spirit.
J.T. That is true, and I believe it was what Paul presented when he taught in the school of Tyrannus. In Acts we find three periods in connection with teaching. It says in chapter 11 that Paul and Barnabas were for a *whole year* together in the assembly, and taught a large crowd. And it says that at Corinth he remained *a year and six months* teaching among them the word of God. Later on in @Acts 19 he reasoned daily with the disciples in the school of Tyrannus, and this took place for *two years*. And from chapter 20 we see that he was with them for *three years* in Ephesus. It was in Ephesus that the assembly reached its climax. It is also in the epistle to the Ephesians that we find the highest divine truths presented in connection with the assembly. It says there that the assembly is the fulness of Christ, and also that God shall have glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages.
Ques. Do we find the same thought in @Exodus 15: 27 in connection with the seventy palm trees?
J.T. I was just thinking of this. I believe that we see in these twelve springs of water and the seventy palm trees an indication of the help which a perfect administration affords us. This type speaks of what God has placed in the wilderness for us. Pharaoh thought that the wilderness would compel the people to return to Egypt, but in the wilderness God supplies all that the people of God need. In
{45}
His goodness and love God gave them twelve springs of water in the desert. I am sure that when the people came to this place their hearts were filled with deep gratefulness to God.
Rem. Although the flock was led into the desert, and not yet into the land, they had these resources.
J.T. It was God's resources in the desert, as expressed in J.N.D.s hymn.
<blockquote>'Is the wilderness before thee, <br>Desert lands where drought abides? <br>Heav'nly springs shall there restore thee, <br>Fresh from God's exhaustless tides'. (`76:2)</blockquote>
Rem. The wilderness in its spiritual application is not an inferior side of the truth if we are in it with God.
J.T. Not at all, for it is where we learn to apprehend what God is for us. Therefore it says in the verses read in @Numbers 21 that they came to Pisgah "which looks over the surface of the waste". From @Deuteronomy 34 we understand that one could from there look into the land of Canaan, but the thought in Numbers is to show what God has been for me in the wilderness.
Rem. Their resources in the wilderness were unknown to Pharaoh even as to the world today.
J.T. The resources are for those who in faith have gone out into the wilderness: all are available to them. One can understand how these types that we have considered allude to what is, so to speak, outside of us, objective things. They have to do with the divine administration.
Ques. Is it possible for believers to lose the enjoyment of this?
J.T. Let us look at @Numbers 21 in order to see how the believer's portion comes out. What they found at Elim alludes to what a young believer finds when he takes his place amongst the people of God. Here he finds these springs and these palm
{46}
trees where there is shadow. He has not himself procured these things. God has provided them, and they are found here. The young believer encamps beside the waters. You find young believers sometimes wishing to return to the world; they do not encamp by the waters. The number twelve speaks of perfect administration. The seventy palm trees speak of something which is beyond that. We find that the Lord sent out twelve disciples and later seventy others.
Ques. What is the difference between Egypt and the wilderness?
J.T. Egypt is a figure of the world, the place where the flesh finds its life. It says of Moses that he esteemed the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. For us Egypt prefigures also the world as the sphere where Satan holds souls in bondage. This world becomes a wilderness to one who believes in Christ and it is here in the wilderness that God opens for us another world. In the tabernacle we have what prefigures the heavenly things (see @Hebrews 9: 23). We have there presented to us that world to which God will bring us. These things which God has given us in the wilderness are in view of sustaining us on the journey through it.
Ques. Does what you have spoken of correspond to the land?
J.T. The tabernacle was a figure of heavenly things. It is true that there was a foretaste of the land in the tabernacle, but while we are walking here in the wilderness we are reminded that we are not yet in reality in heaven, although we get the good of the heavenly things. So we find that these two sides go on simultaneously, our public life in the wilderness, and our private intercourse with God, outside the wilderness. It is in Numbers that we are made ready, in an objective way, for entering into the land. After they had sung, "Rise up, well!
{47}
sing unto it", they went forward from one place to another until they came to Pisgah which is on the border of the land of Canaan. The springing well in Numbers is found in the same chapter as the brazen serpent. In @Romans 8 the brazen serpent stands in connection with our life in the wilderness, so that the righteous requirements of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit.
Ques. Is it by entering into our heavenly privileges that in the power of the Spirit we can take up our responsible side down here?
J.T. In @John 4 the Lord says that the fountain of water in the believer springs up into eternal life. This stands in connection with the land, but in @John 7 we have the other side in view of testimony; namely, that he who comes to Christ and drinks, from him shall flow rivers of living water. This points to the wilderness, the place where water is so needed.
Rem. Caleb's daughter sought springs.
J.T. She was in the land already, and she desired that which could maintain her there. But what we find here is what can help us to come into the land, namely the Holy Spirit which springs up to eternal life in the believer, from whom should flow rivers of living water to meet the need of others.
Ques. Does the word 'perish' in @John 3 mean to be without water in the wilderness?
J.T. It refers to those whose bodies fell in the wilderness. It is not exactly the judgment of God. All men are perishing, but God would save men from it. No believer perishes in the wilderness. How solemn that their bodies should be left in the wilderness! They were not buried.
Ques. Does this correspond to a worldly believer?
J.T. I do not think so. I do not believe that any true believer falls in the wilderness. Hebrews shows
{48}
plainly that they did not go in on account of unbelief; they were apostate, they were not even buried. It is remarkable that all those who had faith, and of whom it says that they died in the wilderness, were buried; they are Moses, Miriam, and Aaron. It says of the unbelievers that their carcases, not their dead bodies but their carcases, a very ignominious word, fell and were wasted in the wilderness. It was as if God would show His abhorrence of the unbelief that rejects the heavenly testimony. @Numbers 21: 18 reads, "from the wilderness they went to Mattanah". They are beginning to leave the wilderness now in order to enter the land.
Ques. Is this the thought that they who do not enjoy eternal life do not enter the land?
J.T. Yes, that is why it says in Hebrews: "For we enter into the rest who have believed". It does not say that we shall enter in a time to come, but we are characterised by entering into rest now. This chapter shows us how we may enter. We enter by the Spirit.
Ques. Have our meetings and our exercises to do with the wilderness, and if so, how can we combine the thought of life with this?
J.T. We have to consider the assembly from two sides. One is found in Corinthians where the assembly is looked upon as a local gathering, as was seen in Corinth, but in Ephesians the assembly is considered as being placed in the heavenlies, and this is not a material thought, but a wholly spiritual one. When we get a view of the assembly as we find it in Ephesians, it is then we come into contact with eternal life. As we have been saying previously, where the people of God are gathered there is a sphere where life can be experienced. The more holy, spiritual and separated we are as believers, the more we shall touch a heavenly condition which is outside this world. Eternal life is considered as
{49}
something which is quite outside the sphere of natural things. John writes: "These things have I written to you that ye may know that ye have eternal life who believe on the name of the Son of God". The word 'know' in this verse means conscious knowledge. I am conscious of having it. If we receive rightly the truth in John's epistle we should be conscious of having eternal life, and this can only be in the power of the Spirit of God. Eternal life is in His Son; that is to say, it is something which is wholly outside the conditions of flesh and blood. It is on the other side of the Jordan. In @1 John 5 it says: "This is he that came by water and blood, Jesus the Christ". He is looked upon as the One that has died. Later we find a threefold witness; the Spirit, the water, and the blood. When we apprehend these three witnesses, we are able to enter into eternal life, for it is outside the sphere of flesh and blood; it is in the Son.
Rem. We may view the assembly in two ways. Firstly as in the epistle to the Corinthians, and this leads us to fellowship, and then as in Ephesians where the features of Christ are seen in the assembly.
J.T. Quite right. In Ephesians we find what is wholly the work of God.
Rem. Believers may not have light as to the truth of Ephesians though they might apprehend what comes out in Corinthians.
J.T. I do not think I should be able to apprehend this if I were connected with any human system.
Rem. Believers may not understand the precious truth we have in Ephesians, yet I thought that all christians could comprehend something of the truth of the Corinthian epistles.
J.T. I do not think it is possible for one who is connected with any acknowledged religious system to have a right apprehension of the assembly either from the Corinthians or the Ephesian side of the
{50}
truth, for if he has this, he acts against the light. The epistle to the Corinthians condemns severely anyone calling himself by any other name than christian. If I say: I am a Lutheran, a Methodist and so on, I am condemned by the epistle to the Corinthians. Paul says there: "Each of you says, *I* am of Paul, ... and *I* of Cephas, and *I* of Christ". And he asks: "Is the Christ divided?". If I cannot say: I am of Paul, I should not either be able to say I am of Wesley or of Luther. We find that after Barnabas and Saul had spent a whole year with the saints at Antioch, the believers there were called christians. Then we find in scripture that they are called brethren. They are also called saints. Why should we assume human names? Paul asks: "Has Paul been crucified for you?".
Ques. Are not these the things that contribute to what we call the ruin of the assembly?
J.T. Yes, they are. The saints of God are divided into groups and parties, but Scripture says that it is *one* faith, "one Lord, one faith, one baptism", @Ephesians 4: 5.
Rem. Christians will acknowledge that *all* believers belong to the assembly, but many affirm that it is something that cannot be realised these days. They speak of an 'invisible church'. If you asked, Are you the only ones that form the assembly? they answer: 'No, the assembly includes all believers'.
J.T. When they state that, they really confess that they are partisan. They are of Paul, of Cephas, and so on. If they confess that there is one assembly they ought to withdraw from all that which is not.
Ques. Is it right to say that we may stand on the foundation of Scripture in spite of all being in ruin?
J.T. Yes, "The firm foundation of God stands". So that we can say there is only one assembly. This is the language of Scripture, and if every true believer in the world took this ground, all real
{51}
believers would be found together. This implies that I must withdraw from all that which contradicts it. Therefore we find, as we have said before, that Paul separated the disciples. The Lord Himself withdrew with His disciples to the sea. In @2 Timothy 2 Paul says: "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". Then he says that we should "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". There is thus found a way for the people of God today in spite of all these parties.
Ques. Would you kindly say something more about the twelve springs in the wilderness, and of the well that the princes dug?
J.T. They had no need to dig these twelve springs. They speak of something which God gives us through the ministry of the word, what the believer finds when he is converted. But the well in @Numbers 21 had to be dug out. This digging points to the removing in us of all that is a hindrance to the Spirit's work in us. And as they were digging they sang to the Spirit. When I sing to the Spirit I acknowledge the Spirit as a divine power, the only power that can bring me into the land, as the Lord says in @John 6. "It is the Spirit which quickens, the flesh profits nothing". That is why it says immediately after they had sung to the Spirit: "And from the wilderness they went to Mattanah". They left the wilderness behind them.
Ques. Does the digging speak of self-judgment?
J.T. Yes, I think so. They did this by the word of the lawgiver. For us it is by the word of Christ. The digging must go on.
Ques. Would you say that the digging depends on us and the spiritual power we possess, whereas the springs are what God has provided?
J.T. I think that is right.
{52}
THE WAY TO MORAL ELEVATION
@Acts 1: 9 - 14; @Acts 10: 9 - 13; @Acts 19: 1
My thought, beloved brethren, is to speak of moral elevation. The thought of elevation, whether we look at it as moral or literal, has a special application in christianity. The literal side we find specially in the gospel of Luke, and this corresponds to the epistle to Ephesians. In a coming day there will be found a people of God that has its blessing on earth, but our blessing is in the heavenlies. It says in Ephesians that "God ... has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ", and in connection with this it says that He has "raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". It was in the purpose of God to set us in the heavenlies. Nothing in Scripture is plainer than this, that our calling is a heavenly one. As the apostle says in @Philippians 3: 14: "The calling on high of God in Christ Jesus". That is why, as I said, the gospel of Luke develops step by step the great principle of elevation.
In @Luke 2 we find the angels saying, "Glory to God in the highest"; and in chapter 10 the Lord says to His disciples, "Your names are written in the heavens". In chapter 19, when the Lord passed into Jerusalem for the last time, He rode as King and the multitude of the disciples celebrated this occasion saying, "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". In the gospel of Luke the believer is always reminded of what is in the highest in view of our place there. In @Luke 10 the Lord says, "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven". He shows how swift his fall is, that the sphere may be free for the assembly to come and take its place. In correspondence to all this we find at the end of Luke that the Lord was carried up into heaven.
{53}
All this prepares the way for these three scriptures in Acts that have been read.
The Acts of the Apostles has the assembly in view, and is intended to help those who are of the assembly to understand how we may become morally elevated, before we are literally elevated. In the present time we are to understand moral elevation. I wish to show how this moral elevation comes out when the believer refuses to connect himself with the religious ways and habits which are current in christendom. That we are gathered here tonight bears witness to what I have said. If we had been gathered in an acknowledged religious building with the religious arrangements that are found there, we should not be morally elevated but rather in a spiritual sense be degraded. We are morally elevated when we withdraw from that which has public reputation, and when we avoid ways and habits that the world recognises.
In the light of the elevated place we possess in God's thoughts and in the light of the recognition that will be ours one day, we may be satisfied with being hidden and unseen. It says in Revelation about the assembly that it came down out of heaven from God having the glory of God. This shows that when we come out in public glory, we shall be seen by the whole universe. What answers to that now is to be hidden, to avoid all religious acknowledgement, to evade what man considers good in a religious sense and to avoid all mere publicity. Those who can be content with being small now are such as are really great according to God. It is not that we should be inactive or conceal ourselves but believers should, as Paul says, be recognised by being "unknown, and yet well known". We are unknown because the world will prefer to overlook us, but if we are faithful to Christ in our testimony it will know us well enough. Even if we are unknown as
{54}
not forming a part of this world, we are, all the same, well known in the testimony, and this testimony incurs persecution.
Now I wish to show how this came out at the beginning. In @Acts 1: 9 we read, "A cloud received him out of their sight". Their eyes were fixed on Jesus, and it was as they were looking on Him that He was taken up. It is well, dear brethren, to ponder a scripture like this and, so to speak, try to picture the whole event before our eyes. Suppose you had been there when the Lord was taken up, you would have received an impression of it, as of something which had never been seen before. It was a Man going up; think of that! Have we ever pondered such an event? It says, "They beholding him". Think of a Man who goes right up! What grace in Him! what feeling of victory! what joy in His heart when He went to the place from whence He had come! And it was not only that He went up to heaven, but He was *received* up. If you had seen it you could never forget it; you would get such an impression of elevation. When we see Him going up, we get a thought of our going up, and we could say, 'Here we find the way in which we are going up'. The two men in white clothing who stood by them, when He went up, say, "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven".
Satan does not come down from heaven in this way. The Lord says: "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven". The Lord Jesus does not fall. He comes down in glory and dignity. He shall thus come as they had seen Him going into heaven. And between these two events, the Lord's going away and the Lord's return, we find the assembly. And what might we expect should fill their hearts who form the assembly during this time of expectation
{55}
but the light of His elevation and our elevated place with Him? These disciples saw Him going up, and they returned to Jerusalem, and it is in their behaviour and in what they now do, since they have returned to Jerusalem, that we can see that of which I have been speaking. We can see how the thought of elevation fills their minds. It says: "And when they were come into the city, they went up to the upper chamber". We see how the thought of *going up* comes out.
Let us ask ourselves: What have I before me when I go into a large city such as Gothenburg, London or New York? Do I look for what is morally elevated? If I am unconverted or worldly minded and travel to Paris, then I wish to see all the sights in the city. If I value religious reputation I shall visit the most famous church there. I mention these things to show the contrast to what we are speaking of, namely *moral* elevation. If I love the Lord Jesus and His interests, and I go to Paris it is in order to meet some few of those who believe in the Lord Jesus, and who might come together in some humble place there. When I come to Boras today I do not know of any place like this room where we are gathered. I should look out for this place, and why? because here is found what corresponds to heaven. Here are found such as love the Lord Jesus, and this is what characterises heaven, for heaven is filled with those who love the Lord Jesus.
Therefore as we see, these disciples went into the upper room when they returned to the city. And whom did they find there? Was it the great men of the day? Not at all; there were not any such found there. There were found Peter, James and John and Andrew and all the apostles together with a few women and Jesus brethren, and they were together praying. If I had asked Peter about the latest news,
{56}
he would not have had to say of such things nor of the money-market. He would have answered, 'We have in our hearts the light of another world altogether. He whom we love has gone into heaven, and He said to us before going up, that He would come back to fetch us. He even said that in a few days the Holy Spirit would come upon us'.
We can understand, dear brethren, that it is such things they were speaking of in a company like this in the upper room. If a so-called higher critic, one who denies the deity of Christ and the inspiration of the Bible, had come into this upper room and had said to Peter, 'I do not believe in the man of whom you speak, I do not believe in the inspiration of the Bible, I do not believe that Jonah was swallowed by a fish', how do you think they would meet a man like that? There would be found no place for him there; they would surely meet him very coldly; they are all occupied with Jesus. They know who He is, and they know *where* He is. I notice a woman there, Mary, the most wonderful woman in the world. Where would you find a woman, who can speak to you as she can? She could speak about the childhood of Jesus, of His earliest years as a young boy; she could speak of Him at the age of thirty. One can understand what this upper room was as filled with the most wonderful people that one could meet. And you say to yourself, 'I should like to stay here; I am willing to give up all religious reputation in Jerusalem in order to be in this company. Whatsoever I have to leave, I must stay here'. In this upper room we find God's nobles. The emperor at Rome in all his power cannot add anything to a company like this; in this company the least of all is greater than the emperor. There we see moral elevation. We get an idea of what christianity is as well as what this world is. What is this
{57}
world? John says, "The world is passing, ... but he that does the will of God abides for eternity".
One can understand that this upper room in Jerusalem was a contrast to the temple with its splendour. Perhaps you would remind me that these same disciples went into the temple according to what we read in Luke's gospel; but we find an explanation of this when we see that at the end of Luke's gospel they are viewed as the remnant of Israel, and that they are found in grace in the temple, as if God once more would appeal to the nation. But as I have mentioned already, we are viewed in the Acts as in the light of the assembly, and the building, which corresponds to the assembly is not a building like the temple or a cathedral but an upper room. The meaning of the word 'upper' is not that it is any better than other rooms, but that it is insignificant and humble. The expression 'upper' involves moral elevation.
To speak of our next scripture, it says in @Acts 10 that Peter went *up* on the roof to pray. God intended to bring in the gentiles. In chapter 19 it says that Paul went through the upper districts to Ephesus. Romans answers every question in connection with me as a believer on earth. All this must first be made clear to my soul. Romans is given us of God in order that our souls might be set right as regards our sins and all that concerns us regarding our responsible life here on earth, even our bodies; wherefore we are encouraged in this epistle to present our bodies a living sacrifice to God. Later on we might reach to a more excellent side, and, so to speak, reach to the truths of Ephesians "through the upper districts".
When the nations were to be brought into the assembly. Peter was found in the house of Simon the tanner by the great sea. This speaks of God having the nations in view. Peter went up instinctively
{58}
as it were; he went up on the roof to pray, he did not go down. And heaven honoured him with a vision, for it says that while he was praying an ecstasy came upon him and he beheld the heaven opened and a great sheet came down. What I have before me is that God might make us evangelical. He longs to fill our hearts with love for souls. If we cannot preach. He will give us ability if we pray about it, but in seeking to reach souls we must not drop down to common religious methods. Peter went *up* to pray. It is not time for us now to settle down, but it is time for us to be diligent in the testimony. If we have no ability to preach, let us pray, but let us go up to pray. Peter went up to pray, and it was as if God said to him, 'This is pleasurable to Me, and as you have come up to pray I will show you what I intend to do'.
When Peter relates about this sheet he says, "It came even to me". That is to say, if we are exercised concerning the testimony, and if we go up to pray, and we refuse worldly methods in connection with the testimony in our service. God will honour us, and He will do this by revealing His thoughts to us. The sheet descended with all the quadrupeds and creeping things of the earth and the fowls of the heaven. That shows how all mankind, men of all these different nations, ought to hear the gospel. Peter was now prepared for this, and when he opens the door for the gentiles he does it in the light of the thoughts of heaven. The gentiles are brought in on this upper line. If believers around us wish to come into fellowship they come to what is morally elevated. When Peter preached to the gentiles the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard him speak. This thought is affirmed as we have seen in @Acts 19, when Paul in Ephesus through God's guidance wished to announce the truth about the
{59}
assembly. If we read @Acts 20 together with the apostle's epistle to the Ephesians, we shall understand how elevated the assembly is. It says that Paul came to Ephesus, through the *upper* districts. May God bless these few thoughts!
{60}
HOW BELIEVERS ARE LED TO CHRIST
@Matthew 2: 1 - 12; @Luke 2: 8 - 17
I am thinking of believers being introduced to Christ. Many are vague as to the transaction by the Father of making the Son known in the heart. We have examples of this in Peter and in Paul. In Peter's case the Father revealed to him who the Lord Jesus was, so that he could say who He was; it was not simply a question of what he *thought* He was, but what he *said*. The Lord did not ask them as to who they *thought* He was, but who they *said* He was. So that Peter by reason of the Father's revelation to him said of Him, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". Then Paul said that God revealed His Son in him, and he preached Him as the Son of God. So that you see, dear brethren, it is not only what we *think* about Christ, but what we *say* about Him. In the profession around us men are saying very bad things about Him; others who are not so opposed are saying very indefinite things about Him, so that it is for us who love Him to be able to say definitely who He is. It is a question of what we are saying about Jesus; we are not to be silent. When others who oppose Christ are saying such blasphemous things about Him it is incumbent on each of us to say openly and definitely the truth about His Person. But if we are to know this, there must be a transaction from the Father, or in other words, heaven takes the initiative in introducing us to Christ. This may not be very definite in our experience: it may come in through our reading the Scriptures, or through someone ministering the truth, but at some time or another in our christian experience God introduces us by His Spirit to His Son. I do not believe that any of us will need an introduction when we get to heaven; the introduction is while we are here. This may be by the Father's
{61}
act directly by the Spirit, or it may be by the Spirit through ministry, or it may be by the Spirit bringing home to us some passage of Scripture. But it is imperative that this transaction should be known in every one of our souls, that we have a definite apprehension of the Person of Christ and that if we have that apprehension we speak about it, for we shall be challenged. Here in the gospel of Matthew the Lord challenges all of them; He says, "Who do ye say that I am?"
Well now, this principle of introduction appears in all the evangelists, but particularly in Matthew, in Luke and in John. In Matthew it is through the star in the East; in Luke it is by an angel; in John it is by John the baptist. You will all remember how John the baptist looking on Jesus as He walked said, "Behold the Lamb of God". You see, John knew Him; he had been directed how to locate the Person of the Lord Jesus. The word was, "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit". Now John saw that, and thus he knew the Person. But he did not keep silent about it; he immediately adds, "I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God". Two of John's disciples heard this and followed Jesus; they heard John say, "Behold the Lamb of God".
Now this was when Jesus was entering on His ministry but Matthew and Luke record introduction to Jesus when He was a Babe and I believe the Lord would have a word for us as to these two introductions. The first record speaks of wise men from the East, but Luke speaks of shepherds. That is, we have in Matthew persons of distinction in this world -- those who belong to what we call the educated class. Luke, on the other hand speaks of persons of no special distinction in the world; they are just shepherds. I mention this so that we may
{62}
see that God is no respecter of persons; all men are the same to Him. If you were to look down from an altitude of one thousand feet, straight down, all men would look very small; whether one man was one foot higher than another would make very little difference. Men would not look as trees walking, but would be more like ants. And so you see, if God looks down -- to use my simple figure -- all men are the same to Him, whether it be the emperor or the beggar. He respects the king or the emperor, as He does the beggar, for He will never encourage socialism or Bolshevism; I believe He hates it as much as anything there is; it is from that that the worst possible evil will arise. But then, He is not specially honouring the monarch; he is just a man to Him. But he *is* a man, and the gospel of Mark tells us that a man is better than a sheep; that is to say, from the standpoint of grace it is the greatest possible thing to be a man, for the grace of God carries with it salvation for *all men* (@Titus 2: 11).
God does not ignore governmental circumstances in this world. If He wishes to convert a king He will employ means to get at him; if He wishes to convert a beggar or a prisoner in the dungeon, He will employ suitable means. If a man be an astronomer it is very likely that God will speak to him through the stars or the firmament. If a man be a fisherman it is very likely that God will speak to him through *his* profession; or if he be a ploughman or a gatherer of summer fruit, as it says, "The invisible things of him ... are clearly seen, ... by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead", @Romans 1: 20. God can speak to men through the heavens, through the sea, and through the very soil which a man ploughs; such are the wonderful instrumentalities that God has through which to address men. And therefore we are not to be disrespectful of the various grades of humanity, as we speak, or
{63}
callings. Christianity teaches us to accept everything as it is. So in regard of the testimony of the nations, you see these wise men from the East were evidently men who read the heavens, and God spoke to them through what was in the heavens. They saw a star; they saw it in the East; that is, they saw it where they were employed. We have therefore a wonderful example here of the testimony of creation. There is not a word as to the scriptures in regard of them. So that if anyone raise a question as to the East, that is, the seven hundred or so million people in Asia, we can say, Well, these wise men had a testimony; there it is, the everlasting gospel, the heavens, and they were moved by it, and God was working in their souls.
Well now, what they saw was not a known star, known to astronomers. Of course, all the stars belong to Christ; He made them all; He calls them all by name. But this is *His* star -- "We have seen his star in the east". They were able to tell what belonged to Him, what had reference specifically to Christ. Then another thing here is that in being thus guided they are un-national. National feeling and prejudice goes a long way in hindering the growth of the saints of God. But these wise men are not affected by their national feeling. They come to Jerusalem and they say, "Where is he that is born King of the Jews?". If they had said, 'Where is he that is King of kings?', then they might have reserved their national feeling, for every kingdom and nation on earth may claim the King of kings. But when they speak of the "King of the Jews", they give up all national rights; it gives the Jews prior rights on the earth, and, if God has given a nation prior rights, He is sovereign, and if His sovereignty takes away from me my nation, my wisdom is to submit. The great principle underlying all God's dealings is His sovereign rights. He has
{64}
taken up a nation sovereignly and given it priority among the nations, and every nation on earth will have to recognise the priority of the Jews. In the future, every nation that does not come up to Jerusalem to keep the feast of tabernacles will get no rain. And so you see, God has given prior rights, a hegemony, to the Jewish nation. And so these wise men were truly wise; they were already recognising the sovereign rights of God. They say, "Where is he that is born King of the Jews?". They are concerned about Him as born. The natural mind would say, I will wait till he has grown before I give allegiance.
Our position today is that we own allegiance to Christ before He is acknowledged at all. Outwardly He has been cut off and has nothing, but we know that He is exalted in heaven and we acknowledge His rights already. We acknowledge the sovereign rights of God too; we see that God had set His King on His holy hill of Zion. And so these men here are anticipating our position; they are concerned about the King as born -- not the King *crowned*, but the King *born*. You see what light they were acting on, but then what one would observe is that notwithstanding that, they fall into wrong hands. They went to Jerusalem and came into the hands of Herod, the rival of Jesus. We are thus reminded that whilst we may have light and are guided up to a point, we may miss our way. Thousands of our brethren who love the Lord started out as converted to find Him, but have fallen into wrong hands; they have become members of established religions with the result that the interests of God have suffered. True enough the Scriptures were there at Jerusalem, and true enough the Scriptures are read in Protestant countries in the established churches. We are very thankful that in a great number at any rate the Bible is 'Appointed to be read in churches'; it is
{65}
infinitely better that we should have the Bible read in churches than the Koran or any such book.
There is thus some guidance in these establishments; at least the Scriptures are there. So you find that the chief priest and scribes are appealed to by Herod as to where Christ should be born, and they could tell that much. But notwithstanding the fact that they had the Scriptures and could tell where Christ should be born, there was positive hatred to Him there. Herod, it says, was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. Why should they be troubled with such news that the King was born? Fifty cannon would roar in modern times at the birth of the Crown Prince, the Prince of Wales, or the like. Why then should they be troubled at the birth of the King of the Jews? It should be an occasion of joy. But the secret was that Herod was a rival to Christ, and the sorrowful thing is that all Jerusalem was with him, a condition exactly like our own today, for not only are the leaders opposed but the people are with them in great measure. Infidelity and opposition to Christ is growing and increasing rapidly. And so in such systems as these we are in wrong hands. Although they can tell us a great deal about Christ, they are opposed. And there is subtle deception too, for Herod says, I want to come and worship Him. He had no thought of worshipping the King; his thought was to murder Him.
Well now, what is so beautiful is that when these men had heard the king they went their way. They had not gone that way in going to Jerusalem, but now they are on *their* way and the star appears and then they find the King. How lovely to see that star as it rested over the house where the King was! No one of us should be restful, beloved, until we find the King. However small He may be in our minds, He is the King, He is the born King. He is not a usurper, but is born a royal personage. And so the
{66}
true state of their souls is disclosed. They enter into the house and find the little Child and Mary. Matthew always brings the King forward and so he puts the little Child before its mother. And then they become worshippers. What examples for us; they are not formal worshippers, but bring forth their treasures, gold and frankincense and myrrh. They have got things; they are wealthy. And now after they have become worshippers practically, God says, 'Now you must not go back to Herod again'. So there is a warning for every one of us -- do not go that way again; do not go in the way of the opposers of Christ. They may be distinguished personages, high up ecclesiastically or otherwise; they may know something about the Scriptures and something about Christ -- enough to oppose Him; but do not go that way again. Be warned! God sets up a beacon light as it were in that direction -- do not go that way! God warns them not to go back to Herod and they are obedient to the vision; they return to their own country another way. We have to find that other way; that way is the spiritual way; it is a different way from the way *via* Jerusalem. You see Jerusalem here in this passage represents what is accredited publicly; Matthew always casts a slight on Jerusalem. He wishes to direct the true believers in Christ to the assembly and hence he says, 'Do not go back that way; you will never find Christ in the assembly that way'.
Now going on to Luke, you see how different the people are here in the social scale, and whilst God is no respecter of persons, He does greatly value any traits of Christ that are emphasised in us and will honour them. So that these men although humble and obscure, having no place in the world socially, are keeping watch over their flock by night. In other words, they are shepherds in truth; they are unselfish people -- keeping watch over their flocks
{67}
*by night*. It was a time not only when other people would be asleep, but when some would be enjoying themselves in the cities, for it is census time. That is to say, it might be represented in this way -- suppose you have a fair here in Gothenburg; people come in from the country from all directions and you may be sure all kinds of pleasures are in vogue. But these men are not there; they are unselfishly guarding their flocks by night. And hence they are honoured; they are not left alone, for the angel of the Lord was there by them and the glory of the Lord shone round about them. They are evidently much more honoured than the wise men from the East. So that whilst God is no respecter of persons, He is a respecter of the traits of Christ shining out in us, and the more of these that appear, the more we shall be honoured. Then the angel communicates to them the wonderful news that *to them* was born a Saviour; you see, it is not simply that the Saviour was born, but "unto you", it says. There is no such word in regard of the wise men. Then it says that as the angel is communicating this wonderful news a multitude of the heavenly host appeared, that is, heaven has come down in volume to introduce these shepherds to Christ. It is as if their hearts were to be impressed with heaven's thought of Christ. One often thinks of that, that if we were to get into heaven and see heaven's thoughts of Jesus, how heaven regards Jesus, every one of us would be ashamed at the great difference between heaven's regard for Him and our regard.
Now the angels depart up to heaven and what will these men do? The angel had said, "Unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you; ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger". There is in this instance no exposure to Herod. The city of His
{68}
birth is mentioned and the sign as to how He is to be located. Thus the more traits of Christ we have, the more heaven will honour us and the less we shall be exposed to the official class. So that as the angels depart into heaven, the shepherds say, 'Let us go'. Let us go where? To Bethlehem! The angel had not used the word 'Bethlehem' at all, but these men were spiritual to a point; they knew David's city, that it was no other than Bethlehem. So let us go to Bethlehem; let us go now. That is what they say, and they go, and notice, they find Mary and Joseph and the Babe. Luke is not concerned about the King; with him it is a question of grace, that Jesus the Son of God could come down so low. So that the parents are mentioned before the Child, whereas Matthew mentions the Child before the parents.
These shepherds go their way to Bethlehem, and where will they go? Will they go to the mayor of Bethlehem, speaking modernly, or the city council, or the centurion, if there was one there? No, they are shepherds and the angel had told them about a manger; they knew what a manger meant. The magi of the East might be quite unconversant with any such small thing as a manger, but the shepherds knew where cattle were kept. You see how perfectly God suits the light He gives to the state we are in. And so it is, where there is true guidance from heaven and we are subject, we shall go directly to the spot. As they went into Bethlehem they would be looking around not for the big houses, but for the mangers, and they find the babe in the manger. They found Him; let us find Him. As I said, God is at all times introducing to us His beloved Son; He is giving clear indications as to where He is. It may be in the smallest and almost humbling circumstances outwardly, but let us not falter; He is sure to be there. As the word is, "Ye shall find"; there is no
{69}
mistake about it. Having found Him, as I was saying at the beginning, they speak about Him. It says, "And found both Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in the manger; and having seen it they made known about the country the thing which had had been said to them concerning this child", @Luke 2: 16, 17.
You see the teaching of these passages: heaven is introducing us to Christ. For the moment He is in very humble circumstances outwardly, but soon He is to come out in His majesty, in heavenly glory, and the assembly will be with Him. In the meantime He is in obscure circumstances outwardly, but if we are subject we shall not fail to find Him. As finding Him we shall not fail to worship Him, nor to confess Him, and to say who He is, that He is the Christ, the Son of the living God.
{70}
MATERIAL FOR THE ASSEMBLY AND PERSONAL DIGNITY
@Matthew 16: 15 - 18, 28; @Matthew 17: 1 - 5; @Matthew 18: 19, 20
J.T. It is well known to some of us that Matthew's gospel is the gospel that most of all speaks about the assembly. In the gospel of Matthew the assembly takes the place of Jerusalem. It is in the assembly that the light of God and the order and government of God come out. Our first scripture alludes to the material of which the assembly is being formed, and the two others point to the persons that constitute the assembly. We ought to make a distinction between material and persons. We may look upon every believer as being material for the assembly, or we may consider him as a person in the assembly, a personality there. Looked upon as material it is a question of *what* he is; considered as a person it will be of *who* he is.
In chapter 16 Peter is addressed by the Lord not by his own name, but according to what he was, "*Thou* art Peter". It is interesting to compare this with @John 1 where it says: "Thou shalt be called Cephas (which interpreted is stone)". In John it is a question of what he should be called, his personality. In John's gospel the Lord says this after having looked on him. When the Lord looked at him He saw certain features in him, and therefore He says: "Thou shalt be called Cephas". This was to be his name. The name speaks of the personality. But in Matthew it says: "*Thou* art Peter". In Matthew the thought is *what* he was, but in John it is *who* he was. In Matthew Peter is looked upon as material, and this on account of what he says, but in John it is in connection with his behaviour, what one could see in him.
Ques. When it is a question of testimony, is the thought then of *what* we are?
{71}
J.T. Yes. In his first chapter John presents the Lord as the last Adam; He gives names. It does not say that Adam gave names to anything not having life; he named living creatures. In the same way we find that the Lord in John's gospel is occupied with that which has life, living persons. As the living creatures were led to Adam he named them all. The names he gave every creature allude to the life that came out and was expressed through the movements of each creature. In this way we see how the Lord in @John 1 comes forth as the last Adam, giving names. He looked at Simon, and He said: "Thou shalt be called Cephas". He was to be known by this name. The name spoke of what he was in his personality. But when the Lord in Matthew speaks of Peter, he is thinking of the material which was found in him. Further on in the gospel of Matthew we find how the thought of personality comes out more distinctly. The visions on the holy mount come in to show us the greatness of the Person in heaven, so that the Lord says: "There are some of those standing here that shall not taste of death at all until they shall have seen the Son of man coming in his kingdom". It is the Person that is coming out here, the Son of man coming in His kingdom. Peter's confession showed that he had apprehended the Lord as the Son of God, as the Christ. This is the way in which He is known down here in grace and power. But what these three disciples were to see was the Son of man coming in His kingdom; that is to say His personal majesty, not only a person, but the Person in His own glory, coming in His kingdom. It is not Jesus in lowliness, but Jesus, the Son of man, in highest majesty and honour. Therefore, when we come to the truth of, the assembly in activity, we get the thought of personality, first of all in Christ, and then in the two heavenly saints, Moses and Elias, and further in
{72}
connection with the relationship into which the disciples were brought, namely sonship. Between chapter 16, where the material for the assembly is mentioned, and chapter 18, which speaks of the assembly in activity, comes chapter 17 showing us what personality implies.
Ques. Is this your thought that we commence as persons whom God has called to have part in the assembly, but if this material is not found in us we cannot enter into the reality of the assembly?
J.T. I believe that the thought of personality in Scripture comes out after the thought of material; that is to say, I gain what one might call personality in the assembly; I cannot bring my natural personality with me into the assembly. If I were a prominent person in this world, a nobleman or a professor, then this personality has no place in the assembly of God; the only kind of personality which is of worth in the assembly is the personality I have received of Christ.
Rem. I thought you were contemplating John's side first, and then Matthew's side, and that it is the right person that makes the material.
J.T. No, I was speaking of John to show the order in Matthew's gospel.
Ques. What is your thought as to personality?
J.T. Personality is some characteristic feature which distinguishes one person from another. Each one in the assembly has his own dignity, and the name he receives from the Lord intimates what underlies this dignity. This name may involve that which the Lord sees beforehand is to come out in us. He knows the end from the beginning, and if He gives me a name as He gave Peter one, He knows what will come out in due time. The dignity which characterised Peter was something which he had gained in being in the company of Christ.
{73}
The believer is looked upon as being material for the building, but he is even viewed in his personal dignity as one who has part in the assembly. The assembly is regarded from two sides, either as a building, and for this there is need of material, or also as a body or organism which consists of such as have spiritual intelligence. In @Matthew 18 the Lord says: "And if also he will not listen to the assembly". Here He does not view the assembly as a building, but as a gathering of certain persons, something like the Sanhedrim, the council of the Jews.
Ques. Do we find in chapter 17 our place in the kingdom in connection with our personality?
J.T. Yes, but it is not only our place in the kingdom. We see what kind of *persons* these were, and how they appear. In chapter 17 we have a heavenly picture.
Ques. It says of Gideon's brethren that each one resembled the sons of a king. Was this their personality?
J.T. Yes, quite so, it was their personal dignity that came out. In connection with Matthew's way of representing the vision on the mount of transfiguration it was not only that they should see the kingdom of God, but that they should see the Son of man coming in His kingdom; that is to say, it was the Person who was so great. We see His majesty. It is as if God would show us majesty in a Man, before we consider the assembly in its activity, as we see it in chapter 18. There is no one found in the whole universe to be compared to Him. It was not Jesus seen here in humiliation, but Jesus as He is up there. It says that He was transfigured before them. His face shone as the sun, and His garments became white as the light. That is how He looked. When Peter later on writes about it, he says, "Having been eyewitnesses of *his* majesty"; this chapter lays stress on His personality. See too
{74}
how Moses and Elias appear; they appeared to them talking with Him. Thus we have here the very greatest personality in Christ and then two of the heavenly saints that appear in glory talking with this exalted Person. When I contemplate this wonderful vision on the mount, I begin to ask, How great this is as compared to what we are accustomed to see on earth? What we see up there, is what is going to continue. God's thought was that this personality which was found up there should be reflected in the three disciples when they came down from the mount.
Ques. Do we see this in @Acts 3 where Peter says: "Look on us"?
J.T. Yes, there they were two persons, and the word was, "Look on us". We find the same thought there.
Ques. Have we the same thought in @Acts 1 where it says: "The crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty"?
J.T. That is a good thought. We were reminded of them in chapter 3 where Peter says: "Look on us". It does not say: Look at this, but, "Look on us". So also in chapter 1 it says, "The crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty". Each name had its own personal significance. Further on in the Acts we see these persons as living stones; this alludes to *what* we are. This is a question of what God has wrought in us, love and all that which makes us suitable for the building. But at the same time as we are fitted together in the building, we are also several individual persons. In @Acts 15 we find that when a case was to be handled, the apostles and elders came together, and we read that Peter stood up and spoke; after that we get James speaking, and each one spoke according to his personal dignity.
{75}
Ques. Is it so that each one of the saints possesses this personality, or is it only those who are more prominent?
J.T. Each one has it; it says that the crowd of names was one hundred and twenty. This includes sisters as well as brothers. Amongst this number the apostles are named, and also the mother of the Lord is named, as if she also was to be distinguished. I suppose that the eleven apostles and Mary, the mother of Jesus, had a special place in this company. In chapter 2 we find them all together in one place. This shows that they were material suitable to be joined together.
Ques. Is the material that which God forms in the believer?
J.T. Yes, that is the thought, and as being material I am suited to be built in. But the thought of personality involves that the believers exercise influence. Every believer has some characterising feature, and this feature is what exerts influence among the brethren. But this shows how important it is that all that which might characterise us after the flesh is shut out. I do not doubt that every one of those one hundred and twenty in the upper room had some personal acknowledgement from the Lord during the time He was with them. If we had been with the Lord during the time the Lord Jesus went in and out among the disciples from the baptism of John until the day when He was taken up, we should find that He would recognise us in some special way. He would mark us out by the way in which He spoke to us.
This shows how the Lord, when He came in and went out among them, could intimate what each one was. Every one was to be marked out in a special way, and He could say what it was. If we think of the names of the twelve tribes of Israel, we find that these names were given with prophetic significance,
{76}
and later on we find how the names are made use of in poetical form with a spiritual meaning. The name of Judah: "Thy brethren will praise thee". This shows us what the name means. So also Levi which means *joined*; he was to be joined to the priesthood. The Holy Spirit applies the word and connects it with the truth. When the Lord calls John and James sons of thunder He meant something with it.
Ques. What is the thought in this?
J.T. I cannot say, but I would only point out how names come out in connection with the truth. We may be sure that the name the Lord gave them, Boanerges, came out in their service. Mary, the mother of Jesus, was *one* amongst the most honoured in the company; for her name is mentioned together with the apostles. Twelve names are mentioned, but only one is a woman's name. She is mentioned as the mother of Jesus. This shows how every kind of personal dignity that we may gain in this world must be shut out from the assembly. The Lord shows in connection with our entering the assembly what each one of us will be, and this is not on account of what I have been before, but of what I am *going to be*. What I am going to be is what I may gain in the assembly. Suppose I were a nobleman with a high title, and I found myself in some way transferred to heaven, of what value would my nobility be there? It would not help me for a moment to know how I ought to behave there. And the same thing holds good in assembly. The assembly down here ought to correspond to what is found in heaven.
Ques. Is Stephen an example of this?
J.T. Yes, his face shone as the face of an angel. This showed he was a personality from another world. What we see on the mount in chapter 17 is what should come out in the disciples down here, that is sonship. In the last part of this chapter the
{77}
Lord says, "Then are the sons free". And later He adds, "Take that and give it to them for me and thee". This great Person whom I have seen in heaven, and who is addressed by the Father as Son, is leading the disciples into sonship conditions and is linking them with Himself as sons. Not any personality that might distinguish me in this world could for a moment be compared to this, that I am a son. It is only in the light of this that we can understand chapter 18. Here on earth is found something very wonderful, that is, the assembly; it is composed of such dignified persons that if someone who has done wrong will not listen to them, he will be regarded as a heathen and a publican. It says in verse 19, "Two of you"; this shows us that the thought of personality may be applied in a day when everything is in ruins. It is not a question of two who are believers, but it says "two of you"; it is such persons.
Rem. These disciples had seen something that we never saw.
J.T. But in principle believers see these things by the Spirit. Scripture speaks of what is possible, and not of what is impossible.
Rem. There may perhaps be some among us who wonder if all the saints may be considered as material.
J.T. From God's side all believers are in the assembly, but the Holy Spirit presents for us in Scripture what is God's desire for us, and this is what we ought to be occupied with. In chapter 16 we find a man who had light about Christ in his soul. This light he received from the Father. Every believer ought to understand that this is possible. For us it is not in exactly the same way as it was with Peter, but it must be something corresponding to it. The Father has had something to say to my soul about His Son. We have apprehended so little the greatness of the Holy Spirit's presence here and
{78}
what is possible on account of this. By the Holy Spirit I can take in what it means that Christ is up there; I get an impression of His Person who is in heaven. It is in the power of these things that the believer is in the "building" and even in the "assembly". When the Lord therefore says, "Two of you", He alludes to two of such persons. If I cannot reckon myself as of such persons I ought to ask myself, Why not? Is it not open to us even here in Gothenburg to be one of these?
Rem. I suppose, it is open for each one who has an impression of Christ in his soul. Peter got an impression, did he not?
J.T. Yes, and later it says, "It shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens". Not only that it shall come, but it shall come to *them*.
Ques. Do the words "two of you" in chapter 18 allude to such as we have been reading of in chapter 17?
J.T. Yes, no doubt; it says "two of you", so also, "Where two or three"; they are the same persons. The Lord says, "There am I in the midst of them". We are amongst these whom heaven acknowledges.
Rem. Is this possible at the present time?
J.T. Yes, to be sure. It is a great consolation to know that such persons are found on earth.
Ques. Is @Romans 16 an example of such personalities?
J.T. Yes, and there we find such who were well known in Rome, and we find the word 'salute' there mentioned twenty times. In @Matthew 18 we see the assembly in activity. We see there what the saints are as composing the assembly. They are persons who are known in heaven. Heaven would, so to speak, salute them.
Ques. When can @Matthew 18: 20 be applied?
{79}
J.T. I believe it is that side that Matthew presents. It is not the privilege but the administration side, administration that has God's interests in view down here. This verse shows therefore that we may act on God's behalf down here. The Lord gives His support to "two or three". That "two or three" are gathered to His name involves that they are gathered as representatives of Him here.
Ques. What we call a care meeting?
J.T. Yes, or wherever it is a question of administration for Him.
{80}
THE WORLD OR CHRIST?
@2 Chronicles 18: 2; @2 Chronicles 19: 1 - 3
These scriptures show in a few words how God comes in with salvation for one soul among His people, whereas judgment falls on the one who remains in unbelief. Two prominent men are spoken of here. One was distinguished for his wickedness, the other known for his piety. To have got a prominent place in this world is not an evidence of God's recognition. A person may be a prominent politician, a scientist, an official or military man, but at the same time be lawless, and thus be outside the sphere of salvation. Ahab was a prominent king in Israel, but what characterised him specially was his lawlessness, which was like the lawlessness that is current at the present time, a lawlessness that is prevalent among those who are highly esteemed and have influence in the world. The lawlessness that is found in leaders exercises an influence over persons of more humble station. We find here that it was in Ahab's time that Hiel built Jericho (@1 Kings 16: 34). He built a city that God had destroyed, and regarding which God had uttered a curse on the man who should rebuild it. At this present time we see how man is employed in rebuilding the old world with its atheism and idolatry.
In our time such a disregard of God's authority and of the Scriptures is predominating that men of all classes of society are acting according to their own thoughts and opinions. It is a day of lawless freedom, when the heathen world is being rebuilt. It is what Hiel did. He built Jericho, and it says that he laid the foundation in Abiram his first-born, and set up its gates in Segub his youngest son. Thus we see how God is opposed to men who build up the world which is at enmity with Christ and His people.
{81}
What can we say about Ahab? how great was his responsibility! We see him surrounded by royal splendour. Can he escape the judgment? On the other hand we have one who is a real child of God, for Jehoshaphat is a type of a real believer in Christ, and what is presented in this chapter is that he links himself with Ahab, who was one of the most wicked kings in Israel. In type Jehoshaphat is a true believer in Christ, and in many ways a pious man, but he joins hands with the man who in his time was characterised by great lawlessness. Scripture tells us that Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance. Perhaps there are here some that are children of believers, like Jehoshaphat who was the son of the pious king Asa, who themselves perhaps in their youth have walked in the fear of God, but who now walk hand in hand with the world. To be joined to the world at the present time means to be joined to the world in its most wicked form. The world is often pleased to have the company of believers. Ahab killed much cattle for Jehoshaphat's sake. The world would like to gain the friendship of these who are children of godly men and women. Jehoshaphat was the son of a godly father, and moreover, he was himself one who feared God, and even one who received blessing from God, and yet we find him joining hands with the most ungodly man of his time. No wonder Ahab was glad of it! There are now among the children of the saints many young ones who themselves wish to walk in the fear of God, and it is just these that the world seeks after. The world can use you, you may be an adornment for the world; it would ensnare you by persuading you thus. We see this in our chapter. The king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, having put on their robes, sat each on his throne; and they sat in an open place at the entrance of the gate of Samaria. But what did heaven think
{82}
of all this? You have perhaps been having friendly intercourse with worldly people and altogether forgotten that heaven has witnessed it.
In God's mercy there was a faithful servant of the Lord by the name of Micah. We who are now speaking to you wish to be honest like this prophet. We would not desire to be like Baal's prophets of whom we read that "the king of Israel assembled the prophets, four hundred men, and said to them. Shall we go against Ramoth-Gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?". These four hundred men were prophets, but they were false prophets. There are many such today; we do well in being on our guard against them. They answered that: "Go up to Ramoth-Gilead, and prosper". They flattered both Ahab and Jehoshaphat. They who are like these prophets now speak flattering words to men. They speak of how the world is making progress, and of all the new inventions that are made, of the advance of science, and how the world is being reformed. They think that we shall reach a condition of things where peace will reign, and where people will enjoy happiness, but all this is deception, and a false show. Scripture tells us, dear friends, that "wicked men and juggling impostors shall advance in evil, leading and being led astray". There is no hope of the world being reformed, it is already judged, as the Lord says, "Now is the judgment of this world". We would not like to do what these men did who spoke lies, we would rather be like Micah a solitary man against four hundred. He had the truth, and he spoke the truth.
We see these two kings dressed in their robes and sitting on their thrones, but what does heaven think of these thrones? What does heaven think of Jehoshaphat, him who was a true believer, but for all that had joined hands with Ahab in his pride?
{83}
What does heaven think of you, young man, young woman, you who walk hand in hand with this world? Micah says, "I saw Jehovah sitting upon his throne". God has a throne. It seems perhaps as if those who preach the gospel are weak and without defence in this world, but the truth is that they are here announcing the gospel as those who are supported by the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven, for He is sitting on the throne. Of what value are all the thrones of this world compared with God's throne? Micah saw the Lord sitting on *His* throne, and the throne on which the Lord is sitting, young man, or young woman, is *against* the world to which you are united. Micah tells us even that not only the hosts of heaven and the angels are subject to the Lord on His throne, but the evil spirits themselves must obey Him. The hosts of heaven are standing before the Lord; and of what is the Lord thinking? He is at the present time occupied with the saving of men's souls, and that is why we are here tonight. He is sitting on His Father's throne, and this implies grace, a time of unqualified grace. But at the same time judgment is even preached, for it says in the same epistle that speaks about the truth of the gospel that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven (@Romans 1: 18). Nothing is more clear in the Bible than this, that God is going to judge the ungodly. The book of Revelation speaks of the terrible truth, that there is a great white throne, and that One is going to sit on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven shall flee.
We find here that the evil is so great that God must meet Ahab in judgment. It is something dreadful that God should so direct a man's course that he must meet his end in judgment. Have you thought that heaven may, perhaps, have fixed that the very person with whom you keep company must come under judgment? This world in which you
{84}
desire to walk and have your part is already under the judgment of God, and God is even allowing evil spirits to entice it into the way that leads to destruction. This is what happens around us every day. The Lord says, "Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-Gilead?". In other words to meet his *destruction*, not his salvation. In spite of that, do you keep company with such a one as Ahab, one who hates the Lord? It was said to Jehoshaphat, "Shouldest thou ... love them that hate Jehovah?". Perhaps you will answer, But they are nice people, educated and looked up to. Yes, but they hate the Lord, and *you* love Him, and for all that you are on friendly terms with those who hate the Lord, and you are intimate with one whom heaven intends to destroy.
"Who shall entice Ahab ... ?", says the Lord. And a spirit comes forth and says, "I will entice him". The Lord says: "Wherewith?". He answers: "I will go forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets". Is there any hope for a world where there are four hundred prophets who have a lying spirit? This lying spirit speaks flattering words, and says that the world is getting better and better, and that we shall soon reach a kingdom of peace and happiness through social reforms; and men believe this. People who are educated and gifted give addresses and write books in this direction in spite of God's having said that the world is already judged, and that it only grows worse. Is there any hope when a lying spirit is enticing the world into the way that leads to judgment and perdition? Are you joined to it? Is there anyone here in such a situation? Listen to a word of warning! The Lord says to this spirit: "Go forth, and do so". This explains what is going on around us in christendom. The result is that the world is allured into destruction. We find here, however, this god-fearing man,
{85}
Jehoshaphat, following in the same way. He goes to Ramoth-Gilead to fight along with Ahab.
This leads us to the gospel; we see now how God comes in. Will God allow Jehoshaphat to continue on this road? A true believer can never be lost. The Lord Jesus in John's gospel says that He gives His sheep life eternal; and they shall never perish, nor shall they come into judgment. We find all the same Jehoshaphat going to battle; he is on the very road to perdition, but heaven saw it. Yes, heaven is looking on us, and if there is one here who is joined to the world, heaven is paying attention to it. Perhaps this meeting will lead to your being saved, as Jehoshaphat was. Ahab was sure he himself would not perish, but God was as decided in His mind that he should lose his life. There is no possibility for those who do not believe to escape perdition; that is, God's judgment. Ahab says to Jehoshaphat, "I will disguise myself, and will enter into the battle; but put thou on thy robes". Ahab sought to hide himself in another's apparel; but he forgot that he had to do with God, not only the Syrians. He might perhaps have escaped the Syrians, but he could not escape God. If there is anyone here who does not believe, and who is determined to continue his own way in opposition to God, one who refuses to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ in this day of grace, then it is beyond all doubt that judgment will fall on him. As the psalmist puts it, "Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? and whither flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into the heavens thou art there; or if I make my bed in Sheol, behold, thou art there; If I take the wings of the dawn and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me". Who can expect to gain victory, when he takes up the struggle against God? "And a man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of
{86}
Israel between the fastenings and the corslet". You say perhaps that this happened by chance. There is no such thing with God. What may often look like a chance, is something ordered of God. A misadventure happens to you in the street perhaps, you might be overrun by a car, be brought to the hospital and die there. Such things happen often. Or your heart may cease beating through something unexpected happening to you. All these things the unconverted call a chance only, or a happening, but it is not so.
"A man drew a bow at a venture". A soldier drew his bow without knowing whom he would hit, but it was God's righteous judgment that struck this wicked king. May no unconverted person here in this room think that he can escape God's judgment. The great white throne is not a bow drawn at a venture, it is a judgment seat where everything is judged after the most accurate estimation, and the Lord will sit on that throne; the judgment is then fixed. But this incident shows that what appeared to be a mere accident, was in reality God's judgment on an adversary. Ahab had been hit in a joint of his armour. He had, to be sure, put on an armour of iron. There are many who do that; they try to shield themselves in every possible way. But this arrow drawn at a venture, smites him between the "fastenings and the corslet", so although he stayed himself up in his chariot until the evening he died nevertheless. He died under the judgment of God. It is terrible to die under the judgment of God. Death is not the end for man; "forasmuch as it is the portion of men once to die, and after this judgment", @Hebrews 9: 27.
The scripture says here, "And it came to pass when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat", they thought, "That is the king of Israel", whereupon they surrounded him to fight. Then Jehoshaphat
{87}
cried out, and Jehovah helped him, and "God diverted them from him". I would now wish to speak a word to a believer who is perhaps joined to the world. Through the grace of God you have, as it were, by a hair's breadth escaped the judgment. As it says in @1 Corinthians 11: "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep". Why is that? "That we may not be condemned with the world". When we see Jehoshaphat surrounded by the Syrians it looks as if he were sure to be killed. He was dressed in his royal attire and was exposed to the enemy. But Jehoshaphat cried to the Lord. Ahab did not cry to the Lord; Jehoshaphat, on the other hand, knew God. And perhaps you had to do with God when you were young; you used to pray to Him and He answered you; but now you have ceased doing so. Consider then, that now is an opportunity to cry to God. Jehoshaphat cried, and what happened? God helped him. God is here to help you. He turned away the Syrians from Jehoshaphat. This was God's salvation. He helps us when we cry to Him.
We read in the gospels of a man whose son was possessed by an evil spirit. It says of him that he cried, "If thou couldst do anything, ... help us". He got help from the Lord, and He will never refuse to listen to a real cry for help. Will you not turn to the Lord just as you are, and just where you are? Break with the world, for it is already judged, and there is no hope to be found for it. But there is hope for you; the Lord loves you too much to let you go the way the world is going. God was active during the battle to see to it that Ahab should not escape, but also in order to save Jehoshaphat. This meeting tonight has the same end in view, that you may escape the judgment that is hanging over this world. In the next chapter we see that Jehoshaphat was saved and returned in peace to Jerusalem.
{88}
We might say he came back into fellowship. He was saved from Ahab and all connection with him. Jerusalem in Scripture is the sphere of the testimony of God, and we who are in Jerusalem are longing to see those who have strayed from the testimony return. It says in @Psalm 125, "Jerusalem! -- mountains are round about her". Salvation is found there. The Syrians cannot reach you there. The blessing of God is found there.
We read of Jehoshaphat that he returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem, but his conscience had to be awakened. Why had he been going on with the world? Why have you been away? These questions must be raised. Jehu the seer came to Jehoshaphat and said, "Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate Jehovah?". The seer applies the word to the conscience. It is no longer a question of delivering you from the Syrians, but a question of your soul being set right with God. The Spirit of God does this with us, and awakens our consciences. Later on Jehu said: "Therefore is wrath upon thee from Jehovah". If we turn to the world, we will have to bear the results of it; certain consequences in God's governmental dealing come over us, but, in spite of all, Jehoshaphat was saved, and he was restored and dwelt in Jerusalem.
A soul who is restored knows where he ought to live. Your salvation, blessing and joy depend upon your remaining in Jerusalem. Later "He went out again among the people from Beer-sheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them back to Jehovah the God of their fathers". He is a good brother now, and a valuable servant. In this type we see what is available to us, when we, so to speak, return to Jerusalem. You are restored, you live in Jerusalem, and you are useful in the Lord's service.
{89}
VISITS BY DIVINE PERSONS
@Genesis 18: 1 - 8
J.T. Abraham is the first man in Scripture of whom it says that God "appeared to him". God walked in the garden of Eden, Enoch walked with God, and Noah walked with God. God had intercourse with these, but it does not say that He appeared to them. Stephen says, "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham". @Acts 7: 2. When God appeared to Abraham and later to others, it is clear that He wished to give them an impression of Himself. Stephen says that it was the *God of glory* who appeared to Abraham. He intended to show him His glory. It was the God of glory he saw, not yet God's glory. When Stephen speaks before the council, he speaks of the God of glory; later it says that he saw the glory of God. He saw this in heaven. The God of glory who appeared to Abraham had now reached His purpose in Christ in heaven. Stephen's face shone, for he was affected by it.
It says in @Genesis 17: 22, after God had spoken to Abraham, that He went up from him, and at the beginning of chapter 18 we find that God appeared to him again. What comes in between these two manifestations is that Abraham in obedience circumcised all the males of his house. When God told Abraham to circumcise every male of his house, it was in order to test him, and when Abraham did it, he showed his obedience to God. The Lord Jesus says: "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him", @John 14: 21. Manifestations of this kind depend on our obedience. If the light comes to us, and we walk according to this light, God will honour us. In @Genesis 17: 4, God
{90}
says, "It is I". Jehovah presented Himself personally to Abraham; it was not only certain characteristic features of Jehovah, but it was Himself. It was as when the Lord said to His disciples, "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is *I* myself". It is as if God would give Abraham a feeling of the mutual intimate conditions that existed between Himself and the patriarch. It is very precious when God says to us, "It is I", it gives our hearts confidence, and He who has said so also says, "I am the Almighty God".
Rem. It has been said that every time God appeared to Abraham. He communicated something fresh to him.
J.T. Yes, we have just noticed this principle, that when we take a step in obedience, we receive new communications from God. If we do not follow the light that comes to us, we do not get new light. When God had left off talking with Abraham the latter was immediately ready to obey this commandment, to circumcise his household.
Ques. Have we something similar in 2 Corinthians? As the saints were obedient to the exhortation in the first epistle, they got more light in the second.
J.T. And that is why the apostle in the second epistle emphasises their obedience, and he now presents the truth of reconciliation and new creation. We cannot expect anything in the way of manifestations, or fresh light from God, if we are not obedient to the light we have already received. When God revealed Himself to His people, it was because He would give them an impression of what He is. So that when He appeared to Abraham as the God of glory. He wished to convey to him an impression of another world. He could not connect His glory with a world that had turned its back on Him. Therefore He says to Abraham: "Go out of thy land, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, to the land
{91}
that I will shew thee", @Genesis 12: 1. This implies that there was another world, where the glory of God could shine, and that world is now established in connection with Christ where He is. The Holy Spirit has come to lead our souls into that world which Stephen saw in heaven. Paul's ministry which followed soon after Stephen's death was in view of forming the assembly, in which God shall have glory in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages (@Ephesians 3: 21). In Revelation we see the assembly; coming down out of heaven from God, having the glory of God (@Revelation 21: 10). The commandments of Christ are what now put our obedience to test. If we are obedient to His commandments, He will come to us and manifest Himself to us. The disciples were grieved when He spoke of going away, but He says: "I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no one takes from you". He comes and manifests Himself to us, and the Father and He are coming and will make Their abode with us.
Ques. Is this more on individual lines?
J.T. Yes. John shows that even a single individual may enjoy this, and how in a day of ruin, the individual soul is sustained and helped. And if one soul can enjoy such a visit, then many individuals can.
Ques. What is the difference between the Lord revealing Himself to a soul, and that the Father and the Son make their abode with him?
J.T. Both these privileges are mentioned in @John 14. The former is a promise to him who loves the Lord, and who keeps His commandments. One of His disciples then asks Him, how it is that He should manifest Himself to them, and not to the world, and He answers, "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him".
{92}
This promise is true of those who keep His *word*, and the former of those who keep His *commandment*. If anyone walk according to the light presented in the first epistle to the Corinthians, he will receive a manifestation of Christ; but keeping His word implies more than this, it involves that all the thoughts of God are kept in the heart, for instance, the truths of Colossians and Ephesians. To keep His word involves a spiritual state in the believer where He can make His abode.
Ques. Does this correspond to Philadelphian state?
J.T. Yes, "Thou ... hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name".
Ques. I should like to know if this is something to be experienced in the assembly only, or if it may be known to the individual.
J.T. I believe John shows us it may be the experience of an individual believer, the very smallest number. Matthew shows us that the privileges of the assembly can be enjoyed by two or three, but John shows that it may be enjoyed if there is only one found.
Ques. If there is none other found who is in the good of the truth of the assembly, can it nevertheless be enjoyed by him?
J.T. It says: "We will come to him". We should read @John 14 together with @Matthew 18. The one of whom it says in @John 14 that he keeps His words and commandments has the same privilege as the two or three gathered to His name, or the "two of you" in @Matthew 18: 19, 20.
Rem. It has been said that if there is only one in the gathering who is in the good of @John 14: 22, 23, it would suffice for the Lord to come to us.
J.T. The Lord would be present, but it depends on the state of our souls if we can enjoy His presence. In @1 Corinthians 15 it says that He appeared to
{93}
above five hundred brethren at once. He had each one of those five hundred in His thoughts, but if there is only one in the gathering answering to @John 14, we cannot expect that His presence should have the same effect. It is clear that all these five hundred brethren were in a state to appreciate His manifestation.
Rem. On the shore of the sea of Tiberias there was one who recognised Him.
J.T. That is a type of what we have been speaking. John says, "It is the Lord".
Ques. Is the Lord's presence among us always dependent upon our spiritual state, or can He come in independent of this?
J.T. We ought to see what Scripture says. In @John 14 we have: "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him". This is the condition. And then in verse 18 we find what is normal, as it was at the beginning. He says: "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". And in @1 Corinthians 15 we have six instances when He was seen by His own. Those to whom He manifested Himself were surely in a right condition. He appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. Then He appeared to above five hundred brethren at once. Then to James, then to all the apostles, and Paul says, "and last of all, as to an abortion, he appeared to me also". Here there is no question of their state; that point is not raised. It is only stated that He appeared to all these. But we need also to bear in mind that the Lord may come in a different way to a certain place, as when He came to Bethany. So also when He came to the various assemblies in the book of Revelation, where we see Him walking among the assemblies. He speaks words of warning and says that He was coming to one and another
{94}
of the assemblies. In such cases He comes with chastening, and this is very serious, for if we do not walk rightly He must come to us in discipline. But @John 14 and @Matthew 18 have not this side in view, they are occupied with the privilege side.
Rem. If there were only one person in a place who had light about the assembly, one such man could not constitute the assembly.
J.T. No, but @John 14 shows us that such a one might enjoy a visit by the Lord. We find the thought of the assembly in @Matthew 18 where it speaks of *two or three*. "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be". We find here a praying company, and whatsoever the matters may be that they ask, it says, "It shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens". This shows that heaven acknowledges these. And these two or three enjoy the support of Christ, for they are gathered to His name, and He is in the midst of *them*. In the gospel of Matthew we see what particular persons are in view. It says: "Two of you". It is those of whom He had spoken.
Rem. It was two of those who had had a visit from the Lord?
J.T. Yes. There are many who have taken these verses in @Matthew 18 as support for establishing a meeting in independency. But if we look at it as being any two or three believers, then these may go out and establish another meeting in the same place independent of those who are already gathered there to the name of the Lord; this is the principle in a free church, or the open principle.
Rem. Many religious parties refer to this scripture, saying that they are gathered on this ground.
J.T. Yes, and even those who are walking in disobedience. We need to read this verse more than any other in its connection. It has in view those whom the Lord had before Him from chapters 13
{95}
to 18. In chapter 18 we see that it is possible for a man to sin against his brother, and that he may refuse to listen to the assembly. This person finds perhaps one or more who are influenced in the same direction as himself, and they establish another meeting and claim the word in @Matthew 18 as support for this. But this is a misapplication of the scripture, for in that case this verse would justify independence in its worst form.
Rem. You spoke of how the Lord might come to a certain place. Will you say a little more about it?
J.T. I was thinking of Bethany. He came to Bethany. He might even come to Gothenburg in the same way. If things are not right in a place He might come to them with chastisement, and this is very serious. If the Lord comes to Gothenburg, He comes in connection with His people in Gothenburg, but if He comes as we read of in @John 14, then He does not come to His *people* in this place, but to *him* who keeps His commandments. @John 14 does not speak of Him as coming to a certain place, but of how He comes to certain persons. We must remember that every believer in Gothenburg is of interest to Christ. When He writes to Laodicea it is to the assembly in Laodicea. He has this *place* in view, and He speaks of judgment, and of how He stands at the door and knocks. Think of the Lord coming to Gothenburg, to all the many believers there, and having to stand at the door knocking! This is what He is doing.
Ques. If it is a question of judgment He comes to a place, but when our privileges are the point He comes to the individual, as we find in @John 14?
J.T. Yes, that is right. And when He writes to the assemblies the different places are in mind. The letters to the assemblies may be applied at the present time.
{96}
Ques. I wondered if Jehovah's visit to Abraham brought out what Abraham was personally?
J.T. I believe that is the thought. God had left off talking to him and had gone up from him. Later He comes back. But in the meantime Abraham was obedient to the commandment and had circumcised his household, and he is in a right pilgrim condition. He sat at the tent-door, and instead of taking his ease, and lying down to sleep in the heat of the day, he has his eyes open. "And he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, three men standing near him". Thus we find that if it is a single person who keeps His word, divine Persons can come, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit who is here already. So that we have three divine Persons, and beside them one who keeps His word. What a company! Jehovah appeared to Abraham in a wondrous way. It says that three men stood before him. Wonderful that they stood before him! Abraham perceives that the Lord is there amongst them. Two of them were angels, but they came as men, and that was why Abraham felt at home with them. We have here the thought of 'making abode with him', for they stayed a good while. The thought of making abode is that they remained and did not hasten away. It must have taken Abraham a good long while to fetch and dress the tender calf, and then we read how the Lord was detained by Abraham, and that He did not go away till He had ended speaking to Abraham.
Ques. Are these men a type of what we have in the New Testament?
J.T. Yes, it is a foretaste of what we have at this present time. They speak in the plural to Abraham: "They said, So do as thou hast said". God desires to let us know what heaven is. On the mount of transfiguration we see Moses and Elias talking *with* Jesus.
{97}
Ques. It says that "no one has seen God at any time", but Abraham called One of these three the Lord. How are we to understand this?
J.T. The import of that verse in @John 1 is that no one can see God in His divine Being. But this does not hinder the Lord making Abraham know that it was the Lord. We have the same truth in connection with Jesus, that the Son has become man that we may learn to know God in Him. It is God having come within the reach of our souls.
Ques. Can we say that the meal Abraham made was something like the meal they made for the Lord in Bethany?
J.T. Yes, there is great likeness. In both cases He came before the meal was ready. It says, "There therefore they made him a supper". It is the place that is stressed.
{98}
HOW THE LORD JESUS FELT SORROW AND JOY
@John 12: 27; @Luke 10: 21
These scriptures speak to us of the holy feelings that moved our Lord Jesus Christ, and show us what a real Man He was. In John's gospel it says that the Word was with God, and the Word was God. There is no change in His Person. He always remains a Person in the Godhead, yet He became a real Man, so that He is able to feel all things as man. I wish to speak about these two scriptures, but first I would refer to certain types in the Old Testament.
The Old Testament serves to make intelligible the truths about Christ presented in the New Testament. Our knowledge of Christ, and indeed of the truth, will be very deficient if we do not read and understand the Old Testament.
The eunuch on his way from Jerusalem to his country was reading the Old Testament, but it does not suffice to read, we need to understand also. There was one who had the Holy Spirit, and who was led by Him to follow the eunuch's chariot; as getting alongside of the eunuch, he asked him if he understood what he was reading, to which he replied, "How should I then be able unless some one guide me? And he begged Philip to come up and sit with him". We know that the Holy Spirit has now come here, a Person who can explain the Old Testament to us. It says in @Luke 24 that the Lord interpreted to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself. It was by the Holy Spirit's guidance and by His help that Philip beginning from that scripture announced the glad tidings of Jesus to the eunuch. It is obvious that he was not limited to this scripture; nor was the Lord limited to only one scripture when he interpreted the Old Testament to His disciples. He began from Moses and from all the prophets and
{99}
"interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself". This gives us an entirely new view of the Scriptures. When we understand that in the whole Scripture is found that which concerns Christ, we should, if we love Him, love to read all that which has been written of Him thousands of years before He became Man. The personal and public glories of Christ have in a wonderful way been depicted and foreshadowed all through the Old Testament. We can scarcely find any presentation of the Lord Jesus in the New Testament that is not typified in the Old.
Now to come to our subject we find in Joseph a type of the personal feelings of the Lord Jesus. Joseph's brethren spoke to one another in his presence of the anguish of soul they had seen in him when they lifted him out of the pit and sold him to the Midianites. We read how Joseph turned away from them and wept when they said this. In this Joseph is a type of Christ, for He felt deeply that His brethren, the Jews, rejected him. We find even when Benjamin came to Joseph in Egypt that he went into the chamber to weep there when he saw him. This shows what a great love he had for his brother. These tears speak of deep love to a brother. We see here in a type the Lord's joy in His people, and in each one of us as those who are His brethren. Then again we find in @Genesis 45 how Joseph expressed his feelings when he made himself known to his brethren, and how he wept aloud so that the Egyptians and Pharaoh's servants heard it. It says that he fell on his brother Benjamin's neck and wept, and that he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them.
In all this, dear brethren, we see the love of Christ presented in type for us several hundred years before He became Man. It is very touching to think of it. The apostle Paul says: "The love of the Christ constrains us". He speaks of "The Son of God, who
{100}
has loved me and given himself for me". The Lord gave him an apprehension of His personal love to him, something like that when Joseph wept on Benjamin's neck. It ought to appeal to our hearts, that the Lord, when He died, loved each one of us personally. He loves us now, but the apostle spoke of the love the Lord had to him, when He died on the cross, for he says, "Who has loved me". It says nothing in @Genesis 45 about Joseph's brethren, that they wept. It is said of Joseph that he fell on his brother Benjamin's neck and wept; and Benjamin wept on his neck. Benjamin, like the apostles Paul and John, responded to Joseph's love, but Joseph's love was for all his brethren.
We find also in the account of Moses that he wept when, as a little child, he lay in the ark of reeds in the sedge on the bank of the Nile. Both Joseph and David are types of Christ. In David we have not only a type of Christ, but even of a believer, and of what is working in his heart. We see how David wept when he came to Ziklag and found that the Amalekites had taken his and his men's wives captives, and carried them off and all their belongings. Things may happen to us in our life which seem to overwhelm us; they may seem as if they happened by *chance*, but they are not to be so considered. God will speak to our souls through them; He will call forth *deep* soul feelings in us. It says of David and his men, that they wept until they had no more power to weep. God's desire for us is, that we, as regards our experiences, should be in accord with Christ. He sometimes brings us very low, so that we do not see a way out; the difficulties seem to be overpowering, but this is God's way of prospering us; he ploughs up the soil in our hearts. He is longing to see us feel like Christ felt. David and his men wept till they had no more power to weep. It was a time of learning for them. David was a great servant
{101}
of God, and all this was in order to prepare him for his service. Paul says in one place that he even despaired of life, but he speaks of how God saved them (the apostle and Timothy) out of such a death, and he adds that he had the confidence that God in the future would save them as needed.
As regards David we see how he also strengthened himself in the Lord his God, and all that seemed lost was recovered. David was now a greater servant than he was before the event at Ziklag. He was to be prepared for other experiences; every testing was necessary for the presentation of the testimony of God. Everything that happens to us, great or small, is calculated to make us sober and humble, so that we feel all these things in fellowship with God. The result is that we can represent Him in relation to the testimony of the gospel and "encourage those who are in any tribulation whatever, through the encouragement with which we ourselves are encouraged of God".
Later on we find in David, when he parted from Jonathan, a beautiful expression of love, the feelings of love in a man when he loses a friend whom he loves. If a brother or sister is taken from us through death we are not insensible or indifferent as to it but we feel it deeply, and this is what God wishes to produce in us. He wills that we should feel compassion for men around us, who have not the light that we have. The four leprous men in Samaria said: "We are not doing right", to enjoy all this abundance whilst the people in Samaria are starving. And, dear brethren, if God gives to us so abundantly, it is only right that we should think of starving men and women around us. These leprous men said: "This day is a day of good tidings". And they went back to the king and to those who were in the city. If we had the same feelings for men as God has, we should be evangelical. When David parted from Jonathan
{102}
it says that they kissed each other and wept together, and David exceeded. The love of the Lord never abates. If we turn from Him He loves us still. David wept more than Jonathan.
We see from what I have said that there are numerous scriptures in the Old Testament that speak of the feelings of Christ, especially in the Psalms of David. The Lamentations even are an expression of this. We find in the book of Ezra, when the foundation of the temple was being laid, that the ancient men who remembered the first temple wept, but the younger ones shouted for joy, so that one could not discern the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the people. We should even in our day, if we have God's interests before us, feel the great difference between this time and the day of Pentecost. We should feel how very much smaller and weaker everything is than in the days of the apostles, but at the same time we should find our joy in all that which is of God at the present time; in other words, our hearts are not insensible, but we feel things and find our joy in what God works now.
Now I wish to speak of the two scriptures in John and Luke. The Lord Jesus says, "Now is my soul troubled". We see what a real man He was both as to spirit, soul and body, as we say. He was troubled in His soul when He thought of the death He was about to die, for He was on His way to death. No one could take His life from Him. He said: "I lay it down of myself". And He took it again according to the commandment He had received from His Father. But He was going to die, and He knew what death was, for as a divine Person He knew perfectly what the work of atonement involved. Therefore He says, "Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say?". If any great calamity was going to happen to me, and my soul was deeply distressed at it, what should I say? I should pray God to deliver me out
{103}
of it. But He says: "Father, glorify thy name". We see from this how the deep feelings in Jesus that were found in His soul, found an expression in His perfect subjection to His Father's will, and here it was not only a question of His Father's will, but even of the glorification of His Father. He was concerned about His Father's name being glorified. Our desires as children of God ought to be that His name should be glorified first of all.
It says here, "There came therefore a voice out of heaven, I both have glorified and will glorify it again". We see what perfect harmony was found in feelings between the Father and the Son. We might even say that all the holy feelings that are found in the hearts of the people of God are perfectly known to the Father. It says that He searches our hearts and knows what is the mind of the Spirit, for He intercedes for the saints according to God. He intercedes for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. These groanings find their expression in our innermost feelings, and that is why God searches our hearts. It says too that the Holy Spirit knows the depths of God, and God searches the depths of our hearts. And what is it that God finds in our hearts when He searches them? Does He find, I wonder, that we groan over conditions in christendom at the present time? God marks our groanings. In @Ezekiel 9, as we remember, we find that God commanded a mark to be set upon the foreheads of the men that sighed and that cried for all the abominations that were done in Jerusalem. Then, dear brethren, every one of us, young or old, who sighs and who feels the condition of things in the same way as God feels it is marked by Him.
All that which I have said now stands in connection with the cross of Christ and with the sorrow which sin has brought into the world. We remember how the Lord wept at the grave of Lazarus. One of
{104}
the most precious words in Scripture is this, "Jesus wept". But Luke gives us another view. From John's gospel we learn to feel things deeply; Luke too acknowledges this, but he will *lift up* our spirits. At the very beginning of Luke's gospel we find a tone of rejoicing, of heavenly joy. We find a child, John the baptist, not yet born that "leaped" with joy at the thought of the Lord's birth. We see Mary, the mother of the Lord, Elizabeth and Zacharias filled with joy; we find also Simeon and Anna blessing God, and above all we have a multitude of the heavenly host praising God. We have here the bright side. If we for a moment could look into heaven and see the place which Jesus has there, we could not but rejoice. While the shepherds were keeping watch by night over their flock, an angel of the Lord was there by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them. And then there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God and saying, "Glory to God in the highest". We find here in @Luke 2 that the heavenly multitude comes down. It is as if heaven surrounds us, that we might apprehend what heaven is and not be downcast, but lifted up in our souls in the light of what heaven is.
In chapter 10 we see that Jesus rejoiced in spirit. Here He is not sorrowful, but He rejoices in spirit. And what is the cause of this holy joy of our Lord Jesus? He says, "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes". We see that *we* are the cause of this joy. The Lord of heaven and earth has hid certain things from the wise, but has revealed them to babes. What a place we have in His heart! He had told them just before not to rejoice in the spirits being subjected to them, but that they should rejoice that their names were written in heaven. The seventy
{105}
that had been sent out had returned and told the Lord how the spirits were subject to them in His name; in other words they had been very successful in their service, but we must not have our life in our service or in the success we may have in it. It is very blessed to be in the service of Christ and to prosper in it, but the Lord tells us in so many words that we should rather rejoice that our names are written in the heavens.
How little we understand of this, that if our names were mentioned in heaven, they would be well known there already. If any one of our names should be mentioned in the royal palace in Stockholm tonight it would not at all be known there; but if our names were intimated in heaven, they are well known there, for they are written there. In @Hebrews 12 it says, that we belong to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven. This gives us a place there, and we rejoice at it. As those who are faithful followers of Christ, we have no name in this world; our name is cast away, as if it were an evil thing, but our names are written in the book of life, in heaven. Not only are we looked upon as being among the living, but we are reckoned as those who belong to the most elevated family in the universe. I am not saying this in a boasting spirit, but under the impression of how great all this is.
As faithful and devoted followers of Christ we have no name in the world; it will not acknowledge us. "Away with such a one as that from the earth", they said of Paul, "for it was not fit he should live". They had said the same of the Lord Jesus. "Take him away, take him away, crucify him". When His name is mentioned in the world, we notice how He is rejected, but if you just then were able to look into heaven, you would see how He is regarded there. Paul was so highly esteemed in heaven, that one day he was caught up into paradise; he says, "caught up
{106}
to the third heaven", @2 Corinthians 12: 2. It was not as an apostle but as "a man in Christ" that he was caught up. We see that heaven knew him and esteemed him highly. And in connection with this the apostle says, "Of such a one I will boast". Why should not we boast of the dignity God has given us in heaven? Therefore the Lord says in @Luke 10, "Rejoice that your names are written in the heavens". And the Lord Himself rejoices in spirit at this thought. The very thought to have us, to have the assembly with Himself in heavenly glory and dignity, made Him rejoice in His holy spirit.
May God speak to our hearts, so that we are exercised, feeling deeply the state of things around us, and at the same time apprehending more what a place we have in heaven.
{107}
HOW GOD PREPARES A DWELLING FOR HIMSELF AMONG HIS PEOPLE
@Exodus 1: 21; @Exodus 2: 1 - 3; @Exodus 15: 20, 21; @Exodus 35: 25, 26
I believe that these women, mentioned in Exodus, give us a thought of the result which God will effect in our souls. In the Bible the woman represents the subjective side; that is to say, the work of God in our souls and the result of it. The objective truth is presented in Christ, and the subjective is the outcome of the work of God in us by the Spirit. In every book in the Bible we find some special feature of the truth, and I believe that in each particular book the women whose names are mentioned point out to us what these features are. We see this both in the Old Testament and in the gospels in the New Testament, as also in the Acts. God takes up things we can see before our eyes, in order to show us what He has in mind.
These women in Exodus give us a thought of what God will teach us in connection with the truth in this book. The first women of whom we read are the Hebrew midwives. We remember that Pharaoh had charged them to kill all the male children as soon as they were born. These Hebrew male children were in type sons of God. It says in the first chapter of this book: "These are the names of the sons of Israel who had come into Egypt". They were viewed from the spiritual side, not only as the sons of Jacob, but as the sons of Israel. We have here the thought of a spiritual family; and the desire of the enemy is to destroy this family; he therefore orders the two women, whose names are mentioned, to kill the children. They disobey this order. A feature that we often find in women is that they hide their actions, and we find the same in these women when they refused to enter the enemy's service. In certain cases it can be right to keep secret what one is doing. In
{108}
Colossians we have the wonderful truth called the mystery, and in this epistle our life even is said to be hid. Thus in the service of God are found hidden things, and things that are revealed. We need wisdom to act in secret in order to frustrate the intention and work of the enemy.
We see here that the enemy's purpose was to destroy the spiritual family. This family was called Hebrews, which indicated that they were suffering reproach. As those being born of God and having the Spirit of God, even we suffer reproach, and the enemy would destroy all such. At the present time it is not through literal death he seeks to destroy us, but through the influence of the world. God is carrying out a work in the hearts of His people, and this in view of preparing a shelter for the young and the newly converted ones. It is when the spiritual life in a soul begins to appear that the enemy endeavours to destroy it. Therefore the young converts need the greatest care. They do not know to what dangers they are exposed, but we, who are older, know. These two women received special blessing from God. One does not need special gift to care for the young, but more a spiritual instinct, wishing to protect the new life that is in them. God will specially honour and encourage such a service, for it says that God dealt well with them and built them houses. What a precious thought this is, that God will give spiritual increase on account of this service, as we, in spite of the enemy's bidding, have sought to protect the spiritual life in the young, that there might be found an Israel of God according to the word of the apostle: "And as many as shall walk by this rule, peace upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God". In the eyes of the enemy we are regarded with reproach like Hebrews, but in the eyes of God we are the Israel of God.
{109}
In the second chapter we read of the mother of Moses that she saw him that he was fair. The midwives did not take into consideration whether the children were fair or not. They saved the male children, but for the mother of Moses it was the fairness of the child which was of such importance, as it says in @Hebrews 11, that they saw the child beautiful. This was, of course, another reason why they should protect the child. All believers are fair and pleasing in the eyes of God, even if this trait has not yet come out in them, for God knows the end from the beginning. As those who are born of Him, we shall all be fair, for we shall all be like Christ. When Gideon asked the kings of Midian about his brethren they answered, "As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the sons of a king". In the light of all this we see of what value the saints are, and how important it is that we should protect them against the enemy. This woman hid the child; she protected it from the enemy's influence and power. We find in this woman the principle of preserving what is of God from the power of the enemy. Young believers are in a special way exposed to the enemy's power through the influence of the world. In type the mother of Moses delivered the child to death. This corresponds to what we do when we let a child come under the water of baptism, the type of the death of Christ. When Moses was put into this ark of bulrushes which was prepared with such care, he was saved. We may say that even the daughter of Pharaoh had something of this woman's spirit about her. She was in her mind quite unlike the others in her father's house; she showed mercy.
When one goes about amongst the people of God one perceives what great lack there is of gift to preach the gospel and even of ability to serve the people of God. But if this secret womanly service that ought to characterise every one of us, brothers
{110}
as well as sisters, is found amongst us, we should find that young people would grow up in our midst, and they would be furnished with gifts. Another thing that we find in Exodus is that they who served God did not fear the wrath of the king. It says of the parents of Moses that they did not fear the injunction of the king. They did not obey it in spite of the consequences. And it says of Moses that he did not fear the wrath of the king. This service requires courage.
The next woman we may consider is Miriam. She is mentioned by name for the first time here in @Exodus 15, and she is called a prophetess. She was no doubt, Moses sister, the one who watched over him when he lay in the ark in the sedge of the Nile. Very early she commenced this service of which I have been speaking, but now we find that she is called a prophetess. It is obvious that she was an old woman here, older than both Aaron and Moses. We find even that she had grown in her soul. It is something remarkable that a woman should be a prophetess. God would not use any person to represent Him and make known His thoughts if he was not characterised by His features. Miriam had, no doubt, for a long time walked with God in secret, and therefore she could be called a prophetess, and not only this, but we read that she took the tambour in her hand and led the women in song. We see that she had a great influence over the other women, for they all went out after her with tambours and with dances. When we consider how many women there were in Israel then, we understand what influence she had.
It is of great importance to exercise a good influence over the people of God. They all followed her, and she did not lead them astray. It is, alas, possible for a sister or a brother to lead the people of God astray. It is most sorrowful when one having
{111}
influence amongst the people of God leads them astray. But he who by his influence is able to lead the people of God in the right path is of the greatest value amongst the saints. We see here how *all* the women went after her. They followed her with music which speaks of something that calls forth response from our hearts. It is important to have understanding in the things of God, but it is great value to be able to call forth spiritual feelings in the people of God; and this was what Miriam did here. When we come together as we do at this time or in one another's houses, our hearts are moved with spiritual things and spiritual feelings. This is a feature that enters into the peace-offering. There is a state of spiritual joy coming in amongst the saints, and the meetings are not dull but vigorous and characterised by refreshment and holy joy. The Lord gets His portion in all this. We see here that all the women are in this, and it says that Miriam answered them: "Sing to Jehovah, for he is highly exalted: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea". So that in Miriam we find the ability of calling forth the best feelings, and she is also able to give an answer; she apprehends the position: "Jehovah ... is highly exalted". Here we see the full result of the work which the midwives commenced, but now it is no longer a service in secret, it is a public service, for the enemy was conquered, and God was exalted.
The final thought I had in mind is found in chapter 35 where the great result comes out, that is, the tabernacle and the women's part in the making thereof. It says, "And every, woman that was wise-hearted spun with her hands". We come now to a work done with hands, a work that had the dwelling of God in view. All this, dear brethren, is something which ought to be found in every local place where the saints are, for if we save the saints from
{112}
the enemy, and if we protect the spiritual family and call forth the innermost feelings of their hearts, then all this is in view of God having a dwelling here. Every woman who was wise-hearted spun with her hands, and she brought what she had spun. It was the work of hands, it was a personal service with their hands, and therefore they brought it, the blue and the purple, scarlet and byssus. Later it says: "Every man and woman whose heart prompted them to bring". Here we see that it came from their hearts. The Holy Spirit sheds abroad the love of God in our hearts with the result that we love God, and our hearts move us so that we desire there should be a dwelling for God here.
From all this we see, dear brethren, how these women speak to us of the great result that is in view in Exodus. We find the family of God, saved from the world, preserved in spiritual life. Thus we see how the innermost feelings and love of the saints come out, and at last the work which we can do with our hands, so that God might have a dwelling amongst us as it says in Ephesians: "In whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit".
{113}
HOW WE MAY ENJOY THE INHERITANCE
@Joshua 2: 8 - 11; @Joshua 15: 18, 19; @Joshua 17: 3 - 6
Some of us have recently noticed how the instruction in certain books of the Bible is illustrated by the women who are mentioned in these books. In the scriptures which we have read we find also certain women: Rahab, Achsah, Caleb's daughter, and the five daughters of Zelophehad all mentioned by name. In Rahab we find one of the features which illustrates the truth that specially comes out in this book. She shows us the result which God would attain in each one of us as those who believe in Christ.
The Old Testament was written for our instruction. Peter tells us that it was revealed to the prophets "that not to themselves but to you they ministered those things, which have now been announced to you". As regards Rahab, I think that we may consider her history with a view to the instruction that we may get through what the scripture says about her. She is mentioned three times in the New Testament, and what is said of her there is of great help to understand what is written of her in the book of Joshua. In @Hebrews 11 it says: "By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish along with the unbelieving, having received the spies in peace". She sent them off "by another way"; it was not the usual way. In Hebrews she is viewed as one who is saved on the principle of faith, and in James's epistle we find that she put forth the spies "by another way". Many believers are justified by faith, and on account of being believers they cannot be lost, but it is not always true that they follow "another way"; they rather continue in the same way as they went before, a more or less worldly way, and they walk like men do. In this they do not resemble Rahab, they have not taken up "another way".
{114}
When Rahab is mentioned in Scripture she is nearly always called Rahab the harlot; she appears as a sinner, and she represents a soul that has gone astray and who needs to be set right. Mary of Magdala in the New Testament is also such a one; it says that "from whom seven demons had gone out". The woman of @Luke 7 was also one such, and Saul of Tarsus was the chief of sinners. We may also mention the woman at the well of Sychar. The Spirit of God makes mention of all these in order to show us what grace can effect. The woman at the well of Sychar had sunk very deep, and she needed to be set right. The Lord Jesus laid bare her life when He said: "Go, call thy husband, and come here". All that marked her past life as well as what she was now, was thus exposed; marriage was not kept in honour by her, and that bond was very little esteemed. This woman was to call her husband. This shows us what import God gives to the marriage bond. In @1 Corinthians 7: 16 it says: "For what knowest thou, O wife, if thou shalt save thy husband? or what knowest thou, O husband, if thou shalt save thy wife?"
As I have said before, Rahab is named in the New Testament both in Hebrews and in James as Rahab the harlot. But we find also that she got a very honoured place, her name being in the genealogy of Christ, and this confirms what was said of her in the book of Joshua, chapter 6. After being saved out of Jericho we are told that she dwelt in the midst of Israel, *to this day*. She is the type of a soul who has been saved from perishing along with the unbelieving. But she is also a type of a believer who takes *another way*. We ought to take another way than the one we were in before we were converted. One can doubt if a person really is a christian if he does not follow *another way*. Rahab is also the type of a christian who dwells among the people of God.
{115}
She continued to dwell amongst the people of Israel, and she got a place in the genealogy of Christ.
When she hid the spies we are told that she had stalks of flax which were laid out upon the roof of her house; they were a token that she sought to follow what was right. Flax in Scripture generally has to do with holiness, at least what would help us to holiness. She had this flax laid out upon the roof, which shows that when the two spies came to her house, she was already, so to speak, converted. She had also comprehended something about the power of God. In the book of Joshua it is a question of taking possession of the land, the inheritance. We cannot, dear brethren, take possession of our inheritance without the power and help of God, for the enemy is there; but God has given us power. It says in 2 Timothy, "For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion". Rahab is also the type of a christian who knows something of the power of the Spirit of God. She says to the spies: "For we have heard that Jehovah dried up the waters of the Red sea before you". She had also heard what they had done to the two kings of the Amorites, Sihon and Og. She had in type apprehended what God did through the death and resurrection of Christ, and even what saints can do in the power of the Spirit of God. We see, dear brethren, that she is in pattern a believer who enters upon and takes possession of the inheritance which God has given us in His love.
The next woman we find in chapter 15; that is Achsah. She is very unlike Rahab, for she belonged to the family of faith. Rahab came into the family of believers, but Achsah was born in a believing family. Her father was Caleb, a man, who forty years before this was characterised by faith. It was he who, along with eleven other messengers, went up from Kadesh to spy out the land, and who spoke
{116}
well about it and even sought to persuade the people of God that they were well able to take possession of the land of Canaan. Achsah foreshadows here those of us who have been born amongst the people of God. What a great privilege this woman had to have had such a father! She seemed to have followed his faith and his desires. I think this is something for the young ones to think of, these who have believing parents, that they might not be behind them, but turn to their own account what their parents possess. An inheritance of faith has come to them through their parents. What we find in this woman is very beautiful. She desired these springs from her father. She dwelt in the midst of the inheritance. I speak to young men and women here. You come to the meetings and you listen to much that is presented from the word of God, not only about salvation, but even about God's purposes of love. How do you think you can be preserved in this precious light? It can only be through what corresponds to the springs of water. This woman desired springs from her father. She says: "Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a southern land; give me also springs of water". Even we, who are older in faith, can only be preserved in freshness and enjoyment of our inheritance in the measure in which we make room for the Spirit of God. We have our usual weekly meetings, but what room do we there make for the Spirit of God? A token of the Spirit of God being free is the mutual conditions of love that are found among the saints; each one ought to know his own responsibility as one who possesses the Spirit of God.
I would challenge my own heart: how much am I of help at the meetings? It is easy to be occupied with mistakes and complain of weakness, but the question is, Can I be of any help? If I have received the Spirit of God and make room for Him, I ought to be one who contributes. If everyone of us took up
{117}
our responsibility, we should together be able to enjoy the inheritance; the meetings would then be neither tiresome nor dry, but refreshing. It says in @Psalm 104, "The trees of Jehovah are satisfied". We are in this way liberated from being dependent on the service of a single man, and place should be given for any little gift which might be found amongst us, and we should enjoy the upper and lower springs. In this way we should all make progress in our souls and enjoy peace and joy and be able to praise and worship God. Even a sister who is to be silent can, if the Spirit of God is not grieved in her, contribute to make the meetings fresh and the saints edified. We see how beautiful this woman's conduct was when she came to her father. It says she sprang down from the ass. When the Holy Spirit is not grieved in us, there is life and energy. "But if Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness". It was a question here of life and energy. She did not alight in ease from the ass on which she was riding, but she sprang down. We find what reverence she had for her father.
The women which we will speak of last are the five daughters of Zelophehad. We read of them in Numbers. They came to Moses and Eleazar at the tent of meeting and said to them, "Our father died in the wilderness, and he was not in the band of them that banded themselves together against Jehovah in the band of Korah; but he died in his own sin, and he had no sons". They recognise that he died for his own sin, but he was no rebel like those in the band of Korah, and these women now claim an inheritance amongst their father's brethren. The sisters must not be without the inheritance. Sometimes sisters think they are wholly dependent on the brothers, but in these five women we find urgency to get the inheritance. They first came to
{118}
Moses in the wilderness, and now when they had come into the land they came to Joshua and Eleazar. According to divine command Moses had complied with their desire to have their father's inheritance. This commandment of Moses corresponds for us to the truth of the epistle to the Romans. Romans shows us we have right to the inheritance, and many are satisfied with that, but these women were not satisfied with it. They came to Joshua, and this corresponds in a spiritual meaning with Colossians and Ephesians. We ought not to be contented with having a right to the inheritance; we need also to enter into it. Thus we find, dear brethren, how they a second time went to claim their lot. We are told that they got what they desired and obtained an inheritance *amongst their brethren*. Perhaps you say, I live far away from the meeting, or, I have so much to do, or, I have poor health. But these women would have answered you: You must be among your brethren. The inheritance is yours, but you can only enjoy it among your brethren.
What I have said shows something of what the book of Joshua teaches us. Firstly how we may come into righteousness, like Rahab did. We cannot enjoy our inheritance if every question of our sins and our daily life has not been settled; we must stand in a right position God-ward. Then we get a place among the people of God, an honoured place, like the one Rahab got. "She dwelt in the midst of Israel to this day". Then further it will be a question of life and freshness, that is to say, the Spirit of God gets His place in us, and at last, that the inheritance I have received, can only be enjoyed amongst my brethren. From @Numbers 36 we see that these women, Zelophehad's daughters, were not to marry outside their tribe. We ought not to be connected with anything outside the christian family. All these
{119}
women married within the tribe of Joseph. This is a very important matter for me to ponder, that every connection which I may take up outside the Lord's authority is a hindrance to the enjoyment of the inheritance.
{120}
THE BLESSING OF A BELIEVER'S HOUSE
@Genesis 16: 7 - 9, 13, 14; @Genesis 21: 14 - 21
I suggested these two scriptures for two reasons; first because in them we have the idea of a well or spring, and secondly because they speak of two persons who belong to a believer's house, and whom God sought to bless because they belonged to a believer's house. The idea of a well, it may be remarked, has a very great place in Scripture. It is found frequently in this book and throughout other books of scripture whether in the Old or New Testament, and suggests what is living as meeting man's need. It may therefore be regarded as typical of the system of grace which God has established in Christ, which system involves not only doctrine and light, but what is living. The Holy Spirit came down from heaven as sent down by the Lord Jesus Christ as exalted up there; it is therefore a living system of things.
The apostle Peter in his first great gospel address alludes to it. The Holy Spirit was present at Pentecost in Jerusalem, and men and women were possessed of Him. And they were supremely happy, so much so that the unregenerate around thought they were full of new wine, but Peter explains that they were not filled with new wine as was supposed, but that a wonderful power had come down from Christ in heaven and had taken possession of them, so that he says, referring to Christ, that "being by the right hand of God exalted ... he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear". It was there, you see; it was obviously there, and thousands of his hearers said to him and to the others standing by him, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?". His answer was, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you ... for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of
{121}
the Holy Spirit". Then he adds, The promise is unto you and unto your children. This wonderful gift from God was there and was available to believers. It was, as I said, symbolised by a spring or well, that which springs up, which refreshes and satisfies, which indeed, as the Lord said Himself, shall be "a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life".
This symbol is found in the two scriptures read, and it is found for the first time in these. Water is spoken of earlier; we have it in oceans, in seas, in lakes, and in rivers, and in each of these divisions of water God has been thinking of men. But a well is a peculiar provision, as if God would think not only of the masses of men, but of every single person in the world. An ocean may serve millions of people at once, but a well suggests provision made for one person or for a family, and, as I said, it is peculiar in that it springs up and contains the element of refreshment and satisfaction; hence it is a beautiful symbol of the system of grace that God has established in Christ.
Now I want to show how it is connected with these two persons belonging to Abraham's house, knowing that many young ones here belong to households of faith. Abraham is said to be the father of all believers; he is the great patriarch, and so may be taken to represent every believer who has a household. It is said of Abraham that he would command his children and his house after him. In seeking to command their houses, believers are oft-times profoundly concerned about the members of their households, and God knows this. God has great regard for the head of a house who is concerned about every member of his house, and He will work with us in the salvation of our children. But in working with us. He would work *through* us, and if He is to work through us we must feel things. If we are concerned about a thing we will pray to
{122}
God, and God will never fail to answer the prayer of faith.
The first of these persons is called Hagar, and what is said of her is that an angel found her by a well. And what was she occupied in when he found her? In the path of disobedience, showing that God follows us up although we take the path of disobedience. She was disobedient, and if we are to be blessed through Christ, the element of obedience must show itself. The apostle Paul said, "I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision", but here is a member of Abraham's house actually fleeing from that house. From whom is she fleeing? From her mistress; from one who had authority over her; like many young men and women to whom the home authority becomes irksome, who wish to be free of it. The authority that God has placed in our parents is the very best kind of authority; it is the authority of love.
Now you may say. Hagar was not fleeing from her parent. No, she was fleeing from her mistress; she was fleeing from one who had authority over her. Sarah is one of the most remarkable personages in Scripture; she belongs to the holy women of Scripture. True enough it is said that she oppressed Hagar, but then, she was her mistress, and Hagar was her bond-slave. So that you see she was entitled to exercise authority, and Hagar was manifesting an insubordinate will. Her mistress was being despised in her eyes. In other words Hagar is here therefore a type of an insubordinate young man or woman in a believer's household, and rather than submit to the authority, she flees. But where was she fleeing? That is the question the angel asks her. Where wilt thou go? he asks.
I would say to you young people whose faces are towards the world. Where are you going? You say, I want to see a bit of the world and my parents will
{123}
not allow me to go to the cinema or theatre; I want a free hand. But then, where will you go? You go to the theatre, but what is after that? Year after year rolls on, and old age comes, and what then? You have had your fling in the world, but what then? You are passing away and the world is passing away, but what is the end? The angel says to her, Where wilt thou go? and all that she could say was that she was fleeing; in that she told the truth. Young people are blinded as to what this world is. I have seen it on good authority that ten thousand young people go from the country into New York every year; they go to join the chorus and the theatres and what not, and they are not heard of again. And so I say, Where will you go? what is the end of this course? The world, you see, eats people up, though you think you may shine in it.
The angel says to Hagar, Where wilt thou go? He found her by a well of water. The angel of God is after this fleeing rebellious woman. It may be that Sarah was pleased that she left; it does not appear that she made any effort to recover her. And so it is that young people may leave their father's houses and their mother's houses, but God's eye is upon them. It may be that the door is on the latch for you to come back; that may be as it was in this case, for evidently Abraham's house was open to her to return, but there is no indication that Abraham or Sarah sent anyone after her. But look! God sent an angel from heaven after her. Is it not remarkable evidence of the grace of God? It says that the angel found her by a spring of water in the wilderness -- by the spring on the way to Shur; that is to say, it is not simply any spring, but a particular one, one that could be located. In other words in the spiritual application of it, it is a spring known to us who are christians, and you are by it at this very minute. So to speak, the angel of the Lord is
{124}
here to find you; he would remind you that you have been in the path of self-will, and that your salvation depends on giving up that path. So that he says, 'Return to thy mistress Sarah and be submissive to her'. You see, something had happened that brought out the insubordinate character of the woman. She had set out on a path of destruction and her only salvation lay in giving up that path and returning to her mistress Sarah.
Well now, I would appeal to young people here tonight, that the angel of the Lord, or rather, the Lord Himself, is here to save you. But there must be submission; God is not going to fill heaven with insubject people. In His patience He has tolerated lawlessness in men for thousands of years on the earth, but all self-will and lawlessness is going to be cleared away; all must be in subjection to Christ. And so the word here is, 'Return and submit yourself'; that is the point. Hagar listens and she called the name of Jehovah who spoke to her, "Thou art the God who reveals himself". That is to say, she is in the presence of God. What a wonderful opportunity for her! Then the well that is alluded to here receives a name that remains -- Beer-lahai-roi, meaning 'the well of Him that seeth me'. That is the well. It is on the way to Shur, we are told. We christians know that; it is the well of Him that sees. We christians know what it is to come under the searching eye of a holy God -- like that well-known woman at Sychar who said, "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did". She understood, you see, what it meant -- the well of Him that sees. Every true christian is thankful that God is seeing into his inmost soul, and as we judge ourselves before God, we come into the benefit of this well. This well is connected with Isaac later; it is seen as Rebecca approaches him. He stands related to this well. That is to say, Christ in heaven stands related
{125}
to this well. So that the assembly knows, Rebecca knows, the significance of the well. Rebecca is a type of the assembly composed of all believers; she understood the value of the well. She was accustomed to carrying the water pitcher and filling it at the well. When Abraham's servant drew near she let down the water pitcher and he drank; she gave him drink and the camels also. That shows that all true believers come into the appreciation and use of the well.
Now I want to show from chapter 21 that whilst this well was available to Hagar, apparently she never got the good of it. And this is a warning to all young people, that whilst God follows you up in grace, you may in the end not get the good of it. The time may come when you will have to say, 'The harvest is passed and the summer is ended and I am not saved'. Hagar had returned to Abraham's house, but her offspring of whom it was said, he would be a wild ass of a man, had proved himself to be this, and now both she and he are cast out. How dreadful to be actually cast outside of a believer's house. It is one thing to flee in self-will, but it is another to be cast out. The word is, "Cast out this handmaid and her son". You may say, 'One in that case is beyond salvation'. Not yet. Not yet, young man; you belong to a christian's house, and God has great regard for the prayers of your father and mother, and although you are outcast, God is still following you up. So you find Hagar and Ishmael here in the wilderness; the water in the bottle that Abraham put upon her is all spent. Like the prodigal she has nothing now, but look -- let this touch our hearts!
It says in verse 15, "The water was exhausted from the flask; and she cast the child under one of the shrubs, and she went and sat down over against him, a bow-shot off; for she said, Let me not behold the death of the child. And she sat over against
{126}
him, and lifted up her voice and wept. And God heard the voice of the lad". You see, you are in dire distress now, you are an outcast with no water to drink, and no bread to eat; death is staring you in the face. And what happens? God heard the voice of the lad. You see, He had not given them up. He will go to the utmost extremity; whilst you are in the body there is hope; whilst this wonderful gospel day remains there is hope for the greatest sinner. Although so self-willed, so crooked that you are cast out even from the household in which you have been brought up, yet God hears the voice of the lad; God heard it in heaven. A young boy thirteen or fourteen years of age, cast under a shrub to die, but God heard the voice of the lad. Does it not touch your heart? If there is a cry going up from your heart for salvation, God hears it. There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth. Jesus died for such as you. Could there be a greater wild ass of a man than Saul of Tarsus "breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord", and yet a voice from heaven calls him by name, "Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?"
Ishmael had been persecuting Isaac, and he is an outcast, but God hears his voice. It is the dispensation of grace -- the grace that carries salvation for all men has appeared. And so God heard the voice of the lad; He heard it where the lad was. And where was he? He was under a shrub, about to die, cast there to die. God heard his voice where he was. In other words, God knows all about your circumstances. You may have gone far into the world and indulged yourself -- disgraced your parents it may be, dishonoured the Lord's name it may be, but now, you see, a voice goes up, a cry of need, and God hears you where you are. Well now, you will observe in verse 18 the angel says to Hagar, "Arise, take the
{127}
lad, and hold him in thy hand". Now, you see, the time of salvation is at your very door. She was to hold him in her hand. The point is that for which you are responsible. Hagar was here responsible for her boy; she is to take him in her hands.
In the epistle to the Romans I learn that I stand before God in my responsibility; I stand before the bar of God as convicted -- a sinner. All have sinned and come short of the glory of God. My case is truly hopeless unless God acts. And so that epistle says, "But now ... the righteousness of God is manifested towards ... all, and upon all those who believe: for there is no difference ... being justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth a mercy seat, through faith in his blood". You see, that is exactly Hagar's position, she is standing with the boy in her hands before God. And so in @Romans 3 the sinner stands before God in his responsibility, and he is truly lost unless God acts for him. But God *has* acted for us; He has sent forth His Son -- "whom God has set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood". So that God is "just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus".
Well now, all this grace is brought to Hagar and Ishmael. It says in verse 19 that God opened her eyes and she saw the well of water. As I have been saying, it is God's wonderful system of grace that He has set up for us. He opens her eyes to see it. May He open *your* eyes, and may you embrace this wonderful opportunity of being saved, to receive forgiveness of sins and the gift of the Holy Spirit, so that the well is in yourself, that which, as it says, is in the believer a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life. As the Lord further says, "Whosoever drinks of the water ... shall never thirst for ever". Would you not like to have such water, such a well? We are not speaking merely of
{128}
theoretical things; we know what we are speaking about; we have this well in us. We do not thirst; we have in us that which springs up into everlasting life.
All this is brought to Hagar. It says God opened her eyes and she saw the well of water, and she went and filled the flask with water and gave the lad drink. Then it says God was with the lad and he grew. So far, you see, things are going well, and for a soul truly born of God all is perfectly secure, but alas, in Hagar's case and in Ishmael's case, all this wonderful grace and consideration on the part of God seems to have been lost. And this is a very solemn word for each of us. We may take the flask and fill it, and drink of it, and yet turn away to the world. As is said in Hebrews, we may taste the good word of God and the powers of the world to come. We are warned here of the necessity of deep-rooted work, of thorough repentance and self-judgment. What you find with Ishmael is that his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt. There is no evidence, you see, of accompanying evidences of salvation in her case. Think of a parent going deliberately into the world to select a wife for her son, or a husband for her daughter. There is no evidence of salvation there. Salvation is not only from judgment to come; it is from this world, and if I link my child on with the world, where is the evidence of salvation in that? And that is exactly what Hagar did. She selected a wife for her son from Egypt. The believer, on the contrary, in Genesis, makes a point of selecting a wife for his child that belonged to the family. Abraham caused his servant to swear on this very point. And so Isaac in regard of Jacob.
You can see that whilst this wonderful system of grace is brought within our reach, and we may taste of it in an outward way, yet we may not be saved
{129}
from the world. And this, as I said, is a word for all parents here, that if we are to have our children saved, we must keep them out of the world. But then, what I am occupied with now is not that so much, as that this wonderful system of grace is brought to your very door this evening. God opened Hagar's eyes and she saw the well of water and she went and filled the flask with water and gave the lad drink, and God was with the lad and he grew. You see, the elements of salvation are all present. May God help you young people to see the well, to see the wonderful system of grace that is available. Forgiveness is offered to you, the righteousness of God and the Holy Spirit on the simple principle of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. May God bless the word.
{130}
Pages 130 - 533 -- "The Fulness and other Ministry", U.S.A., 1937 - 1944 (Volume 191).
THE FULNESS (1)
@Colossians 1: 19, 20; @Colossians 2: 9, 10; @Ephesians 3: 19
J.T. The idea of fulness attaches especially to christianity as involving the complete shining out of God. There are no reserves. We are to be filled even to all the fulness of God. The passage in @Colossians 1 has in mind the greatness of Christ rather than anything accruing to man from the fulness of God. It says, "In him all the fullness ... was pleased to dwell". In chapter 2 it dwells "bodily" in Him so as to come within our range and apprehension, but its setting in chapter 1 is in relation to the greatness of Christ. There was One great enough here in whom all the fulness could dwell. Then in Ephesians, as I said, we are to be filled unto all the fulness of God. In @Colossians 2 the fulness is within our range; that is, in Christ bodily, and we as apprehending it are filled full. These are the thoughts that one has entertained, and the Lord, I am assured, will help to open them up for us.
J.D. Does chapter 1 involve the Lord's Person in Deity? It alludes to Him in manhood, but His greatness is in view, and this is one of the items of His greatness.
J.T. Yes, there is One in whom the fulness of Deity could reside. It is the great basis of the whole position, that there is a Man great enough for that.
R.R.T. Is your thought that in relation to this subject of fulness, it was a thought that God began with? In the beginning there was a state of emptiness, contrary to God's desire, but here the substance is brought out, and One is here in whom all the fulness is able to dwell.
{131}
J.T. Quite so. There was a state of emptiness, then God brought order out of the emptiness. It was a question of creation, what God is, as Creator, in bringing order out of chaos. The result of the operations in the six days helps to bring out the thought. @Genesis 1 gives us the formation and order that God brought out, but the shining out of what was effected is in chapter 2; the idea of fulness is there. You have first the creation, but the development of it shows the idea of fulness, what works out in it. We may consider these chapters in regard to the fulness of the work of God in the saints. @Genesis 2 is the shining out, the effulgence; that is what we need to see. We have man created in chapter 1 and in chapter 2 he is seen as formed by Jehovah Elohim, in relation to the history of the heavens and the earth. We have in chapter 2 the history of certain things before they grew, and man taken up in a new way, *formed* out of the dust of the earth, the earth being affected by the mist; and then the garden planted and the river flowing out of Eden to water it; the animals coming to Adam, and his naming them; and then Eve brought to him, and his naming her. @Genesis 2 indicates the fulness of what "God had created in making it". That is what God delighted in, the working out of what He had laid down basically, according to chapter 1. The time for the fulness of Deity to come out was not yet, but All was there. The idea of Deity, in the plural, which is the form used, is that All was there. In the beginning God -- God was there in all that He is. He created the heavens and earth, and something happened, and then He begins again and sets up what we are accustomed to now. Adam was a figure of Him that was to come, but the fulness could not dwell in him, but, as we have seen, there is now a Man great enough for all that God is to reside in.
{132}
H.G-h. In that way @Colossians 1 is God moving out.
J.T. Yes. He moved out in @Genesis 1 as Creator, but not yet to effect His own eternal thoughts, although all was in His mind. Fulness in every respect depended upon the incarnation. Colossians develops the great fact and result of incarnation involving the fulness of God shining out.
R.R.T. Adam was not great enough to give expression to the fulness of God, but here is One who is great enough for the fulness of God to dwell in.
J.T. But how very interested God was in that creature! He is mentioned again in chapter 2, as formed out of the dust of the earth, evidently as affected by the moisture, and God breathed into man and set him over the garden; he named the animals and his wife. So far, he was pleasing to God. It was further history. @Genesis 2 is history in the sense of effulgence or shining out, so you get another name taken by God; Jehovah Elohim, the covenant God is brought in there. It is in that connection you get shining out. The name, Jehovah Elohim, might be counted twenty times in chapters 2 and 3, showing that God was working from His own point of view, and He was pleased with what was coming out, as seen in chapter 2.
E.W.M. Is Jehovah Elohim God coming into revelation and covenant relations?
J.T. That is right, not only relations in creation, but covenant relations with men.
F.C.B. Does this expression in @Colossians 1 refer to any particular time in the Lord's pathway?
J.T. It refers to Jesus properly as to public testimony, when the voice from heaven announced His sonship and the Spirit came down. What was there was the same as was there before, but we are dealing with testimony and what comes to our
{133}
notice. The allusion would be to His testimony. It does not say manhood in this verse, but that the fulness was in the Person. It was in manhood, only that it is viewed as the greatness of the Person who was there.
J.D. Would the end of the previous verse help, "That in all things he might have the pre-eminence". That would involve His manhood.
J.T. Quite so. The passage begins with God as Father having translated us into the kingdom of His Son. That is where the subject begins. The allusion is to manhood, but it is to bring out the greatness of the Person of Christ. Headship of the assembly is brought in in that very setting.
C.S.P. Does not Solomon speak of this, that the heavens were not great enough to contain Jehovah?
J.T. Just so. They were not great enough for Him to reside in, but here is a Man great enough. It is a very wonderful thought that there should be a Man greater than the heavens, the created sphere. "The heaven of heavens cannot contain thee", Solomon said, and yet as Solomon finished his prayer the glory filled the house, as if to point to this very verse, a type of Christ, great enough for the dwelling of all the fulness of Deity.
J.D. He was viewed here as Man, and "in him all the fulness ... was pleased to dwell, and by him to reconcile all things to itself". The word contemplates Christ as Man here, and God's thoughts toward man set forth in Him.
J.T. That is the thought, without going so far in applying it, but it does bring in the primary thought of reconciliation; but the thought is to bring out the greatness of the Person.
H.G-h. Does the expression that He has "translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love" contemplate that there must be material to take this in?
{134}
J.T. Just so. That is where we are, and in that kingdom all this truth is opened up as to His Person, the Person into whose kingdom we are translated. Proverbs helps us as regards that statement; the Son of the Father's love is spoken of there anticipatively, and you get the question, "What is his name, and what is his son's name ... ?" @Proverbs 30: 4. Colossians helps us as to who this Person is.
W.G.H. Does that give character to the mediatorial system?
J.T. It all hinges on who the Person is. The Lord has raised this question. It is not what He is in absolute Deity, but what He is as Man, a divine Person in manhood. How great He is!
J.L.F. The voice in @Matthew 3 says, "This is my beloved Son", and in Mark and Luke the word is, "*Thou* art my beloved Son", calling attention to the greatness of the Person.
J.T. Attention is called to Him. We have 'This' and 'Thou'. "*Thou*" is the Lord Himself, "this" is for others.
G.C. In His greatness we recognise His supremacy over all, that is as Man.
J.T. This is what these verses bring out in such a striking way. After we are told that we are translated into His kingdom, it goes on to say in verse 14, "In whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins; who is image of the invisible God, firstborn of all creation". It is all one great statement as to the Person, the personal greatness of Christ in manhood. How great a matter it is that we should be conversant with these things, because we are viewed in the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love. The Lord says to the disciples, "But *ye*, who do ye say that I am?". That is the question that should come to us at a meeting like this. Who is He?
M.D.F. Do you see the greatness of Him by what He has done?
{135}
J.T. Yes, creative power, and He precedes all things, in that He is the "image of the invisible God". All that is intimated too. You can understand if we were at Colosse when this letter came, how spiritual brethren would say, 'These are wonderful things. We did not know Christ was so great'. That is how it ought to come to us, so that we get the greatness into our souls. Professing christianity is saying this and that. But what do you say? It is not what we think, but what we say, about Him.
R.R.T. The emphasis here is on the word, "All the fulness". The Spirit of God would indicate a point had been reached in this blessed Person in whom there were no limits. *All* the fulness was pleased to dwell.
J.T. I think the allusion would be to all that preceded. There was some little shining out from the outset, but *all* is the thought now.
J.D. Would that verse in @John 1 come in as to the fulness of life, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men"?
J.T. I think so. Of course, it is life in the sense in which we participate in it, but it can only be said of Him.
W.G.H. In Hebrews it says, "Who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance". Would that come in?
J.T. I think it would. "The expression of his substance" would allude to the Being of God, the expression of it being fundamental to christianity.
L.E.S. Do you think the fulness would be seen somewhat in the beginning of @Joshua 3: 7? "This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel"?
J.T. Just so. This comes out before our eyes. That is what a meeting like this is for, that Christ might be magnified in our eyes, because He is not magnified in the world. "Who do ye say that I
{136}
am?". What are *we* saying about the greatness of Christ? The Lord has called attention to this peculiarly for many years back, and the question is, Are we saying these things that are brought out and made clear as to His Person?
W.B. Why do you make a difference between what we say and what we think?
J.T. There are many who think, but thinking is not testimony. It is right to think, of course, "Think on these things"; but thinking is not testimony. So it is with many young christians, they do not come into salvation because they confine themselves to thinking. The word is "confess".
E.W.M. So that Peter gave expression to divine revelation regarding the Person of the Lord.
J.T. Yes, he said it by the Spirit, the principle of revelation, showing that it is a spiritual matter. It is not a mere mental thing with us, because many are christians, and it is what the creed says about Christ that they say. That may be right enough so far, but it is what is known in one's soul, what one has spiritually, that is of value. It is a time of spirituality. You cannot have Christ aside from spirituality. That is what is in mind. The Lord says to Peter, "Flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens".
W.B. I think that is very helpful. So much lies with confession.
J.T. Yes, it is a great matter, because christians regard what is in the creed, what is learned doctrinally, but the forty days that the Lord sojourned here after He arose is to bring out the spiritual side of our position. You cannot have christianity without that. The forty days were as essential as the three and a half years of testimony. They are both essential to christianity. The Lord, could have gone to heaven at once after He arose, but it was a question of bringing out spirituality.
{137}
J.D. Would you say just a few words on what you mean by 'spirituality'?
J.T. The Lord is never referred to as being in two places: He was never said to have come through closed doors during His sojourn. The natural mind could take in His movements in the flesh. We read of His hiding Himself from them and going through the midst of them, but it is not spiritual in that sense, it is a physical movement in each case. Whereas in resurrection, as risen, you have His coming in. We are told expressly that the doors were shut; it is to be understood spiritually. The Christian Scientists cannot explain that, it is a spiritual matter. Luke corroborates that in speaking of the Lord going with the two who were on the way to Emmaus, and then while the Lord gave thanks He vanished out of their sight. That is a spiritual matter. No one can explain that physically, but they became spiritual by it; they were not upset by it. They were not perturbed. They got up and put on their clothes and went to Jerusalem without the least suggestion of being perturbed by what occurred. They related to the company how He came in and how He was made known to them in the breaking of bread. That was spiritual. Others said, He had appeared to Simon, which is intelligence, but that He should have vanished whilst He broke bread is what is spiritual. And whilst they were saying these things Jesus Himself stood in their midst and they are upset. Why is that? They were not spiritual.
R.R.T. They had not reached that in the boat when they thought they had seen a spirit. When the Lord came to them on the water they thought they had seen a spirit.
J.T. It was not a spirit, it was a real physical Person. It is the idea of spirituality, that we can take in what is meant by a thing; that we are being introduced into the spiritual world and to learn to
{138}
think spiritually. They were affrighted, upset, and thought they had seen a spirit again, just as they thought in the boat. But the Lord says, "A spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having". That is a spiritual thing. He came in through closed doors and yet He is flesh and bones, and He proceeded to allay their fears, and said, "Have ye anything here to eat?". It was for them to prove that it was real humanity that was there.
R.R.T. The thought is that if we are spiritual we would be accustomed to the Lord's movements now in that manner, that we would not be affrighted; but if we are spiritual we would be accustomed to when the Lord comes in.
J.T. That is the thought, because we get on pretty well in the meetings in regard to order and in regard to what we say, as breaking the bread, but when the Lord comes in, that is where we miss things. That is the great defect; the whole of the external thing may be quite acceptable. "Rejoicing and seeing your order" (@Colossians 2: 5), the apostle says, but when the spiritual side is presented we are upset. Luke would teach us, in his record in chapter 24, that they were saying these things and while they were saying them the Lord appeared; as much as to say, 'I am pleased with what you are saying', but afterwards they were upset. You could not call that a good meeting. It is a confused meeting, and why? because the Lord is there; a very remarkable thing. The Lord had in mind to add to the thing for them, but they are confused.
G.J.B. He showed them His hands and His feet.
J.T. Quite so. That is to show them that it was Himself, but why should the saints be perturbed? It is the Lord. It would look as though there was an unspiritual element, which is often the case. You might have a few spiritual brothers, but they cannot carry things.
{139}
J.D. How do you think the Lord comes in today?
J.T. It is a wholly spiritual matter. What happens is in us, not in the room, but what happens is in the saints. It is the state of our souls that enables us to detect it. It is by virtue of the Spirit being here as a medium. If He came in the body He would stand outside. But in coming in spiritually, He is in all of us, so it is a question of what we are.
L.E.S. It suggests confession, of naming the name of the Lord, involving spiritual sensibilities on our part.
J.T. Yes, we might come to this later on. We are slipping away from the great thought we have. It is well that we should have the general position in mind, that the Lord comes in spiritually, but in such wise that it is the Lord, and the spiritual one says, "It is the Lord". That leads to the assembly.
G.C. In thinking of Peter, it is what we say. Peter would say we can only say what we have seen and heard of the Lord, who He was.
J.T. Just so. You get a great deal in the forty days. You never could have christianity without the forty days. You might have blessing, but not christianity. Paul stresses the different appearings of the Lord after He arose. He appeared to Cephas, to the twelve, to five hundred, to James, to all the apostles. If we do not understand that, we do not understand the assembly. We get along pretty well in the breaking of bread, but when the Lord comes in we are not able to say, "It is the Lord".
H.G-h. Then the forty days are for education in view of His appearing.
J.T. The Lord did not go up at once. In the forty days seen of them, He presented Himself living, as if to say, 'You must see Me as I wish you to see Me'. He presented Himself alive after He suffered.
{140}
J.A.W. Have you something in your mind as to what answers to the forty days now in spiritual history?
J.T. The forty days denote the great importance of spirituality. We have to come to that, and it is to be treasured now. We do not get forty days again, but the effect of the forty days remains in the treasury. That is, the Holy Spirit has that here and we come into it.
J.F. In what we have detailed for us, we get along pretty well, but when it comes to what is spiritual, we are tested. We show how far along we are.
J.T. I think so, and it comes out in the hymns and the way we speak.
J.D. How far do you think the coming in of the Lord involves a spiritual touch from a brother?
J.T. Usually it is so. It works out *in us*. The Lord does not come in and stand beside us, He would speak Himself. He is here bodily in the sense of the saints being His body.
R.R.T. John speaks of what we have heard from the beginning. Would that include the forty days?
J.T. I think so, more particularly that. It concerns the word of life, what He was as risen, although it was always there.
R.R.T. John says, "That which was from the beginning". He goes back.
J.T. That is the beginning of Christ really. The resurrection is not the beginning.
Going back to Colossians, it is the greatness of the Person here, to be the residence of Deity in His attributes. But fulness is not only attributes, but what the Deity is in the sense as coming out in Christ. It is no less than God.
J.D. It involves revelation.
{141}
E.W.M. @Colossians 2: 9 is remarkable. It involves not only His divinity but His deity.
J.T. It is a different word. We have divinity in @Romans 1 and in @Acts 17, but it is a lesser word. It is not such a full word. God is the Deity, but in these two verses in @Colossians 1 the Deity is not mentioned, but it is in @Colossians 2. All the fulness of the Godhead is there. In chapter 1 it is even stronger, in the sense that who else could it be? What fulness could it be? The fulness could be taken almost as a name or a title. Like the word "greatness" in Hebrews, "Set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high". What greatness is that? The soul is filled with the infinitude, that all was there in the Person of a Man here. What a marvellous thing it is. Chapter 2 shows that it is within our reach.
G.J.B. All that we have in Christ in all this greatness is to be enjoyed now.
J.T. Just so. In chapter 2, Paul says, "In him dwells all the fulness", that is the present tense, *dwells*. In chapter 1, "In him all the fulness ... was pleased to dwell"; that is past tense. That is the one great fact that all the fulness was pleased to dwell there.
H.G-h. Is the thought that the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell in that Person, so that God would make His dwelling there?
J.T. I think it is amplified by, "In whom I have found my delight". I think that is the allusion.
J.D. That would be in manhood.
J.T. Yes, manifestly. So here it is the Son we begin with, who has a kingdom into which we are translated. It refers to Christ today. The intent is, what can I say about Him now? If this meeting does not bring more into my soul, then it is of no value. He would say, What are you saying about Me?
{142}
L.E.S. Is this in view of the filling out of all things as in @1 Corinthians 15, "that God may be all in all"?
J.T. Quite so. We would be prepared for all, "all things", which we call the eternal state of things, where the Son is subjected and God is all in all; that is, the whole domain is *filled*. The assembly is said to be filled unto all the fulness. The brain will never be puzzled there. Even my own being I do not understand, and certainly the broad creation is inscrutable to me. What is beyond that? If I am filled in the fulness I am stayed and satisfied. There is no lack or anxiety or uncertainty. The assembly is to be filled unto all the fulness of God. That is the eternal state of things.
J.D. Is it not remarkable that in @Colossians 2 it says, "In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", and immediately follows the statement that brings before us the philosophy of the world, and Paul goes on to speak of the perfection of the saints in Christ?
J.T. It is filled full. There is no room for anything else in you.
H.G-h. In result of the idea of God coming out in this way, the whole scene will be eventually permeated.
J.D. God will be all in all.
J.T. It is not "all" in an objective sense, but we are to be filled.
W.B. You said that @Colossians 1: 19 was in the past tense. That seems very remarkable, and I was wondering if that would refer to the time when the Lord was upon the earth?
J.T. I think so.
W.B. Is it what the divine Persons saw in the Lord Jesus, that They were pleased to dwell there?
J.T. That is the way it is put. As history was being made in heaven in the first moment when the
{143}
Lord breathed, it was what was seen here that heaven is occupied with. What was there was so pleasing that the fulness was pleased to dwell there. The great fact is that Jesus was *here*, the Son of the Father's love. When at the Jordan, I think, He was the complete expression of it. The heaven was opened to Him and the voice heard, but the Father's name is not mentioned. Of course, it is to be borne in mind that it is the Father's voice. That is a deduction, but the point is the voice, it is Deity that is speaking, and in "My beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", we have a Man under His eye. Then the Holy Spirit came down in the form of a dove. The totality of the Deity spiritually was there.
C.S.P. Do I understand that it is first the greatness of God, then the greatness of the incarnation, and the greatness of the eternal position. God all in all? All that is in view here.
J.T. It ought to affect us so that we would be able to speak about these things. A little has been said about them, and it has drawn forth a great deal of opposition, but that does not mean that we should not continue to speak of these things. How great the Person, how great the incarnation!
J.D. Do you think the truth is that the more they are spoken of, the grander they become? The service of God from the saints rises to higher levels.
J.T. We come into the greatness. When Nathan came to David and spoke about Solomon, Jehovah says, 'He is going to be my son', pointing to Christ. "I will be his father, and he shall be my son", @2 Samuel 7: 14. David was limited as regards what he was to do; he was not to build the house. His son is to build the house. David entered into the house that then was and sat before the Lord, and he makes a remarkable speech. You are impressed with the number of titles he uses in addressing Jehovah.
{144}
What remarkable richness there is in his soul as to God. The Lord would help us in that now, that the Deity be brought before us and within our range in the sense of fulness, that we should be encouraged in our souls, and speak to God not merely in technical terms, but speak to Him about Himself in terms of richness in our own souls.
C.S.P. So that the saints at the present time come into the good of reconciliation and are able to respond to God.
J.T. You see how it proceeds at once to speak, "By him to reconcile all things to itself". And then, "You ... yet now has it reconciled in the body of his flesh" so that you can see what the mind of God is in the fulness coming in.
G.C. Reconciliation puts us in a position with God where He can come in.
R.B. Is there any reflection of the fulness of God to be seen in the assembly now?
J.T. I think we shall see that in our next meeting, as to how it works out in christianity. The fulness of Christ will come in, in the next reading, and how the assembly is His fulness, the fulness of Him who fills all in all, but we should get into our souls now the greatness of the One in whom God *was* pleased to dwell, not 'is', but "was": when He was alone here, not when He was in heaven. His greatness would be seen in that the residence of the fulness of the Godhead was there.
J.L.F. One of the important things that the Colossians would learn was that they were complete in Him.
J.T. All the fulness being in Him bodily means that it is within our apprehension.
J.L.F. The completeness of the saints is to be the result of that.
{145}
J.T. If a man came to you with a philosophical book you would say -- I do not need that, and that is the end of it.
J.D. With this in mind, as to the Son, all the fulness of the Godhead dwelling, how much opens up and becomes increasingly clear to us.
J.T. You get in John's gospel what amplifies all this. John says, "I beheld the Spirit descending". Nobody else says that. It is a plain statement. But John says, "I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God". And as he was about to die, he said, "He must increase, but I must decrease". He is filled full of Christ.
J.L.F. Why is it in John's gospel that John the baptist bears record and in Matthew he is preaching?
J.T. The apostle John brings him in as an ideal witness although he was with Christ only a few months. The Evangelist says, "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth". Then the Baptist bears witness, "This was he of whom I said, He that comes after me is preferred before me, for he was before me". That is the way John is brought in in John's gospel. He is the ideal witness, because he says, "He ... is preferred before me". He acknowledges that Christ has taken a place before him.
H.G-h. The fact that he sees the Spirit descending and abiding upon Him shows he understands where the fulness dwells.
J.T. I think it bears out this passage. John's gospel bears it out in that way in the testimony of John the baptist, that he began by saying He was preferred before him, then progressed, and in chapter 3 says that He must increase. He has the grasp of the thing.
E.W.M. It is healthy for a soul by the help of the Spirit to contemplate the glory of the Lord, to contemplate who He is.
{146}
J.T. The Lord is calling our attention to that, whether we are profiting by the things that have come out and have been spoken of, or whether they are just in books to be laid on our shelves like a creed.
J.D. What you say as to John is most interesting. He said, "I knew him not", but then he said as to Him, "I beheld the Spirit descending as a dove from heaven, and it abode upon him". It seems to me your path changes after you have seen that; you come to the point where you see the Spirit of God descending upon a sinless One.
J.T. That is the starting point of all in relation to the assembly. What is said in chapter 3 shows that John progressed in the thing. I do not think his disciples progressed so well, because some of them were disputing about purification; that did not mean anything, but John was not engaged with that.
G.C. John says, "Of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace".
J.T. I think that was John the evangelist. It is not easy to tell in these early chapters in John. It is designed to honour John the baptist, that he came near to the evangelist's testimony.
E.McG. Why do you put so much stress on the speaking?
J.T. Because it is testimony. The Lord said to the cleansed leper, "Go, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift which Moses ordained, for a testimony to them", @Matthew 8: 4. He does not say for a testimony to him, but "to them", as though the whole system would be in mind. God would witness to Christ.
J.L.F. Anybody who does not say anything about Christ is not an ideal witness.
J.D. Being filled to all the fulness of God -- does that in your mind take in the three Persons?
{147}
J.T. The Deity must take in all three Persons. Only, when Scripture presents them as in a mediatorial position, it is well to have in our minds how Scripture presents things, so that the apostle says, "To us there is one God", @1 Corinthians 8: 6. That abstractly must take in all the Persons, but he fixes it on one Person, the Father.
J.D. Do you think that is here at the end of the apostle's prayer? "To know the love of the Christ", that is one Person in the divine economy. Then, "that ye might be filled even to all the fulness of God". Is it God the Father in that sense?
J.T. The Deity is expressed in that one Person; no one excludes the others, but you are leaving Them as abstractly inscrutable. I cannot grasp these things; my wisdom is to follow the divine way of teaching.
R.R.T. In relation to what we are speaking of in John, it says that the Spirit abode upon Him, but here it is that all the fulness was pleased to dwell in Him. I was wondering if this is a little in advance of John's thought?
J.T. John could only speak of what he saw; that is the testimony. We have to trust to direct statements of Scripture for many things.
F.C.B. When you speak of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, do you have one divine Person in mind?
J.T. That is how the Scripture presents it, "One God, the Father ... and one Lord, Jesus Christ". In approaching God we have access to God by one Spirit. It is all very simple as regards the link between the Three. If we get to thinking first of all of God in the absolute, standing in relation to nothing, and then God in the economy, that is in relation to all creatures, we shall see that it becomes simple. And two of the Persons take mediatorial positions,
{148}
taking lowly places in order to serve, that we might come into the apprehension of God as to who He is.
M.D.F. Peter says, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". Is that in relation to God or in relation to man?
J.T. I think Peter's confession to Christ is in relation to man, in relation to testimony. The whole testimony would support that, but the whole testimony taught that such an One as that is come in revelation. It makes it a very spiritual matter.
R.R.T. Would it suggest the greatness of the anointing, that He was the Christ -- the anointed One?
J.T. I do not think the anointing is in view *until* He was anointed by the Spirit. There is the *mingling* in the type of the meat offering, the mingling of oil and fine flour, but I do not connect the anointing with Him until He was anointed. We had better go by the Scriptures. When Peter confesses Him that He is the Christ, that means that He is the anointed. The Son of the living God is that He is living.
J.D. As to Jesus in the first thirty years of His life, the testimony does not seem to be connected with that. He was the fine flour mingled with oil.
J.T. So it says He began to be about thirty years of age. He answered to the divine thought as to "the Christ".
L.E.S. Would the inscrutability of Deity lie behind the thought of fulness?
J.T. Yes, it would. We always carry that thought in our minds. Fulness indicates He has come out according to what God has been, pleased to show. He is the invisible God (@Colossians 1: 15). The fulness is dwelling in the Person here on earth.
E.W.M. I was thinking of the remark you made at the beginning -- Jehovah Elohim, God coming into revelation. It comes in properly in @Exodus 3.
{149}
It was there before, and in the name apparently, but not the significance of it, "I AM", the ever-present God.
H.G-h. I was going to ask what was in your mind in connection with "that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God", @Ephesians 3: 19.
J.T. We take all that in so far as we are capacitated. We are not filled with other things. It says in @Colossians 2, "Ye are complete in him", that is, towards God, "in him", not 'by Him'. It is our state before God. The idea of Christ begins in Romans. In Colossians it is the completeness of the furnishings of the saints as reflecting the fulness. It is what we are towards God, that is the idea in Colossians, so that we say we do not need that book or that course of instruction. We have it all, and more, in Christ. The point in Colossians is more Christ than God, but in Ephesians it is more God than Christ. The thought is amplified in the fulness of God. It is the same idea, but we are brought into eternal relations in being filled to all the fulness of God. The apostle's mind is so full of the idea that he goes on to say that the glory of God is to be in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages. In that sense the assembly is filled with God, filled unto all the fulness of God.
J.D. One feels the need in these days of the apostle's word, "Be not drunk with wine, in which is debauchery", @Ephesians 5: 18. That does not mean literally wine, but it is anything that would fill the mind with philosophy or vain deceit. Our mind is to be filled with the Spirit.
J.T. Wine has an intoxicating effect. We are not to be filled with that, but to be filled with the Holy Spirit.
L.E.S. Would @Philippians 3 be the setting forth of that?
{150}
J.T. I suppose @Philippians 3 is a model for us in the way of energy and laying hold of the great things that are presented to us. We see in Philippians the concrete example of one filled full of Christ. There is no need for anything else.
C.S.P. What is the bearing of the dimensions given in @Ephesians 3, the breadth, length, depth and height?
J.T. There is a thought in these dimensions which is unusual, not material things. It bears out that they cannot be fully apprehended but by the power of His Spirit in the inner man. It is power in the soul, that you might be strengthened with power by the Spirit in the inner man (@Ephesians 3: 16). It is that we might take in the four dimensions. Three dimensions is what we have in creation, but when you get four, you get what depends upon Deity, the breadth, length, depth and height. The depth is what we do not understand. We can understand the exaltation of Christ into heaven, because @Ephesians 4: 10 says, "He ... has also ascended up above all the heavens", and you touch the inscrutable. That is the height, but the depth has to do with what is below us, and that brings out the degradation to which Christ went that He could say, "I am a worm, and no man". Death brings out the power of compression in Christ, that He could go to such a length. It is beyond me to understand that He could say, "I am a worm, and no man".
C.S.P. Do you think the love of Christ expressed that?
J.T. The love of Christ constrains us in that way. How much do we feed on the idea of death? How are we affected as we see an opened grave? No one ever realised the utter degradation that attaches to man as having sinned; no one but a
{151}
divine Person could shrink from it in the way that the psalmist speaks as to it in @Psalm 22.
H.G-h. It was essential if all things were to be filled.
J.T. It is the expansion from one going so low, becoming so small.
W.G.H. "He that descended is the same who has also ascended", @Ephesians 4: 10.
J.D. Would the lower parts of the earth mean more than death?
J.T. It is that He went down to the very depths, the lower parts. He went down to the bottoms of the mountains, as Jonah says. No one could grasp or speak of it as Christ did.
C.S.P. All that was necessary that the assembly might be filled unto the fulness of God.
J.T. Just so. The mind that is in Christ Jesus, the mind to go down. How pleasing that was to God. Think of Him in @Psalm 16 saying to God, "My goodness extendeth not to thee". I do not understand it, but the Lord said that. There is the power of compression, the power of going down and down, as answering to the will of God.
{152}
THE FULNESS (2)
@John 1: 16; @Ephesians 4: 13; @Ephesians 1: 22, 23
J.T. Our subject this morning has been the fulness of God; and now we have the fulness of Christ. These scriptures suffice to show the features of this side of the subject. First, the fulness as available to believers, "For of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace", @John 1: 16. Then it is the "measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" (@Ephesians 4: 13), which is a standard for us at which we are to arrive in the unity of the faith and knowledge. Then finally in @Ephesians 1: 23, the assembly is said to be Christ's fulness. God "has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". We may consider the subject in that order; first, the fulness of Christ being available to believers so that we receive of it, and then that the measure of the stature of it is a standard for us to arrive at, and then the place we have in that fulness. That is, the assembly is said to be the fulness of Christ as filling all in all, so that she has a great part in this subject.
G.J.B. Would you say this is finality?
J.T. It is the subject in its finality. The verse in @Ephesians 1 shows the setting of the coming world when Christ is to appear as Head over all things to the assembly. It is finality in that sense. The assembly has a great part in it, for it is His body. Evidently the idea of its being His fulness is in the fact of its being His body.
G.J.B. Is this the end of His ways with the assembly?
J.T. It is testimony, I think, running on to the millennial state of things and merging in the eternal state of things. The assembly has a great place with
{153}
Christ in the future, as she has in testimony now, and it lies in the fact that she is His body; she has a peculiar place as His body.
J.D. What precedes the first scripture you read is, "full of grace and truth"; then "of his fulness we all have received". Would that be the fulness of grace and truth that was seen in Him, taken note of by believers?
J.T. It seems to be the apostle's words, for he says, "We all have received, and grace upon grace", and then he adds, "for the law was given by Moses: grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ", so that is what is in his mind. It would be, therefore, that feature of fulness that meets our need, grace meeting our need and carrying us through, for there is no limit to it. It is "grace upon grace", and it is spoken of here from the standpoint of experience, for the writer speaks of the experience of others, the reception of grace upon grace.
L.E.S. Would the bearing of the thought of fulness we are now considering be linked up with "when the fulness of the time was come", @Galatians 4: 4?
J.T. That is another phase of our subject, "the fulness of the time". Time has a fulness which we see a little of, but it enters into what we are saying now. The fulness of time alludes to the introduction of sonship as over against minorship. It is really a lesser thought than what is before us, for we receive sonship. It is not the fulness of Christ, but fulness of time.
J.D. Does the thought of Father and Son in @John 1 enter into the fulness of grace and truth? It is said, "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father".
J.T. I think so. It is an antecedent of this. "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth",
{154}
and then "of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace. For the law was given by Moses: grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ".
H.G-h. What has been brought in in relation to this Person is going to remain.
J.T. That is right. The verb is singular, two ideas merging in it; "grace and truth" being one idea, one perfect blend in that Person. So that we should not alienate truth from grace, but grace comes first, because it is a question of man's need. The presence of the Son of God here on earth must of necessity raise the question of need. How is it to be met?
L.E.S. Would @Matthew 18: 21 enter into this "grace upon grace": "How often shall my brother sin against me and I forgive him?"
J.T. That is how it works out in us. There is to be no limit to it. "Grace upon grace".
H.G-h. Grace having to do with our need, it suggests the assurance that we shall be carried through.
J.T. It is a fixed thing; "grace and truth subsists", it says. It is not that grace has ceased in its effect in us, otherwise there would be lapses in our history. It is "grace upon grace" received, so that it becomes one history of drawing upon this inexhaustible reservoir of grace. Then "grace and truth" are one idea, fixed in Christ. So that grace will not be exercised without the experience of truth. "Subsists" is a singular verb, showing that they are not to be separated at all. They may act separately, as they do. Grace is the first thought, but truth is always there. It must come in.
J.L.F. Is that the thought of the word subsists; making it one thing?
J.T. The thought is that the singular verb makes it one idea. Grace may operate by itself, but truth is never to be overlooked. It is always to be in mind.
{155}
G.J.B. It is a continuous flow, is it not?
J.T. Yes, according to the need. He puts it here that it is received, so that it is a tangible thing. John has that in mind. Grace is not a theoretical thing, but tangible, and the speaker says, "We have contemplated his glory" and received His grace, and it is "grace upon grace".
J.D. Would the reception of it in our case be connected with what He gives in @Ephesians 4, "But to each one of us has been given grace"?
J.T. That is the idea. There, however, it is *gift*. He is really looking in @Ephesians 4 at the idea of *gift* to the end that we might arrive at the thought of fulness as a standard. We ought to arrive at the thought of fulness as a standard, and then we get some idea of fulness in the saints, how the thing applies to the saints. It is as we see the thing in Christ and arrive at the idea of the fulness of Christ.
G.C. Could we connect it with @Psalm 84: 7, "They go from strength to strength: each one will appear before God in Zion"?
J.T. That is good. Another potent thought is "from glory to glory". So that you have "grace upon grace", "glory to glory", "strength to strength".
C.S.P. Would these scriptures speak of the fulness of Christ, especially emphasising His manhood?
J.T. I think they do. It is a finite thought, not that we ever forget the infinitude of Christ personally, but when we speak of a standard at which we are to arrive, it must be a finite thought.
M.D.F. So that we are not only taken up in grace but we need grace all the way through.
J.T. It is the history of grace really, and it has different branches, as "Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace" (@Hebrews 4: 16), all opening up the subject in detail. John presents the great thought of fulness of Christ, and he has experienced it and others, not once or twice, but
{156}
indefinitely. "Grace upon grace", it is a continuous thing; wherever the need is. He is ready to meet it.
J.D. In man's activity there might be the tendency to run grace beyond truth, but your thought is that these two elements enter into the constitution of believers, both are blended.
J.T. You have the grace of the dispensation maintained in your soul. I believe that is included in what they were saying in the meeting at Jerusalem when the Lord came in, "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon". Simon would say, 'That is one of the instances that He appeared to me. Why should He appear to me? It is to exalt the idea of grace'. That is what they were saying. There is a great sinner and the Lord appeared to him first. He needed grace, not at that juncture because he was not then denying the Lord, but he needed grace and the Lord made a point that there was a flow of it to him.
J.L.F. What would you say was the difference between "full of grace and truth", and "grace and truth subsists"?
J.T. It really is that it is the prominent thing. The word 'subsists' would mean that it is sustained. All things subsist through Him. He maintains everything, but this is the particular thing that John stresses which you would expect, because he is dealing with christianity, and "grace and truth subsists". It is a fixture. It is a question of Christ being able to maintain them as over against the law given to them by Moses. The law did not subsist in Moses; it did not subsist in any tangible way, but was written on the tablets of stone. But here is a reservoir of grace in one Person, and maintained in one Person.
R.R.T. What we are having is just another aspect of the greatness of Christ. When here He was a
{157}
Person great enough for all the fulness to dwell in Him, and now this grace is of *His* fulness.
J.T. Yes, and He makes the thing available to man. How wonderful is the skill of it, for according to Colossians, the divine fulness is brought within man's range, in Christ bodily. Here we have the detail of it. The first thing mentioned is what meets need, the direst need is met; that is what is in the apostle's mind.
W.G.H. Is this the primary application of the fulness?
J.T. That is right. The application of it, but it is *Christ's* fulness, not God's fulness. It is the working out in an administrative way of what was there as He was seen baptised in Jordan. He is baptised and the Spirit comes down in acknowledgment from heaven. He is anointed and there is a voice heard saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight". John is giving account of how that applies to need here, to poor sinners. Here he says we have received it, so that it is a tangible, known thing. Surely every christian ought to be able to speak that way of Christ. We were speaking this morning of what *we* say about Him. This is Paul's side of the matter. John does not record that. He shows that any christian ought to be able to give some account of Christ, and of His fulness as it is applied, how it meets human need; and what a fine gospel text it is.
L.E.S. Paul would have a great impression of it, as in @1 Corinthians 15, where he refers to the Lord, and says, "Last of all ... he appeared to *me* also".
J.T. You would feel that. 'I was not deserving of it', he would say, 'because I had persecuted the assembly', but he could measure up with Peter, who would say to him, 'Well, Paul, I feel like that; I understand, because I was not deserving of it either.
{158}
but the Lord appeared to me also'; they knew that was the idea of grace.
J.F. Is this the exemplification of the Old Testament word, "Loving-kindness and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other", @Psalm 85: 10.
J.T. Yes, a very good scripture as entering into it.
J.D. Would that passage in @Titus 2: 11 come in, "For the grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men has appeared, teaching us ...". This grace of God carries with it salvation, and the idea of teaching enters into it here also.
J.T. That is another thing, the teaching of the grace which carries with it salvation for all men. That is a very fine statement. Who carried it? Christ carried it, but grace is personified. It is a wonderful feature of the dispensation. It has appeared and it carries salvation, but then it also teaches. A very important side that we should have the teaching of grace.
C.S.P. Would you say something on the activity of grace.
J.T. What was said in the meeting at Jerusalem when the two from Emmaus arrived, indicates that they had some inkling of how matters stood, that there was to be an administration of grace. Grace is to reign, it teaches us; the position is that "Grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 5: 21. He is the instrumentality of it. Not "in Christ" there, but through Christ, and I think the administration of it involves the kingdom. So we see how it heads a great system; it is absolute, grace is on the throne.
C.S.P. The psalmist says, "Grace is poured into thy lips", @Psalm 45: 2.
H.G-h. It is stated here, "For of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace". Is that part of the fulness?
{159}
J.T. It is part of the fulness, it is not all. Grace is part of it and stressed as the thing that meets our need. We are sure to speak of it first because christianity, from the standpoint from which we are viewing it, means that there is no reserve with God, that it is a final state of things, the last word, and meets conditions for you, and specially here, so as to culminate in eternal life. That is how it is set out in Romans. We all are to be characteristic christians. No doubt John speaks of himself, and he and others had direct contact with the Lord. They had to do with Him in a way no others had, but they speak of it, as if it is characteristic of christians. I think that we all might learn as we go on, that this is all a practical thing. We are christians; we have to do with christians who know very little of these things; let us convey something of the fulness that there is blended in the order of things we are in; there is an abundance, and we testify to it because we have received.
L.E.S. The administrative side in @John 20 is in keeping with it, "Whosoever sins ye remit" comes in first.
J.T. That helps. John is for the last days, whereas @Matthew 18: 18, binding and loosing, is for the beginning of things. "Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven". John looks towards the last days and has before him the loosing of souls by the Spirit. The Spirit knew many of the Lord's people would be bound up in human organisations in the last days, and that need is to be met in grace at first, not to convict them of sin exactly, but to occupy them with grace first, because there is so much that we have in common with our brethren in these organisations around. It is well to occupy them with the grace side first.
M.D.F. Christianity is the result of grace.
{160}
J.T. I think that is what is made clear. He appeared to Simon, and Paul says, It is that grace reigns through righteousness. It is not righteousness reigning, but grace through righteousness. Grace is first.
R.R.T. If that is true, what was so delightful to God in this blessed Person, full of grace and truth, from whom we have received grace, will come out in us delightful to God.
J.T. So that there is evidence of fulness. I think the idea of extension of what was in Christ is well to keep in mind. It does not say, 'In whom I have found *all* My delight'. The voice did not say *all*; I think God in heaven left room for the extension of Christ in His people, leaving room for the body.
J.L.F. Is grace reigning through righteousness a moral thought or does it have reference to the millennium or some special time?
J.T. It is the present time. @Romans 5 is "through ... Christ" and @Romans 6 is "in Christ". Grace is the way you are divinely taken account of, however guilty you may be, however bad you may be. God would say to you, 'I know that you are bad, and you know it too, but there is forgiveness with Me'; of course, the parable in @Luke 7 illustrates it beautifully: having nothing to pay he frankly forgave them both gratuitously, knowing the amount of the debt: "Her many sins are forgiven". The Lord did not minimise them. That is a wonderful expression of grace, and the woman knew it. She would say with John, 'Amen'. The sisters can always say that, whenever anything is said you know is true in your own experience, always say, 'Amen'.
J.F. Would you say that grace is expressed in the millennial order of things?
J.T. It is, of course, but it is more particularly now. Romans brings a man in guilty.
{161}
L.E.S. Paul says, "But the grace of our Lord surpassingly over-abounded with faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. Faithful is the word, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom *I* am the first. But for this reason mercy was shewn me, that in me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole long-suffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal", @1 Timothy 1: 14 - 16.
J.T. Yes, there you have one man speaking from experience. He was an insolent, overbearing man, and he can say, 'I am the chief of sinners. Grace has over-abounded toward me'. It is very fine when you get persons speaking experimentally; even if they do not speak in the assembly, they can say 'Amen' to confirm what is being said in your own experience. 'Amen' is the confirmatory word; that is what it is for.
R.R.T. In that sense there is an Amen in @Luke 4: 22, "All bore witness to him, and wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth".
J.T. Quite so. "Bore witness to him".
J.D. Coming back to grace reigning, it says in @Romans 5: 21, "Even as sin has reigned in the power of death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". Has that to be experienced in the souls of God's people?
J.T. Every christian ought to be able to say that. It is the effect of grace upon us acting of itself in supreme dominating ways. He could do nothing else. It is the idea of reigning; grace is on the throne.
J.D. So that the apostle could say in @Galatians 2: 19, "*I*, through law, have died to law". He had died to law by the application of the law to himself.
J.T. Yes, then grace reigning through righteousness, in the same soul, *where* death reigned on the
{162}
principle of law; there grace is reigning with a view to eternal life. It is the great end in view. I think the history of christianity on earth makes history in heaven. Every effect of grace upon earth affects heaven in a peculiar way, even in bringing about repentance in the soul. One of the most interesting things we can think of is what heaven is thinking about, and is affected by. What occurs down here from the standpoint of grace is the extension of Christ and the flowing out of His fulness. What a thing christianity is, the resources that are there.
Rem. Grace says to me, I know exactly where you are.
J.T. Yes. "Come, see a man, who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" @John 4: 29. That woman would say, 'He knows all about me'. Those men knew the kind of woman she had been, but the Lord knew also. He brought light into her soul. What a sense she had of it as having met the Lord Jesus.
R.B. Would you say here is the conscious reception of grace, and there would be the bearing of like fruit?
J.T. That is the effect of it. Then it begins to teach you as has been remarked. Grace teaches us; that is, it regulates us and sets everything in order in our souls, and we know the why and wherefore of things.
R.B. Does it bring responsibility upon the one who has received grace, that he should show it unto others?
J.T. Exactly. That is what the Lord said to the man in Decapolis, "Tell them how great things the Lord has done for thee", @Mark 5: 19.
R.B. The Lord, in @Matthew 18, speaks of one who had been forgiven, but would not forgive another who owed him something. The Lord takes up the
{163}
question of how he had been forgiven, saying, "As *I* also had compassion on thee".
J.T. In @Mark 5 we read of the man at Decapolis, who went and told "how great things Jesus had done for him". He did not disobey the Lord; he implied that Jesus was God. God was there. It is Mark's and Luke's way of putting things. Jesus did it, but God did it.
G.C. Would you say reigning in life would be consequent upon grace reigning in you?
J.T. Reigning in life is a great thought, no doubt bearing on the future, the way we are to reign, reigning in life. That gives us the fulness really of what we are speaking of. It is the fulness of the thing, magnificence. We reign in life, not only are we forgiven.
J.F. What is the thought of truth here?
J.T. It is the regulating side. As we were saying about the woman at Sychar, the question begins with the thought of the gift of God. "If thou knewest the gift of God". If there is something to give, there is something to receive. "And who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". That was grace. She says, "Sir, give me this water". Jesus says to her, "Go, call thy husband, and come here". That was the truth. There rests the whole point of truth, but if she is to come into the thing, the state of her history has to be gone into. The truth is a perfect standard, and I feel there is something of it lacking, so that "he that practises the truth comes to the light, that his works may be manifested that they have been wrought in God", @John 3: 21. He faces the light, he is not afraid of it.
J.D. What would be the bearing of that verse in Timothy: "That thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the
{164}
assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth", @1 Timothy 3: 15?
J.T. It carries truth forward into disciplinary matters. The assembly is the pillar and base of the truth. Your behaviour in the house has to come to that, do you not think?
J.D. I was wondering as to distinguishing between grace itself and the mystery of piety. You have drawn attention to that verse, "God has been manifested in flesh" as peculiar to Christ alone. I was wondering if it would not be a necessity to have our minds fixed on the full thing in Christ Himself first.
J.T. Quite so. The assembly is the pillar and base of the truth. It acquired that from Christ. That is a wonderful verse which you quote, "God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory", @1 Timothy 3: 16. What was there was justified in the Spirit. Everything that Christ did was justified in the Spirit, not justified in the minds of the Pharisees or Sadducees, or Pilate or Herod, but justified in the Spirit. That is where it works out. The Spirit is full justification, so that when the Lord was here justification went on. "Seen of angels", as if He had not been seen before by them. It is a question of piety. It is a mystery. They had not seen it before. Now they have seen God, and He has been preached among the nations and believed on in the world. It is all to bring out what has happened, that this thing is established in experience. It is by experience. "Believed on in the world, has been received up in glory". It is established in heaven, established in faith below and justified in testimony by the Spirit here. That enters into the treasury of the assembly, the constitution of the assembly. That it is the pillar and base of the truth, and then all behaviour in it must have that in mind.
{165}
T.A. How can piety be applied to God?
J.T. Well, it could be applied to Christ. What is in mind is Christ become a Man. The incarnation is in mind. The manifestation of God is in Christ.
G.J.B. He was heard because of His piety.
J.F. Would it suggest God coming into our circumstances?
J.T. How supremely that was seen in Christ. "I have set Jehovah continually before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved", @Psalm 16: 8. The Psalms are full of this.
R.R.T. What you say about the woman in @John 4 fits in, she wanted to receive something. She is an example of one who received grace and truth. The fulness of grace was there for her; she also received truth and she went away conscious of having received something.
J.T. It was the truth side she presented really, because the point was to show that she was affected. The men of the city would know. She went to the men and this is what she said, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?". They might say, 'We understand something must have happened in that woman, she is different'. She is an illustration of "if Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness", @Romans 8: 10. She called attention to life made manifest.
W.B. Would you say a little more on the first chapter of John. It says, "And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we have contemplated his glory". My thought is the glory, "Glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth". Then it says, "For of his fulness we all have received", and in connection with fulness here truth is left out; it says, "grace upon grace". Then the next verse says, "The law was given by Moses: grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ". I
{166}
was thinking it would help if you would say just a little about the glory, and truth with the glory. When His fulness is mentioned, the word is that we have all received grace upon grace. It is grace upon grace; and then subsisting in Christ is grace and truth.
J.T. It is a wonderful section of John's writings. It is an introduction of the subject he has in mind, and is most charming spiritually, that the Word become flesh is contemplated. He is speaking of it from the standpoint of experience. "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth". That is the first thing, then he introduces John. John bears witness and cries, "He it is of whom I said, A man comes after me who takes a place before me, because he was before me". Now the Spirit of God would bring John as a believer before your mind at once, and he is crying about something. What is he crying? About the Person of Christ; he is urgently speaking about the Person of Christ. John brings him in here. He speaks to christians by bringing in John the baptist in this beautiful tribute, "He it is of whom I said, A man comes after me who takes a place before me, because he was before me". What a fine example that is for every christian in speaking about the fulness of Christ. Christ is so great and I am so little. Say it loudly. John was not whispering. We are told what John was saying, not thinking. He is saying it in the cry. He wants everyone to know that although he is a great servant, there is One preferred before him. That will enable me to be a second or a third amongst the brethren. I can be a second among the brethren if I have learned that. I do not think we will be much unless we can take a second place. Not that anyone can say I am to take a first place. Someone is preferred before me, and there was a good reason, "because he *was* before me". He says it in a loud voice.
{167}
Then it goes on to say, "Of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace". It does not mean that fulness does not include grace. There is one wave after another coming into my soul, and finally that grace and truth subsists, meaning that it is a fixed thing with God. God is not going to be diverted from it, no matter what happens in christianity. God will not be diverted until the time that grace is finished.
G.J.B. Is it right to say this is the introduction of the new man?
J.T. The new man is of course a creation. You can never speak of Christ as the new man. Grace is the effect of what Christ is in incarnation, not new creation. The new man is created in truthful righteousness, and holiness. I think those who speak from the standpoint of experience would say that that is the new man *in you*.
F.C.B. Is "grace upon grace" something additional to what we get in verse 12? "As many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God"? Does this "grace upon grace" go on in addition to that? Would it bring us into the full gospel of sonship as suggested in Christ as the only-begotten with the Father, not forgetting what is unique in Him?
J.T. "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father" lays the basis of the family for sonship, although John never says we are sons, except once, that is in @Revelation 21, and it is put on the ground of overcoming.
@John 1: 14 is the end of the prelude to the gospel and ought to be read in connection with chapter 20. These first 14 verses are a sort of introduction to the whole book. Believers have the right to take the place of children of God, for they are born not of flesh nor of the will of man, but of God. It is the family, only from the standpoint of children, and John later
{168}
says in his epistle, "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God". That is our position down here. It is the thought of the family in testimony here. In verse 15 of @John 1 he speaks of Christ in His supremacy and then that "of his fulness we all have received". He was "full of grace and truth", because of the need here. What a guilty sinner needs is found in grace. God says, 'I know all about the need and I have provided against it'. That relieves a man's conscience.
W.B. "Grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ".
J.T. That principle is fixed and God is not diverted from it. It is not simply that it is fixed in an arbitrary way, but it subsists in a Person. It is all according to His own mind. The idea of subsisting here is that the thing is characteristic of Christ, because you cannot have grace and truth in an abstract way. It is an applied thing. The Lord is characteristically that. He is always applying it so.
W.G.H. John presents the thing progressively. It is grace upon grace. It is an advance. In @John 9, in the blind man, you get family thoughts and associations introduced. Do they not exemplify the thought?
J.T. Yes, it is constant in the gospel. I suppose Luke furnishes the best illustration of it, how Peter and the apostles one after another came into it. Peter when he was first touched said, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man", but then he fell down at His knees. He knew grace was there.
E.McG. Would Stephen fit in here, that he was full of grace and power. Then he expressed it in what he said before he died?
J.T. Yes; he represents more "from glory to glory". His face shone as an angel's. He was so like Jesus, as he kneeled down and prayed for those who were stoning him. The first is an angelic glory,
{169}
the second is a moral glory. It is "from glory to glory". He saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God. He saw the glory and Jesus. He reflects all that down here. He is an excellent illustration of the word, "from glory to glory" -- "We ... are changed into the same image from glory to glory". The first glory does not disappear, but it takes on another and another.
M.D.F. God has left the system of works and now it is a question of grace in contrast to works. It is an active thought.
R.R.T. Is that why it says, "through Jesus Christ". It does not say 'in Him', but 'through Him'. He is the channel.
J.T. Not only the vessel of it, but the channel of the flowing out in the administration of it.
W.B. Why is the law given by Moses brought in at this point?
J.T. To bring out the contrast of the dispensation. The law did not subsist in Moses, but "grace and truth subsists" in Christ. That is an active thought, a stated thing, not a theoretical thing..
J.D. Would that verse in @2 Corinthians 3, which speaks of the ministry of the Spirit subsisting in glory, involve the work of the Spirit in the souls of the saints?
J.T. It subsists in glory; it is a fixed thing, but it is an active thing. The Spirit is active.
J.D. Many of us have thought that grace and truth are abstract.
J.T. Something outside of ourselves rather than the Spirit maintaining these things in our souls.
G.C. It is the activity of grace. Grace is effected in our souls according to our delight in Him. There is the effect of grace and then we begin to praise that Person to others.
J.T. There is the idea of extension. The apostle says that "No one has seen God at any time; the
{170}
only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". It is the full thought of God being brought out by the Son in the bosom of the Father.
H.G-h. What is the distinction between grace and truth and what you read in Ephesians as to the faith system?
J.T. That brings us to @Ephesians 4. The subject begins really with verse 1 and runs on to verse 16 and it is to show that the assembly was self-edified as a result of the ministry of gifts. They were given "with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ; until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". That is the setting of our passage and what is in mind is our arriving at this thought, "the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". But it is in the unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son of God. I think that is what is meant, for the truth of christianity is not preserved in writings or creeds but in the faith of our souls. I think that is what is meant, not simply that we have faith, but I think the faith includes what is held in unity. There is the unity of the Spirit in verse 3 and the unity of the faith in this verse. We are not endeavouring to maintain the unity of the Spirit at the expense of truth. Unity of the faith goes with that.
H.G-h. Would you say that the knowledge of the Son of God is that which gives life and impulse to it all?
J.T. That is the next thing, "the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God". That is another side brought in. The knowledge of the Son of God, I apprehend, here is the knowledge of Him as setting out sonship, laying the basis for sonship.
{171}
J.A.T. "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father". When the disciples said, "Where dwellest thou?", the Lord answered, "Come and see". Where did they come to?
J.T. It is John's way, a spiritual thought. "Come and see". John would have the people of God to prove things for themselves. You might say if you were there and followed the Lord, that He went to a certain street and to a certain house, but that would not be a spiritual thought. "Come and see" is a spiritual thought. It is where He is spiritually. They went with Him and abode with Him that day. They contemplated His glory, it was there to see. That is the idea with John. Come and prove the thing itself.
J.A.T. John says, "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father". He would invite His disciples to see where He dwelt.
J.T. You have to bear in mind that it is in the bosom of the Father. "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father", not who was. There are those who would make that His place in Deity before incarnation, but that is not the point. The point is declaration, and refers to His place in manhood. This was written long after Christ went to heaven, but anyway the idea is spiritual. "Come and see" is spiritual. You get a grasp of the Lord's living associations. Luke says that He used to go to the mount of Olives at night. If you wanted to know where He dwelt, you would have to go there. It is a spiritual thing.
W.G.H. We are to arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God. It is the full-grown man, the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ.
J.T. I apprehend it is more Christ as a pattern for the family. It is not the incarnation. "No one knows the Son but the Father". Here it is all that
{172}
is known of Him as Man; as the Leader. He is bringing many sons to glory. He has perfected the thought of our salvation. He is on that line, the pattern of the family. We cannot arrive at the inscrutability of His Person.
H.G-h. Is it possible for a person to have all the outline of christianity as a doctrine and not know the Son of God who gives light to all?
J.T. We are to arrive at the knowledge of Him, what He is as with the Father; what Scripture opens up to us.
G.C. I suppose John would give us the way to that, the one who was in the bosom of Jesus?
J.T. You can see the relation between the two thoughts. The bosom of the Father is a receptive thought, and so in @John 13 John was in the bosom of Jesus. The word suggests what is receptive, that you draw one to you, but John also leaned on the breast of Jesus. That is another word. We have nothing about the breast in @John 1: 18. He was in the bosom of the Father. I think the declaration includes the Declared as well as the Declarer. He is part of the Deity. The "Him" is not there in the original. As declared, what we had this morning, really involves the fulness of Deity.
T.A. The first thing that is said in Luke at His birth is, "The holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God". John speaks about His being in the bosom of the Father.
J.T. John does not present the birth of Christ when he says, "The only-begotten Son". He does not present the public side of His position. He presents Him in fulness as acting in the testimony, and when he says, "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father", he speaks of Him as from God's side, and as the One who made the declaration. The word 'declaration' means to bring out God. He has brought Him out into public view. It is declaration.
{173}
It is fulness brought out. Revelation is that you remove a veil and look in. Here in @John 1: 18 it is declaration, the Son from the divine side. We have no part in it. That is purely the function of Christ viewed on the divine side, and as conscious of love. @Ephesians 4 is sonship on our side. The Son of God is the Leader of the family thought, the pattern of the family. We know Him in that way. John in the bosom of Jesus is in the place of the Urim, in the place where he knows things. In @John 1: 18, it is not the principle of sonship, but the place of love and light.
J.D. What is your apprehension of arriving at the knowledge of the Son of God as in @Ephesians 4?
J.T. It is what is there. It is such a thing as that. I believe we get the idea of the treasury, what the apostles reached as christians belongs to the treasury. The Spirit has it, and it is there for me to arrive at.
J.D. I was thinking of Paul's challenge about not coming to Corinth in @2 Corinthians 1: 19, 20. He says, "For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus), did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him. For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us".
J.T. Paul refers in the previous verses to uprightness and transparency which are to be reflected in the saints when Christ is preached. It is the Person that is presented to man and the preachers are in accord with that. The Son of God has to be apprehended as the Head of the family. He is to be the firstborn among many brethren, and I believe arrival at that knowledge is what is meant here.
J.D. Do you think that is why He asked the man in @John 9, "Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God"?
{174}
J.T. The time had come for it. The man was ready for all that was to be known about that Person.
W.G.H. It is a matter of experience, a matter of *arrival*.
J.T. We have Paul using that word in Philippians, in saying that he might arrive at the resurrection. He wanted to arrive at it. It was a known thing, that had to be reached, and this is a known thing. You will want to reach it. It is there to be reached.
H.G-h. In speaking of the knowledge of the Son of God, is it the fulness of Christ?
J.T. It is the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. It is fulness in that sense, that it is what He is towards God, and as the pattern Man, the fulness that is expressive of the kind of man God is pleased with, is delighted with. In @John 1 it is what comes into us of the fulness, but this is the other side.
J.D. Has the full grown man every spiritual faculty developed?
J.T. The fullness is in measure of the stature, the use of the word 'measure' shows that it is a finite thing; it is a finite thought. In these scriptures there is what is measurable in us and immeasurable in Christ.
{175}
THE FULNESS (3)
@Ephesians 1: 22, 23; @1 Corinthians 12: 12, 13; @Colossians 1: 18
J.T. The scripture in Ephesians teaches us that the assembly as Christ's body is the fulness of Christ who fills all in all, and that He is Head over all things to it. It suggests the wisdom of looking into the subject of the body in the different epistles in which it is mentioned, for it is a great feature of the truth. It is mentioned in Romans in a very elementary way in chapter 12, in which it is stated that "we, being many, are one body in Christ". It is not the body of Christ in Romans; the truth does not take us that far. It is one body in Christ, our status outside of the world, for "in Christ" implies an out-of-the-world status. Then in 1 Corinthians we have the further thought linked on, that is in chapter 10. Paul says, "we, being many, are one loaf, one body"; then in chapter 12, we have the body mentioned, and that we are baptised by one Spirit into one body, and are made to drink into one Spirit. The chapter enlarges on the subject as the Lord may help us to touch on it. In Colossians the body is brought in in the verses read, as an element of the greatness of Christ, He is Head over it. We have the whole thought there. He is Head of the body, the assembly. All these scriptures are to be understood if we are to see how great a position it has in Ephesians in view of the future. The Lord Jesus is said to be given to be Head over all things to it, and then it is stated that it is His fulness.
C.S.P. Is the thought in Ephesians, given to be Head over all things to the assembly, in contrast to what is put under His feet?
J.T. Quite so, but the assembly, as you might say, has part in the headship. It is the way in which
{176}
the Lord expresses Himself. Indeed, it is His fulness. The fulness presented in a very concentrated way in the saints. It is what He is in the saints viewed as His body, that He has that which is directly affected by His headship, and the headship extended universally, in that way, so that the body becomes a medium. It is fulness of Christ towards the universe apparently.
J.D. Would you say a few more words on the setting of the truth of the body in @Romans 12. You use the word 'status'.
J.T. It is like all the features of the truth in Romans; it has a delivering effect, a saving effect, especially now when there are so many bodies, so many organisations of men: trade unions, Masons, Oddfellows, and a lot of other less notable organisations of men. It seems to be an element in our makeup naturally that we link on with others; indeed, at Shinar they said, "Let us build ourselves a city and a tower". It was a collective idea. They were all having part in it, and all such organisations are inimical to the truth, particularly those secret ones. I think the allusion in @Romans 12 is to bring out the status of the assembly; that is, of the saints viewed as *a* body. It is not said to be Christ's body, it is simply that as one body we have many members, but all the members have not the same office. Thus we, being many, are one body in Christ. I think "in Christ", is to lift us outside the range of everything else. It gives it an out-of-the-world status, and has a delivering effect upon us. It is a degrading thing and unseemly for a christian to belong to any other body; there is only one body *in Christ*.
J.D. Do you think that it is the character of Christ coming out in the body in @Romans 12? It is characteristic, such a body as that, Christ's body.
J.T. It does not go so far as Christ's body, but there are the many persons. As in Rome, that is
{177}
how it should be taken up. A christian in Rome when this letter was read would say (some of them might be more or less social, some having different settings in the world), 'Well, I see now that I cannot belong to any worldly affairs. I cannot be a member of any of these things, any of these guilds or whatever they may be called, secret societies or whatever they be'. I do not know that they existed then, but they exist now, and it is a question of the bearing of Scripture at any time. So that a scripture written then, though eighteen hundred years previous to our time has its bearing on us. The Spirit of God wrote the Scriptures having in view the variations of history, so that it is a question of our seeing the bearing of it on our times. Hence, a christian in any secret society or trade union would be uneasy when he heard this letter read in the assembly, as Phoebe brought it to the brethren. No doubt they came together and read it. They had the Bible readings in that way, especially when the apostle came for the first time. What great interest there would be and how everyone would be challenged by what was said.
H.G-h. Would the truth of Romans, being on individual lines, prepare them for the truth of the body later on?
J.T. That is right. The truth of the body works out in relation to the will of God. That is how the initial idea of it stands. @Romans 12 says that we "may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God", and "present your bodies a living sacrifice". That is how we prove the good and acceptable and perfect will of God. Each of us is to come to that, that we are here for the will of God and to prove that it is good. It is a happy thing to be in, not an irksome thing. It is good and acceptable and perfect. That works out in the body, because when you come to 1 Corinthians it is stated that the
{178}
bread which we break is the communion or fellowship of the body of Christ. That body was for the will of God here, the body of Christ, and then Paul goes on to say, that "we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf". In partaking of the one bread, we are committing ourselves to the will of God so perfectly maintained in Christ's body. "Lo, I come ... to do, O God, thy will", @Hebrews 10: 7.
We are said also to be "sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all" (@Hebrews 10: 10), so that we are committed to the idea of the will of God in partaking of the Lord's supper. That is a very important lesson. It comes home to us when we partake of the Lord's supper. That is our profession in the partaking of the Lord's supper; we are committed to the fellowship. In @1 Corinthians 12 we are said to be "Christ's body". That is the order in which it stands, that being amenable to the will of God we are morally equal to the thought of being Christ's body. "The Christ" in @1 Corinthians 12: 12, is the body of the saints, viewed as anointed. God committing Himself formally to it as we commit ourselves to His will.
L.E.S. The body would prohibit any other will, would it not?
J.T. That is the idea. We are committed to the will of God in carrying it out, and God says, I will commit Myself to you. I believe that is the *order* of the truth, even seen in the Lord's own path; where the will of God was everything to Him, and God committed Himself to Him.
M.D.F. We are to keep free from every other fellowship.
J.T. It is consistent to do that. It is a matter of consistency that one holds himself in relation to the will of God as partaking of the Lord's supper. The idea is that we are all partakers of that one bread.
{179}
J.D. As to the body and the bread which we break, connecting that with the passage in Hebrews, "a body hast thou prepared me", it was in that body that the will of God was effected, and if we take that bread we are to follow in the steps He took.
J.T. It is worked out in @Ephesians 1, that the assembly is in such a place that the Lord is Head over all things to it, not of it. It is not brought in there as part to which He is Head. He is Head to it, and it is evidently because it is His fulness, that it has part in the headship, you might say. A very great and glorious thought relative to us, and the Lord I am sure would help us to grasp it.
J.F. Would you say 'head to it' suggests our apprehension of Him?
J.T. That would underlie it, as a husband is head over the family, so he is head *to* his wife. That is the principle, that she has part in the headship. In truth she does come under the headship, as @Colossians 1: 18 would teach us, but Ephesians is a greater thought that she has part in the headship because she is His fulness. The organism is so perfect that He is reflected in His body. Union underlies this. The two are one flesh, one idea in the two. All is in view of headship working out in the universe, and it comes out now in the saints in the assembly. You get what comes out from Christ immediately, the truth of the assembly. The universe does not get His movements directly; they get it through the assembly, His body, which is His fulness.
J.D. Going back to the partaking of the loaf, setting forth the body of Christ, and our communion with it, how in a practical way would that affect the practice of the saints? If for instance, a brother or sister not walking in the truth, in some sect perhaps, dies, would it be right, as brethren breaking the loaf, to attend the funeral services if a sectarian would be in charge?
{180}
J.T. It would be confusion; one would compromise the fellowship. Of course, if you are a natural relative of the person, you would show your respects, what is seemly, by visiting the place or house and maybe having prayer with them and the like, whether it might be a Presbyterian or any one. I would be free for myself, and have done so to help them as christians, and to have a little prayer with them, but not with a clergyman in charge of the funeral. That would involve the truth, and we would have to bear that in mind. The Lord said to the man in @Luke 9: 59, "Follow me. But he said, Lord, allow me to go first and bury my father". The Lord said, "Suffer the dead to bury their own dead". I do not like to make it too strong where they are christians, but suppose it is not a christian. You would have to have some respect for them and you would have a way to show interest, but you could not go beyond that. It is a question of letting the dead bury their dead.
J.D. If, for instance, it was some of the sects, such as open brethren or other independent companies of brethren so-called, if they were in charge of the services, you would not be free to go to the burial service.
J.T. I would be less free to go there than anywhere, because there you have imitation of the truth, which is the worst kind of opposition.
W.G.H. The practical working out of 2 Timothy would have to come into consideration.
J.T. Quite so. That is how we must arrive at all truth today. All collective truth, relative to the assembly, has to be approached now through that avenue. We have to learn how to cease to do evil before we can learn to do well, and that involves the working out of the truth of the body, because it is the will of God initially. The Lord coming into His body said, "Lo, I come ... to do ... thy will",
{181}
that is to be continued down here. The Lord personally has gone to heaven, but the will of God must go on here, and Romans teaches us how we come into that. In @Romans 6 our very hands and feet are members of Christ as they come under the will of God, and in chapter 12 we have the increased thought of presentation. "Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service. And be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God". That is what everyone desires and it leads up to our being one body in the sense of so many persons of that kind. Not yet called the body of Christ, but one body *in Christ*, so as to get the status outside of the world.
L.E.S. It is mentioned to elevate our thoughts and minds and help us in regard to our responsible history here; that is the setting in Romans.
J.T. I think so. You feel you can see how it would work in your town in regard to all societies, school clubs, young people's clubs, golfing clubs or may be other sports, countless things that take on this character. I may be linked up; you may say it is harmless, but it is below the status I am given. I am brought into, something called a body that is in Christ, lifting up a christian in Rome above the status of the emperor even, and what goes with this is newness of life, newness of spirit, and that sort of thing. It is to give us a status outside of those things, for it is degrading for a christian to have part in them.
R.R.T. The essential thought in a body is a vessel for the will of God. That is, whether it be in Christ in taking a body, or the assembly viewed as the body here, or our natural body individually, it is a vessel for the will of God.
{182}
J.T. That is it exactly. You can see that we can be of no use to God in this world in a disembodied condition. It is a great moral feature in Romans that a believer rescues his body in this way from being linked up with anything here.
R.R.T. So that in Ephesians here it says He is "head over all things to the assembly, which is his body". The Lord in His body was the perfect expression of the will of God, and that fulness is to be expressed in the assembly, which is His body.
J.T. We have the fullest position, the greatest position of the assembly in these verses, but what is more needed by us here this morning is to get the initial idea so that the thing is not a theory. I am a part of this, and to be that I must learn to yield my members unto God. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin". It has ceased to respond to the workings of sin. It is dead in that relation. That is what @Romans 8 says, and I believe the best illustration of that is the woman in @John 4. The result is seen in her body; there was what she had been, and how she was affected publicly. She leaves her water pot. She brought that to carry water home, but she left it and went away by herself. The teaching is that she understood what the Lord said as to her body, that it would be a vessel of living water and she goes to the men of the city and says, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" Anybody could say that this woman had another Man in her mind, not men, not five husbands or six, but one Man, and that leads to @2 Corinthians 11: 2, "for I have espoused you unto one man". She is really affected by that one Man so that her body is immune from the influence of the men of the city. She influences them, that is, Christ is in her. She is the best illustration of one who fits into the body. She has learned
{183}
the truth as to her body, that it is to be a member of Christ.
T.A. Where does risen with Christ come in?
J.T. That comes in Colossians where we reach the thought of headship in Christ; as understanding that He is the source of everything, the whole body draws upon Him. It leads up to that, but the verse read from Colossians is to bring out the whole idea of the assembly as under Christ's headship. He is Head *of* it, not to it. It is governed by His wisdom directly, but in Ephesians He is Head *to* it, so that the headship works out in it towards the universe.
A.D.S. In connection with Christ being Head to the assembly, is it the thought that impulse flows from the head of the body in relation to the will of God?
J.T. Yes, that is Ephesians. I think it is the thought that it flows out indirectly to the universe. It is direct in regard to the assembly. Headship is direct, in fact it is one thought, "The two shall be one flesh". I believe "to the assembly" works out so that the operating is in unity, the assembly being the fulness of Christ.
J.L.F. Do you see it worked out in the heavenly city?
J.T. That is the counterpart of what we are speaking of. It is John's way of putting it. The heavenly city is really the assembly, only viewed as a city, but it has the glory of God and it governs or influences the universe, and we can understand how that would flow out of Christ's headship. John does not treat of the body, but it is a collateral thought.
J.D. Do you think there is the thought of Adam and Eve in this verse in Ephesians, "Head over all things", "The two shall be one flesh"? Head of all things to the assembly places it alongside of Christ.
J.T. That is the thought. She is the counterpart, and the added thought of one flesh, it really means
{184}
the word 'union'. We have the thought in the New Testament, and the thought enters into these two verses, headship flows out of one idea, but through the assembly, so it comes to the universe indirectly. Not simply the assembly as under headship, but the medium of headship, as if a husband is absent and the wife expresses his feelings towards the children. The children are never of the same status as the wife in the household.
J.D. Do you think "over all things" would enforce the great thought as to Christ's headship?
J.T. That is the way the thing stands. What has been alluded to in Revelation helps. You see how the city coming down works out. How marvellous it is!
H.G-h. Then you view headship in the light of Ephesians, as the assembly really, the administrative body?
J.T. That is how it works out. The word 'administration' would fit better as applied to the city than as applied to the body, for headship is the working out of the mind of the head, not simply enacting something, but the working it out so that the whole universe comes under the direction of Christ, but the operation is through the assembly. How important that young christians should see how we come into this, beginning with the idea of the will of God.
You have the assembly which is His body. What is in mind here is the body, because it is a question of union. The word 'assembly' really stands in another setting, but it is to identify the one thing viewed as the body. The word 'assembly' means persons called out, and intelligent persons, but the word 'body' implies an organism. It is extremely fine and delicate. Our own bodies are illustrations of it. How wonderful that your members respond! that is the idea. Every saint is contemplated as so free from
{185}
extraneous matter, his own will, that he moves under the impulse of Christ. It is a marvellous thing. It is a figure, it really refers to the number of saints formed after Christ, innumerable, as we say, but all under His headship. How marvellous! Now it works out, for brethren in Australia, England or New Zealand are all actuated by the same impulse, and I believe God is helping us through the wonderful things that have been disclosed in His creation. By what we call radio power -- these things are inscrutable -- you can speak to a brother ten thousand miles away. That is not man's invention; that is God's. There may be wonderful things that no one knows of but God Himself. But I mean these things show how real the thing is. They are practical evidence of what is possible, and much more so of an actual living organism where things are so tender and delicate and sensitive that the least movement of Christ is felt and reflected in the spiritual brethren all over the world.
J.D. Would it be right to look here at the body as the rib taken from Adam?
J.T. That is Ephesian truth, the actual type in @Genesis 2. The animals were brought to Adam and he named them. God delighted in what this creature of His could do. What delight God had in that, as He saw Adam naming each creature! He did not alter the names in one instance. I think it is to bring out what a wonderful being Adam was. But then it says there was no one his like, his counterpart, not in all these creatures. Adam was alone and God says, "It is not good ... I will make him a helpmate, his like", his counterpart, and hence the deep sleep when God took out of him a rib and builded a woman. It is the first use of the word 'build'. He brought her to man, who had a wonderful instinct of what God was doing, and so he says, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall
{186}
be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man". That is wonderful intelligence, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and cleave to his wife; and they shall become one flesh". That is Ephesians.
G.C. You made a distinction between the anointing in Corinthians and Romans.
J.T. The anointing is not mentioned in Romans. It is as I understand to bring out the status of the assembly or the saints viewed, not under headship but under the common word 'body'. That word applies to other bodies. This body is taken out from the midst of them and set up in Christ, that is Romans. In Corinthians the idea comes in in connection with the bread, that each of us commits himself in partaking of the bread, and professes to be a member of Christ in that way. So that we are all partakers of one bread. The term "the Christ" is applied in @1 Corinthians 12: 12, in a peculiar way. It really alludes to the body, the saints. We are anointed collectively.
G.C. It is an important point to see.
J.T. It is a question of God committing Himself to us. We take the place of Christ down here, and carry out the will of God. The anointing means that God commits Himself in that public way. I believe, in the Lord in Luke, the idea of the will of God is there, and God says, "In thee I have found my delight". The Lord could say, "Yea, thy law is within my heart". And God anointed Him. God commits Himself to Him. He is a divine Person, but nevertheless the word 'found' alludes to that Person.
R.R.T. Viewing man in @Genesis 2, as you were saying, as head over all things to Eve, is that the thought in Ephesians, "Head over all things to the assembly, which is his body". Christ as Head in that way makes available His fulness through the body, for the will of God?
{187}
J.T. Well, I think that is the way it works out. There are other allusions to the body in this epistle. It is said "There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling", (@Ephesians 4: 4), and that is to govern us in relation to the unity of the spirit, that we should be universal in our outlook. Then it says that the gifts, in the same chapter, are for the edifying of the body of Christ. That would mean, that gift, ministry in the power of the Spirit from an ascended Christ, is to edify or to build up the saints viewed as the body. That is what gift does. It is the effect of ministry, but it runs on down to verse 16 where we are told that the body edifies itself. That is, you gradually come on to the thought of independency in the organism. Independency of all else, for it is self-edifying in love. You can see how that leads up to the great thought in chapter 1, so that the Lord can take that on and use it, it being so sensitive that it builds itself up. It is in itself a means of edification, a great thought for us in our local gatherings and meetings for ministry, as we call them, and all our relations with one another, that we will be self-edified in love. You can see how it reaches on to the Eve condition, where she is viewed as a perfect creature, being taken out of Ish, being formed and built by God Himself. The word 'build' corresponds to the word 'edify' in this epistle. It is the same idea. She is brought to the point where she is brought to Christ and united to Him. The two shall be one flesh.
J.L.F. Is the thought in Corinthians the same as @Romans 12, there is one body?
J.T. It goes further. We being many are one body *in* Christ, is what is said in @Romans 12. In Corinthians it is said we are all baptised in the power of one Spirit into one body. That certainly goes beyond.
{188}
J.L.F. I was thinking of the word "there is one body and one Spirit". Does that go back and include the thought in Romans, on the same level as one body in Christ?
J.T. I think Corinthians would be more in mind, for they are all lifted up to a higher level in Ephesians. You would get the scope of the truth in Corinthians and Romans. The more you look at Ephesians the more you feel yourself in the third heaven, as it were. You are placed in a certain place with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies; you are taken out of this world altogether.
J.D. @Ephesians 4: 16 speaks of the headship of Christ, "From whom the whole body, fitted together, and connected by every joint of supply, according to the working in its measure of each one part, works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love". That the saints come to the knowledge of the Head is absolutely essential to the working out of the last part of this verse?
J.T. The scripture is leading up to verse 16 which we had yesterday, the fulness of Christ. We arrive at that, and then, holding the truth in love, we may grow up to Him in all things, who is the Head, the Christ, and then "from whom"; He is the source of supply. But it all develops, and there is the working out of the thought, so that it refers to the power of self-edifying. There is power of edification even if you do not have special gift. It is the organism in itself; it is not Christ; it is edification.
J.D. It is fitted together. Would you say that underneath all this is the work of the Spirit in forming the saints together in this workable way? It really has a local application.
J.T. It has. It begins in Romans in the recognition of the law of God, but when you come to the organism you get very fine thoughts, so that you have here, for instance, the working in its measure
{189}
of each one part. That is a very fine thought, the idea of measure as fitting into the body. I must function and you must function according to measure. Everything in the human body must be on that principle, every member must function according to its setting and what it is called upon to do, according to the working in its measure of every other part. The assembly works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love, every member being in his place, not simply in a public way as in Romans, but in the organism. The body in Romans hardly goes so far, although it is a figure of the human body, but the organism is stressed in Corinthians and Ephesians because of its fine sensitiveness in the Spirit, and the members in self-judgment denying and eliminating all the action of will, so that a brother may be sitting beside me and as I am speaking about the Lord, I become conscious that he has something. I become conscious it is the organism, and I sit down and then he gets up. It is a wonderful suggestion of the elimination of our own wills, all selfish feelings and ambition. It is loving each other better than ourselves. You let another have part in it.
L.E.S. Would you say that it is an organic unit? The Spirit suggests light within, but under the impulse of headship.
J.T. It is an organic unit, it is like the word 'union'. He shall be united to his wife and the twain shall be one flesh. The greatest possible conception in the universe viewed spiritually or physically is the relation of Christ to the assembly.
H.G-h. Is that effected here by what is administered by the gifts? Here is the working out of it.
J.T. @Ephesians 4 shows how it works out, by ministry or gifts, and it is self-edifying. The saints are so affected by the ministry, that they eliminate all selfishness, pride and ambition, and think of each
{190}
other in love, and the whole sensitiveness of the organism is free to operate.
J.D. Would you distinguish at this point between union and sonship?
J.T. Yes, but there is little time for that. I was going to say our subject this afternoon should be the fulness of time, which begins with sonship, and it will afford us an opportunity of taking that up, but I might say here that sonship is an individual and a family thought. It is not what enters into the organism at all. The idea of the organism is worked out from the will of God. It is the elimination through ministry and the power of the Spirit of all fleshly feelings and ambitions, all that emanates from the flesh, so that the believer is entirely secured for the Lord, and he has a place in the organism.
R.B. Would you make a distinction between the assembly and the body? The two words are constantly connected, and I wondered if there is any distinction in the value of the two words.
J.T. The word 'assembly' is used to designate the company as known here. It is linked with the word 'house', "that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God", @1 Timothy 3: 15. Then we have here "that He is given to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body". The assembly is the word used in Matthew. He says, "my assembly". It is viewed as something the Lord has in the way of intelligence and ability for warfare, that hades gates shall not prevail against. In Corinthians it is the public thought, generally God's assembly or Christ's assembly, or the assembly. It is a wonderful thing that God has here for administrative purposes. There are other things too, but regarded as the body of Christ, it is more an inner thought. It is a sort of secret thought. It is a mystery, really, so that there are secret workings
{191}
that the man after the flesh is utterly unable to take account of. In His people the Lord has a vessel in which His very thoughts and feelings are expressed and reflected, as you might say, organically. The saints express what Christ is. He is expressed in them, as His fulness here, and in the future too, so that the whole universe learns Christ, I believe, through the assembly viewed as His body.
L.E.S. Would you say that the practical effect of @Ephesians 4 is seen on the seashore in @Acts 20 where they fell upon Paul's neck and wept sore when he departed?
J.T. That would be quite so, and in other similar instances. It begins practically in one's experience as to how he takes account of the brethren that are nearest to him. That works out as to how you take account of the brethren as we partake of the Lord's supper. Where there is intelligence, but without love, these truths cannot be realised. It would refer to fine sensibilities and developed spirituality.
W.G.H. Would you connect the thought of display with the thought of the body?
J.T. Yes, in the organic sense, the Lord as expressed in His members. Ephesians is in mind, not only what you are but what you say.
W.G.H. In Corinthians would you get the thought of testimony as presented in wilderness conditions?
J.T. That is the idea of anointing; it is our present position here below, I think: it is Christ too in relation to the testimony here. I do not think the idea of anointing goes into eternity. You get it in connection with the tabernacle, but not the temple. The tabernacle was anointed, but not the temple. I think it means that it is not a question of God dignifying us in eternity, but what we are, and that is the relationship of sons, what the saints are personally, the dignity that attaches to them. They are in relation to God as sons.
{192}
J.D. The idea of the body in that sense ceases with the end of the thousand years, and the thought of sonship goes on into eternity.
J.T. The family thought will prevail. I would not like to say that the thought of the body will cease. The idea of the anointing attaches to us as down here, and will go on into the millennium. Wherever testimony is in mind you get the anointing.
J.L.F. Would you say whatever may come out in the assembly publicly, the secret behind it all is the body?
J.T. Quite so. The organism is the centre; there is that working which is hidden for the reason that the assembly is Christ's body. I would not think the nations or even Israel will have the same view of Christ. There will be the holiest and the holy place. Then we have an immediate relation, in our union with Christ. No other body has that, no other family of God has that status.
J.A.T. How do you connect the body with the assembly?
J.T. It is just another word used to designate the same thing, only it conveys a different thought. The idea of the assembly is very largely order and administration here, whereas the body is another view implying organism. It applies to the same persons, but implying the spiritual refinement and peculiar setting that we have as united to Christ.
J.A.T. The house was provisional and the assembly eternal.
J.T. That is true. The house is another phase of it. It is a provisional thought down here because it extends back to Jacob. But we have "my Father's house" in @John 14: 2 which is another thought altogether and covers all the families including the assembly.
W.B. Would you say a few words on the parts of the body that Scripture brings before us, like the head, the heart, the bowels, and the feet, just so
{193}
that we might understand in reading the Scriptures, like "bowels of mercies", for instance.
J.T. These are called automatic organs, alluding peculiarly to the saints viewed as the body. That they work automatically, means that the Holy Spirit produces these different feelings and affections and sympathies without the head. There are things happening constantly with us without the action of the head, but the head and brain must be brought in in speaking. But things are occurring all the time which are automatic.
L.E.S. The introduction to Corinthians and Ephesians is very interesting. One is addressed to the assembly of God, and would be more on the lines of public order; the other to the saints and faithful in Christ Jesus.
J.T. So you can see it is the saints themselves personally that are in mind. Is that the thought? This thought that has been suggested about sonship ought to come up in our afternoon reading. It bears on what we are saying, but it comes in in connection with the fulness of time, a very interesting thought, and sonship stands related to that, so that if the brethren are satisfied with what we have had this morning, we could resume from @Galatians 4.
R.R.T. Is it digressing too much to ask you to say a word as to what it means by growing up to Him in all things, which is the Head, even the Christ (@Ephesians 4: 15)? It comes in in connection with this passage in Ephesians, in the increase of the body to its self-building up in love. Is that the way it works out, we grow up to Him?
J.T. That is what is in view in the chapter. You can see how union becomes a practical thing in the saints. In our intercourse with one another, growing up together in relation to the great idea of Christ being Head to us. How we gradually fit into the idea of the organism.
{194}
R.R.T. That seems a most precious thought, the increase of the body. That is linked up with growing up to Him who is the Head. It is a living thing, the body; there is the self-building up in love; it is self-increase in that way.
J.T. You can see the effort of the devil which the apostle is aiming at here, the systematised error, the terrible influences Satan would work, so as to counteract the influences of this wonderful organism in testimony here.
R.R.T. It is a wonderful thing to view this organism, and the power in itself to increase and edify itself in answer to the thoughts of God.
L.E.S. What a mighty testimony to the triumph of God is the body in Ephesians as over against the efforts of the seven sons of Sceva. I was thinking of the sense Paul had of the power of Satan, and how he brings in the highest character of his ministry, that which in itself would be a witness to the power of God to overthrow Satan's efforts.
J.T. We see in that instance how God can come in for us in dealing with systematised error and break up the combination; combined evil is the most potent evil. In Matthew it speaks of the assembly. We have more about twos in that gospel than in any other. It is because the assembly is an organism. It is systematised. The Lord says, I will build my assembly, and Satan's effort is to counteract it by systematised error. I suppose Rome is the greatest illustration of systematised error, the antiquities and ramifications exceed those of any other system that ever existed in the world. We do not perhaps see it, but it is working. The organism, the saints held together, growing up in love and holding the Head, is evidence of the full victory over all that, and the saints will be preserved. Without love there is no possibility of anything being preserved.
{195}
E.McG. Is there any difference between that and "For we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works", @Ephesians 2: 10?
J.T. That is another view. All these things work together; they are collateral lines. Workmanship of God, the building of God and all these things working towards the same end, so that God is going to have a perfect vessel. He has it now in principle, but presently every member will be there perfected. It will be complete and the universe will see what Christ is as reflected in the saints, His body.
G.C. The Lord speaks of ascending up on high that He might give gifts to the assembly. Is that an additional thought?
J.T. That is in this chapter. We speak of the members of the body, and the body of Christ, and the gifts, but the gifts seem to be an additional thought. The effect is the perfecting of the saints until we all arrive at the unity of the faith. How do we apply it? The measure of the stature of the fulness, and the body drawing from the Head, edifying itself in love, so that the gifts are not in view when the saints are functioning together in love. You may feel a brother is a gifted man, but he is a member. It is a great thing for us to know the gift and distinguish him as part of this wonderful organisation.
G.C. The Lord has entrusted the assembly with gifts to this end, and it seems to involve responsibility upon the whole as to how we treasure what the Lord has given.
J.T. It is a sort of endowment. The Lord will hold us accountable for what they have been to us. In Colossians Christ is Head of the body. Verse 18 of chapter 1 is to bring out the greatness of Christ. He *is* Head of the body, the assembly, but as to the working of it, we have to go to chapter 2, where we have the reference to "holding fast the head". It
{196}
enables us to shut out philosophy and ceremonialism, legality and all that. It is really on lower ground, more limited ground than Ephesians, but it is on the same line, holding the Head from which the body draws. In @Colossians 2: 18, 19, it says "Let no one fraudulently deprive you of your prize, doing his own will in humility and worship of angels, entering into things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by the mind of his flesh, and not holding fast the head, from whom all the body, ministered to and united together by the joints and bands, increases with the increase of God".
J.L.F. It does not go so far as self-edifying. It is just a statement as to increase as the Head is held and ceremonialism is shut out.
H.G-h. He should have the first place in everything. I was wondering if that would lead on to what we have been speaking of in Ephesians.
J.T. I think it does. Colossians is certainly leading on to Ephesians. Colosse was a remarkable assembly and one of those in Asia. It was not included in the seven assemblies in Revelation; it was an additional assembly, but intimately linked up with Laodicea. It was a remarkable assembly, and yet in danger of letting in philosophy and ceremonialism, and hence chapter 2 is to check that tendency. We do not get that in Ephesians. The increase of God would be the idea of divine fulness. That kind of increase could be seen in it and promoting it in the saints in their holding the Head so that God is brought into it. We must come back to God in everything. God is the great ultimate of all things. It is in all the epistles.
C.S.P. In Ephesians it is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Everything culminates in God, and the apostle prays to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and ends with the fulness of Him that filleth all in all.
{197}
THE FULNESS (4)
@Galatians 4: 4 - 7; @Ephesians 1: 9, 10; @Romans 11: 12, 25
J.T. Our first consideration will be in Galatians and Ephesians, the idea of fulness of time; then in Romans the fulness of Israel and the fulness of the nations, all these references being inclusive of the dispensational side of the truth.
The passage in Galatians says, "when the fulness of the time was come". We have in the earlier verses the idea of the period fixed by the father. That is an allusion to what any father may order in regard to his children, "As long as the heir is a child, he differs nothing from a bondman, though he be lord of all; but he is under guardians and stewards until the period fixed by the father. So we also, when we were children, were held in bondage under the principles of the world; but when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son". That alludes to the time fixed by God dispensationally for the introduction of sonship, the minor period, the period of tutorship, having continued up to Christ. The fulness of time involved not only so many years, but also certain developments in God's ways educationally. In that period the children were in bondage and were under worldly principles, not worldly principles in the sense in which we ordinarily speak, evil principles, but principles that fitted in with this world, that were recognisable by the natural man as he was, by the nations, but now, the fulness of the time having come, we have other principles. We have been released from that bondage through redemption, and sonship is entered into as something received: "that we might receive sonship".
J.D. With reference to what you have spoken of as educational, do you think the Spirit of God in Jude speaking of "Enoch, the seventh from Adam" would introduce the thought of the periods of the
{198}
servants in whom the mind of God has been set forth before?
J.T. That is right. From the time that sin came in, God began on that principle, working out things in periods, so the seventh from Adam would suggest a principle, seven being the working out of a thing spiritually. What began in Adam is worked out spiritually in Enoch; that is, he pleased God. @Genesis 5 is what we might call the life line, but chapter 4 is man's will in Cain; chapter 5 is recovery from that in Seth, so that the line is through Adam, Seth and so on. In Enoch we have the seventh. The divine thought is worked out in him in that he walked with God, and was not, for God took him, and before He took him Enoch had the testimony that he pleased God. That is to say, in one man anyway, there is evidence of what God is doing.
J.D. In connection with that, in Hebrews it says, "Enoch was translated that he should not see death". Do you think in the ways of God, it would permit us to look for men who should not see death? They are brought up to that point.
J.T. Yes, I think it foreshadows christianity. Cain is like the Jew. Those of us who move about the world see it as a distinctive murk of Cain on the Jew, and chapter 4 shows that it comes back to confession of having slain a man, even a young man to his hurt, but over against that we have in chapter 5 the re-establishment of the divine thought in Christ risen, typified in Seth. Eve says, Jehovah has given me one instead of Abel whom Cain slew. It is a distinct understanding of what the Jew did to Christ. Seth is Christ as the man appointed. That is the meaning of his name, and he would be Christ as He is now, and then we have the thought introduced of what man is. We have this word brought in, I think for the first time, in the name given to Seth's son, Enosh, a dying creature. That is, death has passed
{199}
upon all men. He was born to die. That is the acknowledgment evidently of faith. Then men began to call on the name of Jehovah; then chapter 5 brings out a new standard, the history of Adam is through Seth and they lived long, but they all died. But there is one who does not; although death is so pronounced, one man is immune and does not see it; he is translated because he pleased God. I think it foreshadows the present time, that no person's death is so stressed as the spiritual man's. I suppose death was stressed in no man outside of Christ, so much as in Paul. He stresses it as in himself, and I believe that is what is going on, what God is doing in enabling men, the saints, to rightly gauge death and have the sentence of it in themselves. Paul says, "We ourselves had the sentence of death in ourselves", and "I am crucified with Christ", which is the strongest thought of death. He accepted it himself. "But in that I now live in flesh, I live by faith, the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me", @Galatians 2: 20. I believe that is @Genesis 5, and is expressed in Enoch the seventh, full spiritual development in the saints, so that we have the idea there in the spiritual thought of seven. Then we have Noah inaugurating a new world here through the flood. Then we have Abraham. Here the line begins. So that there are fourteen generations from Abraham to David, and from David to the carrying away of Babylon is fourteen generations, and from the carrying away of Babylon to Christ, fourteen generations, and there is a working out of this in the periods, and it is on those lines we may reach an understanding as to what the fulness of times means; that is, when Christ is brought in. "God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law, that he might redeem those under law, that we might receive sonship".
{200}
M.D.F. There is a great change from previous dispensations to the present when God is coming out in the fulness of His love.
J.T. Sonship is a thing to be received; "that we might receive sonship". It is a great principle brought in in Christ in the fulness of times. You will notice how much is to be received. Paul speaks in the Scriptures about what is received. One could cite many instances of that, but this is one of the most interesting, that we might receive the thing.
W.B. In @Acts 1 it is said, "Lord, is it at this time that thou restorest the kingdom to Israel?" and the Lord says, "It is not yours to know times or seasons, which the Father has placed in his own authority". I find it difficult to understand that.
J.T. It is important to understand it. The Lord says, it is not for you to know times or seasons; that is, what should follow prophetically. The Lord is not alluding to what we are speaking of now, the fulness of time, the full result of the past dispensation, in alluding to that, for this is within the range of believers knowledge. It is not historical. In Galatians as was said, it is historical. The fulness of time had come and God has sent forth His Son that we might receive sonship. That is a historical fact, that those living in Paul's time, believers, might receive the thing that was there. It is there, that we might receive sonship. Any believer could take that in. It is a matter of light and "because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father". That is the consciousness of it. What the Lord alluded to there, as in Thessalonians, in saying that we do not know the times or seasons, shows clearly that it is not for anyone to prophesy as to when the Lord may come, or what may happen in the world. Men have gone the length of asserting the Lord will come at a certain date and have prepared for it. It is all futile
{201}
because the Lord Himself said expressly that that day no one knows, not even Himself. One of the most remarkable things, that the Son did not know. He says not, I do not know, but the Son does not know. The Father has reserved that. Our period is one of faith and hope that He will come, but when no one can say.
W.G.H. The fulness here in Galatians refers to time. The Son coming in would be the climax of that.
J.T. That is right. The time of minority was when the people of God were in the nursery, as it were, but now they are brought, so to speak, into fulness of liberty in the house. That is the idea. Still we have in 1 Corinthians "the ends of the ages", the dispensations; they culminate in the assembly. Paul says, "Upon whom the ends of the ages are come". Everything culminates in the assembly, all is worked out there, because it is so furnished and fitted with intelligence and wisdom in the Spirit that everything is intelligible in the assembly.
J.D. Do you think that would be involved in the mystery in @Colossians 2, "in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge"? Would that take in the ways and thoughts of God, all gathered up and placed in the assembly?
J.T. I think so. Matthew speaks of one "who brings out of his treasure things new and old", @Matthew 13: 52. All these are in the mystery.
H.G-h. You are suggesting that all hinges on the assembly getting her place.
J.T. It is where it is owned, and Christ has His place. We have the solution of things and everything is clear.
A.D.S. In Galatians it says the fulness of the time, but in Ephesians it says the fulness of times.
J.T. I think Galatians had more in view the actual Jewish economy in the idea of time, the
{202}
period fixed of the father. Pending the time fixed by the father the children were in bondage, the allusion being to what was set up at Sinai, but Ephesians would contemplate all he is speaking of, the time of administration, heading up all things in Christ, things in heaven and things on earth. It is the millennium here in mind. God had determined this in His counsels and His will, that everything should be headed up in Christ, things in heaven and things on earth, and that would be the fulness of times. The millennium is the fulness of times publicly in that sense. Christianity comes in at the fulness of time alluded to in @Galatians 4.
J.D. Would it be right to say that we are in the period of sonship?
J.T. Yes, we are, that is exactly so. The two times are distinct. In Galatians, I believe, it is christianity following the period before when the children were in the nursery; this was from Sinai and on, but Ephesians contemplates times, which I believe began with Adam, foreshadowing different things as regards heading up all things, the administrative side. The millennium is great, you might call it the seventh day of time. There can be no doubt that the number of years from Adam to the millennium is generally predicated in the Authorised Version. The Septuagint is different. The period, I believe, is 6,000 years, but that is not important to think of. It is a question of what is in the mind of God in these times. He has been foreshadowing in everything He has done the climax of all things being headed up in a Man. It is called the mystery of His will. It is one of the mysteries of the Scriptures.
J.D. In @Ephesians 1 it is said that God has "put all things under his feet", as if He was over the system, but it is also said before, that God's purpose is to "head up all things in the Christ".
{203}
J.T. 'All things being headed up in Christ' is positional, but I believe involves more than that. Everything is fixed there, but not static, but operative, so that there will be actual administration in the position. The book of Revelation opens up a lot in regard to this.
W.G.H. Here the apostle is seeking to get things out of the Jewish setting; receiving sonship belongs to the assembly.
J.T. That is right, the previous chapter says, "For ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus". That follows certain statements in regard to time. It says, "For if a law had been given able to quicken, then indeed righteousness were on the principle of law; but the scripture has shut up all things under sin, that the promise, on the principle of faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to those that believe". That is an allusion to time. "Guarded under law, shut up to faith which was about to be revealed. So that the law has been our tutor up to Christ, that we might be justified on the principle of faith. But, faith having come", -- that is an allusion to time -- "we are no longer under a tutor", another allusion to time. "There is no Jew nor Greek; there is no bondman nor freeman; there is no male and female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus: but if *ye* are of Christ, then ye are Abraham's seed, heirs according to promise". These verses show how everything was awaiting the period of faith, so that we are now in the faith period, and being in that period we are all the sons of God, as it says, "by faith in Christ Jesus". That is how we come into it. It is a period of time that has come according to divine fixity, and every believer today is included in the "sons". It is a question of receiving it. It is there for you.
L.E.S. The spiritual import of the prophetic scriptures would have the present period in view,
{204}
whereas the administrative side would have the millennial day in view.
J.T. That is the way the thing stands. There are many foreshadowings of the faith period and there are the foreshadowings of the administrative period too. We are in the faith period. The millennium would be the sight period, but it will be the period alluded to in Ephesians, where all things in heaven and earth are headed up in Christ. Things will be open then; now it is a time of mystery, the mystery of God's will.
J.D. The Lord said, "Abraham exulted in that he should see my day, and he saw and rejoiced", @John 8: 56. He looked forward to a city that has foundations. He will find all realised in that day.
J.T. I think Abraham rejoicing to "see my day" alludes to his son, the time when Christ is known as Son in the house, but the city is the administrative side.
W.B. Would you say a word more, "That we might receive".
J.T. It is a wonderful suggestion seen in so many settings. Things are all for us to be received. They are there for us, it is a question of receiving them. In @John 4 the Lord spoke to the woman about gift, but in @John 7 it is what is received. "This he said concerning the Spirit, which they that believed on him were about to receive". In @John 4 it is what is given. The two things stand, the thing that is to be received is on a giving principle.
R.B. Does this show that all christians, the young included, do not receive an inferior position as children, but sonship, and thus would come into the full privileges of the assembly?
J.T. That is the intent of it. Public christianity has gone back to the period of law. The apostle says they should not go back to the beggarly elements. These elements in themselves were good,
{205}
but they have lost their character in the way they have been held, and the Galatian saints were going back to that. We must remember that here the word 'children' refers to the position of a minor, whereas the word 'children' applied to the people of God, the family of God as in John, is a dignified title. We can take the place of being children of God, and this refers to all christians. Children of God is our position here below. That is an important distinction to make.
R.R.T. Would this expression, "when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son", involve the thought that from the very beginning of time God had this moment in view when He would send forth His Son?
J.T. Quite so. We begin with Seth, he is a type of Christ. Abraham is a type of Christ, then we come down to others such as Isaac, also a type of Christ.
R.R.T. So the expression as he goes on to say, "come of woman, come under law", would indicate that every one of these great movements of God in creation and in relation to the law, all led up to this moment when Christ would come.
J.T. Quite so. Faith looked for it. Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's day. He looked for it and he saw it. He saw it, I apprehend, as in Isaac. He saw the idea. While faith did exist in these men it was not the *period* of faith. They were still minors as to the apprehension of faith. You hardly ever get the word 'faith' in the Old Testament, except in Habakkuk once.
H.G-h. It suggests that that was not the faith period. Is it because everything has come out in Christ?
J.T. It is on that principle. The parables are to hide the truth from the natural mind. Faith discerns it. It requires energy of faith to lay hold of christianity.
{206}
John's gospel stresses faith being for the last day. The disciples believed on Him, and "these things are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name".
W.B. In @Hebrews 11 it says, "these died in faith".
J.T. Yes, it was there but it was not the period of it. The Spirit of God there names the thing that was in them. @Hebrews 11 is the great life chapter of the epistle. We are in the realm of life there.
W.G.H. If we are all God's sons by faith, it would be true that all receive adoption.
J.T. And additionally, we should receive the Spirit of adoption, "God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father". That gives us the consciousness of it. I think teaching is needed in regard to this point. What we have been speaking of this afternoon is for every young christian; it is his inheritance. It is because he is living in this period that sonship is his. It is only a question of taking it in and letting it work out in our conduct and liberty. The matter of being a son is light. It is the mind of God, that period having come. But the crying "Abba, Father", is by the Spirit of adoption.
W.B. So that we might receive sonship. The "we" there would include the apostle himself.
J.T. He would tell you what he went through in @Romans 7, and how he came into the thing consciously. He says in @Romans 8: 14, "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God". They are marked off in that way.
C.S.P. It would be instruction in this period of tutors and governors.
J.T. I think so. It is educational. "By law is knowledge of sin" illustrates it. The Old Testament is full of instruction, and it is written for us. It really was written anticipatively for christians. The
{207}
whole of Scripture is in the setting of faith, but until the time of faith came, they would not understand it.
C.S.P. Would it suggest the futility, of the flesh? It speaks of Abraham having received the covenant of circumcision and thus he begat Isaac and circumcised him the eighth day (@Acts 7: 8).
J.T. Yes, the Old Testament scriptures were not understood even by the writers themselves. Peter, especially, tells us that they did not understand, but it was revealed to them for their own benefit that things they ministered were not for themselves but for us (@1 Peter 1: 12).
R.R.T. Would you say, that there may be in some soul a condition of being "held in bondage" as verse 3 says, or would "because ye are sons" be descriptive of *every* christian? The Galatians were again under bondage.
J.T. I think that describes christians generally who are in human organisations. They are under the principles of the world.
R.R.T. Yet it says, "ye are sons", but in the state of one's soul, it may not have been apprehended.
J.T. What is needed is teaching. It says "they shall be all taught of God" (@John 6: 45), and a part of that teaching is this epistle, so that if you come in contact with a real christian, even if he be in the Romish or the Anglican system, you can say to him, "Be as *I* am, for *I* also am as *ye*", @Galatians 4: 12. *Now* we are all sons, we are all sons of God. It is a question of light coming into the soul. I think Galatians is most important at the present time in delivering people from bondage.
J.D. Would you in the presence of christians be free to present what we have been speaking of this afternoon? The apostle goes on to say, that he might announce Him (God's Son) as glad tidings among the nations (@Galatians 1: 16).
{208}
J.T. Sonship belongs to the gospel. What can be more attractive to a person in whom God is working, than the thought of this glorious family relationship, and that it belongs to all who are in this period fixed by God?
J.D. That is the wealth of the nations.
J.T. That is quite so. The setting of this, that we might receive sonship, is initially a Jewish one. Christ came in under the law, came of a woman, that *we* might receive sonship. It is a Jewish *we*, I think. It is presented here with the intention that the Jewish believers might be delivered from the bondage in which they were held. Another thing is that in the fulness of time, God sent forth His Son, "come of woman"; it is in humanity here that this is said of Him.
H.G-h. Why does it bring in the thought, "when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law, that he might redeem those under law, that we might receive sonship". @Galatians 4: 5?
J.T. The apostle is stressing that side of the redemptive work of Christ. He is stressing this point now, because that is where the Galatians were defective. Virtually he says to them, You are sons, why are you going back to the nursery when you have all the liberty of the house? In @John 8: 31 - 33, the Lord says to those who believed on Him, "If ye abide in my word, ye are truly my disciples; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free. They answered him, We are Abraham's seed and have never been under bondage to any one; how sayest thou, Ye shall become, free?". Never in bondage? What a nonsensical thing to say! Never in bondage to anyone? They were then in bondage to the Romans. The Lord would not wound their feelings, but He says, "Every one that practises sin is the bondman of sin". That is a mild way of dealing
{209}
with sin, but I believe the Lord is really alluding to human organisations as characterised by sin, and those who serve in that way are bondmen. The clerical system is in bondage to those things. The Lord says, "The bondman abides not in the house for ever", without saying anything as to the terribleness of sin. The Lord Jesus is just dealing with one thing. The bondman does not abide in the house. Then it says, "If therefore the Son shall set you free, ye shall be really free". The Son is in the house and He is there for ever, so if the Son sets you free, you are free indeed. I believe the application in our time, and the use of the words sin and bondage, refer to those who serve the clerical system. They are in bondage to it and characteristically they do not stay, because a bondman does not stay in the house. Whereas the Son came in, in principle bringing blessing to the family and abiding there. The setting is free. It is but showing us how He Himself is a Son before God, and we are in that relationship through redemption. It is a glorious side of the truth, and I do not know of any side as to which teaching is more needed at the present time.
R.R.T. The present activity on the part of divine Persons is to bring us into this sonship. There is the activity of the Son, and then the activity of the Father in sending out the Spirit of His Son into our hearts. It would indicate the activity on the part of divine Persons to bring us into sonship.
J.T. That is a good remark. The three divine Persons are engaged in the liberation and blessing of the saints.
R.B. Do you connect the gift of the Spirit with the thought of sonship?
J.T. Yes, it is called the Spirit of adoption.
R.B. The Spirit of Christ was mentioned. Is there any distinction between that and the Holy Spirit?
{210}
J.T. There is a distinction between the Spirit of Christ and the Holy Spirit and the Spirit of adoption. It is the same Spirit in each case. The Spirit of Christ is really the Holy Spirit, but too in the sense of family. It is the Spirit of the family and the Spirit of Christ. The Holy Spirit in @John 14 is viewed under the title of Comforter. It is that title that makes the personality of the Spirit's presence here outstanding. In John's gospel He is viewed as a dove, then as the wind, then as water, then as the Paraclete and Comforter, and then as breath. He is viewed under these terms and the force of all that is to show that the Spirit is substance. His presence is a reality.
L.E.S. Do you think Deuteronomy spiritually understood would belong to the period of sonship? It says, "Ye are sons of Jehovah your God".
J.T. I think that Deuteronomy is like the fulness of the Mosaic period, because it is Moses himself really as a type of Christ, speaking according to the spirit of the law, not after the letter of the law. Deuteronomy is the fulness of the Mosaic period. In scripture the testimony of God is presented under the numeral three, almost throughout. That is, we have three persons coming to Abraham at Mamre, three periods or dispensations; in Exodus you get three ministers, Moses, Aaron and Miriam. These were the leaders. And so in truth you get that principle of three. Three is full testimony from God. He may give more, but three is ample, but development on our side is under the heading of seven. The subjective side is under the heading of seven. Deuteronomy is the fulness of the ministerial period. In Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers you have law in the letter, that is, the ministerial chapters. Deuteronomy is not that, it is the fulness of things. Moses himself is seen in Deuteronomy as king in Jeshurun, he is regarded with affection among the people. The
{211}
blessing of Moses is entirely on the divine side, the spiritual side. So you can see how the idea of fulness of the ministerial period came in.
T.A. Would you say that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, would set forth the three ministers?
J.T. Three men came to Abraham; you see there the thought of three. Then the thought of father, in Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. That is what characterises christianity. Christianity is not a period of judgment. All judgment is committed into the hands of the Son, so that the present time is characteristically free from judgment. God is not imputing trespasses. There is no testimony of judgment, but it is the throne of grace and that is the Father's throne, so I believe after you have the three presented to Abraham that you have the idea of father expressed in the three patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. They foreshadow our dispensation in the sense of grace as presented by the Father.
C.S.P. Is that the thought in Ephesians, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ?
J.T. That is right. John stresses it too. Paul says, "To us there is one God, the Father". When you come to the ministerial side it is Christ, not in Isaac but in Moses and Aaron and Miriam. That is another side, so that we have Him at the right hand of God, carrying on the ministry. I believe that Deuteronomy would suggest the fulness of that, fulness of the ministerial side.
L.E.S. Would "Out of Egypt have I called my son" be the full answer to that, the full thought set out in Deuteronomy?
J.T. Yes, it is touched on.
A.D.S. In regard to Moses, Aaron and Miriam, I think we understand a little of what is set forth in Moses and Aaron, but what feature is set forth in connection with Miriam?
{212}
J.T. I mention it because they are placed together in @Micah 6: 4, "And I sent before thee Moses, Aaron and Miriam", a remarkable thing. I believe that Miriam is the subjective side of it. All the way through the ministerial books there is that thought, something for God. Generally speaking, there were times in the wilderness when there was something for God, so Numbers says, "What hath God wrought!". God has accomplished something during those periods in spite of the general state. Miriam is that side, because in the first song she appears, she is said to be prophetess, the sister of Aaron, linking up with the two great ministers, and she has part in the song. It is almost a repetition of what Moses said, but still it is what Miriam said, and the women of Israel followed her. There was something for God.
H.G-h. Do the scriptures read this afternoon, follow in the order in which they were read?
J.T. The idea of time is very important in the setting in which we have considered it, and opens the way for the fulness of Israel and the fulness of the nations. The fulness of Israel will be when they are gathered up by Christ, and reinstated in their own land (@Psalm 144). What a wonderful time! The apostle says, "If their fall be the world's wealth, and their loss the wealth of the nations, how much rather their fulness?" @Romans 11: 12. Their fulness in the millennium, meaning that the working out of all God's thoughts in them, will mean more wealth than we have now. "How much rather their fulness?" Then the nations in verse 25, "I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, of this mystery, that ye may not be wise in your own conceits, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the nations be come in". That is what is going on now. That is to say, God established the nations, at least He formed human races and nations at Babel, but
{213}
He set the bounds of their dwellings really to present the gospel to them. @Genesis 11 has in mind that the gospel is to be presented to nations in time, so the Scriptures preach the gospel to Abraham, a remarkable thing. "In thee all the nations shall be blessed". That was in prospect. The fulness of that is in mind here. In christianity, in all this wonderful period of the gospel, is the fulness of the nations. God has worked out all things in time.
G.C. The fulness of the nations is different from the fulness of time.
J.T. Yes, and fulness is in persons. It is the outcome. It was the whole development from Babel to this dispensation. What a wonderful result God will get through the gospel! The promise was to Abraham in regard to the nations. He would regard them, although he had a special blessing in regard to his own family. Jehovah says of him, "He is a prophet, and will pray for thee", and he did. That is our position now. The world is in reconciliation and our position is to pray for the nations, for kings and for all men.
J.D. The apostle says the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the nations, announced the glad tidings to Abraham, saying, "In thee all the nations shall be blessed". Abraham had the day of sonship in mind.
J.T. He had the thought that there would be the fulness of the nations, so that when the king of Sodom says, 'You take the goods, I will take the persons', he says, 'Oh no!'. What God gets out of the nations is persons, so Paul speaks of offering them: "that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable".
J.L.F. Paul laboured to that end, that he might present every man perfect.
{214}
J.T. Quite so, and that there should be an offering up of the nations, offering up to God. In fact, all fulness must be for God.
L.E.S. How far would you say the thought of nations extended? Is there a difference between nations and people? We speak of the heathen.
J.T. It would be a question of the context in which the word is used. People would refer to different stocks, as we call them, as the Japhethites. The race was divided up into three heads, Shem, Ham and Japheth, but with many subdivisions as the outcome of climatic and moral conditions, such as negroes, Indians, Chinese, Maoris and a host of others. God, I am sure, had followed up every link and has all before Him, so that He intends that the whole race of men should be blessed. The Son of man is Christ in relation to the whole race of men. The gospel is to all men. In traversing the world, one sees the lowest type of man, but they have a claim on God. One has met them, some christians, and they can claim sonship; so can the negro and all other races. It is a wonderful time, and it is important to make clear that it is a question of the time.
J.G.B. "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings".
J.T. To all creation. The world there is the moral system. There is a difference if you preach to men in a wicked city, or if you look at them abstractly as God's creatures. The gospel is preached to all creation.
T.A. Do you make a distinction between the gospel of the grace of God and of the kingdom?
J.T. Yes, there are about thirteen designations of the gospel in the New Testament, each having its own significance.
H.G-h. In "having made known ... the mystery of his will", is it the thought that the saints of this
{215}
dispensation should understand all that God is going to bring into effect?
J.T. Certainly, the mystery is to be understood by initiated persons. To the public it is not known at all. The leaders of the world do not understand the place in the mind of God of the saints now here in this world until the Lord comes. The mystery of God's will requires that there will not be another king save Christ. All power in heaven and upon earth, all things, are to be headed up in Christ. It brings in the thought of wisdom being in Christ. His wisdom determines everything, and nothing in result will be out of keeping with the mind of God. The heading up of all things in heaven and earth in Christ is the administration of the fulness of times.
L.E.S. I was wondering if God's thought of the nations did not go as far as their being subservient to Israel. Is that the widest possible thought?
J.T. It refers to Abraham, the fulness of the nations. Of course, there are the times of the gentiles; that is another thing; that means the four monarchies spoken of in Daniel. The nations go back to @Genesis 10.
J.D. In @Mark 16, the Lord said, "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation".
J.T. You have to understand what is meant. We do not preach to cows, but still they are not out of sight. In Nineveh there was much cattle.
R.B. How is that word in Mark put into effect at the present time?
J.T. Every time you preach the gospel it is put into effect. At that time the world was viewed as a system, and it meant suffering. Preaching to all creation means that you look at the men that you have to do with as God's creatures, not as members of a system. That makes a great difference in preaching to them.
{216}
R.R.T. While God is moving in relation to the fulness of time, there is also the fulness of evil. "The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full".
J.T. That is another side of the position, and that is going on now. The mystery of iniquity is working out today.
W.G.H. The assembly is the present answer to God of what He purposed and promised to Israel.
J.T. Quite so. Fulness all enters into that, and the question is raised as to how it has been carried out.
Ques. Why do we not send out missionaries?
J.T. It is a question of what is seemly in time. We are in a terribly low state of christendom, and it is not the time for that, it is a question of getting at christians in the systems and gathering them.
W.M.F. You spoke of the energy of faith. What do you have in mind?
J.T. Energy is a simple word. Those who speak about faith just as a theory are not active. Faith ought to be active. If anyone wants to learn about energy of faith, read @Philippians 3.
{217}
THE FULNESS (5)
@Exodus 4: 22, 23; @Exodus 28: 1 - 4, 40 - 43; @Malachi 3: 16 - 18
J.T. What is in mind is to show that these Old Testament scriptures, connected with the New Testament, bring out that sonship is the primary thought of God in view of His being served, and that is the abiding thought. So we have it at the outset in the ministerial book of Exodus, and then we have it in the last book of the Old Testament, for Jehovah says that all those that serve Him "shall be unto me a peculiar treasure ... and I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him".
But in view of conditions in which the service of God is carried on provisionally, that is the conditions in which we are now, priesthood comes in, priesthood representing what is needed to meet these conditions, and to protect what is of God, so as to maintain the service in holiness. As these conditions come to an end, as they will in our perfected state in heavenly glory, there will be no need for the priesthood, for it is a provisional thing. What will abide as before God is sonship, the saints in that relation. So that at the end of the Old Testament period God Himself speaks of His son that serves Him, using the figure of a man sparing his son that serveth him, his own son indeed.
What suggest themselves in this connection are the prophetic statements of Scripture relative to the saints in relation to God's service, especially in assembly, such as "*Ye* are Christ's body, and members in particular" (@1 Corinthians 12: 27) and then "a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ", @1 Peter 2: 5. Then again, "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus" (@Galatians 3: 26), and "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father", @Galatians 4: 6. These scriptures in
{218}
the New Testament correspond with what we have in the Old, reminding the saints of what they are, what we are as the body of Christ, as at the Lord's supper, "We, being many, are one loaf", partakers of that one bread. Then we are a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto God. We are, as Galatians states, sons of God, and have the spirit of adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father. These scriptures I hope will serve as a basis for our reading.
J.D. With reference to the thought of priesthood not going into the eternal state, I think you remarked last year on the absence of reference to the ephod in regard to David in the end of 1 Chronicles; that it is not said that he was robed in an ephod as he was in his younger days, in chapter 15. The ephod is absent. Is that the difference between priesthood and sonship?
J.T. I think that is right. What helps too, is that the glory coming into the temple prevented the priests serving, the priest could not serve or minister, not that the persons are not retained, but the office is not needed. The persons remain and are represented in the materials of the temple such as the different woods and metals. These typify the saints according to their abiding relation.
G.J.B. Are there not priests forever according to the order of Melchisedec?
J.T. That alludes to Christ. We are not priests according to the order of Melchisedec. We are priests according to the function in which we serve as typified in Aaronic functions. The Melchisedec priesthood belongs wholly to Christ as far as Scripture records.
J.D. I think you would help us if you would say a few words on @Romans 6 and 7 as to how that man arrived at the conclusion that he would serve with his mind God's law.
{219}
J.T. I am glad you bring in Romans, because it is the initial epistle in which every young christian should be instructed, and among many other things it touches priesthood, the elements of it. The initial element of it is seen in the reference to the Lord Jesus marked out Son of God in power according to *the Spirit of holiness* by resurrection of the dead. That element develops into priesthood in the body of the epistle, and it begins in the believer reckoning himself dead to sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus, and using his members as instruments of righteousness unto God, and in proceeding thus, he has his fruit unto holiness. That is, the believer arrives at that and the end is everlasting life.
But we are speaking now of priesthood and the link is with holiness. Then in chapter 7 we are told that we are to serve in newness of spirit, not in oldness of the letter. That is, in serving God it is a new thing, and it is new in the spirit of it. What is current today in christendom is not that at all, but a reversion to an Old Testament state of things involving something of paganism. What is called the service of God publicly is a hopeless mixture. The saints should understand that what is seen throughout christendom today is a hopeless mixture and certainly not new. It is as old as humanity. It is the religion that in principle appeals to man in the flesh, not that there are not christians in it, but the Lord seeks to extricate the real from it. "I stand at the door and am knocking", @Revelation 3: 20. So Romans says we are to serve in newness of spirit, not in the oldness of the letter, not in regard to the old form of service that was established at Jerusalem and extended back to the wilderness of Sinai.
In @Romans 7: 25 the apostle also says, "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". He reaches that through an experimental process. The flesh will serve the law of sin, it can do nothing else, but he
{220}
had reached the point where he served God's law with his mind. I believe he had found his feet as a priest, so that God is before him. Then in chapter 8 the Spirit comes in: the Spirit is life in view of righteousness, but the body is dead on account of sin. That is, one comes to that point, that the body is no longer available to sin, and the Holy Spirit in it is life. In chapter 12 the believer presents his body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is his intelligent service. That is priesthood, I think, briefly, as told us in Romans. The term priesthood is used in relation to the Jewish christians, but its meaning is clear enough.
When we come to these scriptures we see that priesthood is not a primary thought, but sonship is. The message to Pharaoh is not, 'Let my priest go', but "Let my son go, that he may serve me", as in the wilderness. We have in these scriptures in Exodus some four or five times over, "that he may serve me as priest", and "that they may serve me as priests". Now we have to understand that along with chapter 4, where God says that it is "my son" that is to serve. Why does He say at Sinai, "That he may serve me as priest", and "that they may serve me as priests", but not a word about sons? That is what we have to see.
H.G-h. Are you implying in suggesting the thought of priesthood being a provisional thing, it is in view of present conditions?
J.T. That is right in view of what we are in the flesh still. The flesh lusts against the Spirit. There is always that danger, and because of that, and because of external conditions around us, priesthood is necessary.
J.D. Would there be any reference to that thought in @Hebrews 7: 28, "For the law constitutes men high priests, having infirmity; but the word of
{221}
the swearing of the oath which is after the law, a Son perfected for ever"?
J.T. Quite so. Sonship is underlying it. Priesthood is necessary because of conditions, but sonship will remain when the official side is not needed.
W.G.H. What do you mean, because of conditions?
J.T. As sitting in the assembly with others, you are conscious of having the flesh in you. The flesh is always ready to serve sin. It is in view of that and external conditions as well, that we need the priesthood. The dress that is described in @Exodus 28 is to instruct us what it is, and what are the qualities of christians that enable them to stand out against those conditions and maintain the holiness of God in spite of them.
J.A.W. What is conveyed to us by the expression the law of sin?
J.T. It is to be learned from @Romans 7. Another law, he says, is warring in my members, that is the law of sin. The word 'law' is a remarkable word in Romans. It is worth while studying the setting of the different references to law. He says, "I speak to those knowing law". Roman christians are evidently viewed as knowing law. It means, I think, that sin will operate as it has opportunity. The word 'law' in that sense implies a principle, like the law of gravity or other laws of creation, they operate consistently. The law of sin will operate consistently with itself. The flesh is always amenable to it, hence we must disallow the flesh.
W.B. It is a most extraordinary thing that we find ourselves in such a condition. I am very thankful that the idea of priesthood is being taken up, because we need to understand the principle of it.
J.T. Exactly. You take the thief on the cross; he was saved through faith in Christ, and the Lord says, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise".
{222}
Now that man in paradise did not need priesthood, in the sense in which we speak of it. If it were possible for him to come down from the cross alive, and be here as a christian in Jerusalem, he would still have the flesh in him, and coming into the assembly in Jerusalem he would need priesthood, he would need to battle against this thing that led him to the cross as a malefactor. He would need priesthood to keep him, which involves the Spirit.
M.D.F. Would you suggest that sonship must be known before we become priests?
J.T. I think that is how the matter stands in Scripture, that the primary thought of God for His people is that they are to be before Him forever as sons. All primary thoughts are permanent thoughts. All provisional thoughts are for us for a time; then they lapse. Priesthood is amongst them.
R.R.T. So that the highest form of service Godward is the service of a son.
J.T. Yes, it will go on, I believe, that when, in the temple, the priests could not serve, it means God is saying, I want you on other ground. Priesthood was there, and it served a good purpose, there was a perfect note in the song. Then the glory filled the house and the priests could no more *serve*, but that does not mean the persons are rejected or shut out. They are there typically in the woods and metals, and other things in the building itself. That is to say, instead of priests, God says, 'You are before Me now free of all that would hinder you, and I want to have a little time with you as sons. That is My eternal thought for you'.
L.E.S. The two thoughts would be suggested in. @Malachi 3: 18 where it is said, "And ye shall return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not". That would be priesthood.
{223}
J.T. Yes. After Jehovah speaks of them figuratively as sons, then He reverts to priesthood. The great point in Malachi is what marked priesthood, that is holiness.
H.G-h. That is encouraging to us, that in prevailing conditions God can be served.
J.T. Yes. He can be served in spite of the terrible conditions about.
J.D. How far does the thought of service go connected with priesthood? Peter says, "a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God". That does not seem to be connected with discriminating between good and evil.
J.T. Discriminating is only one side of the priesthood, and that is why I read in @Exodus 28, because much is made of the high caps which the sons of Aaron were to wear. The high caps denote the intelligence, the renewed mind that Romans teaches, that we do not use our natural minds in the things of God, that we use the renewed mind, that is a holy mind.
W.B. When you say that the temple is taken possession of by God and the priests are unable to serve, is your thought that the temple itself represents the people of God?
J.T. It does. The apostle in @1 Corinthians 3: 16 says, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?". And in @Ephesians 2: 21, "All the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord". That is, the saints form it and God would have us, as it were, to Himself, even if only for a moment in the assembly. He would love to have us on the ground of sonship, while all the time in a public way in addressing Him we speak as priests in holy language.
H.G-h. Is that why dress is made so much of?
{224}
J.T. I think so. The dress has different parts, alluding to spiritual qualities in the saints, so you begin with the ephod, and all that attaches to it; then the breastplate, then the cloak, then the turban, which is especially to be noted because it alludes to intelligence. The sons of Aaron have high caps, it is moral elevation in our thoughts.
L.E.S. To go back, why does it mention two or three times the term 'brother', connected with Aaron?
J.T. It is to show how the priesthood is allied with authority in Christ. Moses is a type of Christ in authority. Aaron represents the element of the brother. Priesthood attaches to the brother. What do you say?
L.E.S. I think that is very good. I wanted to get the thought as to the brother underlying what you are speaking of in regard to priesthood now.
J.T. You find in the epistles, Paul associates the brother with him when speaking authoritatively.
J.L.F. It is always Aaron who is called the brother.
J.T. He is introduced to us as a brother. The first mention of Aaron in @Exodus 4: 14 is "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well". It would mean that he would speak with grace and intelligence. Moses always had the place of priest in the sense that he always had access to the holiest. He was never forbidden anything. In @Numbers 7: 89 he went in to speak to Jehovah. That was priestly access, and Jehovah spoke to him. I think it means the Lord as viewed in His own Person. Everything attaches to Him; He is pre-eminent in all things.
Moses says he cannot speak, but God knew be could speak and ultimately he did speak wonderfully. But Aaron is first introduced in "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well.
{225}
And also behold, he goeth out to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart". That is the idea of a priest, a sympathetic and loving person who is accustomed to speak to God. God alludes to him as knowing he can speak well.
R.R.T. So it goes much beyond his speaking to Pharaoh. It goes on to the service in the priesthood.
J.T. You get it illustrated in @Exodus 16, where Israel murmured. They spoke about fleshpots that they had there. Like young christians, they get tired of the position and would like to go back to the world and have a bit of it. It is constant amongst us. It says that Aaron spoke to them, not Moses. Authority will not do now. When young people, after having tasted the good word of God and the enjoyment of the assembly with us, begin to say, 'I want to go back and have a bit of the world', there is no use in using mere authority. They need more than that; they need something to hold them in their affections. So it says, Aaron spoke to them, and as he spoke they looked towards the wilderness -- a remarkable thing. As much as to say, That gracious speaking from the brethren encourages me to turn my back on Egypt, and look towards the wilderness; hard to travel as it seems to be, I think after all that is the way I will take. Many a young christian has said that, has considered in his own mind before God that after all there is no one like the brethren, no sympathy like what you have amongst them. As they looked towards the wilderness the glory of the Lord appeared. God says, You think the wilderness is bad, but think of My glory. I think that illustrates as much as anything what priesthood is in its practical bearing, and Aaron was that kind of speaker. Jehovah says, "I know he can speak well".
J.F. So you think in that connection that priesthood serves to minister to the thought of sonship and develop it?
{226}
J.T. It is a guide and involves great instruction and great knowledge of God. Of course, every christian is a priest but the thing seen characteristically is in Aaron and his sons. That is to say, characteristically you must have spiritual persons. So what you find in our movements and in our history in assemblies locally throughout the world is that there are certain ones who care, who are deeply concerned about everything. Everyone in the meeting should be deeply concerned, but as a matter of fact everyone is not, but you see in those who are the idea of priesthood, that they watch things. They know the world and the flesh in the saints and are constantly watching so the flesh has no place amongst us. They are spiritual men.
W.G.H. They would be marked by great dignity, as serving in the light of sonship.
J.T. They are sons; the idea of sonship underlies it as in @Hebrews 7: 28, "A Son perfected for ever".
W.G.H. You can only serve in that light, whether young or old. There is no service apart from that.
J.T. But the element of holiness reached through the teaching of Romans is to be kept in mind, that it is experience that brings us to it as to the thing characteristically.
C.S.P. Is the service of sonship the service of love?
J.T. Exactly. It is a person in that relation, and you desire liberty of soul in speaking to God and to the saints, too; but there is something about one that is called spiritual, he knows what to do in an emergency and how to do it. It is intelligence. The priest's high caps denote intelligence.
H.G-h. Why does it enumerate Aaron's garments?
J.T. That alludes to the work of the Spirit going on all the time amongst us; alludes to the skill with which the Spirit carries on the work of God in
{227}
a formative way in us, through persons, of course. It is an element, I think. The wise-hearted refers to that element amongst us.
J.D. In @Exodus 25 it speaks of willing hearted. Would that result in becoming wise-hearted?
J.T. @Exodus 25 is based on chapter 24. It is love presented in its volume, the fulness of it, and the elevation to which the saints are taken. Breakdown came in in chapter 32, but things are taken up again in chapter 35, after the second giving of the law in chapter 34, where you have Moses face shining; that is, where you get wealth of material and persons who bring it. Exodus views us and initiates us into all this in detail. This is what is needed and to see how one man and his family are taken apart to serve Jehovah, "that he may serve me as priest". It is mentioned four or five times, a remarkable thing, not as son, but as priest, because of the exigencies of the wilderness, the conditions which have to be contended with. It is not simply that I am a priest, but the intelligence that is needed, the experience needed. I think that is what we have to lay hold of. So you see the thing characteristically in the service carried on in the wilderness.
J.D. So that the teaching of @Romans 7 has practically to be gone through by every one of us to discriminate between good and evil in ourselves.
J.T. Then you learn to discriminate in the world outside. The position in Exodus is an anointed position, there is nothing about anointing in the temple. That is to be noted. It is the public position that calls for anointing. That is what men see in our houses, as we walk down the street, on our way to the meeting room, seeing us sit down together in the meeting room, hearing the announcements given out, the things that are going to happen that relate to the Lord's interests, the symbols of the Lord's body and blood on the table, and what is done
{228}
initially. The anointing covers all that. That is Exodus. It is a question of the anointing right through, both in regard of the material of the tabernacle and the whole priesthood itself. The whole scene is under the anointing, meaning that God wants men to see something different, that this is a dignified matter. It is not paganism, it is not Judaism. It is a new thing altogether that God has introduced, and the anointing makes us dignified in everything we do. It involves not only holiness but intelligence, particularly intelligence. "I speak as unto intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say". That is, as priests we listen to what the apostle says, and we say, It is right.
Then as you proceed, the thought of priesthood becomes more pronounced, that a brother knows, in virtue of his priesthood, that sonship underlies all this, that in virtue of intelligence as priest, and holiness and sensitiveness, a certain act is not right. That is, the flesh will act in the meeting, a hymn out of place or something is done that is spiritually incongruous, and he says, 'That is not right'. The fact that he maintains right thoughts saves the position to that extent. He is a priest, he knows what is fitting so that the tabernacle greatly helps us, because a man would bring his offering and he would have to go to the priest. He does not go inside, but the priest offers. The nearer we are to God the more this element comes to light. We know what to do and how to do it, and we maintain the element of holiness all the time. Paul says regarding giving out a hymn, "I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing also with the understanding", @1 Corinthians 14: 15. That means priesthood. "I will pray with the spirit", that is his own spirit, but "also with the understanding", meaning that "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". He knows what to do. The mind regulates the thing.
{229}
J.D. Do you mean that from the time the saints come together, the light that governs the position is priesthood?
J.T. You have that great thing before you; you are thinking of the assembly. Our hearts are aglow on the first day of the week. The great activity of Christ as He arose is key to the position. As the sun goes around from east to west, it is a long day, but God is active throughout and wishes the saints to have it before them, the great day of the assembly.
H.G-h. Priesthood would underlie our service in sonship.
J.T. Priesthood really goes right through the meeting, as to what is outside. Priesthood must always be present, but in regard to feelings and attitude of soul Godward, you are in the sense of sonship and a point reached when that takes place where God says, 'You are perfectly free before me'. The enjoyment of love sets us free and gives us liberty in priesthood in our relations with each other. God would have us to be conscious of being sons, but the priesthood is there. We cannot evade the elements around us that are unholy, but the more spiritual we are the more we can abstract ourselves and be in the sense of liberty in the relation of sons with God. That is the way the thing stands. Priesthood comes to light in the way we speak, the intelligence we have in speaking, but it is the love of God that greatly affects our hearts; as it says, "Perfect love casts out fear".
J.D. When the Lord comes in, does He come in as Priest or as Son?
J.T. He comes in Himself. He says, "It is *I* myself". Now, if you come to my house, I think of you; you have a personality. Christ is a Person. Some say He comes in as Head, others say He comes in as Son, others say He comes in as Saviour, but the truth is that He comes in Himself. "It is *I* myself".
{230}
Let everyone take his own meaning from that. The next thing is, what is needed. If there are no conditions in the meeting, He cannot come in as Head. He must have the body to act characteristically as Head. If there are low conditions, He has to make the most of those conditions. He will not ignore conditions that are wrong. It is a question of priestly grace to get the brethren into thinking rightly of each other.
W.B. That is quite a new thought on priesthood. I had always connected priesthood with energy, but I see that priestly intelligence works both ways, to stop as well as to go on.
J.T. The high caps of the priests speak of supreme intelligence. Headship, of course, might be there, but it is a question of what is needed. If we go forward normally and we regard each other in love, as members of one another, the Lord has something He can use as Head. If the body is not there, we cannot have the Head.
R.R.T. Would the service of a son link on intimately with the service to God as Father?
J.T. I think it does. There would be order in the assembly. The order would be the love of the brethren one towards another; that should be mentioned first; it is in that light we sit down together. Then it is the love of Christ, and then the love of God as Father, the Father's love. Then God as the great finality. The great ultimate of all service is God Himself, "My Father and your Father, my God and your God". God comes last. Bearing these thoughts in mind will assist us in our minds as sitting down together. We sit down as those who love one another; that develops into the body, an organism. So then the love of Christ is in the Lord's supper. The love of God as Father is in relation to the family. Christ as Son, and we as sons, which develops into the great realm as to God, "Of him, and
{231}
through him, and for him are all things", @Romans 11: 36. Sonship underlies the position, but it does not come forward until we are in sensible relations with God as sons; the spirit of adoption is the expression of that relation. That is the order at the beginning of the meeting, and if the Spirit is free at the beginning, subsequently the Spirit takes the form of Spirit of adoption, and He cries, "Abba, Father". That helps, if you bear that note, that guides you as to where you are.
G.C. Would you say wilderness conditions call for priesthood?
J.T. That is what I am seeking to show, that the conditions in ourselves and all around us require it, and ignorance in us requires it.
L.E.S. The great underlying feature in Exodus would be priesthood, I suppose, and in Chronicles would be more sonship.
J.T. I would say that. The glory comes in in Exodus as every item in the tabernacle is functioning in its place; that is, every item is anointed; the idea of sonship is not there. It is more the will of God in Exodus; it is the glory in that relation really. That is what enters into Exodus, but in @2 Chronicles 5 the priests are in evidence and serving well, serving with one note. At that point the glory enters, showing that we are on higher ground, and it is called formally the house of God in that passage. The glory filled the house of God.
F.C.B. At that point in our meeting when we sometimes reach God in the highest sense in a spirit of worship, the idea of priesthood does not cease, though we reach the realm of sonship. What you have said would rather indicate that the idea of priesthood would also connect with worshipping God.
J.T. Priesthood is necessary, as I was saying, whilst down here, whatever the service is, as to the
{232}
form of words you use; the state of your mind. You need to exclude every root of evil, as it is said, 'No passing root of evil'. In the eternal state of things there is nothing like that, not the faintest suggestion of evil will be there. In order to reach anything like that now you need priesthood, but there is such a thing as spiritual power enabling you to abstract yourself, even if for a moment. God is pleased with that, God is entitled to view us and think of us abstractly, that is abstracting us from all that we are that is extraneous for the moment. He is entitled to do it, and we are entitled to also take account of ourselves abstractly, but it can only be in spiritual power, so that I am wholly identified in my soul with the work of God and in my relation to God. It may be but for a moment, but that is a great deal to God. That is the idea of the glory filling the house. Let us let God have that. He is entitled to it, that is what we are according to His eternal purpose. It is only in the power of the Spirit, but then it can be so. So in earlier days of christianity, we hear of ecstasy, that is what is meant.
R.R.T. Before the glory filled the house, it says in @2 Chronicles 6: 41, "Let thy priests ... be clothed with salvation". That would set aside all hindrances.
J.T. It would. Solomon is building the temple, all emanated from him, the man of war being formally and intelligently excluded from having part in that. What is before us is sonship. It is the dignity of persons in their relation with God, and the Spirit of adoption in them crying "Abba, Father". It is, I believe, the relation in which we are.
L.E.S. Is that the difference between cedar wood and shittim wood?
J.T. There is only one wood in the tabernacle, that is shittim wood, but the woods in the temple suggest the dignity of the persons.
{233}
J.A.T. That would be a good completion for the meeting and a good start for the week.
J.T. Surely, God is entitled to take account of us in relation to His thoughts, and the Spirit is here that we might take that attitude, abstracting ourselves and thinking of ourselves according to God's thoughts of us. How much is said as to what christians are, "Do ye not know that ye are temple of God", @1 Corinthians 3: 16. "A holy priesthood", @1 Peter 2: 5. "Ye are all God's sons". @Galatians 3: 26. Whatever the relation may be, it is what the saints are. Let us be that in our minds. The Holy Spirit will help us to be that even if only for a short time.
J.D. John says in Revelation, that we are made priests. We are that. If things are normal, when the brother gives thanks for the loaf and cup, thus calling the Lord to mind, does the Lord come in then?
J.T. Yes, in the breaking of bread. The word used there is a word calling the Lord to mind. As far as I know it occurs only four times in the New Testament. It is an active thought, it is your mind. Brethren should bear in mind that all that happens in the assembly happens in the saints, not outside of them; it is our minds and affections that are acted upon. I have a mind and you have a mind; I have Christ before me, and He has devised this means of calling Him to mind. My mind is active. The word is used only four times, and three of them refer to the breaking of bread, in Luke and 1 Corinthians. It is not an ordinary thought of remembrance; it is a word implying that your mind is active. Your mind is on that thing exclusively for the moment, and the Lord is always ready for opportunities and seizes opportunities, and it is the state of our minds that gives Him the opportunities. The breaking of bread is Himself; that is what He did. It is in that that He comes in. The cup also enhances it, for the idea
{234}
of remembrance is in the cup too, so you have not the complete thought of the Lord's presence until you have the cup. So much depends on our minds and affections, 'Calling Me to mind', the Lord says.
W.G.H. Why is it we have more liberty in handling the loaf than the cup? Is the cup on a higher platform or does it need greater spiritual apprehension?
J.T. I think it is a question of being maintained in liberty, able to go on after you have given thanks for the loaf, to go on in priestly power. The Spirit is always with us, I mean normally, in the character of Comforter or Paraclete. He is always present and would support us, and the Lord as Priest supports us, as it says in @Song of Songs 8: 3, "His left hand would be under my head"; that is support of my intelligence; "and his right hand embrace me"; that is support of affections. The Lord graciously does that in His own way, so it is a question of being maintained in your giving of thanks.
T.A. Matthew says as to the loaf, "Take, eat". Does that go farther in regard to nearness to Christ and apprehension of His glory and His work, than the remembrance?
J.T. I think they go together. Luke and Corinthians only mention the remembrance, and say nothing about our eating. Luke has the remembrance in mind and public order. Matthew and Mark have in mind the building up of our constitutions that we might be supported in the position. "This is my body" makes for the unity of the one body. I should not like to separate what we have in @Acts 2 and in @Acts 20 from the assembly. In principle the assembly was there in @Acts 2, only that in Paul's ministry we get the setting of the thing. What the Lord gave to Paul, you may say, was not added to; he says, "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in
{235}
the night in which he was delivered up, took bread and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you", @1 Corinthians 11: 23, 24. I think "for you" alludes to the gentiles. "In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood: this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me". That part is added to Paul's message. That is, the idea of remembrance is attached to the cup, but in general what Paul delivered to the Corinthians is the same as Luke records. Luke records practically the same thing, so that I do not think it would be right to undervalue the Supper as the twelve had it. It was what the Lord gave them, but Paul intimates that he did not get it through them. What the Lord gave to Paul was the same as He gave to the twelve.
T.A. It says in @Matthew 26: 29, "But I say to you, that I will not at all drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in the kingdom of my Father". I thought that applied to the Jews.
J.T. That is the passover. The fruit of the vine is the earthly relation. That was all over before the Lord's supper was instituted. Luke separates the passover from the Supper. Matthew and Mark do not separate it so carefully. They tell us 'Eat this', and 'drink this', and they tell us they sang a hymn, and they went to the mount of Olives. Luke is occupied with the public order and with the remembrance, the Supper as a memorial in connection with which we have the coming in of Christ, and Paul takes up that line. Luke is to support Paul.
R.R.T. Is the service of the temple a higher order of service than the service of the tabernacle in the wilderness?
J.T. It is. There is no service mentioned in the tabernacle at the time the glory came in. Aaron is not in view. Moses could not enter. It is just that,
{236}
the point is, I think, that all the saints are in their places, that is the teaching for us. We come together and sit down and we are all filling our place in the body and functioning. The service is not yet on. Moses and Aaron washed in the laver, but that is all, whereas service is active in 2 Chronicles.
R.R.T. I have been thinking of the service of sonship; it is indeed the highest form of service. The service in connection with the tabernacle was priestly, but when it comes to the service in the temple, we have the thought of the son connected with it. David makes much of Solomon as son and his service gives character to the temple.
J.T. That is right. It is on a higher level, the heavenly side of the position. The tabernacle is more the saints in their position as anointed, it is the public side. In the temple personal dignity is in mind, because of what we are.
R.R.T. The only anointing you get is the anointing of David seen in Chronicles. It is not a priest, but a son that is anointed.
J.T. Great intelligence enters into the position in Christ, in which we have part. We are said to have the mind of Christ. We have part in that mind. The high caps worn by the priests refer to this.
W.B. It says, "For glory and for ornament".
J.T. I think the idea is to exclude the natural mind. It is not to be allowed. These high caps allude to the dignity of intelligence.
J.D. It says in verse 39, "Thou shalt weave the vest of byssus; and thou shalt make a turban of byssus; and thou shalt make a girdle of embroidery", and then it refers to the high caps for Aaron's sons.
J.T. It is remarkable the place they have, and then what goes with that are the linen breeches. That is, we are free from natural excitement in the assembly. You do not get carried away with tunes or the like. All is in dignity, free from natural
{237}
excitement. Linen is what sobers and keeps you balanced whereas wool would excite, producing warmth and heat.
J.L.F. Do you think there is danger of excitement in the service of song?
J.T. We will have to see the place that song has in the service of God. The first mention is @Exodus 15, it begins there and is taken on later in a greater way by David and Solomon, and song is the prevailing thought. Song is poetic. Spiritual poetry incites spiritual feelings, and they run smoothly. The mind is brought into things in an easy way in poetry.
H.G-h. You are not advocating the use of hymns too freely in the morning meeting?
J.T. No, but still there should be more place, I think, in the assembly for the recognition of Christ's relation with the assembly, as leading up to what He is in relation to God as Father. I believe there should be more room made for that, because I believe the mass of the saints are not much beyond the enjoyment of their blessings, and even if you do not go beyond that you may have a good meeting, one which is acceptable to heaven, but there are very few of us able to take up the heavenly side. "Rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens", @Luke 10: 20. That is where the heavenly side comes in, so Ephesians begins almost immediately to say that God "has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ". @Ephesians 1: 3.
E.W.M. If we had power to go on perhaps our meetings would be a little longer.
J.T. They often are no longer than they should be because there are so many present. More scope should be given for the working out of the assembly. The passing of the bread and cup takes considerable time where there is a large number. I think the
{238}
Lord would help us to make more room for His relation with the assembly as giving Himself for it. Paul says, "Now the Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But *we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 3: 17, 18. All that comes under Christ, from glory to glory, so that we put on dress suitable to heaven, taking on the heavenly.
{239}
LOVE ACCORDING TO GOD
@Romans 8: 28; @John 14: 21; @Colossians 1: 4; @2 Thessalonians 2: 10
What is in mind is to speak about what is to be loved by christians. What I have in mind is to engage you with what christians are to love, a subject that gives opportunity to speak of other things. There is the idea of love in the world, but love according to God originates with God. Indeed, John's epistle would show that love is only known since Christ died; that is, love here in this world, for he says, "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us", @1 John 3: 16. It does not say, Hereby we have known *His* love. Having that in mind, I propose my present subject, and to show how this love works out in christians.
There is what is natural, and what is rightly called love, but not in this sense has it to be understood in certain contexts in Scripture. We have in @2 Timothy 3 what is to obtain in the last days. The apostle, warning Timothy, says that difficult times shall come, the first feature of difficulty being that people are loving themselves. The second, they love money; they are covetous. The last is that they love pleasure; they do not love what is good, loving pleasure rather than God. Every christian worthy of the name will confirm this, that it marks our times. People are lovers of themselves; they love to adorn themselves with paint and powder and clothing, all because they love themselves. In order to do that I need money, and hence I love money, and in loving myself and loving money I shall run counter to good people, good in the sense of being real christians. Then it also says that men shall not be lovers of such people or anything that marks them; they do not love what is good.
{240}
If we were to take away these loves, love of self, love of money, love of pleasure, we should greatly diminish the articles of commerce in the world, if all were not marked by these things. Then, as I said, shutting God out of all this, they are non-lovers of God, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God. That is what marks our time. What was then in anticipation is now a fact, and a very solemn one. But my theme is what we should love, and of course God has the prior place. He commences by requiring the affections of our hearts. In doing this He intimated at Sinai that it was not that He did not have lovers, not that He was asking for love, for there were thousands who loved Him even then: "Thousands of them that love me" (@Exodus 20: 6), He says. But He was seeking that others should be added to the number, and so He says, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart". This is the first and great commandment. The thought then was that He should increase His lovers, and that is the thought tonight, that God should increase His lovers.
So in order to introduce this thought, we are told that "All things work together for good to those who love God", @Romans 8: 28. That is the first scripture, one single verse in a very rich chapter. It is one of the greatest things in a sense that could be said, that all things work together for good, not severally, but together. Some things by themselves would be overwhelming. Paul's thorn in the flesh, if left by itself, would possibly be overwhelming. He besought the Lord thrice that it should be removed, but the Lord said, "My grace suffices thee", @2 Corinthians 12: 9. That is the balance. The thorn in the flesh worked together with the grace and with many other things. They work together. Paul was a lover of God, and proved as a lover of God that the things that seemed to be against him were for him. God brings in discipline
{241}
-- what seems to be adverse, and it must be a sort of balance that is needed to work together with something else. That thorn in the flesh was a messenger of Satan, which in itself could not be good, and so it is with many things. Viewed severally in themselves they are not good, but they are workers for good with other things. There is a balance of things with God, and it is in the balancing that you get the word 'together', and the result that is intended. It is the result that belongs to only one class of people, and those are lovers of God. That is the idea. That is an inducement, dear brethren, to young people especially, to fall in with this thought of loving God. He says there are a multitude of workers, "all things" mark you, "all things work together for good to those who love God". I should not undertake to recount what these things are. Things are happening internationally, nationally, and socially in a world-wide sense, and these things all balance a christian. The more he loves God the more he takes account of these things. He says that God is ordering them. They seem to be for the moment against what is of God, but presently other things come up, and the spiritual men, lovers of God, say that they are all balanced. They are perfectly poised. In the discipline of His people, in the ordering of their ways here under His eye, beloved brethren, everything is in infinite accuracy with God. Spiritually we must have the same accuracy that belongs to the physical creation, for if there was a point out of balance in the physical system we should have disaster. So as lovers of God, we shall love to place ourselves in His hands, knowing nothing happens amiss. Everything is perfectly poised with perfect results, that is to say, "good".
I do not want to say much more about lovers of God. What is alluded to is that there are thousands of them, as at Sinai, and so He can speak of them
{242}
today, and He tells us that "If any one love God, *he* is known of him", @1 Corinthians 8: 3. God would salute him, if I may speak reverently, recognising in holy dignity those who love Him. They are known of Him. He picks them out in a crowd. He picks out His lovers, and gives them to understand they are His. Indeed, He goes so far as to mark us off, for "he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts", @2 Corinthians 1: 21, 22. God does that.
Deborah of old confirms this, "Let them that love him be as the rising of the sun in its might", @Judges 5: 31. She had such a sense of good in the great hymn, "Then sang Deborah". I have been thinking lately that we do not sing enough, that the thought of singing is rather dying out amongst the brethren. I have been thinking, too, that the service of God is more made up of singing than of ordinary speaking. If you take the history of the service of God in the Scriptures, I think you will find that the leading thought in it is singing, and you can see how it must be so. The Lord spoke on the cross of singing. It is one of the most touching things, that the Lord could devote Himself to the praises of Israel while hanging on the gibbet. He says, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?". He does not say that in song. That is not the subject of song. But He also says, "But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel", @Psalm 22: 3. He spoke of that. Would He not allude to what we find emanating from the saints in the Old Testament? David is the great leader of praise, the sweet psalmist of Israel. The Lord anticipated it. It was the Spirit of God in David who spoke in @Psalm 22, and we can understand the references in 1 Chronicles, and in the great book of Psalms too, that God inhabited that; not simply that He heard the praises, but He in habited
{243}
the praises. Solomon says to Him, "The heavens, and the heaven of heavens, cannot contain thee" (@1 Kings 8: 27), but the Lord in Spirit says, "Thou who inhabitest the praises of Israel". He found His dwelling place, His joy, in the praises of Israel.
I was alluding to Deborah singing. The song begins, "For that leaders led". It is a song for leaders, and dear brethren, there never was a time when leaders are so needed, leaders who lead. These are the only ones of value. Leaders led in Israel, that is the key. Looking back on the few days preceding, how her heart was aglow with the sense of devotedness and courage and loyalty of the leaders. She finishes with, "Let them that love him be as the rising of the sun in its might". That is no vain desire; heaven heard that. Doubtless that song often penetrated heaven from holy hearts, and heaven answered, "Let them that love him be as the rising of the sun in its might". Is not that an incentive to love God? Deborah had been talking in the song to God, but that verse is in the third person, "Let them that love him", as if a someone after singing that song would put in that word, "Let them that love him be as the rising of the sun in its might". I am putting in a claim for God, dear brethren. That is all I am doing tonight; saying that God deserves the love of your heart, and it will not be for nothing. Join with those who love God!
The next feature of my subject is the love of Christ. I think one of the features of teaching at the moment that the Spirit of God is giving, is that we should distinguish between divine Persons, that we should know how to guard Them in our minds and in our service, that we should not be confused. We are very likely to be confused. We are finite creatures; divine Persons are infinite, but nevertheless They are presented so as to be understood in the
{244}
measure that the creature may understand, and each is to have His own place in the economy, in which He has come -- God eternally dwelling Himself, but manifested in three Persons. He dwells in the unknown absolute state of things, "Dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see", @1 Timothy 6: 16. That state of things remains. It has not been dissolved, but the Deity has come out into an economy with the view to gaining man's heart and securing men in every way for the divine thoughts and purpose. And so one of Them has become Man, so as to be visible. The other two, if you will understand me, speaking with reverence, remain invisible. What God is essentially is not seen, "Whom no man has seen, nor is able to see". It is a most important thing to keep that in mind, but in the economy the three Persons are plainly marked off, the Father, the Son and the Spirit. It is one Name in @Matthew 28 to which we are baptised, that "of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". God becomes apprehended in that way, and we are told that He is love. When scripture says, "God is love", it speaks of what He is Himself, what He is relatively to us. What the Persons are between Themselves we know must be love unquestionably, but what scripture is dealing with is what has come out. We know love, not only in the incarnation, but in that He laid down His life. It is what God is, and God is to be loved, but Christ has taken a mediatorial place, and He is to be loved in His mediatorial place. Hence the great need of being taught, of following the way the Scripture presents the truth to us, and we shall find in doing so that the Holy Spirit is confirming us in our feelings and minds, that we are sure it is the truth, for the Spirit is the Spirit of truth. These are most important things, so that we shall apprehend Christ as come, mediatorially taking a lowly place,
{245}
going lower than we are able to follow Him in order to get down to reach us, and to become an Object for us of personal affection, so much so that the apostle Paul has the greatest love for Christ. He says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha", @1 Corinthians 16: 22. Such a sense of abhorrence did he have of non-lovers of Christ, that he says any such one at that time will be accursed, a most solemn, terrible thing.
So the Lord in this chapter says, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", @John 14: 21. Every christian worthy of the name would say that he loves Christ, but the Lord is not content with that. What He stresses are the commandments. These are the test. "He that has my commandments". It is a remarkable thing that the Lord brings in His love. "I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth". Then, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me".
Then again, one of the disciples said, "How is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us and not to the world?". Jesus answered and said, "If any one love me, he will keep my word". So that you see, dear brethren, what I am speaking of enters peculiarly into these verses in @John 14, and they become a test to every christian on earth. No one has any title to the name of christian in a moral sense save that he keeps the commandments of Christ. I do not ask any mere professor to become a heathen, but at the same time such are not in any better case than a mohammedan, buddhist, or heathen. The test and proof of the matter is that you keep Christ's commandments. Let no one talk or merely assume to keep His commandments. What a great thing it is to keep the commandments of Jesus, what comes to you as a lover of Jesus. The lovers of Jesus are all
{246}
known in heaven; they compose the 'Who's Who' book in heaven. What a thing it is that every name is recorded in heaven. I am known there. I do not believe there is an intelligence in heaven among the angels who would not know the names of the lovers of Jesus. They are going to be there, the nobility of heaven, their names are registered in heaven. Why not be enrolled among the lovers of Jesus?
But the point that I make is, that Jesus said, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him". Are these things not worth something? That the Lord Jesus loves you and the Father loves you, and the Son manifests Himself to you; and not only that, but the Father and the Son come to such an one as that. I think I am putting in a plea for Christ, I do not hesitate to say that. I have been putting in a claim for God, that you should love Him, and I do so now for Christ.
Then thirdly is love for the saints. That is why I read from Colossians. The only mention of the Spirit of God in Colossians is to say that the saints love in the Spirit. One of the greatest things that can be said of a christian is that he loves in the Spirit. That was the kind of love that the Colossians had. It is quality that is in mind. We speak of love a great deal, of course, and we should. It is one of the leading words in the divine vocabulary, but love in the Spirit is the greatest thought in this connection. That means that I am like God, the Spirit brings me into accord with God, that I love like God, and if so I shall love without partiality. One of the most painful things amongst us and the cause of all kinds of difficulties I think today, is partiality. We are to be without it. It is classed among other things as hypocrisy. Love in the Spirit is not partial; it is general. That is to say, wrought out in regard
{247}
to one class, and that class is designated by the name "saints", augmented by the word "all". "The love which ye have towards all the saints". This is a very important point, that is to say, the Colossian saints did not love a brother, a person with ability to serve the saints, because he lived in Colosse. They would just as soon love a gift in Rome as in Colosse. You know what goes with partiality -- sectionalism. It is a great weakness with us. We think of people and talk of them because they are in our section. That is not Colosse. The teaching of Colossians implies that we come to the Jordan and when we come up against death, partiality is to drop out. We are viewing the death and resurrection of Christ, and what comes to light is the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of all the earth, and that is universality. That is not sectionalism. So that Colossians is the great epistle on the way to Ephesians, and it enables me to love the saints because they are saints wherever they live. It works out in the keeping of the unity of the Spirit and the unity of the faith.
One goes around a little, and you meet people in visiting various meetings and brethren, and one has to take account of what is known, is current in the whole assembly. If we are characteristic assembly persons we shall have ears for hearing all that pertains to God that is current on earth -- like the ears of the assembly at Jerusalem. It is the only assembly spoken of as having ears. Each assembly has ears but how do they use them? The assembly at Jerusalem heard about things at Antioch and were affected by what they heard. So it should be. If we are with God we shall have ears for everything that affects God and His people everywhere. "Love ... towards all the saints". We will never talk about what we have in our district. That is merely carnality. It is universal love that is needed.
{248}
If we have a little sister who is not getting on well (@Song of Songs 8: 8), it is an obligation. We have to do something. Instead of running her down we make the most of her. "Love ... towards all the saints".
The final thought is love of the truth. That is necessary. In Thessalonians the apostle speaks of persons who received not the love of truth. It is not viewed as something worked up in myself, but something to be received. It belongs to the treasury, as it were, as available to me, and the apostle says that there would be those who did not love the truth, did not receive the love of the truth, and because of that God would send a strong delusion, and antichrist would come in with all deceitfulness, and God would send them a strong delusion that men should believe a lie. Why? Because they received not the love of the truth.
Now, dear brethren, there is the fourth feature I would suggest. I think four is well even in ministry, because you get the universal idea. It is a principle with God. My subject is on that principle. Love for God is within our reach, love for Christ, love for the saints; "all the saints", do not forget that. We talk about love, but do not forget the universal side of it. How beautiful are the saints! God speaks beautifully about them, and it is to indicate His thoughts to us, that we should think of them beautifully and speak beautifully, and clothe them with the very best thoughts.
So, finally, we have the love of the truth. Perhaps if we make a comparison it is the least known of any. Brethren who love God and Christ do not receive things on one-sided testimony. That is not the truth. That is not love of truth. I must have truth about a thing. As Job says, "Let mine opponent write an accusation!" @Job 31: 35. Let him say all he wishes. You may have people praising and
{249}
eulogising, but refusing the ministry of the one they make so much of. I would rather they write a book, and then we know what they mean. Such persons do not put their mind on paper, they put it where it does harm, and hence the importance of the love of the truth. I must have all sides. I must have the whole truth, as Job says again, "How hast thou ... plentifully declared the thing as it is!" @Job 26: 3. That is what anyone who loves the truth will look for, and if he does not have it, he will inquire from those who have, so that he may have it aright. That is the fourth thought, and I commend it to you. We are now in the days of modernism, all of which is, root and branch, a lie. It is taught in the schools, adorned in every possible way by man's ability and learning, but it is a lie, and indeed the very fact that it is so current and so accepted today, so eulogised, is proof of the prophetic character of 2 Thessalonians, that God allows these things that men should believe a lie because they have not received the love of the truth.
How important it is that those who love God honestly should also love the truth and be a testimony to the truth, for the Lord says, as a great principle, to the man who was cleansed, "Go, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift which Moses ordained, for a testimony to them", @Matthew 8: 4. That "them" is as wide as can be made. It refers to all persons who are against God, but God, in spite of their opposition, is bearing testimony to the truth. Every lover of God would say, I want to be a testimony to them. What a great honour it is in these days to be a testimony. What it is to heaven, our meetings here in this vast city, to go over the truth, enjoying it together, the Spirit of God with us. The Spirit superintends these meetings, causes the truth to go out and be accepted. It is a testimony to them. The priests, so to say, the leaders of
{250}
modern religion, are outside. It is a testimony to them.
The wonderful patience of God is very affecting in the last days. He says in writing the last assembly address, I offer you a word of counsel. I am about to spue you out of My mouth, thou art neither cold nor hot. The counsel is, "Buy of me". You are ready to go any distance to see a little bit of pleasure, and sacrifice to see it. Why do you not buy from Me, I have good things to sell. "Gold purified by fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white garments, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness may not be made manifest; and eye-salve to anoint thine eyes, that thou mayest see", @Revelation 3: 18. How beautiful it is, that Christ should offer counsel in these days! It is a testimony to them. "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking; if any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me", @Revelation 3: 20. That is the attitude of God at the present time to all of them for a testimony to them, and it is our position as lovers of Christ to see, that as far as we may, we render testimony to them. God will bring it up in that day, 'The people in Los Angeles knew about that'. 'I had My people there', as Daniel said to Belshazzar, "Thou knewest all this", @Daniel 5: 22. That is how the matter stands, and you can see that what I am saying enters into it, that it would tend to make us a testimony to them.
{251}
THE LORD TURNING TO PERSONS
@Luke 23: 27, 28; @Luke 22: 61, 62; @Luke 7: 44 - 50; @Luke 10: 23, 24
Each of these scriptures has in it the fact of the Lord turning, first to a number of persons, then to one person, then to another person, and finally to a number of persons; four incidents, each having a special significance. In no sense is any a repetition of the others, but in each case the Lord turns. I desire by His help to speak under each heading consecutively, believing that persons represented in all four scriptures are in this room.
The first class, in chapter 23, is described in the verse as persons who are lamenting. They bewail and lament Christ. You may say, A very laudable thing, and you may think you are saying what is just right, and yet if the Lord were here He would not say that. He would say to you as being of this particular class, that instead of bewailing and lamenting Him, bewail and lament yourselves, for being of this class you are one who thinks of sufferers in a sentimental way. A large class of humanity comes under this head; they may be designated humanitarians, that is, they have sympathy with humanity. They read the papers and are affected by atrocious crimes, murders, kidnappings, and all the underworld happenings, also by persons in serious affliction such as are in hospitals. A large class of humanity is characterised by being peculiarly affected by these things, and yet it has never occurred to them that they are in need of sympathy themselves, that the most terrible things are pending in regard to them, and they have never stopped to think and weigh over, 'What is the end of *my* history to be?'
The Lord addresses Himself to these women. There were others in the crowd, but the women
{252}
there were particularly bewailing and lamenting Christ. They looked upon Him evidently as a sufferer, but there is no evidence that they rightly gauged what He was suffering. That would not be an item of importance to them. He was suffering, He was bearing His cross and going to be hung upon it, and they were bewailing Him. The Lord turns around, as He is here tonight, to look upon them. The Spirit of God might have contented Himself with saying that the Lord said to these women such and such things, but He tells us that He turned around to them. They were of interest to Him, and everyone who comes under this head in this room is of interest to Christ now. He is turning towards you, and He would tell you what He told them, not to bewail Him.
It may be you had your christmas tree and you have listened to the christmas carols, and your heart has been moved. This is possible without the slightest touch of conscience as to one's own guilt; to join in the christmas affairs and celebrate the birth of Jesus with feeling of which an unconverted man is capable, yet never touched by the solemn fact that his sins had brought Jesus, not simply into this world, but put Him upon the cross. We are all capable of these religious feelings, as we call them, sentimental feelings, and never once have we turned to God as to our guilt, as to our sins, as to ourselves. As the Lord says, "Weep not for me, but weep for yourselves", and then He goes on to tell them that the time would come when that which the Jewish woman most keenly desired would be regarded as a calamity, even children, and others would say to the mountains, "Fall on us". You see, they had no idea of what was pending, that the government of God was about to visit Jerusalem in the most terrible way. They did not know that, and the Lord says, "Weep not for me, but weep for yourselves". That
{253}
is what I would say by the power of the Spirit, as I would hope, to everyone of this kind in this room. Weep for yourself. Some day you will have to say to God, and it is for you to think now as to how matters will be in that day, for it is appointed unto men once to die, we are told, but after this the judgment (@Hebrews 9: 27). So it is a question for everyone to think for himself in this matter, and for you to inquire how it is going to be with you in that day. The Lord speaks about terrible things that were going to happen, and if I were to undertake to recount to you from this platform tonight the things that are now imminent -- I say not at a distance, but imminent -- it would take me more than this evening. There are terrible things that are about to happen in christendom, as well as in all the world, but particularly christendom. The world is all set, I may say, for the terrible outburst according to prophecy, but I am not dealing with that now. What is current confirms it, that the time is about ripe for the most terrible outburst in this world, convulsions in the heavens above and the earth beneath in an international and political way. The Lord would use this fact by itself to awaken souls not to be sentimental about things, but to face things and get to God about things, for you to weep for yourselves, as the Lord says, and not for Him. He is not needing your tears now. He is far beyond the reach of man's persecution now. He is saying, I do not need your tears but you need mine.
The Lord was going to the cross at this particular time, and these bewailing people, lamenting people, followed Him, and He turns around to them. He is here tonight, as I may say, to turn towards you, any such persons as are here, with the same words. I am not seeking to say things against anybody here, but this class of person is shallow as a rule, sentimental; they are persons who would go to a bier
{254}
and would bewail because of the bereavement, and then go outside the door and laugh.
The Lord in His time here was accosted by a ruler of a synagogue who said to Him that he had a little daughter who had died. His name was Jairus. When the Lord reached that man's house, the girl was apparently dead -- a very solemn situation. Who would not be moved in the presence of a young girl of twelve years who had just previously been so hopeful in the eyes of her parents? She lay dead, and in that house there were persons who were bewailing the death of the child. The house was full of it. The Lord Jesus entered into that house and He questioned what they were doing. You see, beloved friends, we have to learn everything from Christ, what He thinks of things. He said, Why are you wailing and making a noise, making all this turmoil? And the people derided Him. They justify themselves in all this ado. The Lord turned them all out. You say, A hard sort of thing. But it was the Lord Jesus who did it. Let no one question what He does. He turned them all out; He will not turn you out tonight, nor will any of us; our thought is that you might be detained and get His mind and weep for yourself. He did not say that in Jairus's house. He simply wanted to raise the child into a spiritual atmosphere, and for that reason He turned them all out, showing that that sort of thing has no value, no currency, in heaven.
In another instance, in the city of Joppa, there was a woman, named Dorcas, a very estimable woman. She made garments, a most estimable thing. There are societies called by that name throughout the world, and highly regarded. This woman died and they took her to the upper room and laid her out. They sent for Peter and he came, and the widows were bewailing the loss of this charitable woman. Peter put them all out. Do not think I am
{255}
endeavouring to belittle anyone here, but I am stating facts, that that sort of thing has no current value in heaven at all. But what has a value in heaven is when you begin to wail for yourself. "Weep for yourselves", says the Lord, and for what was coming. Terrible things are coming on, but as soon as you begin to wail for yourself heaven is interested at once, for "there is joy" we are told, "in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth", @Luke 15: 10. It is when we begin to wail for ourselves, or when a young man or woman or an old man or woman, who has never turned to God, begins to smite upon his breast and say, 'God, I am a sinner'. That brings out the interest of heaven. You will not be put out. Heaven is interested in that, as Luke so beautifully puts it, in quoting the Lord, "Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth", @Luke 15: 7.
Is there anyone here who has not responded? This meeting is for you, it is to call upon you to repent. The first gospel address, attributed to Christ by Mark, gives the Lord as saying, "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel", @Mark 1: 15. If He were here, He would say the time is overdue for you. Do not let it go another second. Repent and believe the gospel. That is what He would say to you.
Now this leads to @Luke 22: 61, where the Lord is turning to one person, a person well known to Him. He often looked at Peter with dove's eyes. With eyes of unalloyed affection, for He loved Peter; but here Peter is an inexcusable sinner. He is a christian, as we say, a believer, and he loved Jesus and Jesus loved him, but Peter sinned grievously. He sinned three times within a very short space of time, most grievously and in spite of the fact that the Lord had told him he would do it. It makes the sin all the more heinous. Now it may be that some christian
{256}
is here who has sinned against Christ, against the saints, it may be a long time back. This meeting is for you. The Lord has been waiting His opportunity to call your attention to that sin. Here He was a prisoner Himself before the High Priest. The Lord Jesus has just been arrested through the treachery of Judas and was in the hands of His enemies. It is said in the type, "God ... delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand", @Psalm 78: 61. That is what happened to the Lord Jesus; He was taken a prisoner and was standing before the High Priest to be charged. He did not forget that He had said to Peter, "Before the cock crow thou shalt deny me thrice". The Lord had not forgotten, and He was waiting for an opportunity to look at Peter, so that he should remember. The Lord does not say anything to him; it is a question of His looking at him. He had said something to Peter, and if there is a sinner here such as I describe, the Lord has said something to you and you have transgressed in spite of it. Some of you perhaps have been numbered with us, breaking bread as we say, in fellowship, and had been warned and warned as to the danger, and you transgressed and turned your back upon the Lord and all His people. This meeting is for you. The Lord would remind you, it is for calling of the sin to memory, a very important thing. Sins that have been confessed and forgiven are never called up again by God, never -- a very comforting thing. "Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more", @Hebrews 10: 17. But sins that are committed and unconfessed and unjudged will be brought up. The Lord looked at this sinner so that he might remember, and what he did remember was not his sin -- that was all fresh -- what he remembered was what the Lord said.
Now it may be that there is someone here tonight who has sinned, and the Lord would remind you of
{257}
the warnings that He gave you before you sinned. It is to call to memory what He said, that is the great point. If you call that to mind, the work is done. That is what happened here. The Lord had said to Simon, "Before the cock crow thou shalt deny me thrice". Well, you say, if the Lord had warned me like that I would never have fallen as I have fallen. But I am certain that if there is such a person here tonight, the Lord faithfully warned you before you fell. Peter is there, according to Luke, as sitting at the fire; others say he was standing. He is taking his ease with the enemies of Christ. Who is there here tonight who has been comfortably sitting down with the enemies of Christ? It may be in some theatre, or some bar room, some cinema, sitting down with the enemies of Christ. A maid comes to Peter. 'You are one of the disciples of the Nazarene', she says. Think of Peter standing up and saying to a girl, No, I do not know Him. Think of what we are capable of. Let no one say, I would not do that. You would do it, you are no better than Peter, nor am I. Peter has to suffer for us in that way. The maid comes to him a little while after, and he says the same thing. According to Luke it is one maid and two men, three persons, who one after the other, say to him, You are one of them. No, I am not, he says, I do not know Him, and he began to curse and swear. Think of what we are capable of. It is as though there was a clock hanging on the wall, and the Lord said. Before twelve o'clock tonight you will deny Me three times. The cock tells the time, and as the cock crew the Lord turns around and looks at Peter. Think of that gaze, that interest, the Lord of glory, the Maker of the universe, the Sustainer of it, that He is turning around to look at that sinner.
Let those glances of Jesus, those sympathetic eyes of Jesus, pierce that hard conscience of yours at this time. He is looking at you now, as it were. He
{258}
would pierce that hard shell that has grown up around that sin you have committed. Every day occasions growth in that hard shell that encases the guilty heart, the guilty conscience. The Lord turned and looked at Peter, that was all He did. He had said something, and the point in His mind was that Peter should remember, and he did. May God grant that that may take place in someone here! That is what the meeting is for, that someone may let the light in who has been refusing it. The Lord says in Jeremiah, "Is not my word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?" @Jeremiah 23: 29. The look of Jesus recalled His word and broke the rock in pieces and Peter went out and wept bitterly. What a fine result! Heaven was interested in that, heaven was watching for that. It was on the calendar, as it were. The Lord Jesus had put a note on the calendar, at that particular hour, and He said, Something is to happen, the cock is to crow and I am to turn around to Peter. Something did happen, and that something was that Peter remembered the word of the Lord and went out and wept bitterly.
That was the beginning of the end. There were certain things that had to follow for his full restoration, but that was the beginning of the end, and when the saints met together on the morning of the resurrection, they were talking about something that happened between the Lord and Peter. We are never told that the saints made any criticism about Peter. We have the records of course given by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, but not in the sense of criticism. It is a divine record simply, so that what they were saying in the meeting in Jerusalem on that day was that, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon", @Luke 24: 34. The Lord Jesus met Peter. He appeared to him. Think of the interest of the Lord in one soul. Peter's history is for our
{259}
account, and it is in this case to show how interested the Lord Jesus is in any one of His people who has sinned already and has not confessed it. He is interested in you now and He would cause His eyes to look into your heart and pierce through that steel conscience, to break it down so that you will weep bitterly.
The third one is a woman, in @Luke 7, to which we may now turn. Her history is as well known perhaps as any. This woman's history is familiar to us as a great gospel text. I read from it because it says of the Lord that He turned towards the woman. She is not a Peter; she is not now a hardened sinner. She is a great sinner, for the Lord Himself says, "Her sins, which are many, are forgiven". Peter's was only one, as you may say, in a threefold way. He denied the Lord three times to three persons, but this woman had sinned many times. The Lord knew it. Simon knew it, and this woman knew it. Simon was saying things in his heart about Jesus, "This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is". He did not say it out loud, but he said it in his heart, and the Lord knew it. Let me say of anyone here who is saying things in their heart, the Lord hears it. He knew what was in that man's heart, and He said, "I have somewhat to say unto thee". The Lord went on to speak of two debtors. What the Lord had in mind was a sinner that becomes a lover. How fine! The Lord has nothing less in His mind than that the blackest sinner is to become a lover of Christ. He is not imputing sin. He is not irritating Simon. No preaching of the gospel should irritate, but rather encourage. There is no animosity, there is no critical spirit, nothing but love behind the gospel, and no one can really preach it except one that loves. It requires that one is a lover of Christ and of men to be a preacher of the gospel. So the Lord speaks to
{260}
Simon about love, "Which of them will love him most?". The Lord had that in mind and He spoke about the two debtors. Simon answered intelligently, "I suppose that he, to whom he forgave most". The Lord answered, "Thou hast rightly judged". "And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman?". The Lord would give us to understand by these incidents what a great place the believer has in heaven, how heaven is interested in one person and how the Lord Himself is interested in one person. He has in mind that you are to be a jewel, a lovable person forever with Him. He takes account of the person from the beginning to the end. How beautiful this woman was in His eyes. He turned to her. You would say, She would not be very beautiful in my eyes, I would not think much of her. But the Lord of glory turned to that woman to call attention to the effect of grace in her. I do not think anything is more interesting to heaven than the effect of grace in poor sinners; greater than anything that happened in creation is when grace becomes effective in a poor sinner. Heaven is aglow with interest, and the Lord of glory Himself was here and He turned towards her.
The Lord says, "Seest thou this woman?". Simon had looked upon her with scorn, he would have rejected her at once, but the Lord of glory looked upon her. The Lord says, "I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet". As though to say, You should have done that, you are a man of means and culture, and you ought to know that a guest should be cared for, but you did not treat Me in the ordinary way. That is what man is, he would invite the Lord to his house as a sort of novelty but would not accord to Him the ordinary civilities that belong to a guest. They would deny that to Jesus. Jesus showed how He would treat His guests by washing the disciples feet. Simon did
{261}
not give Him water, but this woman supplied the tears and used them. "But she hath washed my feet with tears". You have often heard of these things, but the Spirit would bring them home to us, the effect of grace in the sinner, and we would challenge ourselves as to whether we could do anything like this, to weep in affection for Christ. Then again He says, "My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment". "Anointed" -- that is a very dignified word. It was as though to say, These feet have carried grace to me from heaven, there are no feet like them in the universe. The woman anointed His feet with myrrh, indicating that they were suffering feet. It is the effect of grace. Let each of us as christians challenge ourselves as to whether the Lord can with complacency speak of us to others, speak of the effect of grace in us.
The Lord does not say anything to the woman in all this until we come to verse 48, as you will notice, "And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven". He had said of her, "Her sins, which are many", but He had no need to say that to her. Let her count them. It will take all our lifetime to count our sins, for it is a question of repenting all the time. Others complained about this and He spoke to her twice, a double testimony. You do not need any more. He says, "Thy faith hath saved thee". First, "Thy sins", second, "thy faith". If there is any weak-hearted christian here, that word is for you. The Lord would say, Whatever you have in the way of faith, that saves you. How comforting! It is to grow, of course, but whatever faith you have saves you. The Lord says to the woman, "Go in peace". What a fine word that is! How different that woman would be if you met her on the street! Poor degraded person she had been, but now a subject of
{262}
administration under Christ. She is going to be a jewel in His crown.
Now finally, in chapter 10, the Lord turns towards the disciples. That is another class. Peter is in this class, and so is the woman too, and so is every person who has really learned Christ; every follower of Jesus is in this class, and the Lord turns. If you were to see Him in heaven tonight, that is how things are. Of course, we are creatures with tiny minds, and things are brought down to us in this way; but if we were to see Jesus in heaven we would see great and constant activity in mind and action of every kind in view of His people down here. They are constantly before Him. They are on His breast, and His eyes are constantly upon them. Everything is taken account of, but if we were to see Him, when the saints are together on Lord's day, Monday, or Wednesday, we would see the Lord turning round towards them. There is constant activity in heaven. History is being made in heaven, it is a most active place. It is the activity of love. Divine Persons, angelic hosts, are all active and we would see that Jesus turns towards His disciples, and what does He say? He does not upbraid them here. He had said to them, "Rejoice, because your names are written in heaven" (@Luke 10: 20), but now He turns toward them and says, "Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see". How a christian is taken account of! Kings of old desired to see the things they saw, but did not see them. But He said, You hear and see the most wonderful things and your eyes are blessed. Dear brethren, the Lord is bringing many things before us. He is unfolding wonderful things to us by the Spirit, and the word is, "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith". He is unfolding things, are we looking at them, are we hearing them, putting them into our treasuries? That is what the Lord looks for.
{263}
This is the last word that I have, that the Lord Jesus turns towards the disciples and occupies them for the moment with the blessedness of their eyes because of what they see, and so He would say to us. How blessed you are because of the things that you see and hear! He leaves us in that way. May we have the sense of it, how He in the glory on high turns towards us. Not only that, but He comes to us as well, which is greater, but I am speaking for the moment of His interest in turning toward the disciples.
{264}
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN RELATION TO THE TYPES OF THE ASSEMBLY (1)
@Genesis 2: 8 - 25
J.T. In considering now the several types of the assembly, it is thought to be occupied with the attendant circumstances in each type which are of particular importance, especially the suggestions of the activities of the Holy Spirit in connection with the types of the assembly. In this chapter we have much that points to the Spirit of God, especially in His refreshing and fructifying power. The moistening in verse 6 is to be noted. We are told that "a mist went up from the earth, and moistened the whole surface of the ground. And Jehovah Elohim formed Man, dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and Man became a living soul". Following that we have the greatest type of the assembly, that is Eve. The assembly as viewed in Eve is seen apart from sin. Sin had not yet come into the earth, and God would give us a view of the assembly apart from sin, for that is how she will appear eternally. In the measure in which the Holy Spirit is recognised in His varied activities we may now arrive at an understanding of the assembly thus viewed in a sinless condition. It may be thought by some that we should begin with the lower types of the assembly, but it seems to be better to proceed as God gives it to us. He begins at the top and gives us a type of the assembly as it will go on eternally without any question of sin ever having been attached to it. Paul alludes to this when he says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". That is what was in his mind, we may say, throughout the epistle to the Ephesians. That epistle looks into eternity and the Spirit now, I think, would help us to begin thus, and then work down to the other types so that we may see how
{265}
the assembly fits into the conditions resulting from sin.
A.E.H. Do you think that the prominence of the will of God in the Ephesians would fit in in this chapter?
J.T. I think that is the thought. Moistening makes us amenable so that God can operate in us unhinderedly according to His will. The moistening, as you will observe, was from the earth itself. The Holy Spirit is not here viewed as sent down from heaven, but as here in a scene in which Christ and the assembly appear. We could not have Christ and the assembly rightly viewed as one subject aside from the presence of the Holy Spirit here, and then we see it in the form of the river, parted into four heads, the universal sphere from which the assembly is drawn, drawn in such spiritual power.
W.B-w. Does the mist refer to the activity of the Holy Spirit here now?
J.T. Well, you cannot have Christ and the assembly, aside from the activity of the Holy Spirit here.
A.N.W. Say a word as to how that develops from the Spirit hovering over the face of the waters.
J.T. That was to bring order out of chaos. "The earth was waste and empty, and darkness was on the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters". The darkness was negative; you can make nothing out of darkness, but waters are a positive thought and the Holy Spirit hovered over the face of the waters. Beneath the waters is the earth, which is to come up out of it. It is the Holy Spirit active in a feeling way in that passage on account of the chaos, but that is all past in our chapter. Chapter 2 is radiant with glory in the Holy Spirit being here, operating in a positive way.
{266}
H.B. I wonder if that is why we get the expression "out of" so frequently in the chapter. "Out of the ground", "out of Eden", "out of Man".
J.T. That is very good. What is there in principle is being developed. We read later that the earth is the Lord's and the fulness. The fulness comes out of what is there in principle.
Ques. What would the moistening correspond to in the New Testament?
J.T. Well, I would say it is the activities of the Spirit in order to make material plastic in the hands of God. Instead of the resistance of the natural will we have what is subject or plastic in God's hands. I would connect it with new birth. You take any person who becomes a positive subject of the work of God, you can see the mellowing subjective condition that arises from the sovereign action of the Spirit. The best example would be Saul of Tarsus; how changed he became. "What shall I do, Lord?" It is a question of subjection, a complete change in the texture of the person. We do not get any rain until the deluge in this book. It comes in in a positive way from heaven, but this moistening, I think, is to bring out what was in the sphere in which God was about to operate, and is now operating in a positive way. The earth comes in on the third day, brought up out of the waters, and it has life of itself. It says in verse nine of the first chapter, "And God said, Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together to one place, and let the dry land appear. And it was so". The point is, "let the dry land appear". "God called the dry land Earth, and the gathering together of the waters he called Seas". This is a plural thought, but the earth is one great thought, "And God saw that it was good. And God said, Let the earth cause grass to spring up, herb producing seed, fruit trees yielding fruit after their kind, the seed of which is in them,
{267}
on the earth. And it was so. And the earth brought forth grass, herb producing seed after its kind, and trees yielding fruit, the seed of which is in them, after their kind". Attention is called to what was there latently. The power of life is there. Typically that must allude to the Spirit in the New Testament, the operations of the Spirit in humanity, so that it becomes material for God to use.
A.R. So the first thing in chapter 2 is the formation of a man. Will you say something about that?
J.T. "And Jehovah Elohim formed Man, dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and Man became a living soul". This is the full thought -- he became a living soul by the breath of God. That is the Spirit in another way, breathing into his nostrils the breath of God. I think that John's writings would serve us in this subject because, beginning with new birth, he develops the truth abstractly. He shows how we reach a state of complete correspondence with Christ, both in the gospel and in the epistles.
Dr.S. The forming follows the moistening; but in chapter one we have the creation of man.
J.T. Formation is in view in the moistening. When it is said he was made out of the dust of the earth, that would be the radical thought. The thought runs back to state before the moistening. The word 'dust' is not a dignified thought, but here it is what material was there in the earth. It is not useless dust, but what material was there, what came out of the waters in the earth.
S.McC. In @John 3, to which you have referred as to new birth, the Lord says to Nicodemus, "If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not"; I wonder if that is not linked with that here in the earth?
J.T. It is what is in the earth, I think, that God is pointing to, what He has in the earth already.
{268}
There is nothing worked out in the heavenlies until after the flood. It is what God had here.
S.McC. So that, the Lord in conversing with Nicodemus did not begin by unfolding to him the heavenly system, but referred to the operations connected with the earthly side.
J.T. Yes, it was to bring out what was there. The heavenly has its place in the counsels of God because the Word says so, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". But it does not continue as to the heavens, but the earth. "And the earth was waste and empty, and darkness was on the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters". The Spirit of God was not brooding in regard of the heavens. They are left for the moment. It is a question of what God is going to work out here in the earth, which was submerged for the moment, but would soon come to life, and is designated as dry land.
C.A.M. Inasmuch as this chapter begins with the Sabbath and rest, is it right to look at this as done potentially before any adverse thing comes in at all?
J.T. That is the idea, I think, that the earth was there before; the earth was there even before the catastrophe. The catastrophe took place, but the earth is not destroyed. It had been submerged, but it is brought up out of the waters, and the material is there that God can use, and He now uses it for the highest purpose, that is, for the formation of Man.
A.R. It would appear that God was operating on the earth, and the breathing would indicate that He was nearby.
J.T. He is operating with the earth. He is using it for the accomplishment of His designs, and therefore, a mist went up out of it. It is what was there. Then there is the formation, and then the breathing
{269}
into his nostrils so that Man became a living soul without any reference to heaven at all.
A.B. Is your thought that the dust of the ground is the potential material for the service of the Spirit?
J.T. That is what is stated, going back to the very radical material; it is not simply moistened dust, but it is just dust. The moistening is to bring it into a plastic condition which God can use, but the thought goes back to what it was before the moistening.
Ques. How would you compare the thought of dust here with the reference in Ecclesiastes, where it says, "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was", @Ecclesiastes 12: 7?
J.T. Well, that is judicial. God Himself said here in @Genesis 3, "Out of it [the ground] wast thou taken. For dust thou art; and unto dust shalt thou return". I do not think the word 'dust' has the same import in each case, because other things had happened. When sin came in, the dust took on a different character. The dust is said to be the serpent's meat, but as it was, as it came out of the waters, it is a different matter.
A.N.W. Have you said that the woman was made of better material than the man?
J.T. That is true; she was "out of a man". Here @Genesis 2, it is not simply man as a creature, but as a figure of Christ. We cannot, of course, apply all the details to Christ, but, still, it is the fulness of God's thought seen in this chapter, and you can have no fulness without bringing in Christ. Adam here is a type of Christ, and Eve (or Ishshah) is taken out of Ish; that is, a perfect being so far. She is built out of his rib, so that the material is different.
A.B.P. As a result of the moistening process in @John 9, the man goes when he is told to. "I went", he says. Does that suggest the work of God? Whether it is the movement of the Spirit, or the
{270}
movement of the Son, all is in relation to our spiritual progress.
J.T. Well, that helps. It links on with what we are speaking about. @John 9, verse 6, says, "Having said these things, he spat on the ground and made mud of the spittle, and put the mud, as ointment, on his eyes". Now we have the earth again. It is capable of use, by an infinite addition, that is the spittle of Christ, which is the divine essence, you might say, but still it is not the cursed ground. It alludes to the humanity of Christ, looking at it abstractly, and as in humanity, this wonderful cure is effected. The figure still holds. It is not looked at as cursed, nor is any of this transaction viewed in connection with sin at all. It is the abstract idea, as we have been saying.
W.G.T. Would @John 9 in that light link on with the thoughts in @Genesis 2?
J.T. Exactly. There is a reference in @Exodus 8: 16, to the dust of the earth becoming gnats. They are despicable creatures, but they refer to the saints. It is an abstract thought. There is no removal of this sign at all. The saints are really in mind in this allusion. God makes a difference between His saints and the Egyptians, after that sign. "Jehovah said to Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy staff, and smite the dust of the earth, and it shall become gnats throughout the land of Egypt. And they did so; and Aaron stretched out his hand with his staff, and smote the dust of the earth, and there arose gnats on man and on beast: all the dust of the land became gnats throughout the land of Egypt. And the scribes did so with their sorceries, to bring forth gnats; but they could not. And the gnats were on man and on beast. Then the scribes said to Pharaoh, This is the finger of God! But Pharaoh's heart was stubborn, and he hearkened not to them, as Jehovah had said", @Exodus 8: 16 - 19. That is, we
{271}
have the testimony to life. Then in this chapter God says, "And I will distinguish in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no dog-flies shall be there; that thou mayest know that I Jehovah am in the midst of the land. And I will put a separation between my people and thy people; tomorrow shall this sign be". There is no removal of this sign. It continues. It is the positive power of life in the testimony.
J.T.Jr. Peter, Andrew, and Nathaniel come into view in @John 1. Would they link on with the thought you have in mind, what is going on in the soul?
J.T. Yes. Christ is seen there at first by John the baptist's testimony. John says, 'He was before me'. He stood in the midst of them and witnessed that "this is the Son of God". Christ becomes the object for following, and then we have Andrew going for Simon, and Simon designated as Cephas, which is another abstract thought, referring to material for the assembly. They are all viewed in that way. John has that in mind throughout.
L.E.S. In @Isaiah 42: 5 referring to God he says, "He that spread forth the earth and its productions, he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein": and later on in chapter 43: 7, "Even every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him". Would that fit in?
J.T. It would, indeed. Israel would come out in this way by divine formation. No people, no branch of the human race, has gone through more ploughing and harrowing than Israel, but God will bring out a wonderful product here on earth, and in the millennial day. The product will be the handiwork of God.
{272}
W.B-w. Mark tells us that the earth bears fruit of itself. Is that the potential thought in the earth? God worked out that in man.
J.T. Yes, that is the thought. It is what is in the earth. Now having the great thought before us of Christ seen typically in Adam, which is really the theme of Scripture (@Romans 5: 14), we go on to Paul's word in @Ephesians 5. "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". That is the theme right through. Scripture begins with that. The last verses of the Bible call attention to Christ and the assembly, so that it is a question for us to look into, how this condition, a sinless state in the assembly, can be possible. The assembly as a counterpart of Christ is viewed abstractly as sinless, but we have to inquire how that is possible inasmuch as sin has come into the world. I believe we see that it is in the power of the Spirit operating here below. In @Genesis 2: 10, we are told that "a river went out of Eden, to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became four main streams". It was a great volume of water capable of being sub-divided into four heads, and we know by the rivers that can now be located, that they were no small streams.
W.B-w. Referring again to the sinless state, the last verse of Ephesians says, "All them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption". God would have what answers to that now.
J.T. That is the idea. All the pressure in the world is to bring about such a state in us. Of course, we can never be sinless here in a concrete sense; but through the Spirit's operations, God is entitled to regard us thus abstractly, and we are to be characterised by love to our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption. Incorruption is the state of our eternal condition. We are to be raised in incorruption. So that you can see that what is going on today is to
{273}
bring us nearer and nearer to heavenly and divine requirements.
Rem. We should be greatly hampered in the service of God if we had not the ability to view the assembly in this abstract way.
J.T. I do not think we could carry it on rightly otherwise. The types in Leviticus contemplate that we are to be apart as sanctified persons. As priests we are to be filled with the consecration offering. It is the consecrated person; and there is the nazarite. They both have to be regarded separately, but they refer to the same person.
Rem. I was going to ask if the man in @John 9 represents this kind of material -- "Neither has this man sinned nor his parents". You see a full abstract thought in this kind of person, who carries on under these conditions as a worshipper.
J.T. That is right. The Lord brings in that. The disciples say, "Who sinned, this man or his parents?". Naturally, we cannot get out of the idea of somebody sinning. The Lord says, "Neither has this man sinned nor his parents, but that the works of God should be manifested in him". That governs the chapter, and then there is the use of the ground by the Lord to make mud. The word 'mud' is remarkable. It conveys what is there. There is nothing degraded in it because the word 'anointing' lifts it into dignity. It refers to the humanity of Christ, which is, of course, absolutely sinless, and we are to be brought into that sinless condition.
W.G.T. Would the bringing in of the thought of his father and his mother, there, represent a sinless generation abstractly?
J.T. The Lord is viewing him in that way. He is not connecting sin with what happened at all. We ought to learn how to be abstract.
{274}
Ques. Do you think that some may have the idea that an abstract thought is an imaginary one that has no real meaning or substance behind it?
J.T. I am sure that is true. When one uses the word, one wonders how much it is understood, but how can we abstract ourselves from a sinful condition, a mixed condition which Galatians contemplates in a christian, aside from the power of the Holy Spirit? No effort of the mind will do it. It must be by the power of the Spirit.
C.A.M. The last verse of Ephesians reads, "Grace with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption". He was speaking of various things that were found among the saints. The "all them" would enter into that and would be viewed abstractly.
J.T. Thank God for that. There are many who can be so regarded.
A.R. By allowing the Holy Spirit to operate in a meeting like this, do we not touch what is abstract?
J.T. Well, we may. We certainly ought to in regard of the things we are saying. We have no other thought -- them "that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption". The river running through Eden would suggest the power to lift you above what is dormant or dead. It is remarkable, the effect of a river in any district through which it runs. It is life-giving to the surrounding territories. The power is in the movement of the waters.
C.H.H. Would Moses in @Numbers 21 refer to the gift of the Spirit? Then the abstract thought comes out in Balaam's prophecy.
J.T. That has a very strong bearing on what we are saying, "Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it". There is entire occupation with the Spirit, and the prophesies of Balaam follow that. The serpent lifted up in @Numbers 21 is the condemnation of sin in the flesh; so that there is means whereby the conscience
{275}
is set free and the power of sin is not felt. Abstractly, we are to enter into the thought of a sinless condition in order to enter into the assembly service Godward; the assembly must be sinless to be a counterpart of Christ. It is a question of how we reach that state. There is teaching in the volume of waters contemplated here.
L.E.S. Referring to the thought of substance; the apostle in Corinthians refers to himself as knowing -- "I know a man in Christ" -- do you think there is substance there?
J.T. "I know a man in Christ" -- not 'I knew', but "I know". The man in Christ continued always with him, but the *experience* he had fourteen years before, established that spiritually he could be out of the limitations of the body. He said he did not know whether he was in the body or out of the body, but he clearly indicates the spiritual possibilities. You could not get that ordinarily. There is no such reference in the Old Testament. It is only in christianity that it is possible.
C.DeB. John speaks of our being "begotten of God".
J.T. That is right. John has the abstract view, and in chapter 20 of his gospel, where the saints are in view, he tells us that the Lord said to Mary, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". The earlier teaching, in chapter 12 says "Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit". The "much fruit" is in accord. It is a sinless state of things.
A.E.H. Does @Colossians 2 connect with what you are saying, association with Christ and so on?
J.T. Yes. It says, "Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from
{276}
the dead. And you, being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses", @Colossians 2: 12, 13. Quickened with Him is association. Quickening is in life, so that "he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one". It has often been remarked, but perhaps not taken in, that you cannot connect sin with that. It is an abstract state of things.
S.McC. In @Numbers 5, where the unfaithfulness of a wife is referred to, the jealousy of the man calls for cleansing. There is the holy water, and the dust of the floor of the tabernacle, put into it. Would there be any suggestions in that with what we are having?
J.T. I am not sure. I rather think that the curse is involved there. It is the bitter water that caused the curse. I rather think the dust there is on the floor of the tabernacle. It is not simply the dust you might gather out of the wilderness. The word does not always mean the same thing. It is a question of the context. The action in @Numbers 5 is to bring to light sin. It is the jealousy offering, and it is the only place where you get holy water. It is remarkable, the ingredients of it. There is no effect. If there is purity, it does not damage. It brings to light evil if it is there. If there is no impurity, there is fruitfulness as the outcome of the trial. It is more like the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
A.R. Would the idea of correspondence in John be confirmed in the breathing into them?
J.T. Yes, that is right. We see the allusion to this incident. He breathes into them.
C.A.M. Is not the trial of jealousy worked out in the epistle to the Corinthians?
J.T. That is right. The two epistles would cover that, but we should always keep in view the abstract, sinless state of things between Christ and the
{277}
assembly, which is in the epistles. You must have that basically in order to have christianity and the service of God.
A.N.W. Chapter 5 of the first epistle says, "Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, according as ye are unleavened".
J.T. That is right; "as ye are unleavened". In the second epistle we have, "So if anyone be in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things have passed away".
C.H.H. @Leviticus 11 speaks of a spring or well that cannot be defiled.
J.T. Yes, where there is plenty of water. The fountain is the most effective thing: the power of life operative there so that it throws off the defilement. It maintains the abstract correspondence between Christ and the saints and I believe that is why the volume of water is here. The first thing you get is the result: Pison surrounds the whole land of Havilah where the gold is. That is what God has in mind. Gold is the purest of metals. This encircling has in mind the keeping of the gold -- encircling it and where it is.
W.B-w. Is it in mind that the Spirit is flowing out universally in the four heads of this river?
J.T. Yes. It is what is on the earth here. Christ here and the Spirit here, and the assembly here. It is a wonderful triumph for God to have this state of things, but how can it be without the power of the Spirit. It is flowing power, and it is universal, because it is parted into four heads. I think the Acts bring out the encircling power, how the Spirit Himself brings into evidence His own activities, but the first thing that they heard is violent breathing. Power was involved and persons were affected. The mockers said they were full of new wine; they betrayed themselves there. Peter begins his gospel, the first gospel really preached after the Spirit came,
{278}
and he descends to the thought of the mockers. It is a most remarkable thing. The Holy Spirit is here to meet opposition. But Peter says, "For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day", @Acts 2: 15. This is a wonderful thing, a positive thing, for the very mockers were a testimony to what was there. Some positive change had come in, so great a change in ordinary people that they looked to be drunk and were testifying to the truth unknowingly, and Peter brings it out. It was to bring out this great thing that was here. The public did not hear the sound. What they saw was these people and heard what they were saying. I think God is intimating what He was going to have down here to carry on His service and His testimony, and the Spirit here maintains the abstract thought.
A.A.T. Was Paul being caught up an instance of one being abstracted?
J.T. He is just stating the thing that happened fourteen years before. The facts governing it imply what we have before us now, that christianity implies that a man may be in the body, or out of the body, and be may be abstracted in the body, so that be may be entirely free from what the body implies. The abstract is what is possible. There was a concrete case. If it was possible in him, it is possible in us. Why should he present it to the Corinthians, if it were not so? It was what he had experienced himself of christianity.
Ques. Does the word in @Psalm 24 fit in, "The earth is Jehovah's, and the fulness thereof"?
J.T. That is one of the things that enter into what we are talking about. Genesis is fulness. The first chapter is a basic thought, "the earth", and so that principle runs right through. God begins with a man in His mind, the basic thing; new birth, and the fulness follows.
{279}
A.B.P. The commandment as to the tree was, "Thou shalt not eat of it". Provision is made in this commandment that should preserve the conditions free from sin.
J.T. Yes, the sin is not contemplated as coming in yet. The idea of command or government will, of course, run through into eternity. There is no abrogation of law as a principle, it runs through even governing Christ and the assembly eternally, because the Son shall be subject, we are told. The volume of water here contemplates power to hold ourselves free from sin. All the epistles have in mind to keep the saints free from sin, even to the extent of abstractly withdrawing yourself from it. John says, "I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day". He was completely superior to it.
W.B-w. "Where the gold is", would indicate that in that condition of things the gold shows itself. Is that the idea?
J.T. That is the idea. The name of one river is Pison; "that is it which surrounds the whole land of Havilah, where the gold is. And the gold of that land is good". And then there is the bdellium. It is another thought, but is the same idea of excellence which belongs to christianity. The onyx stone is also there in this encircling of the Spirit. Encircling would mean a continuous effect so that the good is all brought out.
L.E.S. We would have that in mind in regard of the Spirit in Corinthians where it says, "But all these things operates the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each in particular according as he pleases", @1 Corinthians 12: 11.
J.T. I think so. That is the constant operation of the Spirit. How are we to be in correspondence with Christ without it? It is the continual encirclement going on in these meetings and ministry, and private devotion, that keeps us apart from sin, so
{280}
that we are in accord with Christ, as John says in his epistle, "even as *he* is, *we* also are in this world".
W.B-w. So the gold is always there. We need these meetings to bring out where the gold is. We need these occasions for it to show itself.
J.T. That is so. How important these meetings are, and we can thank God that they are becoming more frequent and better attended. But that gold should come to light is the motive that should underlie our being here, also the bdellium and the onyx are to be in our minds.
C.DeB. Why does it emphasise that "the gold of that land is good"?
J.T. It is christianity. I suppose it is what is good. God had said what He had been doing was good, but now it is the thing itself that is good. It is that land, the particular part encircled by the river.
R.W.S. The Spirit of Jesus forbade Paul to go a certain way, not to go one way, but to go another way. Would that not precede these activities in Philippi?
J.T. Yes, he uses the word 'circuit'. He says he went in a circuit round about from Jerusalem to Illyricum. He might have gone somewhere else, but the Spirit of Jesus suffered him not, and wanted him to come this way to bring out the gold. Ephesus is included in that.
R.W.S. At Philippi the river was flowing. It would indicate what was in the place, the gold, bdellium, and onyx.
J.T. They were already there. The women were already meeting for prayer.
S.McC. Paul speaks of his service among the nations as in the power of the Spirit of God, and he went from Jerusalem in a circuit round about and fully preached the glad tidings of Christ.
J.T. Very good. That is the basic epistle to the Romans, showing what we are at. The power of the Spirit brings it out.
{281}
C. @Psalm 45 speaks of the gold of Ophir.
J.T. Well, now you come down to another matter, and the gold became classified. When you come down to David's time, particularly, there were more varieties and the varieties arose from districts where the gold came from. The gold of Ophir, for instance, and he gave himself a quantity of refined gold. The idea of gold became more and more enlarged on and varied, and the idea comes down to the Philippians. That is the great epistle for excellence. The excellence of things is spoken of in that book. I believe that Philippians is that which brings out the greatest classifications.
W.R. Would the gold then be what is worked out by the Spirit of God in the saints so that it would be seen by others?
J.T. Yes. It comes out. The river brings it out. It is there latently, because that is the idea of what is in the earth in this chapter. "The fulness thereof" is coming out in these forms.
A.R. Would you say that the idea of the river divided into four heads, suggests that the presence of the Holy Spirit maintains headship here abstractly?
J.T. I suppose it contemplates Christ. Christ is already in the scene, typified in Adam. Headship was in Adam as indicated at the outset. The chapter brings it out, too, because that is the next part of our subject. Verses 15, 16, and 17 treat of the responsibility of Adam in the garden, and it says in verse 18, "It is not good that Man should be alone; I will make him a helpmate, his like. And out of the ground Jehovah Elohim had formed every animal of the field and all fowl of the heavens, and brought them to Man, to see what he would call them; and whatever Man called each living soul, that was its name. And Man gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the heavens, and to every beast of the field; but as for Adam, he found no helpmate, his
{282}
like", @Genesis 2: 18 - 20. That is the idea. God is going to bring out headship. The thing is there in those rivers. It is to come out. God is going to test His great creature as to what he is capable of, so it says, "And brought them to Man, to see what he would call them". God brings out the fulness of the man. How this thought of headship comes out, the ability in wisdom to name things, and so it says, "and whatever Man called each living soul, that was its name". There is the great general thought: every one of us has his name. It is a question of what I am livingly, that is, in my movements. We all have a name, and that name indicates the wonderful wisdom, and intelligence of the Lord Jesus. So in John's gospel, He named Simon -- He did not say 'thou art Peter', but, "thou shalt be called Cephas". That is the great point in the chapter. The next thing is the sleep. "Jehovah Elohim caused a deep sleep to fall upon Man; and he slept. And he took one of his ribs and closed up flesh in its stead And Jehovah Elohim built the rib that he had taken from Man into a woman; and brought her to Man. And Man said, This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man". Now we have come down to the great thought in the type, that is the woman, and the word used here is a word for skilled labour; the word 'build' clearly implies skilled labour. God took the rib from man and closed up the flesh in its stead. The rib is replaced by flesh so that the man suffers no loss with the rib taken out, and now he can name something that is a product of skilled labour.
C.A.M. Do you think the deep sleep covers the present period in one sense?
J.T. Well, I think it may do. There was no pain attached to it. It is not the death penalty at all. Sleep is pleasant. It is simply that Adam is not
{283}
seeing what is happening, but he does know it. It is to bring out his wisdom in naming the product, and he knows the origin of it. It is to bring out his headship -- his wisdom. Here we have one great collective thought. What comes out of Christ in death is in the sense of sleep, and not in the sense of penalty.
J.H.E. Would this be akin to John, a grain of wheat falls into the ground and dies?
J.T. Well, that is actual death. This is sleep. Of course, it is a figure of death, but the grain actually dies in order to bring forth fruit. This is the condition of Christ, typically necessary to the figure. It is a sinless state of things in Adam, and therefore, the whole position is sinless here. It is for us to see how our minds are brought into a sinless state of things. Only by the Spirit of God is it made possible.
A.E.H. In your mind you are connecting the thought of sleep with the thought of abstraction that has been before us.
J.T. Adam is not conscious clearly of what is going on, but when he awakes he knows exactly what has happened. It is to bring out in a typical way the wisdom of the Lord Jesus in relation to the assembly. Paul says in Ephesians, "ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ". There is such a thing as the perfect understanding of the thing, and it all flows from the knowledge of Christ in headship. It is from the head we get it.
Dr.T. Would it indicate God's delight in man? He brought the animals to him to see what he would name them, and now He brings to him a woman, and this time it is "bone of my bones". It represents what God finds delight in in Christ.
J.T. I think so. I think the whole chapter brings out what God is obtaining from His creation in the sense of fulness. "The earth is the Lord's, and the
{284}
fulness thereof" -- the fulness of things. The assembly is the fulness of Christ. God had in mind to bring out what was in Adam. "This time", Adam says. He had already had to do with the animals, but now it is a different matter. "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man". He gives the reason now. He does not give us the reason why he called a cow a cow, or a lion a lion. He gives the reason, which brings out the intelligence and the power of headship.
Dr.T. It is like the supreme test and Adam answers to it fully.
J.T. Yes, "this time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh". It just means one bone, but this one bone is used to build up the woman, so that there is perfect relation between the woman and the man, making the intimacy between Christ and the assembly so very precious.
C.F.N. @Ephesians 1, the last verse, reads, "God ... gave him to be head over all things to the assembly which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all"; and then chapter 2, "And has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus".
J.T. Yes, that is the great thought in Ephesians, to bring out what we are speaking of. We have really been speaking of chapter 5, but the great full thought is in the first chapter that you have read. He has given him to be head over all things *to* the assembly, not *of* the assembly there. In Colossians He is head of the assembly, but in Ephesians He is "head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". The fulness is that it is taken out of Him. All that He is is expressed there. The accumulation of the work of Christ in John's writings all culminates in that term,
{285}
"go to my brethren". Then He breathes into them the breath of life.
A.R. Would Saul of Tarsus going to Damascus learn the relation between Christ and the assembly by the Lord's question, "Why persecutest thou me?"
J.T. Well, I am sure that is true. It is a comforting thing today, too, that the Lord Himself is with us in our suffering; the more we come to that idea and that we are to suffer with Him, the better.
Ques. Does the last verse help us in our assembly service, ability to move together with Christ in a sinless condition? We move in relation to the assembly that way.
J.T. They were both naked, man and his wife, and were not ashamed. There is no need of shame. It is sin that has brought in that. It is a shame to be without shame sometimes, you know, according to the Corinthians.
W.B-w. You do not say anything about the other three heads. "And the name of the second river is Gihon: that is it which surrounds the whole land of Cush. And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which flows forward toward Asshur. And the fourth river, that is Euphrates" but it does not say more.
J.T. Well, it is a great boundary spoken of in the prophets. David's kingdom extended to the Euphrates. The testimony of the assembly was never fruitful beyond that boundary. There will be fruit later on from beyond there. The angels which are bound at the river Euphrates are to be loosed. The everlasting gospel, I am sure, will bring out great results beyond the Euphrates.
Rem. The first river perhaps might refer to the proclamation and formation of the assembly, now, and the latter ones to future operations.
J.T. Quite so. It is all one great idea of spiritual power.
{286}
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN RELATION TO THE TYPES OF THE ASSEMBLY (2)
@Genesis 24: 1 - 27, 61 - 67
J.T. The brethren will bear in mind that we are considering the assembly as presented in the types in the Old Testament, especially having regard to the fact that the Spirit is seen in them. We had @Genesis 2 this forenoon, and the Spirit was dwelt on in a somewhat extended way, principally under the figure of water, and in our present type we have the Spirit also, but typified in the man, that is, Abraham's servant, the chief servant of his house. We also have the Spirit in the wells. There are two wells mentioned in this chapter, and we may say the camels also represent the power of the Spirit in this chapter, because it is a question of the power by which we are carried as of the assembly. So we have Abraham's servant as a type of the Spirit and then the two wells and the camels. I think the brethren will see the importance of enlarging on the truth of the Spirit in the types, because the Spirit is so absolutely essential to the assembly's formation, and to her maintenance and movements, her journey to Christ. Rebecca, as we shall see, indicates in her own person the place of the assembly, as already formed before the servant found her. She belonged to the family of Abraham. There is no question of family in @Genesis 2. Now it is a question of family links; the sister before you have the bride. Sarah's family and Abraham's father's family furnish not only types of Christ, but also of the assembly, and the sisterhood. The idea of sisterhood must precede the idea of the bride. Therefore, it is a question of finding a sister first, one who is of the lineage of Abraham. So the servant in giving thanks says, "Blessed be Jehovah. God of my master Abraham, who has not withdrawn his loving-kindness and his faithfulness from my
{287}
master; I being in the way, Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren". It is inclusive of brothers and sisters.
A.B.P. Is the parenthesis in chapter 22 verse 23 a definite link with our chapter, "and Bethuel begot Rebecca", in relation to what you are saying? The sisterhood being established, the Spirit of God now has the assembly in view, leading on to chapter 24?
J.T. I think that is important and helpful, because she was there. As soon as you have a risen Christ as in chapter 22, indeed, a heavenly Christ, then we have Rebecca's genealogy beginning with "It came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham". There would have been light in that for Abraham so that in chapter 24 he was not acting in the dark. He had light that Rebecca existed. There is no question about it, but still it was for the servant to find her, and he was to find her in a simple way, by the graces that she manifested, and he found her by her own confession as to her parentage.
C.H. In Canticles the sister is put before the spouse. "I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse".
J.T. That bears on it. It is found more than once in the Canticles, and, of course, it bears on all marriages. You must have the sister or the brother, before you can have the engagement or the marriage -- the wife or the husband.
What Abraham required was, "I will make thee swear by Jehovah, the God of the heavens and the God of the earth, that thou take not a wife for my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I am dwelling; but thou shalt go to my land and to my kindred, and take a wife for my son Isaac. And the servant said to him, Perhaps the woman will not be willing to follow me to this land: must I, then, bring thy son again in any case to the land from which thou hast removed? And Abraham said to
{288}
him, Beware that thou bring not my son thither again. Jehovah the God of the heavens, who took me out of my father's house, and out of the land of my nativity, and who has spoken to me, and who has sworn to me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land -- he will send his angel before thee, that thou mayest take a wife for my son thence", @Genesis 24: 3 - 7. This ought to be noted, that we are now in the presence of the heavens and the earth, "Thou shalt go to my land and to my kindred, and take a wife for my son Isaac".
Now the swearing is in regard to the lineage -- not qualities yet, but lineage, and moreover that Isaac is not to be taken out of Canaan, meaning it is a heavenly matter. But when the servant goes, he, as it were, is free, free to act wisely and intelligently. We are told the servant took ten camels. Abraham did not tell him to do that. He is the chief servant of his house, and he arose and went to Mesopotamia. And he said, "Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, meet me, I pray thee, with thy blessing this day, and deal kindly with my master Abraham. Behold, I stand here by the well of water, and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water", (verses 12, 13). The position is that the servant is free, and is over all that Abraham has, and he is to act in his own intelligence. Abraham has to do with the lineage side of the matter but the rest is left with the servant. So now it widens out to the ministry of the Spirit. The servant takes ten camels, which is a matter of carrying power, and then he prays. There is the recognition of carrying power and prayer, and so he says to Jehovah, "Jehovah, God of my master". He calls Abraham his master, yet, but later he calls Isaac his master. He is wholly for the will of Abraham, and this corresponds to the position of the Holy Spirit. Then he prays, "And he said, Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, meet me, I pray thee, with
{289}
thy blessing this day, and deal kindly with my master Abraham. Behold, I stand here by the well of water, and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water. And let it come to pass, that the maiden to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink, and who will say Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also, be she whom thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and hereby I shall know that thou hast dealt kindly with my master". He has now made his prayer. He has put the camels where they should be, not only at the well, but kneeling. That is the attitude, and he makes a prayer, and now it is a question of what God is going to do. It is not a legal matter. The position of the ministry is not on legal grounds. It is in intelligent liberty. The result is that, of course, you get qualities. He refers to qualities. "And let it come to pass, that the maiden to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink, and who will say, Drink, and I will give thy camels think also". You see it is a question now of the graces which are in her. He does not ask Jehovah to bring this particular woman by naming her father. It is the person with the necessary qualities who was wanted. Ministry brings out qualities.
F.N.W. In @Matthew 13 the qualities are sought by Christ Himself, the treasure in the field and the beautiful pearl.
J.T. Well, that is good. Excellence is really the point in values, and, of course, that corresponds here. It is this kind of a person. He might have said, 'Let the daughter of Bethuel come'; or 'Let Laban's sister come'. He does not say a word in prayer about her family. It is a question of qualities. In the book of Acts you get qualities brought out in persons as soon as Peter's address was finished. There were three thousand converts, and a beautiful character marked them.
{290}
S.McC. This morning you were referring to the epistle to the Ephesians in connection with Eve. Does Rebecca give us another Ephesian view of the assembly?
J.T. She is the assembly and the bride of a heavenly man. Christ in heaven, only as here in testimony, I think; the point is testimony with Rebecca. She is taken into Sarah's tent. Eve is the great prime thought of the assembly -- what goes through now abstractly in a sinless state; Eve is that. The assembly according to that type fully corresponds with Christ eternally. But I think Rebecca is the assembly, as the bride, and the fulness of the heavenly man, but here on earth now where the testimony is needed.
W.B-w. Referring to the first paragraph again and the conversation between Abraham and the servant about this great matter, does that, as bringing out the intercourse between the Father and the Spirit as to the assembly, refer to what took place before time, or since time began?
J.T. Well, I think it is something like what the Lord Himself said about the Spirit. He proceeds from the Father. "Who goes forth from with the Father". The preposition there means He is beside Him and knows exactly the Father's thoughts. Of course, personally He would know everything, but in view of His service, it is a question of the Father's thoughts. He proceeds from being with the Father.
W.B-w. Does the arrangement about this matter take place in time?
J.T. I would connect it with that, the Holy Spirit coming out from heaven. He came "from with the Father". This would be what the Lord had in mind. The Lord's ministry has in mind the economy. It is the position the Spirit takes up in relation to Christ's manhood even before the Spirit came to earth.
{291}
W.B-w. So the economy is in mind in this chapter.
J.T. It is the economy surely, including all that was eternally purposed.
S.McC. We have records of the Lord praying in the gospels. Would it be right to think or speak of the Holy Spirit praying or is that outside of spiritual terms?
J.T. Well, the Spirit makes intercession for the saints with groanings which cannot be uttered, but if He does pray, it would be through us. The Spirit's ministry is through us, the saints, through the apostles, and others. Whatever we have in that way, is what takes place, by the Spirit as in us -- in the assembly.
W.B-w. At the first the man stooped and bowed down before Jehovah. In the authorised version it is worship. Do you think the Spirit worships?
J.T. Well, it is not good to analyse too much like that. It is wonderful, however, how loyal the attitude of the Spirit is. As He hears He speaks. It works out in those whom He uses.
W.B-w. Paul says, "*We* ... worship by the Spirit of God". Is that right?
J.T. That is instrumental. I would not like to put it that the Holy Spirit worships. He works through us. He has not become incarnate. He intercedes for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.
J.H.E. What would the camels represent?
J.T. Carrying power. Ten -- the complete number in responsibility, so that at the end of the chapter we shall see that Isaac saw the camels coming. It does not say he saw Rebecca. He moves after the person is properly carried to him typically by the Spirit of God. The Lord is looking for the assembly, which is marked off by being carried thus.
C.DeB. In @Luke 10 the Samaritan put the man on his own beast and carried him to the inn.
{292}
J.T. The same power by which Christ was carried here is what marks off a true assembly person; he is carried by the power of the Spirit in his religious services.
J.T.Jr. Is there another view of the Spirit in the angel referred to in verse 7? Abraham says, "He will send his angel before thee".
J.T. That would carry us through to the New Testament, where we are told that the angels are ministering to us. The Spirit of God, of course, is supreme in all this, and He is a divine Person, but still the service of angels helps greatly. Their attendance in meetings like this greatly aids us if we have externals in order. Assembly traits are developed on those lines.
A.E.H. Do you always think of the Holy Spirit in His operations and activities and service in connection with the saints, or do you think of Him acting apart from the saints at all?
J.T. You cannot limit Him and say He cannot do this and that. He is a divine Person, but the mode of His dwelling here is in the saints. That is how He came at Pentecost. How He was in the Old Testament is left rather vague. You can never limit divine Persons. A divine Person is always inscrutable.
A.E.H. Then perhaps the section we are considering in Genesis this afternoon would fit in with chapters 14 to 16 of John's gospel?
J.T. Very much, I think.
A.R. We are linked up with the saints throughout the world by the Holy Spirit; we are all baptised by one Spirit, into one body.
J.T. Yes, there is something that you cannot define in divine operations, or the divine mode of dwelling here. We are all one by the Spirit, but then, what is the link between us here and saints in other parts of the world? The ocean separates us, but
{293}
that does not matter in the creation of God. There are certain elements in the very creation that are not affected by distance at all.
A.E.H. Is that a matter of light, or a matter of your sensibilities and feelings and consciousness?
J.T. I have often felt things that were happening in other parts of the world. How is it? It is the subtle medium through which the Spirit of God acts. You cannot define it. The Lord Jesus comes to us, but you cannot define how it happens.
A.N.W. But is not the whole idea of the one body realised in our spiritual sensibilities?
J.T. That is true. It is a subjective thought, but the light of it has to be taken into the mind. To have sensibilities intelligently you must have the light, but no one can define it. You cannot define electricity, for example, but how much more limited you are when you have divine Persons operating.
A.R. So that impressions received at the Lord's supper in Australia and England, might affect us in a similar way as the day proceeds.
J.T. "Death works in us, but life in you", Paul says in @2 Corinthians 4: 12. He was a long way off from the Corinthians when he said that.
C.H.H. Would the moral features as seen in Rebecca be the work of God in her, as over against Eve being formed by God?
J.T. Well, the thoughts are carried forward, only she comes into these traits on family lines, the family of Terah, the family of Abram. It is a question of family formation, not creative formation. She had a personal existence before the servant found her. Eve did not. Eve had no personal existence until the bone was built by Jehovah. This formation has taken place on family lines. She is there already. The servant does not form her. The traits are there and the formation is there. It is a question of the
{294}
family of God now and the line coming down, what God does in that way.
J.H.E. The outward adornment would be in keeping with what is within.
J.T. The formation was there. The traits properly assembled and that is what the servant is engaged with. He is not engaged with a literal family line, but what is suitable to Isaac. He prays about traits, about character in the person. That was there already. He did not produce it but he prayed for it. That is the principle from this point of view, our service is accompanied by prayer. You have the ideal and you hold it and you hope and count on God working day and night so that you will see it.
W.B-w. We find persons suitable for the assembly. We should be continually looking for persons of this kind every day.
J.T. That is the idea. We are looking for persons of this kind. You pray about it. That is how our local assemblies are to be formed.
H.L. Is the well the link? He was at the well and it was to that point that Rebecca came.
J.T. That is what I thought we ought to carry through. The well is the second type of the Holy Spirit here in this chapter and the servant links on with the well and causes the camels to kneel down outside the city by a well of water at the time of evening when the women came out to draw water. We have to be governed by time in this administration. There are times when it is not wise to bring up these matters. We have to wait on the Spirit. Time must enter into our service from this point of view. Then he prays. He is by the well. He is in the position where you are likely to meet persons like this in this condition. You say, God will bring them to me anywhere, but will He? The servant is governed by intelligence. You get both time and place mentioned very much in the Acts.
{295}
Rem. Paul had the ideal in his mind in going over from Asia Minor to the continent of Europe. He had it in his mind.
J.T. Undoubtedly, and you get there time and place. You get a river and you get the place where the women used to meet, where prayer was wont to be made. He was governed by these thoughts.
A.N.W. He is also governed by the disposition of the woman. He is dependent upon her willingness.
J.T. Well, I think his prayer will bring out what was in his heart. First causing the camels to kneel down. Why is it mentioned? What does it matter whether they are kneeling or standing? It is to bring out the position. It is a time of dependence on God, but then you will not get what you want in a wilderness. You must go where people are, likely ones, such as you want.
A.E.H. Is there an indication of spiritual sensitiveness and sense too in waiting so that the first approach is when she is entirely free from natural influence that might hamper or hinder her?
J.T. It is the time of the evening when the women came out to draw water. You are not looking for men -- you are looking for a woman. If you were looking for a man, you would be concerned about where he went. You take Paul at Corinth, the Lord says to him, "I have much people in this city". They were men and women. Now Paul would be alert from now on, as to the "much people". There is a man who lives next door to me. Is he one of them? Is he likely to be one of them? Paul was a tent maker himself. You may be sure he inquired about the workers in the town. A servant will take account of the conditions of the place. The Spirit of God says, "At the time of the evening, when the women came out to draw water". The Holy Spirit is looking for people who are soberly doing something
{296}
profitable. You may be sure that the Lord would be looking for that kind of people.
C. Was not that why the Lord chose Gideon, because of where he was and what he was doing, threshing wheat by the winepress? The qualities were in the man.
J.T. Just so. You get it throughout the gospels and throughout the Acts. This is the evening time when the women come out. That is a voice to young people. What do you come out for? The day is over. You have been occupied with something else, maybe school, and now there is a little work to be done in the house. Are you doing it, or are you complaining that you have to do it, and you would rather go out to play tennis, or be standing about the streets. The Holy Spirit is not looking for the likes of you at all. He is looking for someone soberly doing something useful. The work of God is sure to produce that.
W.R. There is in mind the saints being developed. Rebecca was not only giving drink to the servant, but to the camels also.
J.T. Well, that is what it is. He says, "Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, meet me, I pray thee, with thy blessings this day, and deal kindly with my master Abraham. Behold, I stand here by the well of water, and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water. And let it come to pass, that the maiden to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink, and who will say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also, be she whom thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and hereby I shall know that thou hast dealt kindly with my master". What a beautiful prayer it is for any servant to utter. 'Let her be the one to be the wife of Isaac'; she was to be that because of the traits she manifests. She not only says, "Drink,
{297}
my Lord!" but, "I will draw water for thy camels also". She is going to be a good wife.
L.E.S. Does @John 4 bring to light the material from the moral side? The well and the Lord sitting by the well bring much into evidence.
J.T. That is a good suggestion. He is sitting on the well, being weary with His journey. The woman is there and the Lord asks her for a drink. She did not come up to the mark, because sin was there unjudged. You can never get true response until there is a judgment of sin. There is nothing to judge here in Rebecca.
W.G.T. We might not be prepared to go so far as to give a drink to ten camels.
J.T. It is a big undertaking to supply ten camels with water. The suggestion is that she is ready for a big job. She is not taking on a small thing.
R.T. Verse 13 speaks of "the daughters of the men of the city". Should there not be among us "men of the city" in view of these features that would be pleasurable to Christ?
J.T. Rebecca is the daughter of a man, Bethuel. "Rebecca came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah the wife of Nahor. Abraham's brother; and she had her pitcher upon her shoulder". She came out.
A.M. Would the thought expressed in Ephesians of God having marked us out according to the good pleasure of His will, come in here?
J.T. Yes. He has marked us out for sonship.
F.N.W. Wisdom in service is to enter into our local setting. It would help us as to whether the open air preaching would be suitable?
J.T. Well, that is a matter for levitical instinct and intelligence. Time and place, you know.
Rem. There is no weariness spoken of here in connection with the servant, as there is in @John 4.
{298}
The moral question had to be raised there and that would involve weariness.
J.T. Quite so. Dealing with the sin question, and bringing home sin to individuals requires great skill. The Lord had that in His mind in all that passed at that well.
W.R. The secret in finding material is being in the way, "Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren", @Genesis 24: 27.
J.T. Yes, it is very interesting to see how she comes out in answer to his prayer. The importance of prayer in this matter. The camels are the power; they are kneeling down, not carrying anybody now. The servant is acting in a priestly way. He is praying. Then the movement of the person. "And let it come to pass, that the maiden to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink, and who will say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also, be she whom thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and hereby I shall know that thou hast dealt kindly with my master". He had not finished speaking when God wrought and there she was.
W.G.T. It is very interesting that God is acting before the speaking is ended. As the prayer meeting is going on God is acting before it is finished.
J.T. Very beautiful. We have to wait sometimes for answers a long time and it tests us as to whether we do that. In @Acts 12 prayer went up and when the answer came they were not sure, they would not believe it. There is no question here of unbelief in the servant's mind, so that it leads to worship. "And the man stooped, and bowed down before Jehovah, and said, Blessed be Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, who has not withdrawn his loving-kindness and his faithfulness from my master; I being in the way, Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren". So we get prayer and praise.
{299}
That is how the work goes on in the assembly. We know that heaven is looking on all the time.
W.B-w. The servant speaks of 'my business'. "I will not eat until I have made known my business". Everything must be taken up carefully.
J.T. We have to look into the section and see, what the servant says to Jehovah, what he says to the maiden -- and what she says to him, and what she tells her brother, and then what the brother says to the servant, and the servant speaks long, going over the whole ground, and then we come to the point of decision, whether the maiden is to go or is to stay for ten days, and that brings out a bit of opposition which we did not get in @Genesis 2. What we see here are the beautiful qualities. The maiden was very fair and the servant ran to meet her, and said, "Let me, I pray thee, sip a little water out of thy pitcher". What a remarkable thing, he is running, a servant of Abraham's house. It reminds us of @John 20; we are told that Mary ran, and Peter and John ran. She is so attractive. He said, "Let me, I pray thee, sip a little water out of thy pitcher. And she said, Drink, my lord! And she hasted and let down her pitcher on her hand, and gave him to drink. And when she had given him enough to drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also, until they have drunk enough. And she hasted and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again to the well to draw water; and she drew for all his camels. And the man was astonished at her, remaining silent, to know whether Jehovah had made his journey prosperous or not". I think God would make us wonder what it is, what this woman did. When the Spirit of God picks people, He tells us what they did, what they can do. "The man was astonished at her, remaining silent" (verse 21). The man himself is getting help in his soul, too.
{300}
C.A.M. Is the working out of this in a practical way in the Acts, this matter of time and place? Do you see this in the Acts of the Apostles?
J.T. Yes, I think so. I think that marks the whole course of ministry.
C.A.M. These different passages that come up in the Acts, Cornelius and others, and speaking in a practical way about our business and our locality, there comes a time when there is a recognition of the Spirit, when there is a bringing in of God, when there is an intelligent service in everything that we have to do with. Our lives, speaking in a general way, seem to be so haphazard, but as we give room to the Spirit, there is a sanctity in all that we do.
J.T. I think that is good. Time and place. We have it actually here. The day of Pentecost was now accomplishing or running its course. That is the time, and the place was Jerusalem. They were all together in one place. They were all there. That is time and place and conditions. The Holy Spirit came in then, and then the next thing is the preaching. What led to the preaching? There is no evidence whatever that Peter hired a hall. I doubt if there was a hall in Jerusalem that would hold the audience he had. He began with what the jesters and mockers had said about the saints.
All the places from whence the persons came are mentioned. The time was the third hour of the day, an extraordinary time from our point of view to start a gospel meeting. These people were interested adversely. He took up the opposition and began there and refers to the time of day. How long it took him to address them, I cannot say, but the result was wonderful. Obviously it was the right time, and great assembly material was secured, and then "the Lord added" them. That is what Christ would recognise as suitable to Himself.
{301}
R.W.S. Would it be right to apply that to the sensitive feelings of holy joy that the Spirit has when He sees the results of His work?
J.T. Well, I think wonderment goes into divine operations. The Lord's name is called Wonderful. It is because of what He does. The man in @Judges 13 did wondrously and I suppose the work of God brings it out and the work in the Acts exhibits all this. We ought to be wondering, I am sure, because we are in the day of small things, but still, wonderful things are happening and we ought to wonder when we see them, the proper effect that God looks for in us.
W.W. She was seen in her occupation, drawing water, and Lydia, in @Acts 16, was a seller of purple.
J.T. I think that is good. The occupation. Peter was a fisherman, and he was staying in the house of Simon the tanner. It was the kind of thing that was needed at that juncture. Death must take place before you can have tanning. The truth of the assembly from the Pauline side is developed in the Acts in connection with occupation.
W.R. There is no minimum of age in this. The Lord at twelve years was occupied with the Father's business.
J.T. Just so.
S.McC. The matter of drawing for the camels is important, because sometimes there is a lack of readiness to take on the truth that comes out, and the meetings that enter into the calendar of the week. Do you not think this is a continual feature of the assembly, readiness to take on what might be best for the saints?
J.T. I think that is good. That enters into what you are saying. How long would it take her? It is a big piece of work she took on, because she carried the pitcher herself.
{302}
R.R.T. Would these beautiful features in Rebecca be akin to what the Lord says, "whosoever shall do the will of God, *he* is my brother, and sister and mother"? It is an indication that brings out these features.
J.T. Very good indeed. The will of God may require very heavy working.
W.B-w. When the camels drank enough the man took the gold ring and put the adornments upon her.
J.T. It says, "When the camels had drunk enough". That was the test. They finished the meeting, that was a full stop. Then it says in verse 22, "And it came to pass when the camels had drunk enough, that the man took a gold ring, of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands, ten shekels weight of gold, and said, Whose daughter art thou?". Notice; he does not ask about her father and mother until the matter is all finished. How much the idea of readiness to serve enters into the location of assembly material. She did the thing needed and they stopped drinking before she stopped.
L.E.S. The work of God as being true to itself would be marked by features of spiritual completion in whatever setting it may be found.
J.T. Quite so. Spiritual completion. The camels settle that matter here. It must have been a great test to her endurance, because it was a very heavy piece of work. That is another matter that comes into what we are doing. The Lord was weary with His journey.
Ques. It would be more than just entertaining a visiting brother, it would involve the work generally, would it not? Many would undertake a bit of work when there is some distinction connected with it, but there was no distinction in drawing water for the camels.
J.T. Quite so.
{303}
Rem. You can understand why there was an assembly in Phoebe's house. She was that kind of a person. "*She* also has been a helper of many, and of myself", @Romans 16: 2. We should help all the brethren without partiality.
J.T. Yes, I think the note as to her would indicate that she did what was needed. I refer to the note on @Romans 16, verse 1. You can understand how Paul himself commended her to the saints in Rome.
T.S. It is quite noticeable the occurrence of the word 'labour' in @Romans 16. It says, "who labour in the Lord" and others, "who has laboured much in the Lord" and also, "Salute Prisca and Aquila" and also some others.
J.T. You can see there, what we are saying about labouring. How much is to be done by old and young in connection with the assembly and the work as done brings out assembly material. You are a suitable person for the assembly. You can see how the adornment fits. It is not like "a gold ring in a swine's snout", @Proverbs 11: 22. "And it came to pass when the camels had drunk enough, that the man took a gold ring, of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands, ten shekels weight of gold, and said, Whose daughter art thou?". I think that ought to be noticed, the ten shekels weight of gold, the ring of half a shekel weight and two bracelets for her hands, as if the hands are specially honoured and then, he says, "Whose daughter art thou?". As much as to say, that is all that is needed now. The qualities are all there. It is the personal identity now and that is sure to be right, sure to agree. "And she said to him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom she bore to Nahor. And she said to him, There is straw, and also much provender with us; also room to lodge". See how intelligent her answer is.
{304}
J.T.Jr. "The gold of that land is good", comes to light here.
J.T. Quite so. The encompassing is here in the man, the spiritual power in the man must have greatly augmented what she was doing. A man who had the greatest regard for her in the way he ran to her -- all that would encourage her.
W.B-w. What do you think of the question in verse 23, "Is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge?"
J.T. Well, I think the idea of the assembly is to bring out the wonderful provision there is down here. @Acts 2 brings out what is suitable to Christ. The Lord added to the assembly such as should be saved. There is room there for the remnant of Israel. There are religious organisations around us that do not make room for people -- hospitality and all that. In a meeting like this the brethren are very hospitable, but the question is whether that hospitality goes on, whether you want all the brethren to leave after the meeting. The point is to bring out the richness of the place; not only the persons themselves, but the camels. This is to bring out the greatness of the assembly and what it is down here in the place of testimony. It is really beginning in @Acts 2. In Paul's ministry you get it in its full heavenly bearing.
R.R.T. When the Lord was here He found no place to lay His head, but now in the assembly this place is found.
J.T. That is the point. You take Cornelius. Peter was in the house of Simon the tanner. I do not suppose it was a house you would care to be in naturally, with the smell of tanning, but it is a remarkable touch you get in the end of @Acts 9; "many believed on the Lord". He was thoroughly made known by what happened. "And it became known throughout the whole of Joppa, and many believed on the Lord. And it came to pass that he
{305}
remained many days in Joppa with a certain Simon, a tanner". They had sent for Peter, but they did not now speak about Tabitha, nor did Peter stay with any of the relatives of Tabitha. He stayed with one Simon the tanner many days.
C.DeB. In the end of @Acts 10 they begged him to stay at the house of Cornelius.
J.T. That is how matters come out through Paul; he was sent for -- the man at Macedonia says, "Come over ... and help us". Cornelius sends to this place for Peter, who is evidently at home and while they were preparing food he was on the roof and he became in an ecstasy. The spiritual power, and the wonderful action from heaven comes into Peter's mind, and the sheet comes down to him. Cornelius sends for him and his neighbours are there. Everything is just as the servant might wish it.
C.H.H. Would you say that the labour of service would be acceptable on the ground of sacrifice?
J.T. Quite so. What we are having before us now is to bring out what the institution is, what the assembly is, as the bride of Christ here in testimony. He is up there a heavenly Man and she is down here. That is really the point. Isaac is not the heavenly man characteristically in an eternal sense, but in *testimony* here, and this is his bride. What we are speaking about will not mark eternity. It is what is needed down here in every place where there is a meeting, that there might be this readiness to serve, because it is in these things that we really see there is a marked work of God in the place. It is in these qualities that you see it.
Rem. Rebecca herself was greatly concerned later that Jacob should have a proper wife to carry on the assembly side in testimony.
J.T. Quite so. That is births, deaths, and marriages. They enter into the assembly position of service, and the sister must come first This instruction
{306}
enters into ordinary engagements and marriages. You must have the sister first, and the brother before you can have an engagement or marriage according to God.
Rem. Paul says, "Have we not a right to take round a sister as wife ... ?". The spiritual side is to govern us.
J.T. It is a very great question. It is a shame to have to mention this matter of mixed marriages, and also of radios. They are real difficulties among the brethren. What we are dealing with now affects all that. You cannot have proper hospitality, unless the husband and wife are in the Lord. It is the Lord; His authority is owned.
A.R. When you say one should be a brother or one should be a sister, do you mean in fellowship?
J.T. In the Lord implies fellowship. I may be a christian, but my associations may not be suitable to fellowship according to God. Ananias and Sapphira were put away although they were undoubtedly christians.
W.R. Why do you think the servant is so slow in considering this matter if it is right; to know whether Jehovah has made his journey prosperous or not?
J.T. It is a good thing to meditate a while. Quietness is important even in the greatest success in order to give us balance. He is getting his balance in the presence of God. That is a very important and wholesome matter.
{307}
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN RELATION TO THE TYPES OF THE ASSEMBLY (3)
@Genesis 24: 50 - 67; @Genesis 41: 37 - 52
J.T. The time failed us yesterday in looking at chapter 24. The type is so important that we should consider it fully and perhaps take into account the life of Jacob affording some light on our subject, especially as to Leah, and then Asnath, the wife of Joseph, bringing out the assembly as with Christ at the time of His rejection by Israel and His acceptance among the nations. After that we have also to look at Zipporah as related to Christ in the wilderness and the testimony of God in the wilderness, the tabernacle and covenant. There are others, of course, such as Achsah, the wife of Othniel, and Ruth, the wife of Boaz, and finally, Abigail, but Zipporah and Abigail are the main types after Genesis.
Leah represents the assembly, the gentiles, that is ourselves, and is not so attractive as Israel was historically; she was tender eyed, whereas Rachel is very beautiful both as to form and generally. Asnath has no special features at all save that she is in the position of wife to Joseph in this important administrative position that he occupies in Egypt. The Lord will help us to see the point in each type, but Rebecca is the most important in the book, next to Eve, and as we had yesterday, she typifies the assembly as the bride of the heavenly man, that is Christ typified in Isaac; great space is given to her in this long chapter and later on, too, as far as chapter 27, where she is concerned about the wives that Esau had, Canaanitish women. The assembly is thus followed up in her, as a type, as discriminating, and judging mixed marriages, which is a very important matter. She is recognised as a holy seed in sisterhood, so that three times over it is mentioned here, that her father
{308}
was the son of Milcah, whom she bore to Nahor, Abraham's brother. The mother is mentioned as well as the father. Her grandfather and grandmother are mentioned also, showing that the female side is peculiarly carried through in Rebecca, as related to Christ above.
Rem. It is wholly a family matter, "To take my master's brother's daughter for his son" (verse 48).
J.T. To bring the thing down to practice, what is referred to there in the closing word of the servant to Bethuel and Laban, is we might say a presentation of a case as we call it, for fellowship in a care meeting. The chapter affords richness in the way of prayer and worship, the fact that assembly material comes to light. The man, it says, "Stooped, and bowed down before Jehovah, and said, Blessed be Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, who has not withdrawn his loving-kindness and his faithfulness from my master; I being in the way, Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren". Then we have what the maiden told her mother's house in verse 28, and then we read that Rebecca had a brother named Laban. Now we have to watch him to see how he is going to act and how the matter may be brought into the care meeting of the saints. Laban is an outstanding personage, because he takes the lead of his father and mother. He and his mother finally decided that the woman should not leave for ten days; that is postponement which is often very dangerous in regard to the saints, especially where there are matters calling for judgment. The servant's speech to them begins in verse 34, after he refused to eat before he told his business. It runs down to verse 49, and he is what we might call the leading brother for the moment. Laban is in mind as the leading brother after this speech in which the facts are stated. In verse 50 Laban speaks before his father, and says, "The thing proceeds
{309}
from Jehovah". He does not keep to that word, however, for he changes his mind a bit. I think he wants to be the leading man to decide a matter of that importance, which is a dangerous thing.
F.N.W. Would the servant be governed by the Holy Spirit? We saw earlier the position that he took in relation to the well. Would he be able to discern the features of the Holy Spirit in Rebecca?
J.T. Yes, his remarks and prayer are connected with the well. Beer-lahai-roi was the well with which Isaac is connected. The word says in verse 62, "And Isaac had just returned from Beer-lahai-roi; for he was dwelling in the south country. And Isaac had gone out to meditate in the fields toward the beginning of evening". The note says, 'came from coming to', meaning that it typified the Lord as occupied with the Spirit in view of Rebecca, in view of anyone coming in, but this must be dependent on the Holy Spirit, or it will never be satisfactory.
A.R. Laban going ahead of his father would not be recognising headship.
J.T. There is that in it. Evidently Laban is allowed to be the leading man in that place. He does well at first. We are told that Rebecca had a brother. "And it came to pass when he saw the ring and the bracelets on his sister's hand, and when he heard the words of Rebecca his sister, saying, Thus spoke the man to me -- that he came to the man, and behold, he was standing by the camels, by the well. And he said, Come in, blessed of Jehovah! why standest thou outside? for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels", @Genesis 24: 30, 31. You can see he is a leading man. It would look as if the father was weak, but then that does not set aside his place. I can understand her going to her mother's house (verse 28) because the feminine line was in view throughout, but the father seems to be weak or else
{310}
the son is too much for him; I think the latter is the case, but this time it is a question of her parents -- the family line.
Ques. Is your thought that this aggressiveness, this forwardness, would forfeit the servant's help? Rebecca is principally the assembly -- a type of it.
J.T. Yes, I think so. Look at the suggestion Laban and his mother make. They say, "And her brother and her mother said, Let the maiden abide with us some days, or say ten; after that she shall go". Is not that an opening of the door to the enemy? Here is the point, this assembly material ought to be at once in the assembly. She is in principle in the assembly, of course. She is a type of it, but we are trying to make it practical. If you have something for the assembly, its place is in the assembly, and it belongs to the assembly. Nobody doubts that, not even Laban, because he recognises the jewels. Nobody doubts that she is the real person, and belongs to the assembly. Why should the matter be delayed?
S.McC. He is marked by vacillation. I was thinking of your reference to "say ten". When he had to deal with Jacob, he proposed certain things, then Laban immediately changes it.
J.T. Yes. That shows the principle, the element of vacillation, really you might say deception, unfairness, for Jacob should have had Rachel at once, but he did not. He was deceived by Laban, who changed his wages ten times.
S.McC. You feel that is an element in our localities that has to be faced. It is very specious in its workings and motives as it has a pretence to serve right ends, but really there is deception working in it.
J.T. Yes. He behaves well at first. It even says he had prepared the house, as if the thing was in his hands.
{311}
Rem. A difference in judgment might arise as to discernment of what is assembly material. In this case it is quite clear.
J.T. That is the point. If the matter is not clear, then we have to wait upon one another, and the person himself, so that the answers are clear, and there is no question about his being assembly material. In this case, there is no question even by Laban. The matter is all clear. There is only this suggestion of ten days or so.
Ques. Would this discernment largely be seen in those that are spiritual? If unspiritual persons take part in it, you may get a wrong conclusion. Is that so?
J.T. Well, that is just it. The servant here is most emphatic. His speech is most conclusive. He has already prayed, and after prayer he found the answer, and after the answer he worships putting on the jewels. Then he states the case at length, beginning at verse 34 and going on to verse 49. It is a long statement by a spiritual man in the meeting. Well, the leading brother and his father say, 'Well, that is from God, so far so good'. What is there to say? There is no need to say anything. Someone says something that is right. Then someone says, 'Let him wait ten days or so. It will do no harm', but it will do harm. Satan will have the advantage.
R.R.T. The servant here seeks to take on the matter himself. It speaks about taking Rebecca. He says, "Do not hinder me". He takes on the matter.
J.T. It is a matter of his responsibility, that is, the Spirit of God operating through the brethren.
A.A.T. Do you get this in @Acts 15, where Peter stands up and then James speaks, saying, "Listen to me".
J.T. Quite so. That is the best example we have of the care meeting. @Acts 15 is always the model
{312}
we turn to. You have an excellent condition in the assembly. Barnabas and Paul are allowed to state the full account of their work among the gentiles; it is always attached to the care meeting, to bring in positive things.
Rem. I was wondering if you would regard this statement as a model of what would carry the concerns of the assembly, especially a woman that is already adorned by the servant, speaking of the Spirit.
J.T. There is no doubt about it. It is the Holy Spirit typically that has committed Himself to her in the adornment in the gifts and the ring; which we might say is an endless matter, not to be interfered with, and that applies to the assembly. I was thinking of the reference to Peter and James in @Acts 15, that the case is stated and an excellent condition is promoted in the assembly by a report of the work of God elsewhere. It is a question of assembly material. Titus went to Jerusalem with Paul and Barnabas, and there was an excellent example of the work of God in Titus, and Peter did not enforce circumcision in his case, because there was not a better brother in Jerusalem. Here in @Genesis 24 the work of God was manifest and the servant's report in the care meeting, so to speak, is lengthy and is supported by positive evidence of the work of God.
Well, they wanted her to stay with them. They do not ask the man to stay, but 'Let her stay with us', they say; which would not help, because now she has come into touch with the Spirit typically, and all that connects with him; her safety lies in movement. They say, "After that she shall go". It is as much as to say, we are the persons to determine this matter. Very often you see that in the care meetings, when some think that it is our matter, but it is not our matter. It is a question of whether the person is qualified, whether he or she has established her
{313}
qualification. We confer nothing on anybody. It is a question of their right. If they have washed their robes, they have a right to the tree of life. It is our matter to see that their robes are washed. They are assembly material the same as ourselves, and it is a question of right. To assume that we will determine the matter is not right; that is the position, and that will never do at all in the care meeting.
A.N.W. Would you say that Laban acting before Bethuel is wrong? Laban should never have been before Bethuel. It would be better to encourage his father to take the lead.
J.T. He should never be before Bethuel. Bethuel may be a weak man in fatherly qualities. Sometimes fatherly qualities are weak, and it is very humbling that it is generally so amongst us, but still they should be recognised. You can see how a pushing man may acquire a place beyond his spirituality. If he has qualities, of course, we cannot ignore them.
R.W.S. After this vacillating, the servant says, "Do not hinder me, seeing Jehovah has prospered my way". In matters so urgent would the Holy Spirit hold the position by asserting His power?
J.T. It is quite clear that Jehovah is in this matter. It is a question of the servant of Jehovah, that is, what the servant says, "Do not hinder me". He is representative, of course, of Abraham. "Seeing Jehovah has prospered my way; send me away, and I will go to my master". That is an excellent word, because you bring God in; you say, ten days will do no harm, but then what about God? This is the work of God.
R.W.S. You mean it is more a question of God than the servant?
J.T. That is the point. It is more a question of God than the servant. The Holy Spirit would do that amongst us, assert God's rights in the assembly.
{314}
Ques. In the care meeting has every brother a right to express his judgment on every matter?
J.T. Well, it is not so much a question of expressing an opinion. The question is, is there any spiritual power in what is said? The idea of a debating society does not enter into the assembly. It is foreign to it.
Ques. Would a brother express anything in spiritual power unless he has taken on the whole commitment of the service of God?
J.T. I think that is good. It is a question of what obligation you are taking on in this matter, or are you just wanting to say something? We have to ask sometimes in our meetings that the brethren be concise in what they say, and that they contribute to the matter in hand, so that no time be wasted. The assembly time is the most important time we have.
W.G.T. You were speaking about the brethren leaving matters in the hands of the ones who take the lead. In the care meeting would we leave the matter in the hands of those who are spiritual?
J.T. Well, quite so. Everyone, of course, is responsible and I think the absence of eldership in Corinthians is significant. It is a time when everyone is responsible. The least is of importance. So that we know that in principle anyone can speak, but if there is fatherhood or eldership, surely that ought to be recognised.
F.H.L. Taking on the whole service of God is most important, as some who are silent in most meetings have a great deal to say in the care meeting.
A.R. When you say eldership, do you mean a brother who says, 'I am fifty years in fellowship'?
J.T. It is not that which qualifies us; it is a question of what years they are. What is his experience in those years? Evidently Laban had a place in the house. How did he get it? It may be that Bethuel was a weak man, and possibly he was, but sometimes brothers are made weak, because others
{315}
are aggressive and take the position that they are not equal to.
S.McC. Do we have a judgment of this in @Acts 11, where Cornelius and his company come into view and certain contended about them, and then Peter sets out the matter before God, and the brethren are brought into it?
J.T. Yes, that is a good illustration. The six brothers that he had with him would show that there was competent testimony. While the testimony is here in the case of Rebecca, it is manifest that she is the one. The thing is from the Lord, too. 'Let us proceed', that is the next thing. Why should we delay ten days?
W.B-w. That suggestion was overruled; "And they said, Let us call the maiden and inquire at her mouth. And they called Rebecca".
J.T. Well, that is the next thing. We come to a hindrance. This ten days matter was supported by Laban and his mother. It looks serious and now the next thing is the servant is very pronounced about it, and his word is "Do not hinder me, seeing Jehovah has prospered my way". We would say the Spirit of God is asserting Himself in what has come about. God is brought into it. He says, "Send me away, and I will go to my master". The word 'master' is important. Authority is in all this. The next thing is to call the maiden and inquire of her mouth. The more you look at her, the more you are assured that she is the one, but what is her decision? Is she definite? Is her mind fixed? They called Rebecca and said to her, "Wilt thou go with this man?". It is a question now of the servant, not Isaac yet, but the person with whom you are going. What has already come out. The servant is definitely of God. Will you go on this line? Are you amenable to all these things we are dealing with, or are you going to listen to an objection that has no weight at all? When a person
{316}
is coming into fellowship, he ought to be ready for all that goes with it. Isaac enters into it by this man. We must recognise what is of God amongst the brethren, and that is the way. In the book of Acts, "the way" refers to this very thing. It is the procedure that leads to the assembly, and she is coming into that. "Wilt thou go with this man?". She says, "I will go". I am going on with what is manifestly of God. I have come into this thing, and am going on with it.
Ques. Would the words used in @Acts 2, referring to the Spirit, "impetuous blowing", be in line with this, that there is an urgency in relation to the working of the heart of Christ?
J.T. That is very good. There was a large number coming into this way. "And they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers", @Acts 2: 42. That is the "way". She is ready for that here. She is with the man.
L.E.S. I was wondering if, at this point, the epistle to the Thessalonians would come in. Paul speaks of cherishing his children as a nurse. Rebecca's nurse is spoken of at this point. There is also the youthfulness and energy that marked the Thessalonians.
J.T. Very good. She needed a nurse, of course. We read of this nurse later when she died. "And they sent away Rebecca their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men". Now this, put into our own language, is assembly procedure -- principles that are abiding and that we are not going to turn from even after we are in fellowship. She commits herself to the "way". That is the idea.
J.H.E. "With this man" is important, because there is a journey between this and the meeting of Isaac.
J.T. Quite so; the quality of Rebecca here is remarkable, and her definiteness. They are all carried
{317}
now. The hindrance is completely overcome. Laban and his mother and all commit themselves, and that shows how important it is that persons asking for fellowship should be definite. Not only that I love the Lord and that my sins are forgiven, but that I am in the thing, in what is called the "way" of God. There is Apollos, he is not fully instructed. They showed him the way of God more exactly. He is thoroughly in the thing, and there is never any doubt of him afterwards.
A.R. That is what the servant says in verse 48, "who has led me the right way" or 'in a way of truth'. That is the idea; he had started it, and she is brought into it. It is carried right on.
J.T. Very good. "And I blessed Jehovah, God of my master Abraham, who has led me the right way to take my master's brother's daughter for his son" (verse 48). It is the way of truth. They all enter into this matter, and she is thoroughly in the thing; in the "way". And the next thing, "And Rebecca arose, and her maids, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man". This is her initiative. She did this herself, showing that she is in the "way" and knows what to do in it. She knows when to take the initiative.
W.B-w. Then the turning point in the care meeting is in verse 56 -- "Do not hinder me". Those of us who are taking too much part, and are hindering the Spirit, should seek ourselves to make way for the Spirit.
J.T. Quite so. It is a good question to see what does hinder me. Anyone who is coming in, from the religious world around, though they may not know it will come in contact with hindrances, and it is a good question to ask, "What doth hinder me?" That is, what the eunuch says. Typically the Holy Spirit says, 'Do not hinder me'. That developed, would be a sin against the Holy Spirit. But it does not
{318}
develop here, thank God. They submit, and the way is secured, and they arrive at definiteness. So that Paul says, "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly". So that any brother or sister coming into fellowship, must realise that it is Christ and the assembly.
D. Would you say that Rebecca was a great model of the assembly in her movements towards Christ?
J.T. The next thing is, what is occupying Isaac in all this matter. It says, "The servant took Rebecca, and went away". She had already taken the camels. She arose, and her maids, and they rode upon the camels. That is the right kind of carrying power; not simply that I am in fellowship, but I am moving by the Spirit. It is the right kind of carrying power to Christ. Isaac had just returned from Beer-lahai-roi, which means 'Well of the Living who was seen'. It appeared first in connection with Hagar (the Jew), which is a remarkable thing. Christ typically is standing by the well. The well is all right, but Hagar was not right. It is God coming in in grace to Hagar in @Genesis 16. The principle of grace is now established, and Christ in heaven is in relation to that. The same grace that went out to the Jews is now going out to the gentiles. The assembly is formed in that grace. Isaac is there. That is what he is occupied with. "And Isaac had gone out to meditate in the fields toward the beginning of evening. And he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, camels were coming". It was not Rebecca that he noticed first, but the camels. That is, if anyone is coming into this way, this is the carrying power, nothing else.
W.R. The Spirit is linked on with the bride in @Revelation 22, in connection with the coming of Christ.
J.T. That is right; that is the carrying power. The Lord is adhering to the Spirit as maintaining the
{319}
assembly position here -- not any religious paraphernalia borrowed from judaism. Christendom is made up of that. The Lord is adhering to the Spirit. That is the only preservative and carrying power for what is of God.
R.R.T. You were stressing the importance of Rebecca watering the camels. What a service it was! Now she is riding on the camels.
J.T. Just so. I think it brings out the mutual conditions that mark the assembly. The end of @Acts 2 is the great dominating thought as to what it is the Lord is adding to. Anyone who reads the passage will see and remember the mutual state of things and how love was operating. Well, Rebecca really administered to these camels, so that it is a continual thing. It is mutual support right through in the assembly.
A.R. Would you say the journey is over in verse 64 of the chapter? It says, "And Rebecca lifted up her eyes and saw Isaac, and she sprang off the camel". That is the end of the journey.
J.T. I think that would mean that she is now suitable to Isaac in actual power. The 'spring' means the Holy Spirit moved her. "She sprang off the camel". It is in relation to the Lord Himself. The camels were no longer needed.
W.R. Does all true service in the assembly point to Christ? The servant says, "That is my master!" @Genesis 24: 65.
J.T. Well, now we come to Christ. It is a question of dignity now, and the same term that is used in regard to Abraham is used in regard to Isaac. So you can see the father and son are duly honoured together.
W.G.T. It is good to see the Spirit and the bride go on to the end. It is an intimate relationship. The bride has nothing apart from the Spirit.
{320}
J.T. Yes, it is a beautiful touch, I think, that the assembly at the end was what she was in the beginning, in intelligent recognition of the Holy Spirit. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". The Lord brings out there what He is here. He is Master to the servant here. The Holy Spirit would recognise that. The Lord says, "*I* am the root and offspring of David". The root is deity, and the offspring is humanity, so that He is God, and the Lord is stressing that in these days -- that Christ is equal to the Father; all that honour the Father must honour the Son likewise.
W.G.T. The assembly in that way recognises that the Spirit is a divine Person.
J.T. Quite so. Well, I think the Lord is helping us to make room for the Spirit, and at the same time to make clear who Christ is.
R.R.T. Does this indication deserve spiritual response to Christ in the assembly? In verse 63 it says, "and he lifted up his eyes" -- and in the next verse -- "Rebecca lifted up her eyes". It is spiritual impulse in the assembly responding to Christ?
J.T. Quite so. He saw the camels, and she saw Isaac. She is justified. Her dignity is there in that she is using the camels, typically the power which God provides.
Ques. Is it typical of the Spirit to retire in His movements to make way for Christ?
J.T. It is like Colossians. Colossians makes everything of Christ. The Spirit is mentioned only once, whereas in Ephesians you get a great deal about the Spirit, and likewise in Romans.
Ques. Is that a lead for us personally in relation to this chapter?
J.T. The Spirit is always ready; even eternally He will be the power of everything, but it is the Father and the Son objectively.
A.A.T. Why did she put a veil on her face?
{321}
J.T. I think that is female seemliness, which comes out in @1 Timothy 2, "I do not suffer a woman to teach". It is just what is womanly under the circumstances. She is for Isaac, and she sprang off the camels, showing that she is thoroughly alive and energetic in the power and subjectiveness of the Spirit.
A.B.P. In @Romans 14 where there is a question about one, it speaks of God having received him. Would you say a word as to where God's receiving comes in? We have had the Spirit's movements in Christ.
J.T. Well, that is good. The reception is that God has received him. And then we are told in chapter 15 to receive one another to the glory of God. It is a question of the work of God -- God has received him, why should we object? The word 'reception' has really no application when we come to a person taking his place in the assembly, because he is of it already. It is a matter of his establishing his right, that he washes his robes. The person has a right. We do not confer it upon him. It is a matter of what is his.
A.B.P. Does it not emphasise the greatness of the matter, that there are spiritual indications that the Lord has committed Himself to the person? I thought it added to the greatness of the matter that these cases have come up, and we should not be behind in what God is doing.
J.T. So that the servant brings God into it here.
L.E.S. Do you think there is a point reached at the Supper, where the assembly fills the place vacated by Israel, and in that setting we have a peculiar sense of the Lord's love, as it says here, "he loved her"? It would be in that setting.
J.T. I think that is the way it stands. Israel, so to say, is dead. It is not Israel rejected here. Sarah is a great person. The assembly is coming into
{322}
Israel's place without saying anything against Israel. The apostle speaks of Israel and says "Of whom ... is the Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever". At that time, when it was Jew first, and gentile afterwards, there was no word about discrediting Israel, but in Thessalonians, he says they are under judgment. Here Sarah is an honourable woman, and Rebecca is coming into a great place, coming into that tent. Is she going to grace it, and make it better than it ever was? I think she did.
L.E.S. I was wondering if @Romans 9: 4 would not answer to Sarah's tent? "Whose is ... the promises".
J.T. That is the point Paul makes there, because he brings in Israel's greatness, and it is coming up again. "All Israel shall be saved". Sarah's greatness is in mind, Israel's grandmother. It is Sarah's tent, and I think Rebecca makes it greater than it ever was. After it is fully graced by Rebecca, she shines more than Isaac does at the end in chapter 27. It is to bring out the quality of the assembly, and how concerned she was about mixed marriages, about Esau going to Canaan for his wives. Rebecca's exercises lead to the revival of family status in chapter 28. Jacob must go to Laban, her brother -- the point was where was he to get his wife. "And Rebecca said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these, of the daughters of the land, what good should my life do me?" (chapter 27: 46). That is assembly language. They are just the bane of the saints, these mixed marriages, doing violence to God, and to the Spirit, and to Christ. We want to be here on our own terms, whereas we should be concerned about Christ's terms. It says in regard of Rebecca, "Thou art our sister; mayest thou become thousands of tens of thousands; and may thy seed possess the gate of
{323}
their enemies!" (chapter 24: 60). That is a real wife, and the real kind of progeny. "And Isaac called Jacob", that is to say we have the position restored, "and blessed him, and charged him, and said to him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan. Arise, go to Padan-Aram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father, and take a wife thence of the daughters of Laban thy mother's brother" (chapter 28: 1, 2). We have come back now to the great line of sister and brotherhood, established according to God, coming down from Terah.
J.H.E. Would this bring in the thought, "Jerusalem above ... which is our mother"?
J.T. Quite so. The father and mother -- the two thoughts run together. Now to bring out the position in Jacob, and then in Joseph; in Jacob we have two wives, but the line is established. They must be of the proper sisterhood which God provides; that is in the Lord. So that when we come to Acts, Rachel is the Jew. Israel is the first love, but the last received. That is, the truth comes out in Jacob. Israel is on a lower level than the assembly, but they are both in mind. Israel is loved first, and Paul was not behind in that. He had great affection for Israel, and that was expressive of God's love and election.
A.R. Would the two wives represent that they are both of the right seed whether it is Israel or the assembly?
J.T. They are both the right seed; they are according to God, only it is a question of time, one coming in after the other. Rachel was first loved, but received last. Well, all that is typical. Christ has come into the assembly now, composed of those who are gentiles. You might say that the assembly as God brought it in is most delightful, and so is what comes down from God out of heaven, and it is seen ultimately as the acme of perfection and
{324}
excellence; but still Jacob loved Rachel more than he loved Leah. That is a suggestion to us, so that we should not be wise in our conceits. It is a public matter that is in mind, and as to the whole Gentile position it is to be pointed out that it is not permanent, whereas the Jewish position is to be thoroughly established, for they are not all Israel who are Jews. It is a question of the counsels of God. That is what @Romans 9 - 11 brings out.
A.B.P. This view that we have of Leah would be in her public position in the testimony.
J.T. I think so. Not that she is unreal, but that she is tender-eyed. The eye is the vehicle of beauty. She was tender and beautiful eyed as David was.
A.R. If we take church history and the history of Israel, Israel has always been greater publicly than the assembly here on earth.
J.T. Quite so. She has a place on earth finally, which the assembly does not have. The assembly comes from heaven. That is another thing altogether.
W.G.T. Temporarily, it would be that Rachel is left barren and Leah becomes very fruitful. Levi and Judah both sprang out of her.
J.T. That is right. That is the history. We have now to touch on Asnath. There is nothing said as to her qualities or appearance. The point is that she is given to Joseph by the Supreme. God determines who Christ's bride is to be. Joseph is Christ among the gentiles, now, away from the Jews. So that he says, "For God has made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house". It is a question of what God has done. Peter, in @Acts 11, says, "Who indeed was *I* to be able to forbid God?". God is doing this, and so it is a question now, of what God has done and these two sons. Christ finds joy in these new circumstances that God has put Him into. God's provision for man is abundant. It is the Lord Jesus, speaking in this way, and, of course, we should all
{325}
speak this way. "For God has caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction". God has done all this. If we let God do things for us, He can do much better than we can.
L.E.S. Would @Colossians 1: 27 answer to this? "To whom God would make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations, which is Christ in you the hope of glory".
J.T. Very good. The allusion is to this; Joseph in Egypt. Christ among the gentiles. Do we value Him? What has the gentile done with Him? That is the solemn question that is raised in the book of Revelation -- how Christ was treated, and what the consequences are.
W.B-w. Would it be right to make the distinction that Rebecca is the wife of a heavenly Christ, while Asnath is the wife of a glorified Christ?
J.T. It is Christ among the gentiles, glorified among the gentiles. The Lord did intend to go away among the gentiles, and they did receive the kingdom of God, so that He has been glorified among the gentiles. That the gentiles will yet be cut off because of unbelief is most solemn.
S.McC. In the day of display, in the millennium, will the assembly take precedence of Israel?
J.T. The assembly is ever viewed as heavenly in the ultimate ways of God. Sarah's tent represents Israel's place, and it is to be resumed, as Sarah's tent, according to the chapters in Romans, that we have been speaking of, and that is the final thought in the millennium that Israel has first place in the earth, and the nations are subordinate. It is a question of what God has done for them. The heavenly city comes out of heaven. It has never been anywhere else. It is the mystery. It does not belong to the ways of God on earth at all. It comes into Sarah's tent, but that is only temporary. Its place is
{326}
above. It is a secret before the world was, and Eve represents that side.
A.B.P. In assembly service, is it proper in speaking to the Lord, to bring in this thought of what He has lost in the loss of Israel?
J.T. I think it is. It is quite right. The Lord comes in -- 'Christ among you'. It is Christ among us here today in America, and elsewhere among the gentiles, but what is He among us for? Not to establish us down here, but as the hope of glory.
W.B-w. Referring to Sarah's tent again, when Israel was rejected in the Acts, was Sarah's tent vacated to make way for the assembly?
J.T. It is carried on in a public way. Peter confirmed that "God first visited to take out of the nations a people for his name". That is a public thing.
W.B-w. Paul made it known that salvation had come to the Gentiles.
J.T. I think that is our public position. We are occupying the place of testimony until Israel is restored. Our place is mysterious. We slip out of the way when the Lord comes. What will men say when the saints are all gone? We do not know. The mystery covers all that. We will come out presently "with Him".
A.E.H. Rebecca veils herself before she is taken into Sarah's tent. Does that refer to the secret or the mystery side of things? We understand what is not publicly understood; we are for Christ, and ever the concern of God thus. We enter into the assembly service now before we come out publicly. We are, in the ways of God, in Sarah's tent.
J.T. He knows who she is. She is veiled. It is a mystery, but she is in the place, and is loved. The Lord says later to Philadelphia, "That they ... shall know that *I* have loved thee". We consider the Cushite that Moses married, that was his matter.
{327}
Aaron and Miriam complained bitterly, but that was Moses matter, and this is Christ's matter. She is veiled, and who knows who she is?
R.R.T. As in Sarah's tent she comes under Isaac's influence now. Rebecca followed the man, but then she comes to Isaac. As we come under the Spirit's leading, we finally come to a point where it is Christ. "Isaac led her" (verse 67).
J.T. It is a mysterious state of things. You cannot follow the history as you follow the Jewish history. The assembly has come into Israel's place, and has graced the position beyond what Israel could do, but she will be taken away mysteriously. It is no question of previous history on earth at all. The assembly is always a mystery.
A.N.W. She veiled herself. She must have done it with design.
J.T. I would think so. She would retain her beauty for Isaac, and all that enters into the mystery of the Christ which includes the assembly. It is for Him. He is pleased to have her in Sarah's tent for a while. It may be for a month or a year, but it has been centuries, but that is the Lord's matter, and we can look at the public result. That is the point. What public results there are in the testimony, beyond anything that Israel could have produced. So that the mystery is still the mystery. You cannot tell the history of this wonderful bride that comes down adorned for her husband. The world cannot tell. It is a mystery.
L.E.S. So the time afforded to Christ personally after the Supper is partaken of, is a great moment for what it leads to.
J.T. I think the brethren are coming to see that. It is a question of His Person. He is great to His own. "He is thy Lord, and worship thou Him".
A.L. Have you any thought as to why there is no conversation recorded between Isaac and Rebecca?
{328}
J.T. It is a question of mystery. We are not to cast our pearls before swine. The mystery implies that we keep things secretive. The Lord would say, Do not tell anybody what has taken place. It is a mystery, and it is to continue to be a mystery. This is involved in the sheet coming down from heaven.
A.R. The sheet that came down from heaven never stayed down. It went back up again when Peter was on the housetop.
J.T. Yes. It is indigenous to heaven even as Christ is.
F.N.W. Would the expression, "The mystery of God" in @Revelation 10, extend wider than the assembly?
J.T. Certainly. The mystery of God goes wider. Every scripture has to be taken in its context. The mystery of God has many other features, but the mystery of the assembly is that in which are hid the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. That is what the apostle is combating about, in order that the saints at Colosse might know the mystery; and that we might know.
W.B-w. Would you say that the expression, "She became his wife, and he loved her" would be evident in Paul's ministry in the Acts. It is not a future thing here?
J.T. That is the thought of "Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it", as Paul says. Paul understood perfectly what had taken Israel's place in the testimony for just a little while. "He that comes ... will not delay", he said to the Jewish christians. That is the thought.
F.H.L. Does the mystery go back to @Genesis 2. "It is not good that Man should be alone"?
J.T. Yes, I think that is part of it; it is what is in the heart of God about it.
Rem. The veiling of this woman indicates that she comes definitely under headship as she is brought
{329}
to Isaac. Would there be a waiting for the word, "Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice", @Song of Songs 2: 14?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord would say that to her. The point is, I think, that it intimates she was for Christ. What is the assembly's measure here? Rebecca was a discriminating woman, especially in regard to her children. God revealed things to her. She really exceeds her husband. It is to bring out what the assembly is in this relation.
J.R.H. Is Isaac one with the servant? Isaac saw the camels were coming, and then the servant tells Isaac all things that he had done. These features are the common concern of Christ and the Spirit.
J.T. I think the Lord is honouring the brethren because they have gone back to first principles. Rebecca committed herself to these principles, and the Lord is bringing us back to them, and so he says to Philadelphia, "That they ... shall know that *I* have loved thee" -- a precious thought.
W.B-w. Referring to Joseph and Asnath again and the two sons, is sonship linked with Joseph and Asnath more than with Isaac and Rebecca?
J.T. That is what comes out there. Jacob elevates the sons. Another line of thought comes in with those two boys Manasseh and Ephraim. They are elevated in sonship. They are acquired under gentile conditions. They get an equal position with Reuben and Simeon. Galatians, of course, opens that up; "ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus".
{330}
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN RELATION TO THE TYPES OF THE ASSEMBLY (4)
@Exodus 18: 1 - 12; @Joshua 15: 13 - 19
J.T. We have an expression in @Acts 7, "the assembly in the wilderness". Moses being alluded to as with it, and that is the point of view in Exodus. We have called attention to the Spirit as standing related to the types in @Genesis 2 and 24. The Spirit is seen typically in persons, and His power in the lower creatures, the camels, as well as in the wells. This is seen in Abraham's servant, whose name is not given there; he is the eldest of his house. The camels we noted as carrying power, which is the Spirit needed for the assembly. Even in regard to Jacob, and Rachel, and Leah, we have also the Spirit as the well mentioned. In coming to Exodus, we have the Holy Spirit in chapter 2, where Zipporah comes to light first as Moses spouse. Moses sat by the well, we are told, and watered the flock of Jethro, which his daughters had brought to the well. Then in chapter 17, we have the water. The rock is smitten and the water comes out. We have the water here as a type of the Spirit. The springs in the passage read in Joshua refer to the Spirit also. The Lord, I believe, would impress us with these great facts. The formation and maintenance of the testimony of the assembly can only be by the Spirit. Christendom has moved away in ceremonies borrowed from judaism and heathendom. The Lord would bring us back by the power of the Spirit, the only power by which we may be in the assembly according to God; and we are testimony in it. The part of our subject now is Exodus, that is Moses wife as typical of the assembly in the wilderness, at Sinai really. The question of "in-law" enters into the matter, not in the qualification of the assembly, as in the type, but to bring out the legal position.
{331}
"Law rules", we are told in @Romans 7. I bring that in because I think that bears on this part of our subject, that is, the legal position. It is prominent in this passage, many times, beginning with Jethro, priest of Midian, "And ... Moses father-in-law, heard of all that God had done to Moses". That is the position of the assembly, the wilderness in relation to the mountain of God.
S.McC. Is there anything of note in the fact that the legal side is stressed after the breaking of the power of Amalek by Joshua?
J.T. It follows as to the Spirit, although it does not say that they drank it, because there is not enough evidence that they had It typically. It says the rock was smitten that there might be water. It says, there was no water for the people to drink, and so God said to Moses, "Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel, and thy staff with which thou didst smite the river, take in thy hand, and go. Behold, I will stand before thee there on the rock upon Horeb; and thou shalt strike the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink". They are not said to have drunk, but the water is here for them, and it is present before the battle. When we come into conflict we prove the reality of it, only that the conflict here is dependent not only on the Spirit, but on the exercise of priesthood in Moses and the generalship of Joshua; but the water is there.
S.McC. The legality of the position is not established today merely on ecclesiastical ground, but on moral ground, too.
J.T. That is the idea, I think, so that the question arises if people wish to have part in the assembly in its public relation: Have they received the Holy Spirit? That is the question to ask. There is the question here that has to be answered. Elsewhere they drink of the water, but here the water is
{332}
present, but has it really been appropriated? The question is whether there are not many in fellowship who have not the Spirit consciously, though recognising it as a doctrine or a principle, as it is here.
A.E.H. Paul challenges the Corinthians who had taken the position in a public way, saying, "I will come quickly to you ... ; and I will know, not the word of those that are puffed up, but the power", @1 Corinthians 4: 19. Does that bear a little on what you say?
J.T. Yes, that is it. It is a question of the power that we have, whether we have the Spirit.
C.H.H. Joshua had to choose out men. Would he discern who had it as he chose the men?
J.T. Well, this is the first mention of Joshua as a developed man, a reliable man. Why did Moses confide to him such a charge saying, "Choose us men, and go out, fight with Amalek; tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill"? The battle is against the flesh; it is a testing matter, whether we are able to overcome the workings of the flesh in us, according to @Romans 7.
J.T.Jr. The Spirit is life on account of righteousness.
J.T. That is right. That is what @Romans 8 says. @Romans 7 is the challenge. The legal position is clear enough; "to be to another ... in order that we might bear fruit to God"; that is in the Spirit. We are to be to another; it is all subjective truth. Galatians contemplates the war; the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and these are contrary one to the other. Then we have the fruits of the Spirit and the flesh too, so it is a question of the fruits of the Spirit. To prove practically that I am in the right position, there must be the fruits, bringing forth fruit unto God.
Rem. It is remarkable that the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in us. In this
{333}
position, the activity of the Spirit in me helps me to maintain the righteous requirements of the law in walking after the Spirit; that is in @Romans 8?
J.T. That is right. The righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled -- not *should* be -- but *is* fulfilled in us "who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit". @Romans 8 down to verse 15 is full of the Spirit. It is the positive side on which the ground is held by the Spirit, not only legally. One may be in fellowship, but has not been to the meetings for five or six months. That such a one is still legally in fellowship cannot be disputed for a moment, but what is there attached to the legal position? Is there any fruit for God?
L.E.S. The fruitful result of the position would be seen in Gershom and Eliezer, they are the product of these exercises according to God.
J.T. That is why they are brought in here. Joseph's children are brought in to show what he found in the family that God provided for him among the gentiles -- what God gave him, he says. A most precious thing -- what God gives us; not only am I satisfied with it, but if I have a sense of bereavement, I can shut out all that. The cup which we drink, the communion of the blood of Christ; involves satisfaction, so that I forget my father's house, and I am fruitful among the gentiles in a strange land. Now Moses sons have different titles; of one he says, "I have been a sojourner in a foreign land", and of the other "God ... has been my help". That is the position according to him. We are strangers. People do not understand us. They do not know what we gather together for. We are strangers to circumstances around us. The next thing is, 'God is our helper'. What would we do without God?
J.T.Jr. In spite of the facts that Joseph and Moses were both out of their family settings, yet
{334}
they were both in relation to God in their family settings.
J.T. That is the point for us now. What he says about his two sons, in the names he gives them, furnishes the light for this position. It is his experience. There is nothing said about Zipporah herself, but she is in a right position. Her relation to Moses is unquestionable. She is a real wife there, and that is comforting. You do not want to be merely that though. If that is all that can be said of you, that can be seen in a marriage certificate. I want to have some fruit and affection for Christ.
R.W.S. She conforms to it in chapter 4 in her action there.
J.T. She conforms to requirements legally. She does just as little as she needs to. "Zipporah took a stone and cut off the foreskin of her son, ... and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me". It is no good title to call her husband. She accedes to what is right. There is that much in it anyway. She comes up to the legal requirements. Her position legally is impregnable. The legal side is established on her part. It is Jethro, Moses father-in-law, who is a positive testimony to the legal side. That is comforting for Zipporah and the two boys, but then we need a good deal more than that.
F.H.L. Over against the legal side there is, running right through Moses history, what he learned at the burning bush.
J.T. Yes. It means that if she is equal to it there are plenty of resources at the mountain of God. There is only one fellowship that God owns, one legal position, so to speak, and anyone coming into it comes into all the resources of God; they are all there, but it is the wilderness, where there is nothing for the flesh. That is the idea. What underlies the gathering together for these meetings? They are not holiday affairs. The position is that
{335}
there is nothing for the flesh at all, and we have to accept that. We desire to be with Christ, and God is my helper. If we come on those lines, we shall always have power, and the sense of the presence of God.
L.E.S. Is circumcision brought in to pave the way for the understanding of the position spiritually instead of merely theoretically?
J.T. Well, it is clearly brought in. She would acquiesce in it legally as far as anyone can see. The thing was done, but why was she sent back? (@Exodus 4: 20 and @Exodus 18: 2). She ought to have been equal to the position in Egypt if she accepted circumcision. They are Egyptian circumstances in Colossians, the putting off of that part of the flesh. She ought to go forward with Moses. The word in @Hebrews 10 is, "If he draw back, my soul does not take pleasure in him". If you are sent back, you are under discipline then. We have to wait for God. Moses father-in-law brings her back again in @Exodus 18.
R.R.T. Is that what chapter 18: 3 refers to, "After he had sent her back"?
J.T. I think so. There is no historical account of it that I know of, except that.
C.A.M. Would you say that all these remarkable happenings were the education of Moses in view of the place of Moses and the assembly in the wilderness?
J.T. Well, she has been brought here by her father and Moses father-in-law is typically to fill out the position. The position must be filled out even if it is only legal. God recognises the legal side. The position is to be filled out and that is, I think, what is meant. She is brought to this position, and it is to the mountain of God. There are plenty of resources, and the legal position is established and the question now is whether we draw on the resources. The power is seen in the overthrow of Amalek. If
{336}
the legal position is to be held aright, it must be in the power of the Spirit and the choosing out of men. That is what we have to come into. The choosing out of men would involve care among us. We have to meet this matter of Amalek, the working of the flesh in young people, especially. How is it to be met?
W.B-w. No individual should be lost, and no local assembly should be lost. It is a question of care exercised by persons like the father-in-law; he brought up Zipporah, and brought her again into the position where she should be.
J.T. That is right. You choose out the men, choose out the men to meet this matter. It is a spiritual matter; and this is where spirituality begins really in Joshua. It is a question of spiritual discernment, the matter of Satan acting through the flesh, and how it is to be met. Satan has the greatest power in youth, but he acts in all of us.
W.B-w. In the next chapter it is a question of choosing out men for administration.
J.T. That is what Jethro proposes. He is not to be despised. He helps Moses. He comes in here in a remarkable way and must refer to some authoritative element in the profession around us which we cannot despise.
C.H.H. Was there weakness in Moses in dismissing the sons?
J.T. I suppose he could not have the mother. If you cannot bring the mother along, you will have a hard job with the sons. It is the motherly qualities that look after the youths. He had to go through the matter alone in that sense. The exodus was Moses matter, but Jethro kept the boys. Zipporah did not have any part in the exodus from Egypt, nor did Jethro.
W.G.T. It would seem that Jethro must have had good principles from what we get in this chapter
{337}
and I thought he would help Moses in right principles even while the sons were away in the land of Midian.
J.T. He had right principles so far. He is acting on testimony, for it says that, "Moses father-in-law heard all that God had done to Moses, and to Israel his people". That refers to what is abroad in the profession. When the movement of recovery began some years back men came along. They had the evidence of being the subjects of God's work. They were allowed to have part in the service. The brethren did not keep them waiting at all. They had the evidence of being with God so far, but now it is a very different matter. The truth of the assembly is out and people have to be tested. "Have ye received the Holy Spirit since ye believed?"
A.R. The test then was going back to the system, the test now is leaving it, would you say? In Mr. Darby's day persons who broke bread established the position by remaining. The question was, could they go back, but now it is a question of leaving it properly.
J.T. That is right. They left the denominations. Mr. Darby had done it himself. He was a curate. The others like him were curates, and such like. They were like Jethro, and were influenced for the moment by the truth of God, by the truth of the testimony and they came. The question of legality was clear, you may say. They had the same right as others. It was a question of brethren recognising one another and moving on together, going on in the Spirit. It is what happened subsequently that tested the persons.
W.G.T. In Mr. Darby's day they were on right lines generally; they were acceptable, and had equal right to the tree of life, which was recognised, but today we have to deal with a lawless system.
{338}
J.T. That was the position. One brother might say to another, Well you belong to the establishment. Do you not? Yes, I do. What do you belong to? Presbyterian. My position is as good as yours then? The point of legality comes up. What is my status? The fact is they were both christians. They could not be charged with anything personally. Jethro was a Midianite, priest of Midian. That is not challenged here. He acts as a priest here. The point is that he is with Moses wife. Abstractly, the idea of the assembly is there and nobody denies it. "There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; ... one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". @Ephesians 4: 4, 6. Jethro says, "I, ... am come to thee". That had to be recognised. He is not taken exception to yet. They would say, We can break bread with that man, he has the same right as we have.
Rem. Then while as to individuals things are not up to the divine standard, there are resources in the Spirit to take them all on. As encamped at the mount of God there are resources.
J.T. Every christian in christendom could have come forward at that time, to the mountain of God. The resources are all there. Every christian has legally the right to be there abstractly. If you can bring things against them personally, they must be dealt with, but otherwise the persons have right to be there, for the assembly is there. Many wanted to go in for the truth of the assembly, the same as we do, but a large number went in for profession merely and missed the real thing. Gradually the way was cleared for Christ and the assembly. They had a hard time, but God was with them, and in general the position remains. If a christian comes into a meeting, abstractly, that man has the same right that
{339}
you have, if he is really a christian, and then it is for him to show that he is.
F.H.L. In @John 6 it was when the Lord said, "The Spirit ... quickens" that many disciples went away back.
J.T. They turned from the truth. John's ministry, of course, was a great test to them. It is the spiritual side of things, but this legal matter is important. The wife, Zipporah, is here, and the evidence that she was the wife is here, and the two boys with the names that Moses gave them. Moses represents God. He is the top stone of it all. He has come through the Red Sea. He gave those boys the names. One is a "sojourner". The other is "My help". What are you going to do? You will not be helped by men. God will help you. That is Eliezer. That is the position.
C.DeB. What would you say in connection with the affection side?
J.T. There is not much evidence of it as far as we can see, but she is there and has a marriage certificate, and Moses is her husband and he does not deny it. That means the assembly is recognised. We are recognised in the legal position. Every true christian is there.
R.R.T. Would the word that Jethro sent to Moses indicate a right movement on his part? He said, "I, thy father-in-law Jethro, am come to thee". It indicates a movement from his own sphere of things to Moses.
J.T. Yes, he is a good brother so far as his words go, but what is meant by this? It is the wilderness position. There is nothing much in the thing in the way of actual positive assembly features, but the legal side is the point. We are sure of our position on the legal line. There is evidence that she is Moses wife, because of the two boys, his own names written on them as it were. Those two names
{340}
mean, I am not going to settle down in the establishments of this world. I am a stranger, and in this strangership I have God's help. That is the line we are on.
C.H.H. Is that why you speak of "her two sons"? The product proved that she was right.
J.T. It was some fruit there. They are the evidence of it. There is some fruit because these two sons were there. They have the names that Moses himself gave them, so that there is no question about it, the legal position is established, and a measure of fruitfulness, too.
W.B-w. Do you think there are those in the organised systems around us today that are bearing fruit in some ways, as believers?
J.T. What would christendom be if there were not? It would all be a mass of apostasy, but if we go back one hundred and twenty years, there were more in the profession outwardly than there are now.
Ques. Would Eliezer be one who would repudiate trade unionism and benefit societies, and all that kind of thing?
J.T. That is a good remark, because if I am a sojourner here I do not want to belong to societies and do not wear a button in my coat. I am a heavenly man, a sojourner in a strange land. You will not get much help nor be much cared for, and the next thing is, God is my help. We are to rely on God.
Rem. A brother was telling me since he came here in regard to trade unions that he did not join them, and God took him out of the sphere where he would be affected and changed his position in the same organisation. He is still working for the same people, but God has apparently answered his faith.
J.T. Well, that is the idea. One might say in one's own experience there are countless witnesses to that very thing. You will say, Well, what can I do?
{341}
I have to be a trade unionist or I will not get a job, but that is shutting God out.
A.N.W. Proving God is a process. Relying on a trade union I am not availing myself of the opportunity to prove what God can do and what God will be to me. The position of a stranger is one thing, but this seems to be a process of arriving at the knowledge of God in it.
J.T. He says, "The God of my father has been my help". It is no mere theory. He has proved it.
Ques. So you would put before a person who sought to break bread with us that an association of that kind is impossible in view of the service of God. Does not the position here and what is in view, show us the importance of these things?
J.T. There are certain outstanding difficulties at the present time with trade unions and mixed marriages and radios. The enemy is managing on those three points to defile the brethren, and it is for us to choose out men; that is to say, to have in the front, men on spiritual lines to attend to this matter. It is a real battle all the time.
J.T.Jr. The idea of union with Christ is opposed to a trade union, which is one of the enemy's potent weapons, to work against union in a spiritual sense.
J.T. Just so.
C. Another difficulty is that you are not a citizen.
J.T. There are a good many who are not citizens. Citizenship is quite all right. It is because of what you are required to swear to that the difficulty arises in claiming it. You cannot commit yourself to what is required.
Ques. What is required compels you to deny your heavenly position.
J.T. That is what Moses means in regard to Gershom, 'I have been a sojourner in a strange land'. The name of the other son, Eliezer, means, 'the God of my father has been my help, and has
{342}
delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh'. What comes out in Exodus is that Moses fled into the land of Midian. We are told in Hebrews, "he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king". But secretly he really feared God. That is the idea and when the time comes for Moses to be used, God says, "All the men are dead who sought thy life". God did not kill them right away, but they died; the difficulties were all removed. God did that.
L.E.S. What is needed is what Paul says to Timothy, "these entrust to faithful men, such as shall be competent to instruct others also". We should be able to teach others also.
J.T. That is the idea. Choosing us out men. Moses made no mistake in the generals he selected for this matter.
Rem. In Hebrews it says, "He ... choosing rather to suffer affliction". I suppose he was qualified to choose out men because he had made a choice in regard to himself.
J.T. Yes, quite so. He made a good choice at the start, but now Joshua is to choose men. No one had ever heard of him before. Evidently a young man when he is called, but he is trustworthy. That is what is needed in those difficulties. The natural mind comes in. Well, this one has done it before; he would be better, but Joshua knew there must be no compromise at all. Can you see Satan in the thing, working through the flesh? That is the battle of Rephidim.
B. How is the choosing done in the assembly today?
J.T. It is a question of letting the spiritual element be in the front instead of the natural element. It is very humbling to hear of things acting otherwise, but the men that are spiritual are needed. There must be *spiritual* unity in the things of God.
{343}
J.H. Would you say what is seen in Joshua is over against philosophy and vain deceit?
J.T. Yes, particularly at Corinth. The first thing the apostle objects to strongly is the partisan spirit. One saying, "*I* am of Paul, and another, *I* of Apollos". Personal preferences, when these matters come up, are the first things to be dealt with.
J.H. It has been said that a brother who has a radio should not be asked to preach the gospel. Would this scripture be the basis for that? Choosing out men.
J.T. Quite so. That is good.
S.McC. There are two or three cases before the brethren in different parts as to this matter of the radio. Perhaps the wife is not with us or the young people in the house, and the sin in having the radio is carried because of that. Do you think allowance should be made for that?
J.T. Well, the man is head of his house. The Lord holds him responsible for what is in his house clearly.
Rem. You remarked that you would speak to a brother who had a radio and keep on speaking. I notice in @Matthew 14: 4 John the baptist spoke to Herod. "John said to him"; and the footnote says it is the imperfect tense, so that literally, he kept on saying it.
J.T. Very good. He kept on condemning these things. Keep on at it and ultimately it gives way. Sometimes there is a long drawn out battle, but God comes in, and the evil gives way.
R.R.T. Would coming out into the wilderness to Moses where he encamped at the mountain of God, involve leaving all these things -- you are speaking about, trade unions and radios?
J.T. That is the point. We have come to the place where divine resources are. This mountain of God begins in @Genesis 22. The mountain of Jehovah
{344}
where everything will be provided. That enters into all this. You say, 'Well, I must have this and that'; but the mountain of Jehovah means that everything would be provided. That is what Moses means in the name he gives his second son. The God of my father has been my help. God has been proved historically. There is plenty of evidence that God helps; the history of the saints abundantly testifies to it.
G.D. As to leaving things, was it there that the young man failed? The Lord says "Sell all that thou hast". He had been right up to that time on the legal line. He said, "All these things have I kept from my youth".
J.T. He was tested but it was really the tenth commandment. "But when the commandment came", Paul says, "sin revived, and I died", @Romans 7: 9. That man was covetous really. It was selfishness. The commandment Paul refers to is "Thou shalt not covet". So that to keep to our chapter, to keep to our type, the position is legal and we need not fear in it, and there is not much spirituality yet, but there is the means of it. @Exodus 17 shows that the power of the Spirit is available. It has cost Christ infinitely that it should be there. It results from the death of the Lord Jesus; the Rock was smitten. It cost Jesus something and why should I not appropriate what cost Him so much? I am to be here in the power of the Spirit, answering to Him, to bring forth fruit unto God. I cannot be that if I am allied with ungodly men in their associations. Can I have the radio which is like a pipeline carrying all the filth of the world into my house? I am responsible to cut that off.
C.H.H. Is there a limit to keeping on speaking? Eli says, "No, my sons". He did not do anything more about it. Is there a limit to protesting against
{345}
these things. Can we keep on speaking and do no more?
J.T. A man may say, I never use it myself. Well, it is there. Eli's sons carried on, although he protested against it, but he did not go the whole length in dealing with it.
J.N. Do you get the right thought in Abraham, he commanded his sons?
J.T. There is very little of that. God says, speaking of Abraham, "I know him that be will command his children and his household after him", @Genesis 18: 19. In the choosing out of the men that is the idea, men who will command their houses.
L.E.S. Jethro says, "Now I know that Jehovah is greater than all gods; for in the thing in which they acted haughtily he was above them".
J.T. It is an advantage to have the truth set out about these things. There is support from God as we act before Him. Support is here in the Spirit. Moses is on high. "And Joshua did as Moses had said to him, to fight with Amalek; and Moses, Aaron and Hur went up to the top of the hill. And it came to pass when Moses raised his hand, that Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed. And Moses hands were heavy; then they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat on it; and Aaron and Hur supported his hands, one on this side, and one on that side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun", @Exodus 17: 10 - 12. That is how the need is met as it arises. There was not a word about Aaron and Hur holding up the hands at the beginning of the battle, but as the exigency arose, the hands were held.
J.H.E. Would you say that one who had these things was true to the fellowship?
J.T. He is not true to it; that is just the point. The battle is in order that all might be brought
{346}
around to it, to see that it is not right to have it, so that I can be one who can be chosen too.
J.H. Is there such a thing as the legitimate use of the radio in the home of a christian?
J.T. The scripture says, "Lead us not into temptation, but save us from evil". What about the ears of my children? You are not delivering them from evil by bringing it right to their ears. It is bringing the world into my house.
R.W.S. What comes into the house comes into the assembly.
J.T. Exactly. It is an avenue for the world to come into a man's house, whatever excuse you may make.
R.C. In regard again to labour organisations, do you regard an organisation within the company on the same plane as a trade union?
J.T. Well, there are grades, of course. It is a question of association; that enters into it, anyway. There is hardly time to go into the details of this matter, but the great question of trade unionism involves murder. Look at the book of Revelation, chapter 15, and see how much is made of those who are victorious over the beast and the mark of the beast.
C.H.H. How long have we to walk with brethren who persist in these things?
J.T. We are certainly not obliged to go on in fellowship with them. The Lord would never put it upon us to do that, and yet we have to exercise great patience with them, if they are breaking bread. It is incompatible with christian service.
D. Surely a union within a company is only a step toward the greater unions.
J.T. Quite so. We do not want to digress too much on these negative things. It is part of the battle of Rephidim. God will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.
{347}
L.E.S. The word of God which is living and operative and sharper than a two-edged sword would help us in this.
J.T. Quite so. Joshua broke the power of Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword. Let it have the sharp edge of the word of God in dealing with matters.
A.N.W. "For the God of my father has been my help, and has delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh". All that we have been saying shows how we would be delivered from the sword of Pharaoh, for that will mean death, and not life to us.
J.T. Just so. It really connects with Zipporah chosen as Moses wife legally, and not only that, but there are these two sons whom Moses himself names; so that it is a real family -- an established family. @Romans 7 lays the basis for this, "that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God". The chapter brings out the person. "*I myself*". He has totally clear deliverance. He says, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law". That settles all these things we have been speaking about. The word of God forbids these things. @Romans 8 opens up as to the Spirit. "There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus". Following that there is a beautiful word telling us how much these things are to God. Paul says, "God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit", @Romans 8: 3, 4. So that the soul is now clear, and chapter 8 speaks of what the Spirit is to us in this position. It is the mountain of God in the wilderness, but nothing for the flesh at all. All resources are from God.
{348}
T.S. I was just wondering if verse 7 of our chapter should touch our hearts as to God's system of help and all that we have been speaking of. In addition to the edge of the sword, it says that Moses went to meet Jethro "and kissed him; and they asked each other after their welfare".
J.T. Love is active. That would further explain what we were saying about what happened one hundred and twenty years ago. This is how the matter went on, brethren loved each other and had confidence in each other, but there were many matters that came out that had to be settled, but still, men like Jethro were recognised. Their advice was taken.
A.R. Moses tells Jethro what God had done to Pharaoh and what He had done to the Egyptians for Israel's sake.
J.T. The whole point is, what God is doing. Joseph mentioned it. Now it is in Moses history. "God is my help". Jethro was occupied with what God is doing. Moses listens to him and he takes his advice, all of which enters into the position, and that is how the administration is to be carried on. We love one another and go on, with nothing against each other. We do not want to bring up things. God brings them up. We are in the hands of God. It is what He will do.
W.T. Jethro learned this matter from Moses in quite a different way from what he would have learned it back in the land of Midian. He learned his place in the testimony in the right way.
J.T. Yes, and look at the beautiful meeting they had here. "Now I know that Jehovah is greater than all gods; for in the thing in which they acted haughtily, he was above them ...", @Exodus 18: 11. He is an officiating priest and he has come in from Midian. That shows the power there was, the grace there was, to recognise what there was of God in a
{349}
man like this. Aaron the priest of Jehovah is sitting down with him. That is how matters stood years ago. The legal position was there.
It is no longer now what is in the wilderness, but in Achsah we have a woman united to a man of great military ability, that is, Othniel, and it is a question of the inheritance of God. This can only be maintained and we maintained in it, by the springs -- the Spirit of God operating among us. She asked for springs of water and Caleb gave her the upper and nether springs. We can only be in the inheritance of God through faith and by the power of the Spirit of God who is indeed the Earnest of the inheritance until the redemption of the acquired possession.
A.B.P. Would the asking come with the desire for spiritual power?
J.T. I would think so. She sprang off the ass upon which she was riding. Caleb has a great place here. It is a remarkably rich setting. We see military power in relation to the inheritance.
W.G.T. You spoke about the radio, in this case the attack is on the city of books -- Kirjath-Sepher.
J.T. Just so. Othniel took that city. He is a military man. He stands related to the same family as his wife. She is in the land and has great desires in regard to springs. The good of the inheritance of God can only be known by the springs of water.
{350}
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN RELATION TO THE TYPES OF THE ASSEMBLY (5)
@1 Samuel 25: 1 - 33, 39 - 44
J.T. We have here perhaps one of the best types of the assembly. Christ is before us in His Davidic character. His royal kingly qualities and military power, and particularly as inaugurating the service of God. Abigail is introduced to us as a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance. The description agrees somewhat with that given of David himself, who is said to be "ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance and beautiful appearance", @1 Samuel 16: 12. In none of the other husbands or bridegrooms typifying the Lord do we get such a reference. It is Christ in His excellence, first, as to what He is personally. His personal attractiveness, and then His military power in chapter 17, and then His kingly and ministerial power; and in the service of God he became marked by priestly qualities.
The description of Abigail in chapter 25 brings out a complete correspondence to David in feminine qualities. She fits into @Romans 7. We spoke of it yesterday as regards the legal type in Zipporah, but here we have the death of the husband, Nabal, so that she is free "to be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God". And moreover, that we should "serve in newness of spirit". We should be to another first, who has been raised up from among the dead in order that we should bear fruit to God, and then in verse 6 "having died in that in which we were held, so that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of letter". Her husband was living when she came into touch with David, but he died within ten days. "Jehovah smote Nabal". "His heart died within him, and he became as a stone. And it came to pass in about ten days that
{351}
Jehovah smote Nabal, and he died. And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be Jehovah, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and has kept back his servant from evil; but Jehovah has returned Nabal's evil upon his own head", @1 Samuel 25: 37 - 39. His heart died within him. Jehovah smote Nabal and he died. Abigail's husband is dead clearly, and David is particular to notice that; "David heard that Nabal was dead ... and ... sent and communed with Abigail, to take her as his wife". So that the road into assembly position in relation to Christ is made clear. The way is made for her to become the wife of David, typically the wife of Christ, made for one who is equal to the position too, who takes it up and graces it. Her graces and her assembly qualities are seen more in her first meeting with David than later. There is little made of her later. She is fully attested to here in her manner in meeting David. That is to say, in applying it to ourselves, we come in contact with the Lord in circumstances such as are described, such as the death of the prophet Samuel, and the opposition of Saul whose character is seen in Nabal. David is still in rejection, but in military power. So that I think we ought to consider Abigail as representative of the saints now taking up the assembly position and doing so intelligently, bringing out the qualities immediately, particularly in her having a judgment as to the one who had a place as husband before.
A.E.H. Do you think that what underlies the whole type of Abigail is the preservation of conditions from which and in which the service of God can be maintained? She seems to maintain the outstanding conditions of the dispensation in her attitude and spirit.
J.T. I think she would, though there is little made of her later, save that she maintains her place as one
{352}
of David's wives. The traits of the assembly are seen at once and they are not freshly developed, as in a young woman like Rebecca, but in one of mature age who has had to do with a man like Nabal. She has developed her assembly qualities in a position that did not promote those qualities. It is just like what Peter says, "We have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God". *We have believed and known*. That is the idea. The one who should inaugurate the service of God was in Peter's mind while others were departing, turning away from the Lord, and manifesting Nabal qualities. There was complaint in Capernaum against the Lord and against the special teaching He was developing in @John 6. Peter and the others with him speak and say, "We have believed and known". You can see he had believed and known.
L.E.S. Would you say a word as to the death of the prophet here, how it fits into the understanding of the type.
J.T. I think the suggestion is, that she acquired her qualities through the prophetic ministry. The place it has in @1 Corinthians I think is just that. The preservation of the assembly is in mind and hence the great stress laid on prophetic ministry. This ministry is seen persisting in the midst of the contrariety from Saul, and from the people. Samuel said "God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you". He persisted, whatever their attitude, and I think that is the meaning of it, and corresponds with the importance of prophetic ministry as in 1 Corinthians.
Rem. So Nabal would be the product of Saul, the public side, and this woman the product of the prophetic side working in the public position.
J.T. Well, that is what I thought. She had developed these qualities whereas Nabal is called a churlish man. He says, "Who is David?". Fancy
{353}
a man saying that when you think of the history of David in those days. It reminds you of Saul in chapter 17, "Whose son is this young man?" and yet he had been in his house and ministered to him. So Nabal says, "Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse? there are many servants now-a-days that break away every man from his master. And shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh which I have killed for my shearers, and give it to men whom I know not whence they are?". Well, that is pride. Nabal knew well enough who David was. David's was a most gracious message. It is the spirit of Saul in Nabal. A man like this would flourish in the days of Saul and would no doubt carry far with man like Saul. He knew all about Saul and knew nothing of David. Anybody who knew anything would have known about David. A young man could describe him perfectly, one of Saul's own young men.
R.W.S. It says she did not tell her husband Nabal, like Jonathan who did not tell his father. She is able to keep things.
J.T. I thought of that. There are two witnesses to that, as you say. "Jonathan ... told not his father" what he proposed to do, which was a spiritual decision. That she did not tell Nabal, shows the importance of hiding things when they should be hidden. The Lord Himself said several times, "Tell ... no man".
S.McC. In what sense would the Holy Spirit stand related to this type?
J.T. The Spirit had a great place in the days of David and as David is introduced to us in @1 Samuel 16, we are told that "the Spirit of Jehovah came upon David". His name is first mentioned in this passage. The meaning of David is 'Beloved'. That is like the Holy Spirit coming on Christ as recorded in the synoptic gospels, coming in the form of a dove upon Him as He is announced to be the
{354}
Beloved. John the baptist says, "I beheld the Spirit descending as a dove from heaven, and it abode upon him". I suppose the Holy Spirit is seen in this book particularly to show how He came in the expression of divine love. The Spirit is here today in relation to divine love. That is how He came on Christ who was then announced to be God's beloved Son. David typifies Him thus -- Christ as the beloved of God. It was not simply on the Person, but on 'The Beloved'. "The Spirit of Jehovah came upon David from that day forward" as if he is here now, and Abigail comes under that too, for David is seen henceforth as loved femininely. The song of the women is "Saul hath smitten his thousands, and David his ten thousands". We are told too that "all Israel ... loved David". He is a lovable person. The Holy Spirit is on lovable people and those lovable to the saints too. So that I suppose Abigail would be a sort of product of the Holy Spirit in that way. The Spirit is a long time here -- not simply come at Pentecost, but here a long time, so that persons are known as loved by the presence of the Holy Spirit.
L.E.S. Would it answer somewhat to Colossians, "who has also manifested to us your love in the Spirit", @Colossians 1: 8? That is the only time the Spirit is mentioned in the epistle, but you have all the wealth the Spirit has produced.
J.T. Quite so. They are lovers in the Spirit to show how genuine it was. The love by which David was loved is remarkable. The Spirit came upon him, it says, when the description is given. Jehovah says, "Arise, anoint him". That is in the midst of his brethren. It is a well-known matter. It is quite obvious that the Spirit came upon him, but not simply on the person, but the person recorded as to what his name means; on David, and the word means 'Beloved'. This is a public matter really, because it
{355}
is in the midst of his brethren, a most beautiful scene, corresponding with the Lord's position in the Jordan. John said, "I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God". He became known to a good many at the Jordan doubtless, so that heaven's love for Christ was known. The apostle says by the Spirit that "God gives not the Spirit by measure". The presence of the Holy Spirit has been for a long time here.
Rem. What you have said seems to explain why there is no outstanding figure mentioned such as water or something else in connection with Abigail. Attention is being called to the man, and the Spirit would be working in connection with that.
J.T. That is the thought. David is later making a comparison between the love of women and the love of Jonathan -- what masculine love is over against feminine love. The love in David is greater than even the love that is in Abigail and that is how it should be. It was in David historically a long time and, of course, she was probably as old as David, so that she is contemporary in regard to what is most precious, and not only what characterises Christ in the assembly eternally. It is a question of love -- masculine and feminine affection.
F.N.W. This is a direct link with @Psalm 45, "anointed thee with the oil of gladness" and then the kings daughters brought in.
J.T. Very good. The Lord is seen there as the King. It is the song of the Beloved really. He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His companions.
C.F.N. What she says in verse 28 brings out her discernment of David. She says, "I pray thee, forgive the transgression of thy handmaid: for Jehovah will certainly make my lord a lasting house; because my lord fights the battles of Jehovah, and evil has not been found in thee all thy days". And
{356}
then she speaks of him as being bound in the bundle of the living with Jehovah. Does that prove, what she is spiritually by what she sees in David?
J.T. I think so. I think that brings her in as parallel with Peter. Peter says, "We have believed and known". It was a historical thing and the product of experience, the knowledge of the Holy One. Here she had a knowledge of David as a military man of genuine character, showing she was really his contemporary. She is not one freshly converted and in her first love, but a contemporary person capable of knowing David and what marked him, but, of course, she had a judgment of her husband as well. She was a woman of discernment. He refers to her in that way, saying, "Blessed be thy discernment".
J.H. Would her understanding and her discernment be qualities formed by the Spirit necessary for a right apprehension of David?
J.T. I would say that. It is the Spirit bringing out what was seen in David. The distinction between masculine love and feminine is striking in his history. It is he who brings it out, so that we have Jonathan's love for him mentioned. We should observe what is said in chapter 18, verses 2 to 7. We are told also that "All Israel and Judah loved David" (verse 16). We may be sure that Abigail was not outside of all that. She was there. It is a contemporary history, therefore, a growing and deepening affection and intelligence as to the anointing of David; that is, of Christ.
W.B-w. So that the word, "a woman of good understanding" would show she was experienced.
J.T. She would be ready for whatever developed further as she had learned in her younger days as contemporary with David. She was a contemporary like the other women of Israel. She no doubt regarded him and exceeded most of them. As a
{357}
contemporary further we have Michal of whom it is also said that she loved David, but it was a mere shadow of the thing and it was untrustworthy. She is given to somebody else here, and she might as well be. She comes in in a sinister way, like the denominations. It is really a snare to Christ and the testimony.
Rem. Now that we have Abigail who corresponds to David, the Michal element goes down; she is given to another. One thinks of the steady deterioration in things all around.
J.T. It is said that she loved him, and at one time, to save David from Saul, she put an image in the bed and the net of goats hair at its head. It was a bad sinister action, though she showed some regard for him. Abigail is the contrast to all that; she loved David genuinely with a thorough understanding of him. So right through this history we have comparative love and the difference between masculine love and feminine love. David's is a time of love. Solomon speaks of "a time to love". Solomon was loved of Jehovah. It was a time when different persons became tested as to the object of their affection, so that love is under observation. Love is a very important item in christianity. John says, we should not have known it at all if Christ had not laid down His life for us. We do not know it in natural things; it is developed through death, the death of God's Son. David went through death typically and therefore comes into our times to make a comparison of love. What kind of love have I got? Of what depth is it? Is it abiding love? Is it a love developed through experience? If it is, it is an Abigail love.
A.R. It says that "All Israel and Judah loved David, for he went out and came in before them". That would be experimental love.
{358}
J.T. They would see him. You may be sure there was much talk about him as an object of genuine affection.
C.A.M. You were alluding to what David says in @2 Samuel 1, "passing women's love".
J.T. That is what I was alluding to. It is a final comparison made. It is to bring out what the love of Christ is in the fullest masculine sense, and feminine love in the assembly, but this is not as great as Christ's love. The masculine is always greater. David in the type is qualified to judge this, because the first mention of David is by his name. He is already in mind as a person, the son of Jesse, but as the Spirit of God came upon David, his name is given; it means 'the beloved'. He is mentioned in the book of Ruth, but that does not mean it is the first mention of his name. The Holy Spirit will come upon a person who is loved. He came on Christ as peculiarly so, not as He comes on us collectively; it was unique upon Christ personally. He was great enough for that, but it is as heaven announced its love for Christ.
L.E.S. Would Paul's word in @Galatians 2 fit in with Michal's character? He says, some were "brought in surreptitiously, who came in surreptitiously to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage".
J.T. Well, that is, I think, what she is; an element in christendom that does not hate Christ. She despises him in time, but there was love in a way there as far as she could have it. She is not a type of a real christian, but a person who has some regard for Christ, but who, in a test case, despises Him. That is the sorrowful side. She is given to another here. Saul did that. He has done his work through her to damage David. Now he gives her to another.
{359}
Ques. Would you say a word as to Abigail's remark that David fights the battles of the Lord? Does that enter into the thought of love in a comparative sense?
J.T. Well, I think we see it in what we have already remarked. The women came out when David returned from the battle; it is then that the feminine side shows itself, "Saul hath slain his thousands". He is not yet out of view but is diminishing in their minds. This section is to show how the Nabal or Saul quality is gradually diminishing, but soon to disappear. In Nabal's case, it took ten days. David said of Saul, "His day shall come to die, or he shall descend into battle and perish". He was shown the greatest consideration, but in the end he dies on Mount Gilboa. It is all carefully ordered, that these two men should die so as to make way for others, really for David. It is all to make way for David.
A.E.H. Is the idea of the battles of the Lord seen illustrated in @John 18? The Lord said, "The cup which the Father has given me, shall I not drink it?". He was really engaged in the battles of the Lord there, was He not?
J.T. Well, chapters 18 and 19 of John and the Lord's conversation with Pilate bring out the Lord's relation with the powers that be. It shows the remarkable power of the truth. He said to Pilate, "Thou hadst no authority whatever against me if it were not given to thee from above". @John 19: 11. "If my kingdom were of this world, my servants had fought ... but now my kingdom is not from hence", @John 18: 36. We have part in this battle. The peculiar kind of warfare that Christ is waging Himself now is a heavenly warfare. It is really brought out in Ephesians. That is, "Our struggle is not against blood and flesh, but against principalities, against authorities, against the universal lords of
{360}
this darkness, against spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies", @Ephesians 6: 12. That is, the darkness of this dispensation, the peculiar kind of darkness active from above. Of course, we can bring that into our chapter. The battles of the Lord have been going on ever since Pentecost not with ordinary swords. "Put the sword into the sheath", is the Lord's word. "All who take the sword shall perish by the sword". We are still in this war. We are never out of it if we are good soldiers of Jesus Christ. The Lord Jesus will take up warfare again when He comes out of heaven. Our position at the present time is a mysterious sort of thing. People do not understand us and the purpose of our warfare.
J.W.D. Feminine affection in us as connected with Christ on our side, does not reach to affection for Christ for what He is to God.
J.T. I think this section is helpful in bringing out what kind of affection I have. Have we love like Michal? A christian may come forward under certain circumstances and contend for Christ, but would allow idolatry in doing so. It is a mixed sort of thing. She puts an image in the bed. What we are saying is well worthy of our consideration. What kind of love have I got? Because there is a variety, and it is in the David period that it comes out. There is in David supreme love. There are other loves too. There is love like Jonathan's. It was a remarkable love, surpassing the love of women, as David says, but still he clave to the house of Saul till the last, and died on Mount Gilboa like Saul, so he did not go all the way. Michal's love did not go all the way at all; it is connected with darkness, an image in the bed, and yet you might say she did the best she could, and when another test came she despised him. That is a testing consideration; one might defend David at one time and despise him at
{361}
another. There were women that came out and sang their songs about Saul and David. They were not very clear, but they gave David more than Saul. Still Saul was not out of their minds. When we come to Abigail, Saul is completely out of mind. She is representative of the assembly. It is only as I see that all elements of Saul's kind are reprobate, that I am ready for the assembly. I no longer vindicate natural sentiment, and that sort of thing.
A.B. The apostle so often said to the Corinthians, "Do ye not know?". He has to tell them about love in chapter 13.
J.T. The love chapter; "a way of more surpassing excellence". He brings in the comparative side there. "The greater of these", not the 'greatest'. It is the comparison that is in his mind.
G-. Abigail says, "I pray thee, forgive the transgression of thy handmaid", but it was Nabal who had transgressed.
J.T. She is an upright woman; she was Nabal's wife still, legally so, anyway. She does not disclaim responsibility for her husband's liabilities. She is accepting them and facing the thing. That is the first thing she has to do; one of her young men says this to her; "Know and consider what thou wilt do, for evil is determined against our master, and against all his household; and he is such a son of Belial, that one cannot speak to him". David was going to destroy the males and she faced the thing. That brings out a great quality in the assembly, that those who belong to it characteristically face obligations. David had asked for things from Nabal, but Nabal refused in a most disdainful way. She brings two hundred loaves, as it says, "And Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two skin-bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched corn, and a hundred raisin-cakes, and two hundred fig-cakes, and laid them on
{362}
asses. And she said to her young men, Go on before me; behold, I come after you", @1 Samuel 25: 18, 19. She knows what to do. This is what was needed and she met David. He came down on one side and she on the other. They met on the plain.
W.G.T. The young men of Nabal were more righteous than he. Abigail had in mind the preservation of the young men.
J.T. Yes. The young man knew where to place the information. Why did he not tell Nabal? He knew better. It brings out what is in keeping with Abigail's good understanding. She knew what to do.
R.R.T. In her dealing with the matter, there is something for us in the fact that she does not attribute the disgrace to Nabal, but she takes it herself.
J.T. Well, that is what I was thinking. Every true assembly person accepts obligation. If it attaches to one, it attaches to all. It is a question of fellowship.
R.W.S. In this matter of love I would like some more help. Is the Lord's love always seen in a masculine sense?
J.T. Always in a masculine sense. It is always that. It is the supreme idea. John says, "Hereby we have known love". You may say he must have known it in the bosom of Jesus, but he says it is known because He laid down His life for us. It is a supreme test of love to die for the brethren.
A.R. Does the presentation of masculine love in the Lord develop in us masculine love or feminine love?
J.T. Feminine love is expressed collectively. That is what we have to bear in mind for Eve is a type. That is what God has in mind -- Adam and Eve. It is Christ and the assembly, and in their eternal relations, so that love in the assembly is collective, what we have together. Can we love together? Can
{363}
we do that? Maybe we never thought of it. The first and second Corinthians are to bring out love. Paul has to describe it in the first epistle. He says, "Shew I unto you a way of more surpassing excellence". That is the way of love. What we had yesterday afternoon about Zipporah speaks of this but it was not very much; that is the assembly in the wilderness. The apostle is aiming at producing love among them and so he gives the complete picture in the first epistle, and I suppose the second would bring out love developing among them, real assembly affection developed among them.
C.H.H. Would masculine love be expressed in the assembly as we proceed to sonship?
J.T. That would be love to God. Sonship is love to God, it is not feminine love, It is masculine love in sons, but the assembly's love for Christ is developed in a collective sense. It is what we are as gathered. It is a question of subjection. The Corinthians were wanting in that. It helps to follow that. It was a little sister who had no breasts in Canticles. She is to be spoken for. That is what the apostle is getting at in his efforts at Corinth.
A.L. In @1 Samuel 18 it says, "Michal Saul's daughter loved David". It does not say he loved her.
J.T. That is important. She loved him. It was genuine love so far as possible but it failed. Divine love never fails.
A.R. Do you develop also masculine love in the assembly?
J.T. Love for God is that kind. It is a question of what man is before God. The word 'man' covers male and female and I think in the great ultimate it is not the feminine thought at all. It is the masculine thought, in "the men whom thou gavest me". It is a question of sonship, so that love for God is not the same as love for Christ.
{364}
C.H.H. How would love come out as we are considered as the Lord's brethren?
J.T. It is not collective. The word 'brethren' is simply so many persons, but the idea of the assembly is a unit, all united together. It is an organism. That is one of the greatest things to get at. Can we love together?
Ques. Is the thought of the Head of the assembly involved in the man and the woman bringing about the love together that you are speaking of?
J.T. I think so. Christ is Head of the assembly in a personal way. The body is a complete thought by itself. The proper figure is a man and his wife, headship is in a man and his wife. Christ is Head over all things to the assembly, as much as to say, He will refer to her. In dealing with the universe He will refer to her. "To the assembly" means He will refer to her. I suppose if David had any counsels to take, you may be sure he would bring Abigail into it. There is not much made of her afterwards. It is an experimental thing. It is a historical matter. As soon as she met David it would all be there.
J.H.E. Assembly love is the Lord's last ministry, that you might have love among yourselves -- love together.
J.T. Exactly, but it is love among yourselves. It is a remarkable way of putting it.
C.A.M. Would you say, this masculine love is expressed in Paul when he said, "I am jealous as to you with a jealousy which is of God"? In a sense that is the reflection of the love of Christ.
J.T. Quite so. He had espoused her as a chaste virgin to Christ. The more you think of this the more you see how Paul had it in his mind in his dealings with Corinth, and I believe Abigail is like the house of Chloe or the house of Stephanas. It is really an Ephesian suggestion. It is the Davidic character of Christ in view of royalty, and kingly
{365}
qualities, and even priestly qualities in the service of God. What will Abigail be now? She will not be a mere drudge in the house, you may be sure. She is going to be a true wife, a person of understanding, but of a long standing. She was a contemporary with this kind of love: Now as she comes into contact with David it is all there. It is a wifely love that would stand the test.
L.E.S. Would the two thoughts be seen in @Revelation 21: "a bride adorned for her husband", the feminine, and "the tabernacle of God is with men", the masculine?
J.T. Exactly. Take that to illustrate what we are saying. It is a love of standing. The second verse of it brings the assembly in abstractly. She is called the holy city, the new Jerusalem. That is not a sudden thing. She is at least a thousand years old. It is in connection with the eternal state of things, so that it is a long standing matter. Verse 9 brings in the same thing, only it is the beginning of the millennium and brings out what can be in relation to millennial conditions. In chapter 19 she is the wife, the Lamb's wife, to whom it is given to be arrayed in fine linen, clean and bright; she is the same in chapter 21: 9, "the bride, the Lamb's wife". It is all to bring out what she is, in the status of a wife; her love is of long standing. That is the kind of love that is valuable. It is a seasoned love. It stood the test.
W.R. Is that not the kind of love that you have in @Proverbs 31, in the virtuous woman?
J.T. The virtuous woman is a type of it. Her husband is absent, but she is true to him.
F.N.W. Does glory to God in the assembly involve masculine love only, or feminine love as well?
J.T. Glory to God in the assembly. It is not the glory of God, but glory to Him, that issues forth
{366}
gut of the assembly,. Glory to Him throughout all generations in the assembly in Christ Jesus, having power in that setting. It is effective really by Christ, what He develops in the assembly Godward. What goes up to God is masculine.
F.N.W. That would be masculine, would it?
J.T. It would be. God has no wife. It is a question of Christ and the assembly. God does use the term 'husband' in regard to Israel in the Old Testament, but the truth in christianity is seen in man -- male and female. Christ *and* the assembly.
W.W. Why is Abigail found married to such a person as Nabal?
J.T. Its meaning is seen, I think, in what existed as the Lord went up to heaven. The saints were still related to judaism. Nabal is judaism. Saul is judaism, but as soon as the husband is dead, then there is liberty to be married to another. That is, judaism became dead. *We* become dead to the law and this severs us. That is a touching thought. We die, as it were, and are now at liberty to be married to another, not anybody, but even to Him that is raised from among the dead. It is a moral thing. The matter of the death of Nabal and Saul applies to ourselves and to all that judaism meant to the body of Christ, that we might be to another, not to belong to anybody, but to be married to another, even to Him who is raised from among the dead.
Ques. Would a comparison with our first type, Eve, help us at this point? There is no previous history there and no historical surroundings at all, but Abigail has both, and is the thought that these are the exercises of the kind of affections that serve the Lord that would enable us after the Supper to reach the highest thought of union?
J.T. I think that is good. You want to have as mature a love as you can have. The Ephesians had first love. They are the only ones who are spoken
{367}
of in that way: "Thou hast left thy first love". You cannot say that is mature love. It is the first, the freshest and in a way, the most delightful. Love never fails. Genuine seasoned love never fails. I believe abstractly it is the love in the assembly which the Lord values right through. It is coming up in the end, and He is going to tell certain ones about it, to make them know He loves her. It is a lovable *person*, "that they shall know that *I* have loved thee". I believe John shows us that love going right through to the end. The assembly comes down from God. Love is of God. She has the glory of God. She really comes from God. She has got love.
A.P.T. Verse 42 says, "Abigail hasted and arose". Is that the agility of love operating?
J.T. Abigail hasted and arose. She acted herself. The damsels who followed belonged to her. They followed her and she went after the messenger of David and became his wife. She is no mere novice, she is a person who understands the position. If it is a military man that has power to do ill and cause disaster, who needs appeasing, she knows what to do; and now that she is to be his wife, she is no novice.
A.E.H. If I follow your thought clearly, are you suggesting that this is the kind of love that should mark us now? There has been a long history and in this peculiar time in which we are living this seasoned love should be in evidence.
J.T. That is the idea. It is a love that is developed toward Christ. It is like persons in the church of Rome, that were real christians but they were not dissociated yet from the old position, but they are ready for it. The prophet Samuel dies, and clearly Abigail is to take the place. The military position is to supersede the prophetic. Samuel dies and is fully recognised, and she comes in on the scene immediately. Undoubtedly she has been
{368}
engaged with the prophet. If she ever met Samuel you may be sure he would tell her about David. She was developing understanding spiritually as a contemporary of David. What is going on in christendom now? Many are given prominence who are not yet severed from their own husbands, but the prophet dies and God brings about conditions which sever them. They are no novices. They are a remarkable element of christendom. It is assembly material, seasoned assembly material.
C.F.N. Would it be right to say this power of discernment is peculiarly a feature of the assembly?
J.T. Well, that is the first thing that David says to her. "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel" (verse 32). That is, it is God's work. God is working with this person. This is not the first time God has dealt with this woman. She has a spiritual history. Now David says, 'He has sent you to me'. He recognises she is under God's control and "Blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou, who hast kept me this day from coming with bloodshed, and from avenging myself with mine own hand" (verse 33). Remember that she is given that honour to intervene so that David should not be in a false position. That is an important matter that Christ, as viewed here in testimony, should not be put into a false position. It is one of the features of the assembly that she should prevent that.
Ques. Could you say a word about Ahinoam? David takes her at the same time, but in chapter 30 she is spoken of first, before Abigail. Would she represent one of whom there is no previous history recorded?
J.T. Well, I had not thought of it. It is said here that "David had also taken Abinoam of Jizreel; and they became, even both of them, his wives". I would think that she is no doubt there before Abigail, but they became both of them his
{369}
wives. They were genuine wives. They had the wifely features. There is not much said of her until afterwards only that they had this status, and over against Michal who did not deserve it at all.
A.R. These marriages have no ceremony attached to them.
J.T. It is the wifely confidential idea. A wife should be a confidante and Abigail would be especially so.
W.B-w. Was Ahinoam suggestive of Israel still having her place?
J.T. He had taken her according to the passage read. They became both of them his wives. It is the fixedness of the relation that is made clear.
{370}
LIGHT IN VIEW OF MOVEMENT
@Genesis 30: 24, 25; @Exodus 2: 5 - 10; @Exodus 17: 13, 14; @1 Samuel 16: 12, 13
What is in mind is to speak of light, and I selected these scriptures to speak about this as it comes out in these four persons, having in view that light comes through persons. In the beginning, the light was commanded to shine out of darkness. The wording is significant. No person is mentioned from whence it shone, but the application of the passage in the New Testament connects it with the Lord Jesus. "God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts for the shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ", @2 Corinthians 4: 6. Clearly there it is connected with the Person of Christ and with ourselves as persons.
Having that passage in mind, I wish to make application of the four passages read to the present time, a time of darkness, and indeed a time in which people are sitting in darkness -- restful, we might say, in it. Many will not have it pointed out to them that they are sitting in darkness; they are wholly without feeling as to it, for when it comes to moral things, men are without shame, alas, as ignorant, but still the light comes into the darkness. Ordinarily light dispels darkness, but in moral things the darkness remains, although the light shines, as John says, "the light appears in darkness, and the darkness apprehended it not", @John 1: 5. The darkness remained. Here the light intruded itself from the divine side. Matthew says, quoting Isaiah, "The people sitting in darkness has seen a great light", @Matthew 4: 16. They have seen it. It alludes to Christ, confirming what I am saying, that light is in persons properly. The first chapter of Genesis typically
{371}
makes that clear. The great lights in the heavens allude typically to persons, and so Matthew says that they who were sitting in darkness had seen a great light.
The Lord Jesus Christ came to live in Capernaum. He had resided in Nazareth. Capernaum was not nearly as desirable a place to live in as was Nazareth. It was lower down, many, many feet below the sea, indeed. The Lord went down there to live, but the light shone in the descent and those who lived in Capernaum had the privilege of seeing it. They sat in darkness. The Lord moved as He heard something. Of course, He knows everything, but as a Servant here, He recognised external facts and information, so He moved from Nazareth to Capernaum after He heard that John had been cast into prison. That was a matter of government. John was cast into prison, and it affected the Lord. Every bit of suffering in His servants affects the Lord, and He moved in relation to His servant, but I am speaking of the move as involving light. Those sitting in darkness *saw* -- not simply that a light shone, but they *saw* it -- they saw a great light. It brings out as I said, the truth that it is a Person. Light is from a substance. "In him was life, and the life was the light of men", @John 1: 4.
Well, now, having said all that about light, as being substance in persons, I take up Joseph. Jacob represents the believer, who normally is on the alert for the light. He does not wish to miss anything, and so, as Joseph is born, his mother names him, giving the reason that the Lord would add to her another son. The believer takes note of what God will yet do, and acts in the light of it. Jacob was not a characteristic believer while in Padan-aram, though he was a believer. There are believers *and* believers. John tells us in chapter 2 of his gospel, that as Jesus made the water into wine, "his
{372}
disciples believed on him". They were already disciples, but they believed on Him as His glory was manifest, and a characteristic believer will watch for that, for it is the light, and as it shines he is to move according to it. He discerns that it indicates a movement.
Christianity is not a stationary thing. It is movable. John presents this in chapter 10, where he speaks of the flock. A flock is movable. Christendom has become a fold or folds; but they are not movable. Christianity involves a flock and it is moved by light. As the Lord says, "I am the light of the world; he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life", @John 8: 12. So the believer, characteristically one of the sheep of Christ, follows the shepherd, the Lord tells us through John. They are alert for the light, and they follow a light shining. Otherwise they may miss their way, they may be left behind, as others move on. Now Jacob says immediately when Joseph is born and his mother had named him, "Send me away, that I may go to my place". He had been with Laban for fourteen years. Why move away? Well, it was not the place for addition. The light coming into his soul involved addition, but that was not the place for addition. You do not want to add to yourself in the circumstances of unbelief. The more you do, the more you will be stationary and you may lose your way. "Woe unto them that add house to house, that join field to field", says the prophet Isaiah, chapter 5: 8. The ray of light in the birth of that child and what is said about him told Jacob that he must move. Is this a voice to someone here, who is stationary religiously, and perhaps thinking you should be? The truth is that you belong to the flock of Christ, and He moves, and the flock follow Him. "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me", @John 10: 27.
{373}
"They who follow the Lamb wheresoever it goes", @Revelation 14: 4.
So we have, therefore, in this servant Joseph, a transitional thought, and as I said, christianity is transitional as regards its place in this world. Presently, the great arising will take place, dear brethren, and the great operation of Christ's power will take the saints out of this world. We do not want to be taken out in our sleep. "For they that sleep sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night", @1 Thessalonians 5: 7. "We are not of the night, nor of darkness". Paul says, "*Ye* are sons of light and sons of day". We are to be on the alert for the light, for the coming of Christ, when He will exercise His great power. I love the thought, and to have now some little sense of the power of our translation. Are we aglow as to this, dear brethren? Everything around points to intensified darkness. We are of the day, and are on the alert for it. We are not going out asleep -- God forbid! -- we are to be fully awake, looking for the day star, as Peter says, "Until the day dawn and the morning star arise in your hearts", @2 Peter 1: 19. The hearts of christians are the great theatre of divine operations at the present time, and God is stressing that these operations go on, whatever else goes on. The enemy would oppress us by suggesting that they do not go on, but the operations continue in view of the final transitional movement into permanency -- into our eternal abode. We are to meet the Lord outside of this world, "to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord". What a prospect!
Joseph represents one transitional phase. It is a movement out of Genesis into Exodus. Moses is a movement out of Egypt into the wilderness. Life is seen in the move. Joshua is another move out of wilderness conditions into the inheritance -- into
{374}
*our* inheritance. David is another further transitional thought into *God's* inheritance, and so we have four transitional phases. The first is Joseph. God is going to add, his mother said. Jacob sees this is not the place to add, but yet he stays and buys flocks, dropping from the level of faith, moving away from the shining of the precious light that came into his soul. How often that happens; light comes in and we resolve to move and then something else comes in. The enemy would say, 'No, stay a while longer'. You may get some temporary advantage, and you listen to the deceiver, whereas the light that shone was intended to move you in a spiritual direction, and it had that effect at the start. So the whole book of Genesis is lightened up with this position. Joseph is the great servant for lifting the people of God out of one position into another position. He says, "God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance", @Genesis 45: 7. But they had to *come down*. He sent up the wagons, and the message to his father and to his brethren was that they should come down into Egypt. It was a complete lift of the people of God from one position to another, and the light governing is in Joseph, he is the substance. He is a young man right through Genesis. The second mention of him in this respect is that his father places him before his mother. It is personal distinction there -- not simply the light for movement, but the light of distinctive personality. The next thing is that his father loved him. The transitional procedure is on the line of attraction. He loved him better than all his sons. That love never waned, and Joseph counted on it. He appealed to his brethren, saying, "And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither", @Genesis 45: 13. Joseph counted on his
{375}
father's interest to hear of him, and not in vain, so that we have Jacob in Egypt. The first verse of Exodus tells us of the tribes coming into Egypt with Jacob, their father. That is, it is transitional -- in perfect order. They do not come down piece-meal, but as a family in relation to their father. The family comes down from the record of Genesis into Exodus, that is, we have the family attracted into Egypt. The people are there now in families. One would seek to awaken interest in any one here who has not light in regard to this great matter -- the great family of faith. It is a transitional movement at the present time, in view of our eternal place of fixity where God shall "be all in all", where the Son, the true Joseph, will be on our side in subjection. Eternal fixity at present is just an expectation.
The next phase is Moses. He has to do with the water. We have to pass over the water for the next move. So Moses is drawn out of the water. His saviour was the daughter of Pharaoh, not without significance. She is more than a mere Egyptian. She had other instincts, for God in His sovereign way establishes links to serve His testimony. There are many phases in His way, but it is really one way in its varied features of transitional movements. Pharaoh's daughter found something in the river. What a treasure! What would heaven see as that ark of bulrushes was opened up? Not a corpse, certainly! Joseph was put in a coffin in Egypt and carried all the way through the wilderness, for he must be in the movement. He is the first great leader. It is an accumulative thought. Now in this ark is a living babe, "exceedingly lovely", or 'fair to God', we are told, and it is left in the water. Water is a great figure in Scripture. The feature I am now speaking of is baptism. It is morally obligatory, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved;
{376}
but he that believeth not shall be damned", @Mark 16: 16. No christian should be otherwise than baptised. You discredit this matter I am speaking of, if you are not. Moses is the great baptiser; he is introduced to us as in the water. As it says in @1 Corinthians 10: 2, "All were baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea". We are told *all*! Oh, you say, infants? Certainly, but households is the proper word. It is a great doctrine -- household baptism -- not to be hidden under the table, but to be laid open on the table to be known and read of all men.
Paul says, "Christ has not sent me to baptise". Is he belittling baptism? No! He does not say he did not believe in it. He just says that he had not been sent to do it. But he did it, nevertheless. Is he transgressing? No. He did what it was necessary to do, but he says he did not wish to make much of it, lest you might think he was making a party, doing things in his own name. He sums it up, saying, "I thank God that I have baptised none of you, unless Crispus and Gaius, that no one may say that I have baptised unto my own name. Yes, I baptised also the house of Stephanas; for the rest I know not if I have baptised any other. For Christ hath not sent me to baptise, but to preach glad tidings", @1 Corinthians 1: 14 - 17. He says he did not come to baptise lest you might think he was a party man -- a sectarian. You see, he is not ashamed to use the word 'household'. They are baptised people -- in households -- and we should be such together. The household of Stephanas had dedicated themselves to minister to the saints. They had moral power in the assembly. Paul says, "Ye should also be subject to such". You see, dear brethren, that is what is meant by Moses. They are all baptised "in the cloud and in the sea". Well, that is all I had to say about Moses, but it is most important.
{377}
The daughter of Pharaoh came down to use the water, and she became Moses saviour -- an Egyptian princess -- but her name is not given. She came down to wash. Washing is a great thought in the Scriptures. "And such were some of you: but ye are washed", says the apostle. She finds this precious babe inside the ark. The child was preserved. Satan was endeavouring through Pharaoh to destroy all the males. We cannot have a family without the male. Moses represents the governing element -- the male side. Satan would destroy that. Satan would say, Save the girls alive, but destroy the males among the people of God. If we destroy the element of rule, we destroy the whole matter. That is how the thing stood in the first chapter of Exodus.
Now the Israelites were increasing with no ruler. Jacob was gone. Joseph was gone. Another king arose in Egypt who knew not Joseph, and Israel multiplied with no protector. What a moment of darkness, of possible destruction of the people of God; but now five women are brought in to be saviours of the male side; those that Satan would destroy are for salvation. Let us see to it that the male side is maintained -- the ruling class, as it were, among the people of God. Little Benjamin, for instance, is a ruler. It is the little ones in that sense. So that God, we are told, dwells between his shoulders -- a dwelling place for God. You cannot have that without rule. Moses represents that principle. "Moses indeed was faithful in all his house, as a ministering servant", @Hebrews 3: 5. He is thus a type of Christ. It is the element of rule through baptism. Baptism is morally imperative and without it there is no present salvation. "He that believes and is baptised shall be saved", @Mark 16: 16. So Peter says, "Which figure also now saves you, even baptism, not a putting away of the filth of flesh, but the demand as before God of a good conscience,
{378}
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ", @1 Peter 3: 21. The doctrine founded on that is separation from the world. We have left the world. It is the second transitional thought under Moses.
The third stage is in Joshua. He is a warrior. Moses brings us into the wilderness. He does not leave it himself. He could not go into the land. In His sovereignty God takes him in later on the mount of transfiguration, but in the type he does not go into the land. Moses takes us into the wilderness. Baptism takes us into the wilderness. The Lord's supper holds us there, not in the land, but always *as out of Egypt*. It is food in the wilderness. These are the two great sacraments. I may be speaking to some here who are stationary christians, and who perhaps know little or nothing about what I am saying -- of these transitional things. You want to leave the stationary position through baptism -- the figure of Christ's death. The apostle says, "As many as have been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised unto his death ... We have been buried therefore with him by baptism unto death, in order that, even as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so *we* also should walk in newness of life", @Romans 6: 3, 4. You begin the great domain of glory in baptism. The first day of the week recorded in the end of the gospel is a day of glory and the great thought is the glory of the Father. Think of that -- baptised unto Him -- baptised unto His death -- He who was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. We should walk in the newness of life introduced by the ministry of Moses.
Then Joshua takes us on. He runs alongside of Moses from Rephidim in @Exodus 17 onwards; he is introduced in relation to Moses, but he goes beyond Moses. He goes into the land and here is a man who has things rehearsed in his ears. We get
{379}
the idea of the 'Book of God' with him. The first mention of the 'Book of God' is here. I call it the 'Book of God', because God tells Moses, "Write this for a memorial in the book". We need to become acquainted with this book because it is written in view of continuance. There is also the Book of Life. You want to know whether you are written in this book. Whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, we are told, was cast into the lake of fire (@Revelation 20: 15). Being in the wilderness position may not ensure your being put into that book. That is a most important matter. You want to get into the book. The things are rehearsed in the ears of Joshua. He typifies Christ, another feature of light in a person -- substantial, but it is light shining.
It is a question of a book, and of ears, and then military success, for the enemy is arrayed against us to keep us out of the land of Canaan -- to keep us in Egypt, in the world. It is by way of the teaching of baptism that we should come to understand the glory of the Father, even now as in the wilderness, and to make sure that you belong to Canaan, and that you want to be in Canaan. As the light of Joseph came to Jacob, he said, "Send me away, that I may go to my place and to my country". Now, what about ourselves in the wilderness? do we want to move to our own place? -- it is in the land; indeed, it is in heaven.
Moses father-in-law would not leave; he would not go into the land -- he preferred the wilderness. Many of us are children of the wilderness. We like it. We have worldly links. We are born of christian parents, and yet love the world. Maybe we would not go to the theatre, but we are worldlings in the sense in which we prefer the wilderness, and do not want to leave it, because, after all, the world goes alongside the wilderness. It is what the
{380}
world becomes to us as we are affected by Christ's love in going into death, and as love wanes with us the separation is apt to lose its force with us. Moses has to do with this kind of thing, the revival of love of the world -- they wanted to return to Egypt. There is great opposition to us who would go on to Canaan. God brought them out that He might bring them in. @Exodus 15 is not only the outgoing from Egypt, but the ingoing into the land. Are we ready for that? Joshua is the servant in whom light shines for us on this point, on our exodus from the wilderness into the land of Canaan -- *our own land*.
Maybe I am speaking to some who might be classified as children of the wilderness. You were born of christian parents who came out of Egypt -- and they are going on to Canaan, but you are not. It is a most pathetic thing to contemplate, a non-movement of children born in the wilderness and of christian parents. The parents are not going back into Egypt, to the world, but they intend to finish in Canaan, indeed in heaven, with Christ. If there is one here, I would appeal to you. Move along with people of God. Get acquainted with the Lord Jesus. He is equal to every opposing power, He never lost a battle, He will see you through in victory into glory.
Joshua is a victorious leader, he leads out of the wilderness into the land of Canaan. God says later, "I lifted up my hand unto them, to bring them out of the land of Egypt into a land that I had espied for them", @Ezekiel 20: 6. It is as though He would say, 'I looked at that land and liked it and I want you to look at it and like it, too'. Of all the lands that His eyes rested upon, that is the land for His people -- not God's inheritance, but His people's inheritance, a land espied for you. He wants you to go there, and He has appointed Joshua to take you there. It is Christ's place. Are you despising that pleasant land, some of you christians here? The
{381}
people, we are told, despised the pleasant land. God says 'They will never see it'. Most solemn! Some day, if you keep on despising, God will say to you, 'You will never see it'. Take notice of it! You will never see it. You will be strewn in the wilderness. Caleb and Joshua were not prepared to stay in the wilderness; they went in to Canaan. You will understand that these are figurative things. They were in the wilderness, but they did not wish to stay in the wilderness. They are numbered to go into the land of Canaan. Will you not come? "Come with us, and we will do thee good", as Moses said to Hobab; but he said, 'No! I am not going with you'. God forbid that that should be the language of any christian here tonight. Come along to share the inheritance on the other side of the Jordan. Do not remain in the wilderness.
Finally, David is the fourth transitional leader. He paid great attention to the service of God. He was a king, but his kingship was subservient to a greater thing; that was the service of God. The service of God is the greatest thing. We are to serve Him all the days of our life. It is a final thought. David, typical of Christ, is the leader in that, and we are to be brought into our own inheritance now. David would say to us that God must have His inheritance too. "I will not give sleep to mine eyes, slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for Jehovah, habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob", @Psalm 132: 4, 5. He invites God to come into his inheritance. What a man he was, and what a man he is typically. All these men represent Christ in His various phases of ministry. David, being what he is, as I said, the leader in the service of God, is a beautiful, attractive person. You get a little touch of that in Joseph, though it was not the main thought. David is introduced to us in the most propitious circumstances, and he is ruddy. He appears in the
{382}
company of his brethren, a desirable environment, a place of affection. He is anointed in the midst of them. The Spirit of God came upon him. He is an attractive man; he is ruddy and of beautiful countenance. The eye is included in this and has so much to do with beauty; it has intelligence and affection in expression. It is a wonderful organ for expression. It is to present Christ to us in the sense of attractiveness. It is not that He leads us in by authority. He draws us in. It is affection -- it is personal attractiveness. "Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty", @Isaiah 33: 17. The Lord would present Himself in this last phase of the movement as we are about to be transferred literally by His power into His heavenly places. I am speaking of Ephesians now and how He attracts us into heavenly places spiritually. We will remain there as accepted in the beloved. He is presented to us as David in Ephesians. David means 'beloved'. That is exactly what Christ is in the heavenly places. It is not resurrection although it will include that. We shall yet experience the operation of His power here, taking us up, but in the meantime He has our hearts there, moved by the Spirit's power, but by Christ as the attractive and absorbing object of our hearts.
We are not going away from home when we go to heaven. If we lose a relative, he has gone away from the home here, yet he has gone *to* home. It is God's home. We do not want him back. God would draw us to the place. It is God's home, the place that He made for Himself to dwell in, dear brethren, and our David is drawing us into that. We are already made accepted in the beloved, that we should be holy, and without blame before God our Father in love. He has our hearts now; that is the result of ministry; but presently a great wave of His power will take us all up. Sometimes in the prayer meeting we get a touch of divine power, that is like
{383}
the rapture, and reminds us of it. Paul says, "to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better", @Philippians 1: 23. But think of the delight of the apostle in his being caught up to the third heaven and into paradise. The Lord Jesus spoke about going to paradise: "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise". The Lord Jesus and the dying thief were both there together that day -- both in the paradise of God, in triumph. What a transposition from the cross of Calvary! We are to become accustomed to these things, our hearts are drawn into them by our David, presently to be taken into them in eternal actuality. One stroke of His power will set us down in our own place. May God bless the word.
{384}
THE DISPENSATIONS (1)
@Genesis 5: 1, 2; @Genesis 6: 9 - 22
J.T. I was thinking of something on dispensational lines, that we might get some understanding of them. We have an expression in 1 Timothy, "God's dispensation, which is in faith". We are in that, but there were others, and there will be another, and it is thought that we might get help, by the Scriptures, as to them. They are all said to come on us, "upon whom the ends of the ages are come" (@1 Corinthians 10: 11), and it is important to have the general thought of dispensations in our minds. The final one is in Ephesians, the dispensation of the fulness of times. I thought we might begin with Genesis and end in Ephesians.
The idea of dispensation in general refers to God operating in relation to His house, and the thought runs through from the beginning. The passage quoted from 1 Corinthians, "upon whom the ends of the ages are come" is clearly to be understood by us, for this one is the greatest of them; this is the day of the Spirit in relation to the assembly, which is God's house, and it is thought that we should become more conversant with it and know how to function in it, for that is the divine thought. It is proposed now that we should consider the antediluvian order of things and later the patriarchal, and then the mediatorial under Moses, and running down to the coming of the Lord and then our own dispensation, which is called the dispensation of God which is in faith, and then the "dispensation of the fulness of times" which is the millennium. The thought of dispensation is perhaps not so clear in @1 Corinthians 10 as in other scriptures, but it is there, especially in Noah who built something corresponding to the idea of a house. We have God's relations with man after sin came in, in order to
{385}
bring about His thoughts in spite of sin and its activities. God was in relation to Adam before sin came in according to covenant, but Adam transgressed the covenant and God resumed relations with man through redemption. There were certain relations involved in this first passage read, "This is the book of Adam's generations". Through redemption. God owns him, so that chapter 5 is full of the thought of what God was in relation to that world. Noah coming in after Enoch shows there was some idea of dispensation current but especially in Noah according to @Genesis 6 and @Genesis 9.
C.A.M. The house idea is a very large thought. Would you say that it is confirmed in that scripture, that "he who has built all things is God", @Hebrews 3: 4?
J.T. Yes, the thought is there. The universe is His house. How far we can touch that is a question, because angels must come into it, and all the worlds must come into it. All is now worked out or concentrated in our own dispensation in which the Spirit is directly operating. Jesus being made Lord and Christ in heaven. The Spirit is directly operating in us, not at a distance, but in the most direct and intimate way. God is operating now and Paul says in @1 Corinthians 10: 11, "Now all these things happened to them as types, and have been written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the ages are come". It is a present thing, and we are supposed to be intelligent as to them.
J.W.D. You mean that all that these antediluvian saints had we have in our own dispensation?
J.T. I think that is the way it stands; having the Spirit of God, John says, ye know all things. The anointing enables us to know all things, to go back and see how God intended them for us. Those who lived then came into them in some degree, but not in the sense that we come into them. Therefore
{386}
these chapters become very interesting for us, for we see how God began things with Adam's generations.
J.W.D. Is it your thought that these give us a record of certain features of blessing which, if we did not enter into them in the light in which they are presented in the Old Testament, we would not get in the New.
J.T. Well, quite so. God spread them out; He spread out His thoughts, awaiting redemption being fully accomplished, awaiting the economy that He has set up in Christ. The Holy Spirit is down here and it is a time of knowing all things. The antediluvian world was not such a time; even the prophets did not fully understand what they prophesied themselves, all pointing to the time of knowing all things, which is our dispensation. God had in mind a time, a dispensation, when all things would become known. What would God be revealing things for, if they were not to become known at some time or another? Paul expresses how much he knew of the mystery. All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in the mystery, and in this dispensation everything is distributed in the place it belongs spiritually.
C.A.M. Would this word 'generation' in @Genesis 5: 1, have significance in relation to the fulness of times?
J.T. It is a word by itself used about ten times in Genesis and two or three times elsewhere. There are two words for generation in Genesis, but this word refers to origin. It does not refer to Adam simply, but Adam's descendants; that is to say, one's forefathers do not end in the person spoken of. The idea of forefathers runs down to all the descendants, so that the book of Adam's generations would run down in its course to all that follows, and I suppose works out in the dispensation of the fulness of times, that is, in the millennium. It is remarkable
{387}
that we have the word 'book' here for the first time. It means that there is an account kept of the history of man as it runs down. There are many subdivisions, but it is all one great idea.
A.N.W. The dispensation seems to run along the histories of men as you were suggesting, but do "histories" in chapter 2 form a dispensation?
J.T. Well, they do. You cannot say that each of the ten generations in this book forms a dispensation. I think that the word would mean that you get a full account of any great thing you ought to know about. Even though persons may die (as recorded in @Genesis 5, all died except Enoch) the 'generation' is to run on; it is not to stop as individuals may die. The ends of the ages are come into our time; and that is what is meant, a way of following things up at any given time, what God is doing with it.
A.R. Is that why God says to Jacob, "I am Jehovah, the God of Abraham, thy father, and the God of Isaac"? The thing is carried forward. Then the Lord brings forward the thought of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in Luke.
J.T. Yes, Isaac has a generation, Abraham has not, Terah has, then Isaac, Ishmael, and in a negative sense Esau has, then Jacob has, so the great roots in Genesis run down. "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham", @Matthew 1: 1. Well, the thing is all interwoven so that faith follows it, and as having the Spirit a christian is anointed and knows all things.
H.B. Is that principle seen in Stephen's testimony in that he began with Abraham and goes down to David and Solomon, and so on?
J.T. Stephen was thoroughly versed in this idea of generations; he was a master in it, and he shows the importance of being instructed. Enoch comes in as a type of all this, a learner; he was the seventh
{388}
from Adam; he would understand the book of the generations of Adam, he would come into it indeed. Stephen fills it out in the New Testament; he was a master of that order of things, that order of instruction -- missing nothing from his predecessors. The word 'generation' means that you learn of what has been before you and look on to what is coming prophetically. Scripture does not leave us in the dark; it looks on to the end prophetically.
Ques. Is that the effect in connection with the two to whom the Lord spoke? They did not believe all that was written concerning Christ.
J.T. Yes, the Lord took up the thread. "And having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself", @Luke 24: 27.
W.L. The thoughts of God are not bounded by dispensation.
J.T. They all culminate by what we may call a refining process, as we go on, and all merges in an eternal state of things, which is not a dispensation, but finality. Finality is eternal, a spiritual state of things, and time has nothing to do with it. Dispensations are in time. It is the learning time when God is working things out for us. Enoch learns through discipline. God puts you into circumstances where things become subjective in you. It is a question of discipline because anything I have apart from discipline I am not an exponent of. Discipline makes it real to me. That is what God means by it. The antediluvian world was a period of old men. How much did they gain by their age?
J.W.D. Are we to look at these dispensations typically or as giving us light as to what God actually had in that period? Is it typical of us or are we given intelligence as to what God had for Himself in that very long period?
{389}
J.T. God was working out something that no doubt Noah and Enoch represent, what was pleasing to God in a man's experience. Enoch is not said to be a preacher like Noah, but in the New Testament he is said to have prophesied. He does not represent gift like Noah. Noah is qualified to carry things through. It would mean how the dispensations link together; they are not isolated. One enters into another and all is carried through. Noah represents that character. He is a man of great endurance and a man who can do things. He is said to be five hundred years old when his age is first given to us. He begot three sons and walked with God. He was "perfect amongst his generations". The generations there are different from the others we have been speaking of. God says, 'I have confidence in you, I will make a covenant with you'; therefore he becomes a carrier-through of what there was in the first world for God. It is carried through intact. The next dispensation would, of course, be set up in all that wealth. Does that link on with what you had in mind?
J.W.D. It seems to me these represented great features of what there was for God in that day. Sometimes we think there were only seven or eight godly persons in the antediluvian world. There may have been great numbers of others.
J.T. That is right. Chapter 5 gives names of persons, beginning with Adam and running down to Lemech and then Noah, all pointing to something for God. Enoch is the acme of it, he was a man who lived only about a third of the life of the others, but God takes him to Himself. God is always looking for something that is pleasing so that He can have something.
J.T.Jr. Would not Enoch in a way suggest the secret side before there can be the public side of service in Noah?
{390}
J.T. That is right. That is a good way to put it. It was not a long life like Methuselah or Noah, but a pleasing life to God, something for God.
N.W. What is the outstanding feature of these dispensations?
J.T. It will take us all these three days to tell that. The one we are at now is primary and basic and less pronounced than the others, but it is a root dispensation. It is a question of man, it is a book of the generations of Adam. It is a question of man, what is to be worked out in man, not angels. When you come to the New Testament we are told in @John 1: 4, "the life was the light of men". It is what God is working out in man, the purpose for which God created them.
M.O. Does the bow in the cloud indicate God's intention to continue to operate with man? The covenant embraces the whole earth and all flesh; God evidently has man before Him, the whole race, as such.
J.T. Yes, we are coming down to the ninth chapter to Noah, for God is showing that He is going on a long time, and He is entering into covenant, and sets His bow in the cloud to assure all generations afterward that He is not forsaking man. He is going through and carrying man with Him. It is a question of man.
C.N. In @Acts 26 the apostle says, "And now I stand to be judged because of the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers, to which our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night hope to arrive". Does that enter into what is before us?
J.T. Quite so. You can see how thoroughly Paul was in this matter extending back to Abraham. God is going through with the thing. The service was not abrogated -- the whole twelve tribes serving God incessantly day and night. God is operating all the
{391}
time. I think that helps. That is what you get in a man who represents all these things, that you might know "my knowledge in the mystery". There is one man anyway who knows these things.
A.R. Would faith take us back to Genesis to see how God made Adam and to overthrow the theory of evolution that has been brought forward in recent years?
J.T. It does indeed. It is remarkable how God helps in Genesis. The enemy knows what is there and he attacks it more than any other book.
A.A.T. The scripture says that "Noah was a just man, perfect amongst his generations". God says that Job was perfect and upright. I wonder how the thought of "just" comes in.
J.T. This is not his own account. God says Job was perfect; outwardly so far as his testimony went Job was perfect, but this is intrinsic. God says in verse 8, "But Noah found favour in the eyes of Jehovah"; then "this is the history of Noah". The word 'history' is the same as 'generations' in chapter 5, "Noah was a just man, perfect amongst his generations: Noah walked with God". He is honoured in the use of this word 'generations', as extending backwards and forwards, but he was also a man of righteousness among his own circle of acquaintances. In his circle of acquaintances he would be known to be a righteous man. If any of us is to have part in this matter, there must be this idea of present righteousness, a local testimony to righteousness.
Ques. Would that have some bearing on those washing their robes in @Revelation 22: 14?
J.T. Just so. "Blessed are they that wash their robes". It is characteristic of such persons; not simply something to be done. You could always point to Noah as a man who was perfect. Noah could challenge any one of his neighbours that he
{392}
was a righteous man so that it is said he moved with fear. He was a godly man, as well as righteous. God had told him of things to come and he was moved with fear and prepared an ark for the saving of his house; he was concerned about saving his house.
Rem. Both Enoch and Noah are spoken of as walking with God.
J.T. Walking with God means that God had something here; persons with whom He has a link. The allusion is to @Genesis 3 where God walked in the garden, and there was no one to walk with Him, because Adam had failed Him, but Enoch walked with Him here. The thing is continued in moral lines in Noah. God takes it up right through, "Walk before me, and be thou perfect".
J.W.D. As to righteousness Hebrews says "Heir of the righteousness which is according to faith". How do you look at practical righteousness, and righteousness that stands in relation to faith in regard to Noah?
J.T. The heir of righteousness would mean that he was a practically righteous man, but it became an inheritance. It takes the character of righteousness by faith when you come to Abraham; it is in him that you have the idea. It is righteousness that God attributes to you on the principle of faith. It is what God has effected in Christ. That is not simply what he worked out in his daily life, it is what he would get later.
C.H.H. Is that carried down from Abraham who is practically righteous?
J.T. Quite so. There were three great righteous men on that line -- Abel, Noah, and Abraham, but Abraham gets righteousness by faith.
J.W. It says of Noah he was "a preacher of righteousness", @2 Peter 2: 5.
{393}
J.T. Quite so. That is very important. How can a man be a preacher of righteousness, if he is not practically righteous?
W.R. It seems that very little except Noah would be pleasing in this dispensation.
J.T. Well, that is so, and God made him His confidant, and spoke about him personally, limiting the position to himself. "Jehovah said to Noah, Go into the ark, thou and all thy house; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation". He is the one God is linking on with.
A.N.W. It says, of Noah that he "became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith".
J.T. That is, be became heir of what we have. Righteousness according to faith belongs properly to this dispensation. It was reckoned to Abraham and he is brought into this dispensation as the father of all believers. In the sense of heirship you come into righteousness by faith, whereas a righteous walk is a practical thing at all times. What is by faith came in later.
A.L. You spoke of Noah going backward and also forward. Would you say something of going backward?
J.T. You go back to your fountain-head. You must begin with Adam, but then he is the figure of Him who is to come. It is all taken up in Christ. Christ is the fountain-head now; He is the last Adam. The first Adam is no more. He is only like you or me as a person. Christ is before God now. We must not forget what God began with.
A.R. Is that the idea in Hebrews of the heir? We might think God was going to wipe off all record from the earth prior to Noah but it has been carried forward in him and transferred to his family.
J.T. If there were any books there, Noah would have them. This is the only book mentioned, but the records remained. John makes a great point of
{394}
writing. "I write to you" and "I have written to you". Things are carried down. If you are a diligent christian, you have all the books and make much of them. Noah was a perfect man in his circle and was a practically righteous man in his generations. No one has any right or title to put himself forward in ministry unless he is practically righteous, but then you come into an inheritance through faith which God has worked out, which is a greater thought. @Genesis 6 shows us the contrast to Noah, and what a terrible world it was at that time.
S.J.H. Noah building an altar and offering all these clean beasts, would be the carrying over of what has gone before into the new dispensation?
J.T. That is good; that is the idea. The Spirit of God would help you to follow down this man. Look what he has brought in. God told him to take the clean beasts by sevens, a male and its female; and two of the unclean. He did not tell him to offer the clean animals, but he did offer them. He is a learner by observation. That is what is brought into the new world.
A.Ph. In the beginning of Matthew Joseph is said to be a righteous man. All righteous men get special commendation from Jehovah.
J.T. Matthew takes up the line of righteousness. The Lord speaks of a person who receives something in the name of a righteous man. If you are a righteous man, you have a name. The passage in @Matthew 10 takes this up and shows its value. Joseph was a righteous man characteristically. Even one righteous man according to @Matthew 10 is important; the Lord says, "the name of a righteous man".
J.W.D. This righteousness must stand related to some faith position, even more than Noah in the antediluvian world. Do you think when "people began to call on the name of Jehovah" there was some governing light to give Noah understanding?
{395}
J.T. Yes, quite so, that is the thing that we should look into. That period is said to have lasted about 1650 years, some would make it about 2300 years, but it is a long dispensation anyway. It is a dispensation of old men who lived a long time. God must have seen some value in it. If He only gets one out of ten, it is worth while letting the ten live a long time. We are told that Seth enters into these generations; Cain is left out. Seth called his son's name Enosh. If you were to ask, Why do you give your son that name? no one ever had that name before, he would tell you, I see that how ever long a man may live, be will die. Enosh means that he is weak or mortal. If you are an exercised man you get help. He would learn that though he thought his children were going to live a long time, he had to realise that this boy is going to die. So it says, "people began to call on the name of Jehovah". We do not know who they were, but it illustrates what this world was before the flood. God had something in it. There were people who called on the name of the Lord.
C.N. Would it be right to say that there is development in God's ways seen in Noah following Adam? These dispensations coming one after another instruct us in God's mind.
J.T. Quite so. It is development in His ways with man as created, not development as evolutionists suppose. Enoch signifies development morally because he is the seventh from Adam. He has gathered up from those preceding him. Noah has the same principle so that he is carrying things on. As we come down to the other dispensations we will see that there is development in us; there is none in Christ. John says, "That which was from the beginning", there is no development in that; then "Him that is from the beginning".
{396}
A.R. How would you work out your thought in connection with the dispensation following? We ought to be carrying forward everything in church history.
J.T. Yes, the city is coming down from God out of heaven in perfection. Everything will be learned in that coming dispensation. The assembly is the great dominating feature.
N.W. At the end of chapter 7 it says, "And Noah alone remained". Is that a principle, that at the end of each dispensation there is a reduction and a refinement?
J.T. It would mean that the quality was there before the old world was destroyed, and Noah represents what is of God and that is going through. As the flood is dried up, he is the same man. He has not lost any ground, in fact he has gained; he has come to know God better through it.
J.W. There seems to be very little for God in this period.
J.T. It looks that way, but there must have been something in the way of result from the dispensation. The fifth chapter gives you a list of names each of which has remarkable meaning. It is the fruit of God's dispensations, the way God is operating in a dispensational way. He did not leave Eve alone, or Seth alone. God was working with them, there was fruit born. Seth is the best example of fruit, because others began to call on the name of the Lord because of what he said. Others began to move in that. There must have been something there at that time.
A.N.W. Enosh lived over nine hundred years, and Cainan his son also, and he begat Mahalaleel. There must have been something in the way of testimony in him.
J.T. His name, Mahalaleel, meaning the praise of God, would suggest that faith apprehended that
{397}
there was a system of glory, revealing the splendour of God. Well, there must have been something there that indicated how God was shining in that time. It was not in his own light that Enosh shone, there was something in him that indicated a knowledge of God. Seth would know that his son was a dying man. Even though we live a long time, it is not eternal life.
J.W.D. It says that, "ye have come ... to the spirits of just men made perfect".
J.T. Those are the men that come into the dispensation we are dealing with. They are all awaiting the coming of Christ.
C.H.H. We are in the dispensation in which all culminates prior to the display of glory in the millennium.
J.T. That is the point. They come on us; that is the point the apostle makes. We should be equal to the burden of carrying them through, they are not fallen to the ground. All coming upon us would mean that the splendour of God is to shine out in christianity.
Ques. The results of God's operating are seen here in both Enoch and Noah. Does the Lord refer to that in His word, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work", @John 5: 17?
J.T. I was thinking of that in the beginning of this reading. The Lord says, "My Father worketh". He was working out a great scheme of glory and blessing all awaiting redemption. The Lord Jesus preached, and the Spirit of Christ was operating in Noah as he preached to the end of his dispensation.
A.R. Is the idea of carrying forward everything seen in the word to Noah, "And of every living thing of all flesh"? He was also to take "of all food that is eaten"; all looked forward to this other world.
{398}
J.T. If we look into the facts about Noah, we are impressed with that, that everything was brought through. What energy must have been needed in the work that was put upon him. Now the point for us is what energy are we showing? Are we taking things on and working things out in our own localities? Is each one bearing a burden?
S.L. Is it seen in @John 14, "The works which I do shall he do also, and he shall do greater than these"?
J.T. That is good. Greater works; and Noah is an example of a man who can do things and do them well. He is dealing with full grown men and women and cattle -- all developed. He is a man able to influence all things, so that the cattle came to him. What an influential man he must have been. God made him that.
C.H.H. God blesses his generation.
J.T. It is the greatness of the man that is in view. Noah was one man that God was pleased with, and God carried him through, and Noah carried through in testimony what God had committed to him.
A.A.T. There were no results from his preaching.
J.T. As far as we know there were none. That was not a defect in the preaching because really the preaching was Christ. It shows the terrible conditions, how bad they were. They are unconvertible. God could do nothing because of their unbelief. Even in the Lord's time. He could do nothing in certain places because of their unbelief.
T.H. Would you mind helping us in view of local conditions. How do we learn things in our local meetings?
J.T. You learn intuitively. You begin to feel things in the presence of God. It does not say that God was inside the ark. It says, God shut him in, but we believe that all inside the ark were devoted to what was of God. Noah did not produce his food,
{399}
or his cattle, or his family; it all came from God. Noah must have been learning all these months while he was in the ark. They must have learned God in the ark. They would go around and look at these animals and know the names that Adam had given them. Each denoted some divine principle. It was the learning time.
A.C. Lemech, the father of Noah, looks for reward, for comfort "concerning our work and concerning the toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah has cursed".
J.T. That is good. His name means violence, and in this line it would mean violence spiritually. He would not let his children go to the theatre; he would be violent about it. Cain was a violent man, but in a physical sense, there was no moral element in that. The Lord says "the violent take it by force", @Matthew 11: 12. Lemech knew what to call Noah. He calls his name Noah and tells us why he did it: "This one shall comfort us". That shows Lemech was an intelligent man. He died before the flood; God took him. It is really like the gospel of Matthew. Matthew tells us that the Lord says, "Behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age" (chapter 28: 20). That means He is watching what you are doing. You work in the light of these principles, and you know what to do. He does not tell us how to do it; but that is how things work out in the assembly; you have general principles, and in our public readings of the Scriptures we learn what to do. We learn, because we have a Model, the Scriptures, the principles, and the books, so that we should know what to do in a crisis or at all times.
A.L. Do we see the intensification of spiritual life in the reduction of age to three score years and ten?
J.T. Persons now are to learn to do things well in a short life, and then the Lord takes them away
{400}
and another comes along. It is a time of short life. The Lord Himself speaks prophetically, "Take me not away in the midst of my days!" @Psalm 102: 24. John the baptist, even Paul and Peter, did not live to be very old, but see what was done in their lives. God says, 'Do your best in your life'.
J.T.Jr. Chapter 5 closes with the names of Noah's three sons, and in chapter 6, verse 10, the Spirit of God says, "And Noah begot three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth". Would it not suggest the new order of things that God had in mind?
J.T. Just so. They are to go through; they are to be blessed. You get their generations too. That is the idea, they are to carry the thing down.
S.J.H. What is the suggestion in the number eight, eight souls?
J.T. I think it is because there is something carried over. *One* suggests a new beginning, but eight is the carrying over of what was in the preceding seven. The dispensations are cumulative. Noah represents the principle of carrying over what is in one dispensation, to another. Now we are to carry something over into eternity which is the greatest thing of all. Everything merges in what is spiritual.
T.H. In view of localities where the old brothers are not able to teach the young, how is the new personnel going to be instructed? Maybe some of us did not take things on early enough.
J.T. That brings out a good deal. Eldership involves that we impart to the younger. An elder who teaches is to be held in double honour. An older brother should be a teaching brother if he can be. The idea is that he is a model in order and behaviour and can instruct people. Noah was a preacher. We do not know much about the three sons. The greatest is Shem; his name means a person of renown spiritually, not like Nimrod who was a mighty hunter
{401}
before the Lord. We get Shem's generation twice. Shem means 'name, or renown'.
A.R. Noah would have first-hand information as to why Adam named certain creatures. He would tell his sons so they would carry it forward.
J.T. We are not told in the first world what the clean creatures were. Noah is supposed to know them. That is another evidence that there was knowledge; he knew the clean from the unclean.
A.A.T. We are dependent on the teaching of the old brothers.
J.T. Well, we are. We are to learn from the old brothers. Enoch means that he is a model; he learned from his predecessors. He was the seventh from Adam. Even Paul refers to his fathers. We learn from those who precede us, whether our direct fathers or those living in our time. "I write to you, fathers". The fathers are distinguished more than any others in John's epistle. They will instruct you in spiritual things. Timothy is called as a younger man, for Paul tells him, "Let no one despise thy youth". He also says, "The things thou hast heard of me in the presence of many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men", @2 Timothy 2: 2. There was a paternal relationship, for Paul called Timothy "my child".
T.S. Paul also says to the Thessalonians, "Ye know how, as a father his own children, we used to exhort each one of you, and comfort and testify, that ye should walk worthy of God".
J.T. Quite so.
A.Ph. David gets divine instruction as to building the house, and he communicated that to Solomon.
J.T. Quite so, that is another good point; father and son again. David says that Solomon is young and tender and therefore he was concerned that he should get everything rightly. David got the pattern
{402}
of the house by the Spirit, but he passed it on to Solomon.
Rem. With regard to the young men you have already referred to, it says, "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. Love not the world, nor the things in the world. If any one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him".
J.T. That is right. Be sure you get the right father. There are fathers and fathers. The fathers in christendom, well, you cannot be sure of what they say. I mean the official fathers who have their place in the ecclesiastical writings. Paul says there may be many instructors, but not many fathers. He had begotten the Corinthians. The Spirit would direct our view to him.
C.H.H. The first seven chapters of Proverbs continually speak of "my son".
J.T. That is by a man who said, "I was a son unto my father", @Proverbs 4: 3. He carried the thing down.
W.L. I was wondering about the thought of command in regard to Noah. Paul speaks of the Lord's commandment.
J.T. That is a point of great importance with Noah, that "so did he". Everything is carried through. There is not a single discrepancy in what he did.
J.W. The ark is a type of the assembly in which things are carried forward.
J.T. That is what I thought we might see, that the assembly is the great thought of God running through all the dispensations. It is remarkable how in these early dispensations Christ and the assembly should be typified, until you have the actual coming of Christ and the assembly formed. Everything is there in the sense of wisdom, knowledge, affection,
{403}
family feeling; all is there. That is where salvation lies, so that the great expanded thought is the assembly as it is here today, and believers are coming into salvation today in the circle in which God is operating.
J.W.D. God says about Himself, "My Spirit" and then we are told, that "it grieved him in his heart". He must have presented certain distinguished personal features of Himself that were understood in that day.
J.T. It is wonderful, I think, in that connection to see how the end of a dispensation brings out God. You have God personally in the most touching manner in this section, Noah's section. How He felt things! Think of the Spirit of God saying that it grieved Him in His heart and that He was sorry He made man. God speaks to us in a way that we as His creatures will understand. We are made after Him; we are His offspring and we ought to be able to judge what He is in some sense. If you are sorry, well, God can be sorry, and He has a means of meeting what causes it. That is the point to learn in this section. Think of the apostle Paul speaking about the foolishness of God. Who understands that? That is Scripture. What a wondrous and blessed Being God is, and He comes near to us so as to make us know this. He gives us to understand -- that He is sympathetic with us in what we are going through. In Noah's day everything he had under his care was either a man or woman, beasts or birds, or creeping things, all were mature beings. Noah is able to manage all that. The Spirit of God would direct us to the second Man, the Head of every man; so our minds are directed to Christ.
J.T.Jr. Peter speaks about Noah quite a bit. One section alludes to putting away of the filth of the flesh, and then he leads us to the right hand of God where Christ is.
{404}
J.T. So that everything is under Christ. Peter stresses that. He makes something of Lot; he calls him a righteous man. How God accredits people beyond what we might.
J.W. If there were no children in the ark why is the scripture in Peter used so frequently in connection with baptism in relation to the salvation of households? It refers to making an ark for the saving of his house.
J.T. Yes, that is right; Noah saved his house. They were all grown-ups, but they are referred to as his house. Paul is the great household baptist man. He baptised households, and makes a point of it. Paul speaks of our little ones; your children are holy, he says, because they belong to christian parents. That is a wonderful point because it gives us a basis of operations. God says they are holy, not substantially holy like Jesus was when He was born. They are provisionally holy and this knowledge of God's mind as to them gives us a basis on which to act, so that our consciences might be governed in what we are doing. God has in mind that they are to be holy and they can only be holy through the death of Christ.
J.W. At household baptisms that scripture in Peter is frequently quoted.
J.T. The household principle is quite right but what people are baffled about is little children. Why should they be baptised? We are entitled to view them in the light of what Paul says, that little ones are holy (@1 Corinthians 7: 14).
J.W.D. When we baptise our children, it is not exactly with the childhood state in mind; it is what they are to be as full-grown persons in the testimony that is in mind.
J.T. The assembly is in mind. The assembly is not formed of children; the assembly is formed of grown-up persons, who have the Spirit of God.
{405}
T.H. The children are constantly alluded to in the expression, "you and your little ones".
J.T. Very good. It is often alluded to. The little ones went over the brook (@2 Samuel 15: 22).
{406}
THE DISPENSATIONS (2)
@Genesis 8: 20 - 22; @Genesis 9: 1 - 17; @Genesis 12: 1 - 3; @Genesis 49: 1, 2, 28
J.T. The idea of dispensations in Genesis from chapter 8 onwards takes two features; the first is in relation to Noah himself and his sons, and the second is in relation to Abraham to bring out the call of God and the patriarchal idea, that is, the development of family, a family of faith, in principle the family of God. I thought it well to begin with sacrifice as having a bearing on personality such as God implies first in Noah. He built an altar, we are told, to Jehovah, "and took of every clean animal, and of all clean fowl, and offered up burnt-offerings on the altar. And Jehovah smelled the sweet odour". The link with Noah's name is maintained here in the 'odour of rest'. His father had said, in giving him his name, "This one shall comfort us concerning our work and concerning the toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah has cursed". So that in this interval we see the personality that God can employ in the great matter of what is to be carried through in the dispensations, and really, it is the basis of the new order of things, the new dispensation. God does not identify Himself with it publicly, but refers to it in His heart. "And Jehovah said in his heart, I will no more henceforth curse the ground on account of Man, for the thought of Man's heart is evil from his youth; and I will no more smite every living thing, as I have done. Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". That is what He said in His heart without committing Himself publicly. It is recorded hundreds of years later, but it does not say that He said this at the time, but it is what He said in His heart, so that public conditions
{407}
would be affected, without committing Himself to it publicly. There is much that goes on. While the earth remains, God orders things secretly without committing Himself publicly. But then He takes up Noah and his sons in the next chapter formally. God blessed Noah and his sons. Now in him we see the personality that God can identify Himself with publicly and a covenant is made with him, which is universal in its bearing. It is a question of man still, because of what God had already said in His heart. The word in chapter 8: 21, is, "on account of Man". It is a question of man and God's dealings with him, not angels, but man and cattle. So that God takes up Noah and his family and blesses them and enters into covenant with them, a covenant that extends right down in accordance with what He said in His heart. All nations and persons are affected by this covenant, and it runs right down. The second great feature is God calling a man out, dealing especially with his family and blessing him, making him a blessing on family lines; so the passage in chapter 49 was read to show how the idea of blessing on family lines and patriarchal lines runs down. And it merges in the assembly, merges in the kingdom of Israel, the house which Jacob had the light of, and develops into christianity.
W.R. Would you say there is a great need of purity of motive as entering into the service of God as seen in Noah's offering?
J.T. Well, quite so. God took account of it secretly. He made no proclamation about it, but said something in His heart. This would have a bearing on secret thoughts, His own feelings, as we have had already. He had man in His mind and would follow him up. Even the weather would be affected by what He had said in His heart, summer and winter, seed-time and harvest. All this is a secret matter with God, but history shows that it holds
{408}
good. No country, no subdivision of the earth is a greater testimony to it than this one in which we are.
C.A.M. Is it your thought that Noah's name and the smell of the fragrance of the sacrifice show that personality in this man really was to be connected with Christ and the fragrance from His death? Is that the way to look at it?
J.T. That is right. It is what was going on in God's heart. It will come out fully later, but what came out publicly would give a clear indication that God had great things in His heart. It will come out presently. Think of God speaking in His heart!
J.T.Jr. He calls attention to the character of man's heart being unchanged, but He is not hindered in His great thoughts in spite of that.
J.T. Just so. He could hardly commit Himself publicly to man, viewed just as man, because of the state of his heart. You cannot expect God to compromise Himself, commit Himself to man as he is described here; it is not Noah but man. God cannot commit Himself publicly to that, but He is letting things go on, certain things are happening that will be beneficial to man, but there is one man and three sons that God can commit Himself to. God is making His own selection. He is not forced to do it. Noah is really worthy of it, for he is ministering to God already.
C.H.H. Would the Lord's own ministry bring that to light? He would not commit Himself to man (@John 2: 24, 25).
J.T. Well, that is the principle, I think. Although Nicodemus did not do so well, still the thing was there and it was pleasing to God. The man Noah did not do so well afterward or his sons either, but so far he had done well, and Nicodemus had done well, coming at night to speak to the Lord.
A.R. Is there any significance in the fact that Noah is the first man to go into the ark and the first
{409}
man to come out of it? He comes out, and then his sons, his wife, and his sons wives, and then the animals, as if they are all moving under him.
J.T. I think that is the thought. There is so much being made of him, and he is maintaining his worthiness. He was never more precious to God than when he offered these animals. Jehovah smelled the sweet odour which is said to be an 'odour of rest', just what Lemech had said about him.
J.W.D. There seems to be a link with creation in this thought in @Matthew 5, "that ye may be the sons of your Father who is in the heavens; for he makes his sun rise on evil and good, and sends rain on just and unjust", as if favourable conditions in the creation link on with personality in the saints corresponding morally.
J.T. Well, it would develop into that. Now we get magisterial matters brought into this ninth chapter. The Lord Jesus is taking up legislative matters in Matthew, but it is really to bring out the Father's attitude, the Father that is in heaven. He treats the evil and good in this way. It is very much like the secret of His heart, but then God is not leaving it like that. It is legislation here for Noah and his sons, and in regard of cattle, and in regard to one another, too, in a physical way. He is not leaving it like that. We are going to have more than that in the way of legislation in magisterial government. But in truth. He has appointed a Man to act in magisterial government. It is all to culminate in Christ because God's kingdom and the day "in which he is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed" enters into the dispensational period. It is not a question of the eternal state but judging all things down here. All this comes into this dispensation in Genesis, although it is not an open thing that God commits Himself to
{410}
formally. The matter of the rainbow and covenant, the seasons, and the fruit of the earth are in some sort open, and God has committed Himself to it in a way, but He is not committing Himself to a state of things in which man's heart is evil continually. God could not compromise Himself like that.
A.N.W. Has the bow a bearing in the way of testimony to men generally?
J.T. Well, as far as they pay attention to it. It is in our hands to tell them what it means, and so the Lord Jesus, as the mighty angel in @Revelation 10, comes out with the rainbow upon His head and puts His right foot on the sea and His left foot on the earth, which shows that God is dealing with that. It is still in His mind and He is coming to deal with things in that way.
J.T.Jr. Would this be the beginning of government? Does God inaugurate the idea of government in what He says to Noah as to how men are to live in relation to one another?
J.T. Well, we are thankful for it. We are here today unmolested; we are thankful for legislation, thankful for the mayor of the city, police, jail, armies and navies, and all on those lines if they are in any way righteous. God is not saying, 'I am the God of all this', but He is saying in His heart that everything of that kind shall be protective and helpful to His people and to men as such. He is the preserver of all men and He is merciful, even in heathen countries giving some sort of government.
A.C. These three men -- Noah, Abraham, and Jacob, would be intelligent as to what God had given them.
J.T. Well, they would. You see how Noah is linked on later with persons -- 'Noah, Daniel, and Job'. God has a personnel in mind that He can use. So that right down through the ages, in the dispensations as I may call them. God always has someone
{411}
that He can link on with, even if it be a Nebuchadnezzar or a Cyrus. It is seen in the development of the dispensation of the four monarchies, for He makes them what they should be. He made Nebuchadnezzar what he should be. They are not ordinary men that God has to take, but God makes them what they should be. So today God has men that He can use in this governmental period.
A.C. Would you say there is increase as the thing goes on? Jacob is an old man of one hundred and forty-seven years, and he serves intelligently. He is ahead of Joseph.
J.T. Quite so. He says, "I know, my son". He is greater than Joseph. The point is now to see the line of blessing in that family. But first let us see something of this great universal idea that God spoke of in His heart. Every man, woman, and child on the earth, even the lowest in the human race, are all benefiting from this secret thing, all ordained while the earth remains. "Seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". We are all witnesses to it, every man, woman, and child on the earth.
C.H.H. Is that seen in the image of @Daniel 2? The gold, the silver and the copper remain to the end -- the complete image goes on.
J.T. The quality is there, what God can commit Himself to. The gold and silver stand. It comes right down. The gold and silver are seen but little, yet there is something that God can link on with even if it is not public. We who know God's heart understand what He would say in His heart. He will do good at all times. The mayor of the city, the governor, the president, are appointed to us for good and we have to regard them for conscience sake.
J.W.D. How do you view great famines as in the Acts and other places?
{412}
J.T. That is another matter. God has a right to act in discipline. We have to make allowance for the 'odour of rest'. Paul says we are a sweet odour to God; that was found particularly in the apostle. Yet there were famines; but famines were greatly modified, and wars in apostolic times were not very prevalent. God orders things; He can change His mind about things. So that it behoves us to render the sweet odour and save the position.
A.R. Does the last verse of chapter 8 suggest an ordered state of affairs, set up in Christ in glory?
J.T. Well, we understand it now, but an unconverted person would not understand it. God is not committing Himself to it here. This was written hundreds of years afterwards, but it was in God's heart, and you may be sure the gospel went on. Still, there were famines in the days of Noah, Abraham, and Isaac, and right down through the New Testament times there were famines. But then you cannot rob God of His sovereign right to change His mind and His ways at any time.
Ques. What do you understand to be the idea of God making a covenant with Noah?
J.T. That is another thing. The end of chapter 8 does not say anything about covenant. It is what God said in His heart. It is only those who know His heart that can understand. Why is He so good? It says in @Matthew 5, "that ye may be the sons of your Father who is in the heavens; for he makes his sun rise on evil and good, and sends rain on just and unjust". It is because of what is in His heart that He does good. Sometimes if we force Him to be judicial in His government the nations might change that too. So that where there is any light at all, however little it is, God takes account of it.
W.R. Does not the attitude of God's heart continue the same? The word here is that these conditions "shall not cease".
{413}
J.T. It does, but He does not commit Himself *publicly*; it is what He said secretly in His heart. The proof of it is that the farmers got a good crop in those days, but God made no covenant on that point. He has made a covenant with Noah and his sons and that stands in the bow in the cloud.
C.H.H. An intelligent person would understand about famine, would he not?
J.T. It is an instrument that God has. You cannot rob Him of His rights in dealing with man. There was a famine in the days of David, the beloved of the Lord, and it went on three years. This famine was because of Saul and his house of blood, and David inquired of Jehovah and then the remedy came.
A.L. Would you see the covenant carried out in the regulating of the rain on the earth?
J.T. He does not send a flood, because He is God, but He sends rain. Rivers in themselves are beneficial; they carry such fructifying power with them. The rain indicates the blessing of God. God has a reservoir of waters above -- another heaven made in the reconstruction recorded in @Genesis 1, and in it there are waters, as though God has a reservoir of waters there for men -- a wonderful thought really. He sends rain because of that. It does not speak thus when "the fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened". That is judgment. But His rain is for blessing.
C.H.H. Is it a spiritual thought -- the waters are above the expanse?
J.T. Well, it is. The actual physical thought is very remarkable too. There are waters above as well as below. They act and react upon one another. It seems to be a provision God made in the reconstruction of the earth in @Genesis 1. It is a
{414}
physical condition, and is really what separates and holds up the waters above. It is not the heavens where He lives; it is really an atmospheric condition.
J.W.D. In Ecclesiastes, where you get the words of the preacher or of a former of assemblies, you get intelligence in these things.
J.T. It is important to bring that in because the book of Ecclesiastes is intended that we might understand the things under the sun. "All the rivers run into the sea".
A.N.W. Speaking about the famine in early Acts, was it to bring about correspondence of feelings in the saints?
J.T. It brought out what christianity really is; what is in God's heart and what is in our hearts. Christianity is in God's heart. What is in our hearts? If christianity is in our hearts, God will bring it out and may even cause a famine to bring it out.
C.A.M. Do you think this matter of the sweet odour is carried on at the present time as suggested in the verse, "Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children, and walk in love, even as the Christ loved us, and delivered himself up for us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour".
J.T. That is Ephesians. That is the full thought of God seen in christianity. It is a great thought that God should bring that out as a means of helping us, to bring out what corresponds in us.
N.W. Did you have something further in mind as to the magisterial idea in the gentile monarchies?
J.T. Well, that would be the enlargement of what is seen in Noah. It is the thing among men as such, but God is speaking to us of a man that He can trust. God must have some trustworthiness in man for government. God is dealing with conditions in
{415}
relation to a man. "And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said to them, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth. And let the fear of you and the dread of you be upon every animal of the earth, and upon all fowl of the heavens: upon all that moveth on the ground; and upon all the fishes of the sea: into your hand are they delivered. Every moving thing that liveth shall be food for you". Now this verse really confirms what you get in @Genesis 1 about Adam and his wife, but there is an addition in verse 3. "And upon all the fishes of the sea: into your hand are they delivered. Every moving thing that liveth shall be food for you: as the green herb I give you everything". Now that is in addition to what was said to Adam and Eve; they were given dominion over the fishes of the sea, but they were not allowed to use them for food. It was all vegetarian but now we have meat given to man, and added to that we have the restriction -- "only, the flesh with its life, its blood, ye shall not eat. And indeed your blood, the blood of your lives, will I require: at the hand of every animal will I require it, and at the hand of Man, at the hand of each the blood of his brother, will I require the life of Man. Whoso sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God he hath made Man". Well, now all this is most instructive as to every-day life. We are allowed to kill a cow, or a lamb, bullock, sheep, goat, and use it for food, but we must not use the blood; and that is carried right into christianity according to @Acts 15, showing how links are maintained in christianity, even reaching to us "upon whom the ends of the ages are come". This is still in force; and then we cannot kill a man. Some say we should not have capital punishment, but that is not according to the scripture, but is a violation of christianity. "Whoso sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed". God has taken care of this.
{416}
W.R. Would you say that there is much expected of us as believers over against the unbelieving element? The believing element would be in life.
J.T. Well, when we come to christianity we have great modification, but here we are dealing with the human race. Notice how many times it says "at the hand of Man". In verses 5 and 6 it is "at the hand of Man" -- Man in the full sense. "Whoso sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God he hath made Man". God is dealing with that order of being, but we christians save life. The President, Governor, and magistrates have power to take life. We could not live here and carry on preaching and teaching if it were not for this.
W.L. Would you say all this was contingent upon Noah's offering?
J.T. I think so. It is a question of persons, and there is some trustworthiness about him.
W.L. The intelligence expressed in the way he offered, meant that further intelligence governmentally could be given to him.
J.T. That is so. It is a great thing to get into the abstract idea. These men that are in authority, though they be not converted, have to be thought of as having something that God has preserved in them. Certainly in Nebuchadnezzar there was; and in a man like Abimelech in this very book there was. We do not know if he was converted, but God could speak of the integrity of his heart. God is good, operating here among men and does great things for a purpose, for a locality.
A.N.W. It is remarkable how this thing is interwoven in civil law, but here we are given the high level of authority. "In the image of God he hath made man".
C.A.M. Do you think in that way these men we respect as having power, have some feature about
{417}
them warranting it; they confess God, something of the image is in them until they become beasts.
J.T. That is just it. Man's heart is given to him. Nebuchadnezzar was a beast but he became like a man. God did that for that purpose, that He would establish the four monarchies with someone that He could trust.
W.L. Do you think that is why it is the present time at the end of verse 6, "In the image of God he hath made Man"? The thought continues.
J.T. Just so.
H.B. Is it all provisional until the Lord comes publicly? It says, "the government shall be upon his shoulder", @Isaiah 9: 6.
J.T. Christ will carry out the whole government of the universe in relation to the earth. It is a question of the earth now that we are dealing with. God is just carrying on, but He is not forced to accept anybody. He is God; He can do anything. God can influence men for a position. So we are encouraged to pray for God to do provisional things so that we might get through.
C.DeB. Is that why in 1 Timothy we are exhorted to pray for all men and those who are in authority?
J.T. Just so. All men first, and then those in dignity "that we may lead a quiet and tranquil life". The bearing of it is on the saints. God would not be carrying this on if He did not have something in His heart to work out as to the saints.
C.H.H. Can you make a distinction between these powers as to your prayers? Would you consider any powers as being out of hand?
J.T. Certainly, if they become beasts. The word 'beast' in @Revelation 13 is really the word 'creature', but a beast is not simply a creature in that sense, but like leviathan in @Job 41. God says, "he is king over all the proud beasts". That is a different matter.
{418}
If anybody like him is in power, then your mind is changed about him. He becomes beastly -- has no conscience. There must be something trustworthy if he is to bear the government.
A.N.W. The Lord was justified as speaking of Herod as a fox.
J.T. Just so. He did not say that of Pilate, although you might say he was just as bad, but not for the moment. Left to himself he would not have put the Lord to death. He was called the governor in Matthew, because he represented that principle. He had a wife who was evidently converted. She was there to influence him too. God put her there. What can God not do?
J.W.D. It says, We are to pray for kings. Would you not pray in the positive sense of this chapter? You may pray for the removal of a beast and that a government be set up that is of God.
J.T. Quite so. It is said that God can change the heart of a king.
C.H.H. Is that why Elisha said he would not look at Jehoram, the son of Ahab (@2 Kings 3: 14)?
J.T. Quite so. He would not look at him but at Jehoshaphat, for there was something good in him. God put him there for a purpose, and even Ahab, at one time. We may need an Ahab.
T.S. Is Paul making that distinction when he said he was delivered out of the lion's mouth? Paul has told us so much as to the matter of authority. "I was delivered out of the lion's mouth", @2 Timothy 4: 17. He is changing his point of view.
J.T. Quite so, like Daniel, who was delivered out of the lion's mouth. Paul had to do with one who was like the second beast in Job, that creature leviathan; Daniel was delivered out of the lion's mouth, and so was Paul. We are encouraged to pray and keep on praying. God can change a man's heart and yet be may not be converted. Take Paul
{419}
on the boat. It says the centurion saved them all because of Paul. Paul knew that man's mind.
W.L. I was wondering if we could look for moral qualities in these men.
J.T. We can pray for them, and God may change them. If He does not convert them. He may change their minds for the time being.
W.R. Paul says in @Romans 13, "For rulers are not a terror to a good work, but to an evil one".
J.T. That is abstract. Abstractly God has got them there for that purpose, and they may be changed like Pilate. They may all be modified, but the abstract idea stands.
Ques. Would all these things understood in the hearts of God's people confirm us that God is faithful?
J.T. That is right. It will come out when the Lord comes out to govern. We are not asserting it. In the gospel preaching we are on a higher level, but when the Lord comes out He has the power of government with Him. It is most comforting. He puts His right foot on the sea and the left foot on the land. There is God's direct government. We are now dealing with God's indirect government which is really in this chapter. The bow in the cloud represents that. God's direct government in His house is another thing. There is such a thing as gift of government.
G.A.T. Would you say that this "Be fruitful and multiply, and fill" indicates great resources?
J.T. Well, God intended that. According to @Genesis 1 He put Adam and Eve over the lower creatures and they were themselves to multiply, and it is continued in this chapter; it means that God is to have plenty of people. He is going to make great selections, selections for His own purposes. The gospel going out too. He makes selections for this. The gospel is going to be sent out, and He is going
{420}
to have myriads of men. The population has never been so great; there are probably two thousand million people on the earth. That is not too many for God. He is going to make a great selection of converts presently; no man can number them. It is God's way of doing things.
C.A.M. Referring to the direct and indirect government of God, it is government such as "the powers that be" that culminates in the chief executives in a country, that represents the indirect government of God. The assembly is the place of the direct government of God.
J.T. That is it, the assembly of God. We are to judge angels even. The magisterial idea extends on to angels, but that is not here. It is a question of man only, and cattle. Think of what we are coming into. The Lord said, "*Ye* also shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel", @Matthew 19: 28. Those who form the assembly will have judgment over them. When it comes to a question of difficulties between ourselves, it says we shall judge angels. Why not the smallest matters that arise now?
W.R. It says in @Isaiah 9, "Of the increase of his government and of peace there shall be no end".
J.T. Well, that is the millennium. It is going to affect the cattle, every creature, the earth itself; the land will be affected. The millennium is what is called the dispensation of the fulness of times. Here we are dealing more with man and the lower creatures and God's provision to protect them from violence. The blood represents that. The shedding of blood God will not tolerate. For eating purposes, the blood has to be shed, but the blood is poured out to God.
T.H. Jonah has to learn that God thought of the cattle, as well as men. The last word in the book is 'cattle'.
{421}
J.T. "Much cattle". Nothing passes the notice of God. The cattle on a thousand hills are His. We can hardly realise how small the population was in the middle ages, but the human race has grown enormously in the past century. It is not too big for God, and He has books covering the whole number, and He is making the book of life out of this great number.
C.A.M. Would you say this matter of sustaining life is through death; life is sustained by eating in this way, but the blood is reserved by God. Does it look forward to the blood-shedding of Christ?
J.T. Yes, it is a question of the life being in the blood. But we are coming into a condition where there is no blood at all.
C.A.M. In @John 6 the Lord's flesh and the Lord's blood are referred to, and are to be eaten and drunk.
J.T. That speaks of the end of that life. What is said here is "Only, the flesh with its life, its blood, ye shall not eat". That refers to God's rights in this fleshly condition in which we are, but God has terminated that in the death of Jesus. He has brought in a condition of manhood apart from flesh and blood. Flesh and blood will be there in the millennium, but not in the eternal state; flesh and blood does not inherit the kingdom of God. As soon as we are changed we are in a bloodless condition, but the ways of God stand connected with flesh and blood. The rights of God are in that. No one can tell what life is, but it speaks of God's rights; it is inscrutable. We must not deal with it flippantly. Every godly man will respect that.
A.N.W. It says here "the flesh with its life". I thought perhaps in @John 6 the blood is viewed apart from the flesh.
J.T. It is the blood of Christ. We drink that blood, and that all refers to our state down here. We are not to have that food or drink in eternity; it
{422}
is the application of the death of Christ now. We do not need that in eternity; it refers to Christ's flesh and blood in its application to us now. We do not need that in eternity; then it will be a bloodless state of things.
M.O. Does God establish and protect His rights here in this day of grace in His operations among His people?
J.T. I think so. He is establishing His rights in this chapter and they are not to be ignored, and nobody can interfere with them with impunity. Those who do so will suffer. God is using this dispensation to work out the faith period and that involves the assembly. He is working that out, and when that is finished, we shall have "the dispensation of the fulness of times" which is the millennium. After that the dispensational idea ceases because we come to the timeless state of things and a bloodless state of things.
Rem. From the side of Christ on the cross blood and water came forth.
J.T. Well, that is a miracle in itself; that could only happen in Him. Blood coming out in that state could only happen in a divine Person. It was necessary for redemption.
C.H.H. The blood-shedding in the millennium would be for testimony.
J.T. I think so. We have the gospel, and all that testimony will run through. Death will be there; a sinner a hundred years old will die and be cursed. It will still be a flesh and blood condition of things, "the dispensation of the fulness of times". Then follows the eternal state as to which not much is said.
A.R. What you are saying would impress us with the fact that every man on the earth abstractly belongs to God. His life is God's, is it not?
J.T. It is. Think of the millions of Chinese, Japanese, Assyrians. As men think of the world, it has
{423}
gone on for thousands of years, but God has not lost track of it; not for one minute. All is recorded in the books of God, and at the judgment seat, when the Lord takes His place on the throne He will deal with that. The knowledge of this enables us to think of men in the right way.
A.R. Paul in @Romans 8 says "we know that the whole creation groans together and travails in pain together until now. And not only that, but even *we* ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, we also ourselves groan in ourselves". The saints are brought into the groaning. The Spirit of God comes into the thing.
J.T. That is right; very good! It makes us feel things like God, a feeling people. I am sure that is right, and this is the time in which God would bring it out. I thought that the passage in @Genesis 12 takes us out of what we have been speaking about. "And Jehovah had said to Abram, Go out of thy land, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, to the land that I will shew thee. And I will make of thee a great nation, and bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed". So that you might say we are entering into another sort of dispensation, although it is properly a piece of what we have been speaking about. It is Israel, Abraham's family in the midst of the rest of the human race, and the nations set in relation to that family. God has a people called out in Abraham, and He has a house among them. The character of the dispensation is seen distinctly because God is operating in connection with His house. Therefore, you have much better, more elevated thoughts than you have in connection with Noah and his three sons.
{424}
C.A.M. Is it better terms because it is more separate, or because of the quality of the persons?
J.T. If we go into the history of God's ways in relation to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and then the mediatorial state in Moses, we shall see that they have a special place, but still standing in relation to the race, and so in the millennium they stand in relation to the race. We are taken up to heaven; we are not set in relation to the human race; but Israel will be still positionally in relation to the human race. The nations will bring their glory even to the assembly.
C.A.M. So that it confirms this matter of what is select or special with God.
J.T. That is just it. Abraham and his family stand. They are taken up, as you notice here, in relation to the earth. "I will make of thee a great nation, and bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed". Notice it says, "all families of the earth". That is a promise. It is what God is still carrying on in relation to Noah and his posterity, but He has something special in the midst of it. That requires a great deal of consideration, but we can only touch on the idea now. You can see that all the nations were set around Israel, and the temple was the ornament of the earth. God was there. "Is it not written, My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations?", @Mark 11: 17.
A.N.W. Is the counterpart of that seen in the position of the assembly in the midst of men around us?
J.T. Just so, but we are not set up in relation to the earth properly. We belong to heaven; that is why Abraham has no specified generations, as
{425}
Noah's here, because he is the heavenly man in type. Isaac has generations, because it is Christ here in testimony. Abraham is outside of it all. He looked for a city whose builder and maker is God. So that there is the heavenly in Abraham, but he comes down to the earth.
C.H.H. While the magisterial system goes on, Abraham is outside of it and becomes an influence.
J.T. That is what we get as we go through the history of Abraham. Then we have an additional thought that Abraham is a person called out. God is using His prerogative to call one man out of the main body of Noah's posterity and set him up in relation to Himself. He is named *Abram*, meaning 'High father', first, and then before he had any children, but in view of having children, he is called Abraham, meaning 'the father of a multitude'. The family of God is going to be very large. It is not as large as the human race. I believe it works out in the Lord Jesus being the firstborn among many brethren. It is a great family.
A.R. God is viewing the earth in relation to one man, but one man as having a family, and He speaks of Abraham to Abimelech later on (@Genesis 20: 7). I was wondering in that respect if the whole earth is being affected by the saints here.
J.T. Well, it is; Abraham called out is an immense thought. The heavenly calling is implied. What influence a man like that effects! He is a greater man than Isaac or Jacob. He represents the heavenly.
J.T.Jr. Would it be right to connect the thought of mystery with Abraham? the mystery in Romans is suggested. Life in that way is mysterious.
J.T. That is a good suggestion. There is not so much made of him when he is dying. He is more concerned about Isaac and Rebecca's union. But a great deal is made about Jacob's death in @Genesis 49.
{426}
It is well to consider these things because Abraham is a heavenly man, but he is more concerned about Isaac and Rebecca than anything else. He gave the other children gifts and sent them away, but the administration is in relation to Isaac and Rebecca. Ishmael and the rest of his family are sent away, but Abraham is concerned about Isaac and his wife. There is a great deal made of Jacob's death, so that we come down to earth and how things should be.
G.A.T. "Be fruitful and multiply" is said in connection with man leading on to Abraham's family. Would you distinguish between fruitfulness and multiplying?
J.T. Fruitfulness is a more dignified thought than multiplication, I think, so that Abraham would be fruitful, but under great restrictions. There are no such restrictions made on Noah, especially in Japheth. His sons are to be fruitful, the nations spread abroad in an influential way because he is the first one, the elder. But with Abraham it is very remarkable how in his family there are so many restrictions in the maternal matter. Sarah did not bear children until she was very old, Rebecca had only two sons, Leah had none for a good while, and Rachel had only two. These are all remarkable things. It is refinement, not an immense number at first, but it is refinement. The children of the families are brought in under great care and restriction.
G.A.T. It is said of Joseph that he is a fruitful bough.
J.T. Joseph was to have the largest number. When they are counted in @Numbers 26 Joseph is larger even than Judah, but there is quality in Joseph; so that we have at the end in @Deuteronomy 33: 13, Joseph's blessing. Moses says, "Blessed of Jehovah be his land!". Then we come down to verse 17, "His majesty is as the firstling of his ox; and his horns are as the horns of a buffalo. With them
{427}
shall he push the peoples together to the ends of the earth. These are the myriads of Ephraim, and these are the thousands of Manasseh". That is the idea of multitude and quality belonging to Joseph. We are not afraid of this matter of numbers because God has His numbers. Numbers with God imply His sovereign selection. He is very particular in those He takes on. Therefore many are called but few chosen, and all that is very testing; yet God will have an immense number, and the universe that He has in mind will be filled out.
H.B. In Jacob's blessing in Genesis, Joseph's blessing includes the blessing of the womb; that would fit in with the thought of numbers -- "with blessings of the breast and of the womb".
J.T. Quite so, that is the same thought carried through. We have to leave this very blessed subject because it is, really, a matter of blessing in the family all the way down. In the verses read the patriarchal thought is stressed first: "And Jacob called his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together, and I will tell you what will befall you at the end of days. Assemble yourselves, and hear, ye sons of Jacob, and listen to Israel your father". The patriarchal thought is to be listened to and carried through, and the sons are to listen to the father because he had light and knowledge. He had said, "I know, my son, I know". So to confirm the idea of blessing it says, "All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this is what their father spoke to them; and he blessed them: every one according to his blessing he blessed them". That is the principle of this family matter; it is a matter of blessing and works out in ourselves because Paul says, "That the blessing of Abraham might come to the nations in Christ Jesus, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith", @Galatians 3: 14.
{428}
A.R. These blessings have to do with the ways of God and go right on to the end of God's operations on earth.
J.T. They do. I think that eternal life is the great general blessing, because if people are dying, what is the use of talking about blessing if you do not live for ever? So that it is eternal life that will come out in the millennium; eternal life will be a public matter.
A.R. Is there anything significant in these blessings? There are certain features of ferocity, and then Dan a serpent in the way.
J.T. It is all very solemn and humbling. Jacob is a prophet at the beginning, but a blesser in the end. There is a blessing for every tribe, even Dan; so that the twelve tribes go through.
J.T.Jr. @Psalm 1 blesses the man. There is no death connected with him, but there is death connected with the wicked. The wicked perish.
W.R. It is good to listen to the Spirit's voice in whatever it may convey in the way of blessing.
J.T. Quite so. The young especially should listen to the elders. We are so apt to be independent and self-sufficient. God has originated the patriarchal thought. It is God's thought, the fatherly thought.
{429}
THE DISPENSATIONS (3)
@Exodus 20: 22 - 26; @Exodus 40: 34 - 38; @1 Chronicles 22: 1 - 5
J.T. Dispensational truth is particularly stressed in relation to Moses, and these scriptures are selected because they treat of the house of God and the last one shows that the bearing of the house is toward all nations. The whole of humanity is in mind in what God set up mediatorially in Moses. This wide outlook marks the dispensations and it is noteworthy that Adam is linked on with Moses in Romans: "from Adam until Moses". Adam, the fountainhead of the race, is linked on with Moses, the great mediator, and God is showing that He has the whole race of mankind in mind and would operate in relation to His house -- all looking on to the present period, the period of the assembly. This first passage is from @Exodus 20 which records the giving of the law, but the idea of the altar is added to it showing that God had man in mind, to assert His mind among them, and that there should be a return, a response to Himself. When it comes to David and Solomon we have the kingdom, its official features. The house is enjoined to be a house of prayer for all nations, as the Lord Himself says.
C.A.M. This response returning to God increases with each dispensation as they follow one another. I think you used the word 'return to God' in connection with the altar.
J.T. I thought the return from men, from God's people, enters into the dispensational truth. It will be seen presently in the nations. The kings of the nations and those who are saved will bring their glory to the city. All will converge on the house; the heavenly city will be before the nations. There will be a corresponding house on earth. They will be linked together, all having God Himself in mind. The nations will come up to worship. The dispensation
{430}
of the fulness of times will show what God had in mind from the outset in His dispensational operations. He has Himself in mind, and the idea of an altar is that there should be a return to God. It is clear enough in this chapter. We have two altars contemplated -- one made of earth and the other of stone. Then in chapter 24 Israel is representatively seen ascending to God; the elders see the God of Israel, and what a God! They ate and drank before Him. At the end of the book He is seen in the tabernacle which the people had provided for Him. In David's regime and Solomon's this works out to all nations.
C.H.H. In the first dispensation it says in @Hebrews 11, "By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain". Would that be the first return to God?
J.T. Quite so. It is remarkable that it should come into his heart to offer; and to offer the best there was, the fat of the sacrifice. That is what God is seeking, a return from man. He came into the garden looking for that.
A.N.W. The book of Leviticus sets out the matter of God looking for a return. "When any man of you presenteth an offering to Jehovah".
J.T. That is very beautiful in Leviticus. It is just the habitation itself. He speaks out of the tabernacle, out of the tent of meeting, seeking what there was, looking for the best. Now Exodus shows what led up to that, what God knew and received, as we had in Noah and Abel and many others. Exodus is to provide light as to how God is to be approached; not simply that we have something, but how it is to be presented to Him.
A.C. Would the last chapter of Hosea have a bearing on what you are saying as to the return? "O Israel, return unto Jehovah thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity". The appeal is made
{431}
to the men of Israel. Then verse 8 of @Isaiah 9 says, "The Lord sent a word unto Jacob, and it lighteth upon Israel".
J.T. There is much in that chapter that bears on what you are saying. They would come back with words. We are told what to do. It is not simply that there is wealth abroad, but how it is to be brought and presented. It says, "O Israel, return unto Jehovah thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity. Take with you words, and turn to Jehovah; say unto him, Forgive all iniquity, and receive us graciously; so will we render the calves of our lips". That helps as to what we are saying. That is really Exodus, and Leviticus too; but in Exodus there is wealth and how it is to be presented. So that brings in the necessity for the priesthood which Exodus provides.
H.P.R. "An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me"; does that connect in any way with @2 Kings 5, "And Naaman said, If not, then let there, I pray thee, be given to thy servant two mules burden of this earth; for thy servant will no more offer burnt-offering and sacrifice to other gods, but to Jehovah"?
J.T. It is the same principle right through -- how things are to be presented to God. There is wealth abroad among men through God's presentation of Himself to them. That is the first thing, God's presentation of Himself to men, and then the Mediator, and then the return, so that the priest is equal to the Mediator, the Apostle. Christ is "the Apostle and High Priest of our confession". So that the response is equal to the approach of God to man. Man's approach to God is equal to that. That is what Exodus has in mind. It is to extend to all ages and to come about in the dispensation of the fulness of times. It is remarkable that we have this here; first, the altar of earth, and second, the altar
{432}
of stone. So that the return is to be according to divine requirement.
J.W.D. Is all this preliminary to the thought of God dwelling?
J.T. That is what is in mind. It is not simply that He has an altar, but He has a house. The altar is introductory to the house. The altar existed in Genesis and the offerings too. The house is only alluded to abstractly in Genesis, but now it is to be a concrete matter. Of course, everything is to be perfect *in principle* in our dispensation, and we are dealing with it now, because it is the time of knowing things. So that the Lord's supper is introductory to the service of God and in leading up to it the apostle says, "I speak as to intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say", @1 Corinthians 10: 15.
A.R. It says in @Exodus 1: 6, "And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation". Would it be right to say in the light of these scriptures that God has in mind a new generation and He expects an increase in regard to intelligence in relation to His service?
J.T. Yes, it was a matter of preserving the males. The idea of the service of God is masculine, "Let my son go, that he may serve me".
J.T.Jr. Would you say that in the mediatorial dispensation God is nearer than in the previous dispensation?
J.T. Yes, and the intelligence is greater. The mediatorial feature involves a man whom God has taken up. Right through we have the idea of a man, but Moses is outstanding and made acquainted with God as no other man had been so far. God saw to that. He tells Aaron and Miriam that He treated Moses as no other man had been treated. There was no one like Moses in the Old Testament times, and that is in mind in the dispensation, that it should be fully represented. What God would bring out should be
{433}
fully brought before men, and therefore Moses was very urgent to know more of God. God said, "I will make all my goodness pass before thy face, and I will proclaim the name of Jehovah before thee", @Exodus 33: 19. He made known to him as much as the dispensation admitted of. God was so intent on enlargement, that the dispensation should be fully developed, as far as possible, in the mediatorial position. Therefore, there are two, Moses and Aaron, the apostle and high priest.
N.W. Is the result of the ministry of Moses seen in @Deuteronomy 26, in the intelligent return of the worshipper who was to say, "A perishing Aramaean was my father, and he went down to Egypt with a few"? Would that be having the service in mind?
J.T. That would be the service in the land which is the carrying on of what we are speaking about. It is the fruit of the land that is brought to God. Here we are dealing with the simple thought of the altar. Of course, it runs into the land, but it worked out in the wilderness too. The point in the mediatorial system is that God is seeking response, but that we should present it properly, and He has provided a mediatorial system for that purpose.
W.R. Moses was faithful in all God's house. Does it prove he was thorough in every service to God?
J.T. Yes, that is the idea. The nearer you come to Christ, the more you get like Him. There was no one like Moses. That is the thing to keep in mind. God is developing His dispensational operations and He is increasing the services by them. In @Exodus 20 as soon as He makes His demands of love, He speaks of the thousands of those who love Him. He is setting out how things should be done by His lovers as they draw near to Him in service.
J.T.Jr. In the way of service to God on the one hand and the administration of matters on the other?
{434}
J.T. Yes, when you come to Deuteronomy and the land things become wider, and when you come to David, wider still. All things in the house were to be exceedingly magnificent. It is to be for all lands. God would have an ornament for all the earth and a place for all nations to pray in. He is concerned about having all there is, but having them according to His own way.
C.N. Why does He call attention to "the heavens" as the place from whence He speaks?
J.T. Then it says, "Ye shall not make beside me gods of silver, and ye shall not make to you gods of gold". They are to be kept from idolatry, for it is abhorrent to love. John in his epistle says, "Little children, keep yourselves from idols". God spoke "from the heavens", so that what He said was clear of all that men were going on with. Even Abraham had to do with idolatry, Joshua tells us in chapter 24 of his book. God was against that from the start, and especially in this matter of His house and His worship. It is always true that the gospel should go out in relation to the assembly. Many have disassociated it from the assembly, making it a matter of persons receiving the light of the gospel without any subsequent formation, and also without any idea of God's house. Peter called attention to this in his first address in Acts; that is, the Spirit as in the assembly. The first great gospel address contemplated the assembly and the Spirit in it.
C.A.M. In connection with that, is it not remarkable that the apostle Paul uses the expression "that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable"? Is it right to say that the gospel is announced in view of what can be placed on the altar, as a return to God in His service?
J.T. Very remarkable, that in @Romans 15. What a wide thought the apostle had in what he was doing through the gospel. He was carrying on a sacrificial
{435}
service and the offering was to be acceptable as sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
A.A.T. Following the instructions to Moses and the children of Israel as to the altar of earth and of stone, God says, "in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee".
J.T. Well, that is one of the greatest things. The house from the outset was where the blessing was, and God says here, "In all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee". The blessing in Genesis was through Abraham's family; right down to the end of the book it is through persons, but now the house is the place where His name is. It is an ordered, settled position that God has provided so that He should be there, and not there in a static way, but where He would *come*. He causes His name to be remembered, and where there is real response to His name, He says, "I will come unto thee, and bless thee". In the Psalms the Lord commands the blessing, "even life for evermore". It is not through persons here, but in a structure in which God is, and in which He surrounds Himself with vessels of holiness. So if we draw near to Him we should be holy.
J.W.D. These fresh features in the service of God involve obedience, and order.
J.T. Yes. It is clearly an addition to what we have had so far. Exodus gives God's requirements. He is asserting His rights and looking for a response to these rights. We know how to behave when we draw near to God.
J.W. Did the dispensation of which we are now speaking begin with the giving of the law?
J.T. Yes. It is a question of God's rights, I think. @Exodus 20 is very formal. We are led on through the earlier chapters, but we do not get this in Egypt. The speaking here is at Sinai and God is
{436}
really inaugurating the dispensation, which was not properly set up until the law was given, and in relation to it, an ordered place was set up, a building, a structure that Israel provided. So that the dispensation is very formal under Moses and runs right down to Christ. This matter of the two altars is to remind us that God is looking for response in an ordered way, and it will come out in the dispensation of the fulness of times, in the millennium when that ordered way will be followed. Ezekiel is very full as to what is required. It is to be better understood now than then because we are in the time of knowledge.
C.H.H. Is that why the Hebrew servant comes in after this, pointing on to Christ?
J.T. Quite so. The return is to be in the fulness of Christ, a divine Person, so that the approach to God is equal to His approach to us. The point now is to see the bearing of this mediatorial position, how it enters into the present dispensation.
Ques. What would you say as to the peace-offering as well as the burnt-offering?
J.T. "Thou ... shalt sacrifice on it [the altar] thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings". The peace-offerings would refer more to what is subjective and our enjoyment. The burnt-offerings are more objective, and what suits God. The peace-offering would bring in the saints in their subjective enjoyment of things. There is so little giving of thanks. We often note how little giving of thanks there is for food among men. True believers, true lovers of God would bring Him into everything, our food: "in everything give thanks". When we come together at a time like this we are all brought into it; it is a collective matter, and we are all thankful that God is accepting the general feeling of thanksgiving to Him. The burnt-offering is a higher level according to Leviticus, but it is joined here with the peace-offering. I think it is a question of the lovers of God
{437}
permeated with the idea of thanksgiving, but it must be on the altar.
S.J.H. What does the thought of an altar represent?
J.T. It is a question of what is suitable to God. Every lover of God is concerned even in his own house about what is becoming in his speaking to God. He is not common in what he is doing, he knows how to approach God. Noah built his altar, and Abraham built his altar. It implied a reverential thought as to what was becoming in approach to God.
W.L. Would you say it is in contrast to idols?
J.T. It is to prevent idolatry. That is what God had in mind. He says, "Ye have seen that I have spoken with you from the heavens. Ye shall not make beside me gods of silver, and ye shall not make to you gods of gold". God is to have His own way; He is to be approached on His own terms. In christendom place is given to man's art and device, but God has brought some of His people back to what He requires, to approach Him as He would like.
A.C. How does the scripture in @Hebrews 13 fit in with what you are saying, "We have an altar"?
J.T. Others are excluded from it; it is what we might call an exclusive altar. Certain persons have no right to it at all; that is those "who serve the tabernacle". The tabernacle there refers to the public profession of christianity as seen in judaism, and the religious world. Then we are to go further: "Let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach". The tabernacle in @Hebrews 13 refers to the Jewish system of things at that time with which christianity had been associated. Believers were called upon to dissociate themselves, to see that christianity was separate from judaism, leading up to what we have now among the gentiles.
A.R. Moses had great liberty to go up the mountain, and to come down and speak, and go back; yet
{438}
in all that there is a great lack of liberty on the side of the people.
J.T. God began with the idea in chapter 19 where there was terror, but gradually liberty was brought in for the saints, as we get priesthood. There is a gradual wearing down of terror so that the saints should be in liberty with God; @Exodus 24 brings out that. God says, "Go up". God is allowing liberty to ascend and "they saw the God of Israel". The terror is gradually disappearing as the priesthood comes into evidence; liberty takes the place of the terror, so that we draw near to God in Christ.
H.P.R. God wants things in order. In the morning meeting, a certain spiritual ascent is made, then later we drop back. We go on with it, but is it not necessary that we recognise the divine order which has been given to us?
J.T. That is the instruction in these books, especially Exodus and Leviticus. God knows that we have wealth, and they had it too; but the order in which it is to be presented is stressed. The elevation is seen in @Exodus 24, when certain ones are invited to go up. They do not stay there; they come down, for the idea is that what is set up here on the earth outwardly is a heavenly thing. If a number of angels came down they would not be affected by theatres; they have no taste for those things. God can trust us as we come down. When He takes us into what is heavenly, as it were. He gives us tastes and instincts so that He can trust us, as we come down. Therefore, in Ephesians the elevation is first; then we are made to sit down together; then there is the habitation here, a heavenly institution here below. The point is to keep to the heavenly in our tastes. That is what Exodus means: the tabernacle is a heavenly thing down here and God fills it with His glory.
{439}
C.H.H. Is that seen at all in the ladder in @Genesis 28 -- angels ascending and descending?
J.T. Just so. That is the first thing you get in connection with the idea of the house. God did not say to Jacob, 'This is my house', but Jacob said "how dreadful is this place!". He called it the house of God the second time, in a balanced and appreciative way. The idea is that it is to be heavenly, the angels were ascending and descending on the ladder. Now in the New Testament it is Christ -- He descended and ascended to keep the link with heaven. So that earthly-mindedness and worldliness is to be shut out. When God said 'Go back to Bethel', Jacob said, 'You must put away the idols'. The house of God is a heavenly thing down here.
J.W.D. Does that heavenly thing call for priesthood?
J.T. The priesthood is essential because it is a question of holiness. The priests in Leviticus are in charge of the law. The idea of priesthood is to shut out worldliness and unholiness. Leviticus has that in mind. The priesthood is established in Exodus but seen set up in the sanctuary in Leviticus, so that when an offering comes the priests are there. The offering is to pass through the hands of the priests and all is to be regulated by them. So the law is in the hands of the priests. "This is the law of the burnt-offering", the sin-offering, the peace-offering. These laws are all in the hands of the priests to shut out worldliness or human innovation in the service of God.
A.R. I think what you say about @Exodus 24 is very interesting. Moses goes up to the top of the mountain and is there forty days and forty nights. In the meantime you have Aaron and Hur; that would watch out for the priestly side.
J.T. Exactly.
{440}
C.N. The last verse of chapter 25 is important: "And see that thou make them according to their pattern, which hath been shewn to thee in the mountain".
J.T. It all comes down. That is really Ephesians. It has all come down from heaven that we might have "a habitation of God in the Spirit".
Ques. Would the idea of the altars be some apprehension of Christ?
J.T. Yes, it is a question first of the humanity of Christ. That is the first altar. The second altar is the resurrection of Christ; it is made of stones. There can be no doubt that that is what is meant. In connection with that no human devices are to be used, no tools, and no steps. Man is prevented from adding something that would expose his wickedness. In truth it is the house of God, the assembly of God. It is stressed in Corinthians.
C.A.M. I suppose we really could not understand the final greatness of things as suggested in Ephesians unless we understood these different dispensations. I was thinking that this matter of coming down, and the idea of mediatorship, will be carried right through to the heavenly city, when all this blessedness will come down and what is below will be blessed in that way.
J.T. Everything comes down, I am sure. That is the principle. The heavenly city is trustworthy because she is presented there as coming down; she has never been anywhere else but up there. She is absolutely perfect as coming down from God out of heaven. Nothing that makes a lie or corrupts in any way is allowed there; there is exclusiveness from all that.
C.A.M. Is it not a remarkable thing that God would give us knowledge through the consideration of dispensations gone by?
{441}
J.T. Well, that is what we are aiming at in this dispensational subject that we have before us, to see how it culminates in us, because it is a time of knowledge. The dispensation of the fulness of times is the millennium, when the fulness of all dispensations will be seen, all headed up in Christ, things in heaven and things in earth. The matter now is that we are rendered capable of dealing with things for God. Abraham could not have acted as we can, or ought to be able to, or even Moses, and certainly not the prophets. The whole matter awaited the coming down of the Spirit. Redemption being accomplished, and the Spirit here, we have the unction and we know all things. What we are dealing with now is this mediatorial matter and how God has established it; so that all nations are in mind for blessing. At Pentecost all nations were represented.
J.W.D. Do we link these altars on with @1 Corinthians 10 in christianity?
J.T. That is what I thought, and there intelligence is stressed, "I speak as to intelligent persons". It is a question of idolatry being shut out, "judge what I say". God has brought in certain things in Christ sacrificially; "the cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ?". That is the death of Christ. That is what we are dealing with and that shuts out idolatry; and on the ground of that we are one body, and we have that which God can approve and commend, too. In chapter 11 the bread is first but in chapter 10 the cup.
C.H.H. Is that included in chapter 14?
J.T. Well, it is known there. Prophecy stresses it, "God is in you of a truth". A man gets light from God; he falls down and worships God.
{442}
C.H.H. In chapter 10 it is if any man is *intelligent*, but in chapter 14, if any man is spiritual, "let him acknowledge". It is the summing up of the thing.
J.T. The prophetic ministry which is in the assembly, not simply a section of it, but all the assembly in the place, is there in relation to all the persons in that town wherever they may be. There is the christian meeting room and the saints are there; and there is the idol house, the Jewish house, and Satan's house. The synagogue is there. They are all there, but the christian assembly is there. A man walking up the street can turn into the christian assembly, no matter who he is. That is what we are dealing with; the dispensations are come to us. That is mentioned in chapter 10, and the man who belongs to the race of mankind comes into the christian assembly and he finds the prophetic word of God. It touches his conscience, and he falls down and worships God. He is convicted of all, as we are told. It must be on the ground of conviction, redemption having been accomplished there must be the conviction of sin. Where God is there must be that. Everyone there is convicted as to this man and he falls down and reports that God is among you. He is not in the idol house, he is in the christian assembly. That is the position.
C.H.H. Would that correspond to "in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered"; and @Matthew 18, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them"? There are a great many places in which we do not gather at all.
J.T. What we are speaking of enters into that. It is a question of two or three of you. God has formed that; it is a house matter. The dispensation of God is a dispensation in relation to His house, and the assembly is His house. The types have come to us, and the ages have come to us; the whole
{443}
matter is there to be understood now. We see all things clearly.
A.L. "Two or three" would be those who recognise these altars as being the means of approach to God. You desire to be near to God, whereas an idol would bring in distance and displace God.
J.T. Yes, the altar is God's work and Matthew enters into all that.
J.F. Is it your thought that His holiness must be proved? He will not surrender His holiness.
J.T. That is the thought exactly. God coming out and being known. When God comes out and is apprehended and offerings are to be made, they must be on His own terms; and therefore it is a question of God's approach to men, not simply Jews, but men. The gospel now has that in mind in many men returning to God. It is a question of men drawing near to God; He has His requirements and these are seen in the priesthood and the altar.
J.T.Jr. Is that the force in the expression in the Colossians "wherein there is not Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision"? The thought of the full knowledge of God; we are renewed into that. The Jew and the Greek are shut out. Christ is everything.
J.T. Yes. Ephesians is the top stone of instruction: "Who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of enclosure, having annulled the enmity in his flesh, the law of commandments in ordinances, that he might form the two in himself into one new man, making peace". We come on to that in Ephesians. The kind of man God is looking for and having is the new one, not the old Adam, but the new one. Ephesians makes provision for that.
J.T.Jr. I was thinking of the thought of full knowledge in Colossians, that the new man is connected with the full knowledge, renewed into that.
{444}
J.T. Quite so. And then the drawing near in Ephesians by Christ of both Jew and gentile in one new man, drawing near by "one Spirit to the Father". Exodus shows us that God is making Himself known more and more, setting His people at liberty to go up. It is a question of elevation and it is christianity that is in mind really, and in this matter of elevation in chapter 24 the principle is that that structure, the tabernacle -- God's dwelling, has come down from heaven. Moses had been up there forty days to get heaven's impressions. They saw no form at all; it is a question of words given to Moses, and they were transferred to the people through Moses. They brought the material, but the structure must be according to the heavenly pattern. God is insisting upon His rights, that it should be brought to Him in His own way so that the dignity of His habitation should be maintained.
S.J.H. As falling into line with these instructions, we get all this concentrated in one place. So there is increase, development, and order; things expand there.
J.T. There is no thought at all of this in christendom today, though there are many religious names and assemblies. What we are dealing with now is the idea of oneness in those who approach, and God says, "In all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee". It is one idea. It is a great general idea of drawing near to God according to the principles of His own system; it is one idea in Corinthians. The customs are always the same and we draw near wherever we are living, in whatever country, in whatever circumstances. We always draw near to God according to the pattern from the mount. That shuts out all ideas of one-man ministry or men taking up priesthood as between God and man. We
{445}
draw near through Christ by one Spirit, "by one Spirit to the Father".
T.H. What do you understand by the cloud?
J.T. Well, that is a symbol of the divine presence. God is saying, 'I am here', and He claims it all. Even Moses services, for the moment, are restricted. God is asserting His rights to the whole position. He insisted on His rights in Exodus.
Ques. Is that the counterpart to the verses read in @Exodus 40? Would it correspond to @Psalm 133 where the brethren are dwelling together in unity?
J.T. Well, that is the principle. The land in @Psalm 133 where the Lord commands the blessing is where unity is. So in 1 Chronicles this matter is widened out as under David. It says in chapter 22, verse 1, "This is the house of Jehovah Elohim, and this is the altar of burnt-offering for Israel". It is the only one. We are told in chapter 21 how David reached it, but this is the result of his exercises in chapter 21. "And David commanded to collect the strangers that were in the land of Israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build the house of God. And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors of the gates, and for the joists, and brass in abundance without weight; and cedar-trees innumerable; for the Zidonians and they of Tyre brought cedar-wood in abundance to David. For David said, Solomon my son is young and tender, and the house that is to be built for Jehovah must be exceeding great in fame and in beauty in all lands". This is the point that I believe we should get clearly into our souls: the universal bearing of the house and that God is operating universally and that it is most attractive. The queen of Sheba illustrates how attractive it was and how she came up with abundance. She observed how Solomon moved toward the house of God. The point is how *we* are moving in the service of God in the assembly. That
{446}
is what is in mind in David and Solomon. It is Ephesians really.
A.N.W. Does it also explain the world-wide aspect? Timothy has a world-wide aspect. He is told to pray for men and kings.
J.T. Quite so. That is where this word 'dispensation' is found, "God's dispensation, which is in faith".
C.A.M. How are we to view the expression, "Solomon my son is young and tender" in connection with this matter?
J.T. Well, it shows what a man David was. He was not giving out that his son would not do things as well as he did. He needs qualification so that he should be a man in dealing with these matters. Hence, the patriarchal thought appears in David, for he really had that honour. He would have the young one coming after him to be thoroughly furnished that the house may be according to the pattern, because he had the pattern as Moses; only David had it by the Spirit. We are advancing in the truth in David and Solomon.
W.R. The queen of Sheba, in seeing all Solomon's wisdom and his house, would carry some impression of what she had gained there wherever she was.
J.T. She would carry back to her own country the impressions she had received. She had brought wonderful gifts to Solomon, but he also enriched her. The Lord calls her a queen of the south. I have often thought of what is in God's mind in the present dispensation as to what is in the south now, what God has effected in Australasia and South Africa too.
C.H.H. "Great in fame and in beauty". That idea is to be maintained. Ezra says in chapter 7, verse 27, that God had put it in the heart of the king to beautify the house of Jehovah.
{447}
J.T. That shows how the gentiles, all men, were always in mind. He segregated them at Babel to reserve them for later purposes and He has never lost sight of them. He told Abraham that he was to be the means of blessing for all these. You could understand how Abraham regarded people differently, and that comes to us. The blessing of Abraham has arrived at the gentiles. We have received the promise of the Spirit, received the matter through faith. So that in our dispensation the matter is finished.
J.W.D. Do you think that along with our ability to take our part in the service of God in the assembly, there is also a spiritual formation that fits us to represent God publicly at the same time?
J.T. I think that is what John's ministry in some respects is for. "Come and see" is a phrase with John. It is what God has established, and what is to be seen. There is very little today, but still the principle goes on; there is something, and God can make it more.
A.R. What is the thought in David saying "the house of Jehovah Elohim"?
J.T. Well, it is the great Creator God; first, the covenant God and then the Creator God. Elohim is God in creation. The name is a combination that links on Jehovah known in covenant with Elohim known in creation. Whether He be viewed as Father now or God, it is the same idea running through.
H.P.R. You spoke of the universal order of the house. Would you say the queen of Sheba got a greater view of the order of it?
J.T. Yes, she says the half was not told her. That shows what the assembly is -- the residence of the divine glory and truth. John is for the last days and he says, "Come and see". What is there? What can be seen in the meetings?
{448}
N.W. Is one less qualified to serve in the gospel if he is not in the enjoyment of the realm of God's love in the assembly?
J.T. Just so. It is the gospel of the unsearchable riches of the Christ, as well as the gospel concerning His Son. You have to come and see these things in the assembly. The assembly is the residence of the glory. It will be seen coming down out of heaven from God presently.
T.H. Would it be right to say that Philip had a sense of the unsearchable riches of Christ as he presented Jesus to the eunuch?
J.T. Quite so. He would tell him about Christ and His riches I am sure, but we must come to Ephesians if we want to proceed to the end of things. In Ephesians we get culminating thoughts.
J.T.Jr. Is this the summit typically of the mediatorial side? God has a nation here through which He rules the world directly. God is seen there ruling the world through David. God is ruling there in Israel, in the house; ruling the world through this king. Is that the position?
J.T. Well, that was the position then, and it is in a moral sense now. Paul makes a great deal of God's kingdom, and it is the present moral situation. The bearing is universal. God is here and the features of His kingdom are here.
S.McC. It would seem that the circumstances of chapter 21 provide a release for all this in chapter 22. Would that not fit in with the present moment of pressure, what is linked with the threshing floor, and the like?
J.T. I am sure that is right. It is a question of David's humiliation as having acted in pride. He wished to know the number of those whom he ruled and he brought down judgment on himself. It is not a question of our numbers. David erred in that, and he had to humble himself. God sees his downward
{449}
course of humiliation and brought in this great truth of the house which is God's glory. It is not what David is going to have as a great king, but it is what God is going to have. David came to that -- the house was to represent God, and was to be exceeding great in fame and beauty in all lands. There was a great change in David. Wherever we are humbled or disciplined some fresh phase of the truth acquires a place with us so that the house of God is developed on those lines. "This is the house of Jehovah Elohim, and this is the altar of burnt-offering for Israel". The word 'this' there refers to what had taken place in the sheathing of the sword of judgment. David is a great military man, but now it is God in grace that is to be known in David, and the sword of judgment is sheathed.
S.McC. Would you say that what has come to light in persons taking issue with assembly judgments, has shown a lack of a right, intelligent understanding of God's place and rights in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. David is brought to recognise God's rights, and God uses the opportunity in the judgment due to him -- the disciplinary penalty that was meted out and mitigated afterwards, to make known to David that there was to be a change of dispensation. It is said that David was afraid to go to where the tabernacle was. "And the tabernacle of Jehovah, which Moses had made in the wilderness, and the altar of burnt-offering, were at that time in the high place at Gibeon. But David could not go before it to inquire of God; for he was afraid because of the sword of the angel of Jehovah", @1 Chronicles 21: 29, 30. David is learning the change of dispensation. God is identified in one place with the sword, and David could not go there but he sees that God is changing over. It is God's mind being changed, for He told the angel to sheath the sword. David's mind certainly was changed through discipline,
{450}
and that works out in what we have now. David is brought into accord with God and there is a change proceeding as the sword is sheathed. Instead of judgment there is grace, so that David has liberty. "And David built there an altar to Jehovah, and offered up burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, and called upon Jehovah; and he answered him from the heavens by fire upon the altar of burnt-offering. And Jehovah spoke to the angel; and he put up his sword again into its sheath". God changes His operations from the sword, to the acceptance of David's offering; instead of executing judgment on David He accepts his offering, and that is where the foundation of the house lies. We have to learn how things can be changed and the ground on which this can take place.
W.R. In the verses we read in the following chapter, would it not show the relation of God Himself in His house as a place of love?
J.T. This refers to all that we have been speaking of in chapter 21. "This is the house of Jehovah Elohim". God does not say that, David says that. In a certain sense David is now the mediator. He has come to that through discipline.
J.W. Would the feature of refinement be seen here in David's word, "Solomon my son is young and tender"?
J.T. "Young and tender" would mean that he is impressionable. David really has the position of a mediator, and he is concerned about the son. It is a question of sonship dawning upon him as it has dawned upon us. It is a question of sonship to be worked out in a young man, "young and tender". David is acting as mediator; he is determining where the house is to be built and how magnificent it is to be, because the bearing of it is to be toward all the nations, "exceeding great in fame and in beauty in all lands". The bearing of the house is universal.
{451}
C.A.M. There is a liberty that results from the apprehension of sonship being developed among the saints. Do you think that the reference to "come and see", and all that follows in John's ministry develops this matter of sonship?
J.T. Well, it does. Solomon being "young and tender" alludes to this idea. John brings out the truth of sonship in Christ; we learn it there and the word is "Come and see". The youthfulness and tenderness of Solomon allude to impressionability that God can use to bring out His thoughts.
Ques. "Thou therefore, my child, be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus. And the things thou hast heard of me in the presence of many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men". Would that correspond?
J.T. Well, quite so. It is the youthful thought that God is taking into account; many of the young men are now in very disadvantageous circumstances. They are like the sons of Zion; they are whiter than snow, but they are exposed to great danger. God is looking at them, their potentialities, youth and tenderness and purity. How terribly exposed they are; how terrible the circumstances are into which they are forced. God is concerned that their youth and tenderness may not be damaged so that they might be available and impressionable for all the great thoughts He has for us, especially in regard to sonship, and to be available for building. That is David's exercise here. He is really a patriarch here; David is called a patriarch in the New Testament (@Acts 2: 29). He was concerned about the young, and Solomon is representative of youth.
W.R. There is great need of preparation and you can see that process in our younger brethren.
J.T. Yes. David is preparing in view of them.
{452}
THE DISPENSATIONS (4)
@Romans 1: 1 - 5; @Romans 15: 18 - 21; @Luke 2: 25 - 38; @Luke 24: 45 - 49
J.T. We have two dispensations to consider, the present one and the coming one, and it seems that we should consider them together, looking at Romans first to show how the earlier dispensations link on with the present, and then in Ephesians this afternoon to show how the present and all dispensations link on with the dispensation of the fulness of times.
As to Romans it will be observed that what has been read speaks largely of the apostle's own viewpoint. His personal part in the whole matter is indicated, and therefore we get inlets to the whole matter more fully than in the body of the book which treats of doctrine. It will be observed that it links on with David. "Paul, bondman of Jesus Christ, a called apostle, separated to God's glad tidings, (which he had before promised by his prophets in holy writings,) concerning his Son (come of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead) Jesus Christ our Lord; by whom we have received grace and apostleship in behalf of his name, for obedience of faith among all the nations". Here we are immediately linking on with what we had yesterday afternoon as to David because the whole matter in these five meetings is cumulative from Adam down; from Adam to Moses, and from Moses to David, and from David to Christ. The passage in @Romans 15 enlarges on what we have here as to Paul's service, the extent and character of it. The passages in the gospel of Luke are simply confirmatory of all this because Simeon and Anna are spiritual; it is not simply an external link, but a spiritual link between the former dispensations and the present one. The Lord's own words in chapter 24 carried that through, so that the twelve
{453}
apostles are seen just waiting for the Spirit from on high to carry on the truth, the cumulative truth, among the nations. @Luke 24 enlarges on this subject, for in speaking to those who are going to Emmaus, "having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself". The Old Testament is made much of; that is, all the previous dispensations. Here in Romans Paul says, "Come of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead". We have Christ linked with David, but linked with God, the Son of God, which is the great final thought. 'Son' is the final thought, nothing after that. The Son carries things through into eternity. He delivers up the kingdom to the Father and He Himself is subject.
A.R. In Revelation the Lord says, "*I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star". Does that fit in with @Romans 1?
J.T. Quite so. The Revelation carries David through to the end. It is a question of refinement when you look at it from that point of view. Here it is simply ancestry and David's seed, "come of David's seed according to flesh".
C.H.H. Would the root of David imply more than Son of God?
J.T. It implies deity. @Romans 1 just says, "David's seed according to flesh". We shall see Paul again in the coming reading, his outlook in relation to Ephesians, Ephesian truth and 1 Timothy; but Romans is on a lower level bringing the dispensations down. 1 Corinthians corresponds; in this we are told that the dispensations or the ages have come on us, the ends of them have come on us.
J.F. Would you say that what marks this dispensation is life out of death?
{454}
J.T. Yes, quite so. Christ is the theme of the gospel in Romans. It is not the unsearchable riches of the Christ, but Christ Himself personally according to these verses. These verses are introductory to the whole book and Israel's part is brought down, is taken care of in the middle of the book parenthetically, so that we are to carry the thing through in our minds -- the past dispensations.
A.N.W. Rome is a particularly fitting place to suggest such a theme.
J.T. Well, it is. He goes on to that saying, "Among whom are *ye* also the called of Jesus Christ: to all that are in Rome, beloved of God, called saints" and so on. It is in the very centre of the Roman world, which is viewed as the habitable earth, where men are to whom God is bearing testimony. Rome was the last of the four monarchies doing great things, making roads, geographically extending what we call the influence of law and civilisation, making way for the gospel. Paul is now contemplating being there, but in the meantime he is writing so as to set out his position in the glad tidings. In chapter 15 we get an enlargement of all this.
A.N.W. "To all that are in Rome", is that to all of the saints?
J.T. Paul says, "beloved of God, called saints", you know, only they are connected with Rome. Phoebe was an easterner, that is, a European, but near to Asia, in Cenchrea. She evidently carried the letter to the Romans and would form a link between Paul and them, and through the letter he sent salutations showing how thoroughly conversant he was with the work of God in that city.
C.N. Would such a scripture as in @Luke 16: 16 enter into your thought? "The law and the prophets were until John: from that time the glad tidings of the kingdom of God are announced".
{455}
J.T. Yes, that covered the dispensation that began with Moses, and that mediatorial system. We also had other dispensations; one in connection with Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; then Moses to Christ really. David comes in as rendering a peculiar character to this latter period, a kingly, royal character and a systematising man; he was a great systematiser, so that the very best was yielded for God out of what there was. That is why be has such a place in the testimony.
C.H.H. Do you think in each dispensation God has secured material that He could use in His approach to mankind in that dispensation?
J.T. Yes, so that there is always a link; mankind is always in mind. When we come to 1 Chronicles which is the inspired account of things, Adam is the first name we have, showing that man is in mind, and Luke takes that up to bring in man, but in Christ. In @Romans 15 we have what Christ was personally in, the whole line of testimony, how He came in in relation to the whole line of testimony. Paul says in verse 8, "For I say that Jesus Christ became a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises of the fathers; and that the nations should glorify God for mercy; according as it is written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the nations, and will sing to thy name. And again he says, Rejoice, nations, with his people. And again, Praise the Lord, all ye nations, and let all the peoples laud him. And again, Esaias says, There shall be the root of Jesse, and one that arises, to rule over the nations: in him shall the nations hope". Now that the nations are already brought in he says, "Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, so that ye should abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit". That is the consummation in ourselves, the present dispensation upon whom the ends of the ages have
{456}
come. David has a great place but, as remarked, it begins with Adam because the chronicler, probably Ezra, began with Adam and came right down, and Luke takes up the line. Luke takes up the line from the point of view we are now dealing with and carries it down to Paul, a prisoner in Rome; it is man that is in mind. We have an immense scope in what is before us. It is a substantial, practical, and choice line of things. These verses in @Romans 15 are very beautiful in their links. "I will confess to thee among the nations, and will sing to thy name. And again he says, Rejoice, nations, with his people. And again, Praise the Lord, all ye nations, and let all the peoples laud him". It is a choice thing. So that the river of God, running right through, so to speak, is full of water. The line is running through in freshness and power. We are not dealing with the matter in the sense of contrast but as all one thing, all being in God's mind from Adam right down.
H.P.R. What you were speaking of, moving on from one dispensation to another, divine Persons and their movements, is there not at the end of each dispensation something accumulated that would be potential as carried forward?
J.T. They are elements carried down according to the scripture in Romans and verified in the gospels. We always have to learn that this present dispensation is the time of full growth. Men were kept in bondage in earlier dispensations however advanced they were; even Moses was not really in full growth. Moses only saw God from behind. It is now the time of God being known in Christ, the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and that is what we see, and we are changed according to that. That is what makes this dispensation the crown of everything -- full maturity. "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the
{457}
Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". So we are able to give an account of things or ought to be, and understand all that preceded us.
A.C. You find Satan's great activities in this dispensation. Paul himself was beset by satanic hindrances right through, especially in going to Europe, the enemy was seeking to hinder him.
J.T. That is very good and appropriate, too, because the whole matter is set out in him personally. If we get what is set out in him we shall get a personal inlet to the whole matter. We will see that more fully in Timothy. So far we have it here.
J.W.D. Shall we not have a link with these that represent the dispensations in the heavenly city? Is not this the time of training for this?
J.T. Well, the link then will be with the millennium, the dispensation of the fulness of times. In the meantime, we are on the lower level of Romans in which the Old Testament is brought in textually. It is one thing right down from Adam to Moses, and Moses to David, and David to Christ. Man is in mind, so that He is come of David's seed according to flesh, not simply Son of God, but David's seed. That morally is from God, because the root of David is God; the seed is Christ.
Ques. Would you link what we have in Romans with @Hebrews 11 and the men of faith referred to there? In the dispensation running down to David they obtained the witness, but did not receive the promise and at the close of the chapter we are told, "God having foreseen some better thing for us, that they should not be made perfect without us".
J.T. Very good. The line of faith covers what we are speaking of so that we have come "to the spirits of just men made perfect". They were not made perfect in their own times. It awaited redemption for them to be made perfect, and we have come
{458}
to them now. The whole matter is settled now and we have come to the spirits of just men, not their bodies yet, but their spirits. That does not mean we are in touch with their spirits, but it is anticipative of the time when they shall be made perfect in their bodies. All that is cumulative and is one thing really, only subdivided, and God is graciously presenting these things in a subdivisional way so that we can take all in, for we only learn in part.
S.McC. Paul says to Timothy, "Remember Jesus Christ raised from among the dead, of the seed of David, according to my glad tidings", @2 Timothy 2. What would he have in mind in saying, "Remember"?
J.T. I think it would be just what we are saying, the peculiar kind of manhood, as you might say, a combination of elements in Christ, "Jesus Christ ... of the seed of David". David refers to quality and that quality is perfect as apprehended in Christ for He is the root, and therefore in completeness He is the offspring; nothing in David is missing from root to offspring.
A.R. In God's ordering Joseph had to go up to the city of David as it says in @Luke 2, and then, "he was of the house and family of David", as if to stress that idea.
J.T. That is the same thing. The royal line, the generation, begins in Matthew with David, "Son of David, Son of Abraham", showing the place David has. The selection is of God, essentially so, because God is David's root, and Christ is David's offspring, so that the whole matter is there in Christ.
A.N.W. I thought perhaps that was involved in the expression "the root of Jesse". It carries with it Jehovah's name.
J.T. That is the royal line.
C.N. Does @Galatians 4 enter into it? "When the fulness of the time was come. God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law, that be might
{459}
redeem those under law, that we might receive sonship".
J.T. That is just what we have been alluding to; those of the earlier dispensations were kept under governors until the time appointed by the Father. That time had not come even in David's day, but there were inklings of it in Solomon. They had light, but they were not in perfection. Now we have come to perfection, the appointed time of the Father, that we might receive sonship. It says "because ye are sons. God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts". That is the full thought; we have reached fulness, finality. So that the dispensation of the fulness of times does not exceed our dispensation, does not even come up to it; our part is purely heavenly.
J.T.Jr. Does the fact that Peter speaks of David so much in his first preaching only bring out the greatness of the Son of God? Peter says David is dead. It is the greatness of the Person that Peter spoke about that is in view in this dispensation.
J.T. Just so. It is great David's greater Son. The Lord baffled the infidels. He says, 'How can David call the Messiah his Lord, when He was his own Son?'. We understand that. That was a puzzle for the Pharisees and Sadducees, for after all David is only a believer, not any more than most of us; even of John the baptist the Lord said, that the little one in the kingdom is greater than he. They are great men in God's ways in testimony, but as regards family dignity the saints of this dispensation have the first place. That is a very important matter, and therefore the dispensation now is the greatest one in that sense.
C.H.H. The quotation in @Romans 15 says, "I will confess to thee among the nations"; this and the other quotations are taken from Moses and the Psalms and the prophets, and all link on with Luke.
{460}
J.T. Yes, the Lord takes the whole of the Scriptures, as often remarked, "And having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself". As we were saying, it is the time of knowing things, not only by the knowledge of the letter of Scripture but by the understanding that He gives us. "Then he opened their understanding to understand the scriptures, and said to them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved the Christ to suffer". He had already said, "These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled". The testimony coming out through Paul is remarkably filled out by Scripture, by quotations from Scripture, especially in Romans. Stephen is introductory to Paul in that sense. His discourse comes down from the God of glory and culminates in Christ at the right hand of God, so that Paul takes up all those lines of thought; they come into his ministry. What a knowledge he had in the way of quoting Scripture -- a model for us.
Ques. Do the verses in @Romans 1 mean that the resurrection of Christ would be the great basis on which all the dispensations would be established?
J.T. Yes, there could be no dispensation or anything at all of value if there were no resurrection; everything would perish into oblivion. That shows the folly of contending about it in Corinth -- those who said there was no resurrection.
H.P.R. Is that why you said that the resurrection is vicarious also?
J.T. It is vicarious. "Jesus our Lord, who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification".
{461}
F.M. Is it important that after speaking of resurrection, the Lord's full title is given there, "Jesus Christ our Lord".
J.T. "Our Lord". You put your claim in there. That is beautiful. It is an expression often used, especially in Romans.
J.W. Would you say a little more about what is vicarious in relation to resurrection?
J.T. Well, everything must be put on that ground. The exposition on the way to Emmaus was not an exposition in the assembly. It was not in the shrine or the temple, although Christ Himself is the temple. It was not on that line, but on the highway, the road, just as Philip's exposition and preaching to the eunuch was on the highway. The Lord's exposition was beginning with Moses and all the prophets. He expounded unto them the things concerning Himself. It is Himself as risen, what He is now. The position of resurrection is reached. It is not yet ascension, however: that involves Ephesians. The point in Romans is that Christ is risen. We are not said to be risen in Romans, but Christ is risen. His ascension to heaven is not stressed, but the fact that He is made Lord and Christ is stressed. He is our Lord. It is a position here on earth, but it is a position of resurrection, the power of God in resurrection. There could be nothing at all without that. That is in mind throughout, that God raises from the dead.
M.O. How far would you carry that in the gospel, the truth of resurrection being vicarious?
J.T. As far as possible. He was raised for *our* justification, just as He was delivered for *our* offences. That is vicarious; the word 'for' means that it was for others; that is, vicarious. He gave Himself a ransom *for* all, but Romans is mainly doctrinal, so that He is raised for our justification.
{462}
M.O. Does ransom stand related to His resurrection, as it does to His death?
J.T. Resurrection is necessary. If He is not raised from the dead, there is nothing. If there is no resurrection what are we talking about? Paul says, "Now Christ is raised from among the dead". It is a risen Christ that is the basis of the gospel.
C.A.M. Should we stress the vicarious thought, because without the resurrection there is nothing positive for man? The first order of man is ended and put out of sight in death.
J.T. All persons raised before, even during, the Lord's lifetime, were just brought back to a flesh and blood condition. Enoch was not raised. He went to heaven by some mysterious way, translated, representing some operation of God; nor was Elijah raised, he went up on the same principle, but resurrection means a new order of man. The old is left behind in death. "Delivered for our offences" means that what we are in ourselves is gone. Our offences in ourselves is the teaching of Romans. Christ is raised, not simply brought back to a state of life out of death, but in a new condition of manhood.
H.P.R. "If Christ is not raised, then, indeed, vain also is our preaching".
J.T. That is the thing. We had a moment ago, "But now Christ is raised from among the dead, first-fruits of those fallen asleep". It is a new condition, not simply a man. Lazarus was raised but he died again undoubtedly, and others were raised even in the Old Testament, but they were not brought back into a new condition of life. It is a new condition of life that is involved in the gospel, a new man.
C.A.M. This is a very interesting matter to all of us. It seems to be a very special matter, this including of the Lord's resurrection in what is vicarious. When we think of the Lord in His present place,
{463}
there is a sort of idea that He is representative in heaven. You do not carry the vicarious thought further than resurrection, do you?
J.T. Well, I think resurrection is the basic thought in Romans. It is not simply that He is in heaven. That brings us to Ephesians, but the Spirit could not come down until He went up. We have to bear that in mind. "If I do not go away, the Comforter will not come to you". He has to reach the full position according to the counsels of God in regard to man, before you get the Spirit. I suppose Romans stresses the Spirit in the sense that the Spirit glorifies us; we are glorified in having the Spirit. John says, "the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified". The reception of the Spirit means glorification; it does not go so far as meaning ascension. There is no ascension for us in Colossians, but in Ephesians we are made to "sit down together". That is a full thought; the Spirit in us means that morally we are glorified (@Romans 8: 30).
C.A.M. So that it is right to carry the thought of what is vicarious until we reach the new order of man.
J.T. Yes, there is what was needed to set aside before God the first order. The question is whether the coming of the Spirit does not imply Christ's glorification. It does certainly, and the vicarious thought may run into that in some sense. Everything is reached in Christ, and the Spirit comes down to make it effective.
C.H.H. Would not the words "if Christ be not raised, ... ye are yet in your sins", imply that the sin question necessitated resurrection?
J.T. Yes. He was delivered for our offences and raised for our justification. Justification includes forgiveness of sins.
Rem. In @Romans 5 it says, "For if, being enemies, we have been reconciled to God through the death
{464}
of his Son, much rather, having been reconciled, we shall be saved in the power of his life". I was wondering if being saved in the power of His life would bear on that?
J.T. It does bear on it. It is His life as He is now.
A.R. Is it right to say that the Lord Jesus represents a new order of man? "By the disobedience of the one man the many have been constituted sinners, so also by the obedience of the one the many will be constituted righteous". There is a constitutional development in a race as a result of Christ having come.
J.T. Just so. Men are brought into it. Of course, when you use the word 'man' it means the race. The word used for Adam involves the race; one of the words covers all of us. When the Lord is spoken of as having come into manhood, it is said He was found in the likeness of men, meaning that He came in in the ordinary sense, not in any outward greatness, but just in the ordinary fashion of man. In all His infiniteness He was in that lowly guise.
C.N. In speaking of resurrection in @1 Corinthians 15 the apostle refers to Christ as the first-fruits, "then those that are the Christ's at his coming". Does that help in what you said in regard to the vicarious side of the resurrection?
J.T. Well, we come into resurrection literally when the Lord comes. Evidently some did in the way of witness according to Matthew; many of the bodies of the saints which slept arose and went into the holy city. That is all we know about them. Whether they came out in a new condition is not stated, and what became of them we have to leave with God; but properly speaking, our resurrection is when the Lord comes. Those of us who are alive and remain will be changed into His image and the
{465}
sleeping saints will be raised but they will be raised first, and that is all based on the vicarious death of Christ and that runs on to what He is. It establishes a new order of man, a new condition of man. The vicarious work of Christ leads to that. That is the position. It is not a man that was brought back to life but a new condition of man, "such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones". That alludes to our dispensation.
A.Ph. Does the present dispensation start at Pentecost?
J.T. In principle it began when the Lord became man, but it required redemption; only that the things the Lord was doing as man here were anticipative. It says He "came by water and blood, ... not by water only, but by water and blood". That is, the incarnation was in that connection. There would be no sense in it if He did not come by water and blood. Therefore, the dispensation began in His ministry, I would say, although He carried on in relation to the old dispensation in a sense, a dual condition in a sense, but He had the new in mind and all that He did was to confirm the new dispensation. The four gospels were not written until after christianity was an established matter here and therefore they were to confirm by Christ's ministry what the apostles were doing.
J.W.D. Do we get in the Psalms, such as @Psalm 22, the blending of the dispensations in a poetic way in Christ's feelings? You get in @Psalm 91, "the Most High" and "Almighty" and "Jehovah", all brought together.
J.T. Well, that is in general what we are dealing with, how all the dispensations come on us. They are all understood by the saints at the present time. The earlier saints really did not understand what they were speaking of; they had some inklings, but the full understanding of all things, inclusive of the
{466}
Psalms, is by those who have the Spirit of God. That is why the Lord spoke of Moses and the Psalms.
J.W.D. It is not a dry and academic thing. In the Psalms you get the mighty outbursts of feelings linking dispensations together.
J.T. Yes, we do, but who understood them when they were written? I do not believe they were understood any more than the prophets were understood. It is by the Spirit we understand the Psalms; the prophets are understood now. "The Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow". It was not to themselves it was revealed, but to us by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. It is in us that everything is understood.
J.W. Paul in his preaching at Antioch of Pisidia alludes to David serving his own generation and falling asleep, and he speaks of Moses and the law, but he speaks of Christ as superseding both, does he not?
J.T. Just so. Christ is everything. Everything awaited the incarnation but also redemption, because the Lord became incarnate in relation to redemption. There would be no result for man in His becoming man if He did not come by water and blood. That new order of man is not simply what He was here in the flesh, but as He is now. John says, "It doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is", as if the entering into the new order for us synchronises with what we shall see. We see Him as He is, and we shall be like Him.
A.R. While waiting that change of body. Paul says in Romans, "walk in newness of life". Would the idea be that the *new* feature is seen even before the external is taken on?
{467}
J.T. Well, quite so. Christ has been raised by the glory of the Father so we should walk in newness of life. The glory of the Father really is what predominates at the present time.
C.A.M. I would like to ask one more question about this matter of what is vicarious. "Buried with him in baptism, in which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead". In connection with the import of *with* in Colossians, is this vicarious matter underneath?
J.T. We could not be with Him otherwise. We are raised by faith; we take the thing in by faith and the energy of the working of God. The power that raised Christ is operating in ourselves so that we can lay hold of resurrection. Paul says that, "I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead". That is what we are dealing with, to attain to it. That could only be possible by the Spirit, the energy of God operating in our souls, but faith is the basis of it. "Through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead". When we are literally raised we shall have been literally dead; it will not be a question of faith. That power takes effect in us, but at the present time faith is operative.
A.L. Verse 13 says, "Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing", that is the fruit of the fulness we have been speaking of.
J.T. Quite so, that is what he is dealing with in @Romans 15 and supports clearly what we are aiming at, what the dispensation is, how buoyant it is, how real the blessedness is, and hence Paul's account of his own work. He says, "I will not dare to speak anything of the things which Christ has not wrought by me". He is not going to speak of the things he did himself. He is going to speak of what Christ had wrought by him. What a perfect witness he is in himself! "For I will not dare to speak anything of
{468}
the things which Christ has not wrought by me, for the obedience of the nations, by word and deed, in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of the Spirit of God; so that I, from Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum, have fully preached the glad tidings of the Christ". It is a full dispensational thought he is dealing with. The thing has been carried out geographically over an immense area. He says, "That I might not build upon another's foundation; but according as it is written, To whom there was nothing told concerning him, they shall see; and they that have not heard shall understand. Wherefore also I have been often hindered from coming to you". He had Rome in mind and Spain. We are now dealing with the outlook of Paul, one man who apprehended, cherished, and valued the whole thought of the dispensation. We shall see what this man was personally and we get a good deal of it here, how he covered the thing. We shall see this afternoon how ages have to be covered in this matter. The apostle is in one age and in one geographical position. Geography enters into it, and the extent of the testimony is covered by one man. He is able to give you an outlook which involves the dispensation.
J.T.Jr. Would you understand from chapter 16 that in his preaching he brought in the mystery? I thought of it in connection with chapter 15. He speaks of his preaching, "so aiming to announce the glad tidings". This mystery had been kept in silence, but would be included in every preaching in some way, do you think?
J.T. Well it would. He was covering that. In the last paragraph of the epistle he lets out the truth about the mystery which really belongs to Ephesians, but certainly it was his preaching that he is alluding to here. He keeps generally to the provisional side of the position of the truth in Romans. The mystery
{469}
comes in at the end of the chapter just to link our minds on with Ephesians.
A.R. What you say about the geographical side should greatly stimulate us in our prayer meetings to ask God to bring this international conflict to an end in order that the geographical position in grace might continue.
J.T. Just so. We were speaking about that some time back, and I think we were all encouraged by the idea that the present war is a universal matter geographically and racially. The whole race is involved; and we who have eyes to see and ears to hear are becoming acquainted with the earth geographically; that is, in relation to the testimony. It is an important matter and will come out more in the coming age when according to @Revelation 14 the angel flies in the mid-heavens, having the everlasting glad tidings to announce. Great spaces will have to be covered in a very short time, not in two thousand years, but in a very short time, but the territory will be covered. We are becoming conversant with it, and so we shall not forget that. I apprehend that the city will come down from heaven in relation to the earth geographically, and we are to be set over cities. We are to understand; this is the understanding time. God is bringing out a family that is supreme in understanding. That is what gives our subject such importance.
C.R. Would the passage in @Isaiah 66 bear out what you said? "And I -- their works and their thoughts are before me ... The time cometh for the gathering of all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my glory. And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow; to Tubal and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my
{470}
glory: and they shall declare my glory among the nations".
J.T. That is all millennial and we will see something of that, I hope. Our present exercise is that we should get Paul's view, because he is qualified in every way to convey the idea of our dispensation. He says, that a dispensation was entrusted to him. Even if it was against his will naturally, yet the dispensation was committed to him (@1 Corinthians 9: 17). That is christianity, that we are going against our natural wills in what we are doing, and that is only by the power of God. Peter is brought into it, in @Acts 10. Stephen and Paul had come in, and Peter, having the keys of the kingdom, was to work on those lines so that Paul might be let in with his great outlook that God gave him. Stephen had a great outlook in the way he treats the Scripture, the historical side, but Paul had the dispensation in his mind. The Scripture helps us as to the earthly side of it, how he worked from Jerusalem to the Adriatic Sea and extending up perhaps to the Danube, a pertinent allusion to geography. He is pointing that out, but he is speaking of how the matter worked out in his ministry. One man had the full idea of the dispensation in his ministry. He had the full limit of the world on the west as he understood it then. Vancouver is the limit of the west, but he was going to the limits of the west as it was in his mind.
A.R. If a brother has desires in his heart to go to Australasia, it is a question as to whether we are praying according to the will of God. If it is the will of God that he go there, God will see that he does go.
J.T. That is so. He does not go sight-seeing nor as a tourist; that would be his own will. We have to understand that the dispensation of God requires the setting aside of our own wills.
{471}
C.A.M. It is encouraging in connection with the extent of the work of the glad tidings in this country. It might seem a difficult business, uncongenial perhaps as far as lack of taking on spiritual ideas, but the way the apostle extended over the world should encourage us to work especially in such a continent as this. The thought of extending the ministry right over to the boundary line of the world would encourage the carrying of the service in such a continent as this, so that it might extend to the very end.
J.T. That is right. These special meetings are a great help because they tend to a universal outlook; because of brethren from different parts of the earth coming, we get a universal atmosphere. They are of immense value in that way. The limits of the west were in Paul's mind. The Lord alluded to the south, "the queen of the south", without saying where she came from, without saying how far. She would rise up with that generation showing what this new dispensation would bring out of the work of God to condemn the narrow limits of judaism.
S.J.H. Why do you speak of all men? Are there limits? You would forbid going to Asia and so on. Does not the dispensation cover every nation?
J.T. No, not if it is worked out according to the Lord's mind. When He spoke to the disciples He said, "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation". He had the universal thought, but then there are other things that modify that. In result the levitical principle came in. The levitical principle must govern the twelve apostles, for it would apparently be carried out particularly by Paul; the Spirit of God aided him in that. He kept his mind toward the west. The twelve may have gone to the east. Some think they did but there is no clear evidence that anything was done toward the east from Palestine. The work moved toward the west. That is simply a levitical matter. We must
{472}
get the Lord's mind for every service. You cannot simply take the map and say I will go here and there. It is said of Paul that the Spirit of Jesus would not suffer him. You may have an outline as to where you are going, but the Lord says, 'I have rights in this too. It is a question of you getting My mind'. That is all detail, and a servant is nowhere if he is not equal to getting the Lord's mind for every bit of service. Paul and Barnabas no doubt mapped the thing out, but the Lord had to say to them, and therefore Paul says the Spirit of Jesus suffered us not. Instead of staying in Asia he had to come to the west.
C.R. In this commission in regard to extending to the nations, the Lord said He would send him before kings and sons of Israel. Naturally, he would reverse it.
J.T. That was his commission; that is what the Lord had in mind for him. He does not say all kings but "kings and the sons of Israel". In truth that is all verified in that Paul would testify to kings, not all, but he must have met Caesar himself. Caesar was a lion and the Lord delivered Paul out of his hand. All is toward the west; he had Spain in his mind. You can see Spain was the limit of the western world at that time.
A.N.W. The conditions that now arise are to be considered, and we come to conclusions as we go along.
J.T. Just so, surely gathering that it is the Lord's mind after all. The work has followed the course of the sun. All that is of interest and the Lord intends us to look into this matter. The constellations are referred to also, bearing on the path of the sun. He comes out of his chamber as a bridegroom and rejoices as a strong man to run a race. That is from the east to the west.
{473}
C.H.H. In Luke Simeon puts the gentiles before the Jews.
J.T. Well, I was thinking we ought to look at that showing that he is representative -- a dispensational representative. He took the child in his arms, showing that he was a fatherly man, a feeling man. "There was a man in Jerusalem", the word 'man' there has a note of significance, characteristically a Jerusalem man whose name was Simeon. "And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon; and this man was just and pious, awaiting the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him. And it was divinely communicated to him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not see death before he should see the Lord's Christ. And he came in the Spirit into the temple; and as the parents brought in the child Jesus that they might do for him according to the custom of the law, *he* received him into his arms, and blessed God, and said, Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go, accordingly to thy word, in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples; a light for revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel".
That is wonderful, I think; the most positive link you could get in this subject. Although redemption had not been accomplished, he was under the influence of the Spirit of God. He is a man in Jerusalem, a feeling man, and governed by the Spirit of God in his movements and outlook; and the child Jesus is there and he takes Him into his arms and blesses God and says, "a light for revelation of the Gentiles" meaning that the dispensation is to widen out to the gentiles. The coming dispensation is put second; he puts this present one first. He is not simply on Jewish ground; he is beyond that, under the influence of the Spirit of God. Therefore, we
{474}
have the link. It is a spiritual link and then Anna comes in after that. We have her honourably mentioned as to her person and life. It is said of her, "Who did not depart from the temple, serving night and day with fastings and prayers; and she coming up the same hour gave praise to the Lord, and spoke of him to all those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem". All is carried down in those two persons, I would say, so that the dispensation is being inaugurated, but the full thought in redemption must be accomplished by the presence of the Spirit of God here.
C.H.H. In Malachi and what preceded this, the people as a rule were looking for Christ, but were not looking for redemption, for the establishment of Israel's glory; whereas this woman showed the necessity of redemption.
J.T. Quite so, she was looking for redemption and there were others also at Jerusalem. It is thought we might look at 1 Timothy and Ephesians this afternoon, some scriptures presenting the actual state of things in the millennium which is said to be the dispensation of the fulness of times.
{475}
THE DISPENSATIONS (5)
@1 Timothy 1: 1 - 20; @1 Timothy 2: 1 - 7; @Ephesians 2: 13 - 22; @Ephesians 1: 7 - 12; @Revelation 21: 23 - 27; @Revelation 22: 1 - 5
J.T. The section in 1 Timothy has been suggested as affording further indication of Paul's outlook, the extent of it and the extent of his service, as it says, "to which *I* have been appointed a herald and apostle, (I speak the truth, I do not lie,) a teacher of the nations in faith and truth". He had already alluded to the present dispensation as in faith, "God's dispensation, which is in faith" (chapter 1, verse 4), and his place, too, in the divine scheme not only as a minister but as a convert. He was personally illustrative, or a delineation, of the dispensations, that is to say, this one and the next one, for he says in verse 16, "For this reason mercy was shewn me, that in me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole long-suffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal". Having that in mind he breaks out into a doxology in regard to the King of the ages which no doubt is an allusion to these dispensations, "Now to the King of the ages, the incorruptible, invisible, only God, honour and glory to the ages of ages". Then in order to see the link with the two dispensations he speaks in @Ephesians 1 of pre-trusting in Christ, one of those who pre-trusted, as if he speaks of himself and others as believing before the time of the last dispensation, I mean the millennium. They believed in our dispensation pre-trusting, though the time for them would be later. Evidently he had that in mind elsewhere in calling himself an abortion, as if he was in mercy brought before the time into something much better than what he should have come into as a Jew. His statements throughout this section in 1 Timothy have a personal bearing between himself and his confidant, Timothy. The passage
{476}
has peculiar interest, and would be the theme of their conversation at any time, not exactly doctrine, but personal views which would be a theme of conversation at any time between them and interested persons, especially a man like Timothy. He has the idea of dispensations much in his mind in the scriptures read, rather in the sense of an age or a time of administration, so that in @Ephesians 1 the millennial time is formally alluded to, "having made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself for the administration of the fulness of times; to head up all things in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth". Then he adds, "in him, in whom we have also obtained an inheritance", so that our inheritance stands in relation to the coming age. What we have finally in the eternal state of things is another matter; and is treated in the early part of the chapter to the end of verse 6. We are the subjects of grace, being taken into favour in the Beloved, and marked out for sonship. That is our eternal portion; but as regards dispensations, we have part in the inheritance of the dispensation of the fulness of times.
C.H.H. Would you say that those who pre-trusted in Christ first were in relation to the coming generations?
J.T. I think so, the prefix 'pre' would mean before the time proper to the Jewish part in the divine scheme. The Jews come into ours as we have in the second chapter. We are both made one.
A.N.W. The emphatic "*ye* also have trusted" is the gentiles coming in as having been afar off.
J.T. Just so. I think what we have said in regard to these passages would give us a general idea as to where we stand at this very moment in regard to the two dispensations. Paul himself represents the link running through both in regard to the present
{477}
and the future, the future ending up with the age of ages, but here (@1 Timothy 1: 17) we have "the ages of ages". The end of @Ephesians 3 is "the age of ages". That seems to be eternity, so far as we can take in eternity, but it is doubtful whether we are capable of taking it in. There is a particular age characterised as the age of ages, whether it might not be the millennial period but merging into eternity, into an endless condition.
A.R. We have been considering so far from Adam to our time, whereas the verse in the end of @Ephesians 3, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", looks onward.
J.T. Yes, what is forward, glory to God "in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". What the actual generations are is not clear, but there is a general indication that eternity is in mind as far as we are able to grasp the thought. The pre-eminence of the assembly is stressed; the glory is "in the assembly in Christ Jesus", meaning that there is power in the position. "Unto all generations of the age of ages"; there is nothing beyond that. That is final. It is the highest thought you can get as to what is coming, of what is fixed, and final; the assembly being the centre of everything in Christ Jesus.
N.W. Would you say that among those families God will have secured a distinct family from each of the dispensations?
J.T. I would think so. There will be a yield from each, made perfect.
C.A.M. Do you think that in these epistles which Paul writes from prison he must have had a marvellous increase of light?
J.T. The epistle to the Ephesians was written from prison. It contains the greatest light and stresses that he had that light and understanding
{478}
from God. In view of Timothy being in Ephesus he wrote to him. It is clear that the truth developed in Ephesus was in his mind. Undoubtedly it was there, of course, while he ministered in Ephesus. He tells us before he went to prison that he had not failed to present to them the whole counsel of God, but the truth that he ministered at Ephesus must have been greatly accentuated and deepened in his soul while in prison. Of course, he had two years at Caesarea and at least two in Rome. They must have been wonderful learning times. Paul says in Timothy, I left you at Ephesus, as if everything should be provided there to consider the light of our dispensation because the acme of things is there. The light and knowledge of our dispensation should be fully worked out. I think @Acts 20 shows that the matter was finished as far as his public service went in that city.
C.H.H. Would Timothy maintain us in the height of the dispensation in a day of breakdown? The teaching of Timothy would further sustain us.
J.T. Yes, and in Revelation the Lord begins at Ephesus showing that that was the top-stone. The epistle in principle does not add anything to that. It may be in detail, but the ministry itself at Ephesus was the top-stone of Paul's official ministry before he was imprisoned. He says, "I have not shrunk from announcing to you all the counsel of God". The whole of @Acts 20 is a love chapter and it shows that Paul was in the very midst of, as Ezekiel says, waters to swim in. The fulness of things had been reached in that city.
A.R. I was wondering if the end of chapter 3 of Ephesians was that you go backward to where we started with @Genesis 5, the generations of Adam, and then you come forward and understand that God still has in mind other generations. You might say, a series of God's operations.
{479}
J.T. Yes. The word 'generations' in @Genesis 5 is origin. Whatever is alluded to here, all the families are viewed as in relation to the assembly as in eternity. Each one is named of the Father in relation to Christ. The assembly is the very centre of glory Godward. What the apostle has in mind in @Ephesians 3 is the one family; that in which we have our part, the assembly, having an official place in the centre of everything in God's service.
H.P.R. I would like to get clear as to the verse quoted, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". Do you think of that as going back to the past generations?
J.T. Well, it is not too clear. The main thought is the assembly in Christ Jesus, the family that the apostle has in his mind in dealing with the ministry in that chapter. It is a parenthesis really, as if it is the very height of things and will be eternally, but what the generations are to be is not clear. What we are at now is Timothy and his being left at Ephesus. The apostle's mind was on this matter of the dispensation of God in faith, and then he says, later in the chapter, "He has counted me faithful, appointing to ministry him who before was a blasphemer and persecutor, and an insolent overbearing man: but mercy was shewn me because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief. But the grace of our Lord surpassingly over-abounded with faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. Faithful is the word, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom *I* am the first". He is calling attention to himself, not now as a minister only, but as a saved man. "But for this reason mercy was shewn me, that in me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole longsuffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal"; and then this allusion to the
{480}
King of the ages which is a doxology, shows how feeling he was about the matter and how much the idea of ages was in his mind and what was set out in his own history as a saved man. It seems as if he would draw us into that so that we might see now how we are linked on with the coming age. The previous dispensation is linked on with ours, as in Simeon and Anna as we noted this morning. So surely there is now to be a state of things by the grace of God at the end of ours linking on with the coming one. The heavenly city will be that in its fulness; by what is going on now it is being completed to have its place in the coming age. In @Revelation 14 we have a company of a hundred and forty-four thousand with the Lamb on mount Zion, and we are told that a song is being sung in heaven before the elders and that no one can learn that song but the hundred and forty-four thousand. This shows that there is a positive link between the heavenly position and the earth, the Jewish position on earth.
A.C. What have you to say about the apostle being the chief of sinners?
J.T. Well, it is to show clearly the extent of the grace extended to us, and the grace that will be extended to the Jews by and by. The apostle represented both; be is a delineation of all, "that in me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole long-suffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal". It is to show the great place he had personally, not simply as a minister, but as a believer, a convert. What a sense he had of grace and long-suffering! He does not merely speak of his own sinfulness in the past, but like Simon the leper, the idea of chief of sinners attached to him.
J.W.D. I was going to ask about the linking on of dispensations. We show forth the Lord's death
{481}
until He comes. Is there in that thought a linking on with the coming dispensation?
J.T. Well, the breaking of bread is not connected with the Jewish remnant. It had the assembly in mind. I do not think it would drop to a lower level than that. It is said that we "being many, are ... one body". In the Lord's mind according to what He said to Paul it is connected with the assembly, "until he come".
J.W.D. Well, is not His coming the appearing? I am not thinking of the breaking of bread dropping to a lower level, but whether it would link on with the Jewish remnant?
J.T. As we read the scripture contextually, it is the coming of the Lord ending this dispensation that is in mind and this would be the rapture. As we read it from the standpoint of prophecy, we might say it goes some years further than that when He comes into view. The point is that the end of the dispensation belongs to this dispensation.
C.A.M. Do you think the fact that it is an announcement to the world of the Lord's death would perhaps look on in some way to the appearing?
J.T. Well, no doubt it is in testimony "until he come", but I think it should be read contextually. It alludes to the time when we are taken.
C.A.M. It would be in a sort of bridal setting?
J.T. Yes, it would be that. I would rather connect it with the assembly, and all that is in the Lord's mind as promoting bridal affections.
N.W. In learning the new song do the hundred and forty-four thousand learn it from the assembly or from some previous dispensation?
J.T. The point is they are the only ones that can learn it. John says in @Revelation 14, "And I saw, and behold, the Lamb standing upon mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand,
{482}
having his name and the name of his Father written upon their foreheads. And I heard a voice out of the heaven as a voice of many waters, and as a voice of great thunder. And the voice which I heard was as of harp-singers harping with their harps; and they sing a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures and the elders. And no one could learn that song save the hundred and forty-four thousand who were bought from the earth". It is evidently a new one just sung and they are the only ones that can learn it. It is a privilege granted to the bride in chapter 19 that she should be arrayed in fine linen, and a privilege is granted here to the hundred and forty-four thousand. They are the only ones who can learn it. They are privileged. It does not say they learned it but they are the only ones that can. It shows that they are of an exalted character above the earth but yet not of heaven.
A.R. Will what is being presented at the end of this dispensation be carried forward as an endowment to the next generation that is to come?
J.T. They will learn from the assembly undoubtedly. The Jewish remnant, really the whole nation in principle, and the hundred and forty-four thousand, are seen as having a remarkable intelligence as compared with all else on earth. No others could learn this song. Who is singing we do not know because the assembly is seen in the elders and the living creatures, but it is clear that the Jews, the Israel of God, will be able to take on something at least of what goes on in the city; in that day their names will be in the city. The heavenly city will give character to all, the whole coming day. Those who form part of it will extend their influence to all below.
S.McC. Do you see any linking on in the present moment with the dispensation to come in the way the testimony is coming before kings and nations
{483}
now, God showing what He has and what He can do. It says in Revelation, "And the nations shall walk by its light; and the kings of the earth bring their glory to it". Do you think God is giving testimony to the greatness of what He has now in the assembly?
J.T. It is remarkable how things are being broken up geographically so that we are able to take account of the whole earth, that to which God is about to bear witness, and out of which He will gather an immense company. They are not of the assembly, nor of Israel, but an immense number out of the nations. This is the breaking-up period. The actual spiritual work is not going on yet. The only spiritual work now proceeding is in the assembly.
J.W.D. To what family does the privilege of entrance within the veil apply in the millennium?
J.T. Ezekiel shows that even Israel do not go inside; they never do. While the names of the twelve tribes are on the gates of the city, it does not go beyond that. The inner thing is always the assembly; even the leaves only of the tree of life go outside. The fruit is for all inside but then that is quite simple. The heavenly city is not viewed by itself in Revelation; it is within reach of the nations. They come and bring their honour and glory to it. I do not think they go inside; I am sure they do not, nor partake of the celestial food. The tree of life is viewed as entirely exclusive to what is inside the city. The leaves go outside. There is a link in that but still, it is not the fruit.
We ought not to miss this passage in Timothy, what there was in Ephesus, what was accomplished through Paul in Ephesus, and ministerially that was before he was imprisoned. The letter, of course, was intended to enhance what was ministered there, but the address would show that it was what they
{484}
had received through ministry. The Lord says to Ephesus, "I know thy works and thy labour, and thine endurance, and that thou canst not bear evil men; and thou hast tried them who say that themselves are apostles and are not, and hast found them liars; and endurest, and hast borne for my name's sake, and hast not wearied"; and then He says later, "Remember therefore whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works: but if not, I am coming to thee, and I will remove thy lamp out of its place, except thou shalt repent. But this thou hast, that thou hatest the works of the Nicolaitanes, which I also hate. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. To him that overcomes, I will give to him to eat of the tree of life which is in the paradise of God". That shows that the very best had been ministered there, and there was not only intelligence, but love of the best kind; you might say assembly affection for Christ. The overcomer represents all that; he is not letting anything go, and he is to be given to eat of the tree of life which is in the paradise of God. That is the fulness, I think, of assembly privilege.
J.T.Jr. He would expect Timothy would have the outline of sound doctrine, and to hold all "according to the glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God".
J.T. Yes, he had fully followed up all that Paul had taught and he is left at Ephesus and would enforce it. He would follow up all that had been taught, and establish elders so that the position at Ephesus should be held intact as representing the fulness of the New Testament or our whole dispensation, the fulness of light and the truth of God. We get our dispensation contemplated in this epistle to Timothy; "God's dispensation, which is in faith". It must be there, because there is a fulness, a summit in Paul's ministry, and I believe Ephesus is intended
{485}
to represent that. Timothy was to remain there to see that it was carried on.
J.T.Jr. Do you think that Paul alludes to himself and his conversion to show that besides the sound doctrine, you need the persons to maintain it? It shines through the persons. Then Timothy follows. All is handed down through persons.
J.T. That is the idea, the King of the ages coming into his mind. It is God coming in Himself, but in that majesty He is dealing with dispensations, of which we reach the fulness now, in result, in our own dispensation. The others have all come to us, and Paul is looking on to the coming one as well, for that is the next thing. Paul is a delineation of that also, to those who believe.
C.H.H. Would the tree of life be to maintain us in the heavenly setting livingly?
J.T. I think so. The twelve manner of fruits keep us within the bounds of time. It is clearly a millennial setting, but we have such food as would maintain us in our heavenly calling. We are in touch with it according to our own constitution by this twelve manner of fruits from the tree of life.
A.R. I was wondering if in the millennium the Ephesian features will give character even to what will be given in time?
J.T. Well, that is right. It is already here, so that when we come to chapter 2 of Ephesians we see how the thing is already taking form in the assembly. The idea of the mystery is touched on in @Romans 16, but in @Ephesians 2 he speaks of it as having taken form. He says, "having annulled the enmity in his flesh, the law of commandments in ordinances, that he might form the two in himself into one new man, making peace; and might reconcile both in one body to God by the cross, having by it slain the enmity". And then he shows that the Lord Jesus came and preached. That is in view of
{486}
the mystery being reached, the full thought being reached; "Coming, he has preached the glad tidings of peace to you who were afar off", that is to the gentiles, "and the glad tidings of peace to those who were nigh". The gentiles come first, very remarkably, as in Simeon's blessing. The gentiles are first here. "For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father". We are in the enjoyment of the mystery. The highest position, I think, is contemplated here. And then it goes on to state, "So then ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God, being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone, ... in whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit". I think in this section we see the force of the word 'dispensation' involving a house, involving God's abode. At Ephesus it was fully reached and God carries on the administration of His grace in that connection, and that is what our dispensation is. There can be nothing higher. The link then is touched on so that the temple grows, "the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord". "In the Lord" would allude to the use of it administratively and undoubtedly it goes on to the millennial day, to what Christ is there as Administrator in the dispensation of the fulness of times. There is a temple there. The assembly will be the temple in which everything is made plain in so far as the earthly families, the earthly side, and other families are capable of taking it in. The assembly has all knowledge and has it by the power of the Holy Spirit.
A.R. In Revelation it is said, "The Lord God Almighty is its temple". How would you fit that into what you are saying?
{487}
J.T. Well, that is inside. He says, "I saw no temple in it; for the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and the Lamb". That is divine Persons. If there is anything inside beyond what is in the assembly, it is in divine Persons and that, of course, is infinitude. Divine Persons are there but are more than the temple of it. Here in Ephesians it is growing to a temple in the Lord which means He is acting in administration. The title "Lord" means that. The queen of Sheba came up with her questions. There will be no more enigmas, but everything will be solved in so far as the earthly families are capable of taking in the truth.
J.W.D. Do you mean that the heavenly city itself is the temple?
J.T. That is what is in view here. It is growing to that.
J.W.D. These names of divine Persons, you said, represented God as in infinitude. Is that right?
J.T. Yes, the further you go in, the more infinite all becomes; because there must be the idea of infinitude. God is God. God and the Lamb are there, and in so far as the idea of temple is there, the Lord God Almighty *is* its temple, and the Lamb.
C.A.M. The heavenly side of the truth is what we are thinking of, not what is in Ezekiel's temple.
J.T. Ezekiel's temple is not contemplated here at all. It is the assembly here growing to a holy temple in the Lord. In Corinthians it says "ye are the temple of God", and that is already true in our Bible readings, such as this. When we come together we can count on light for a solving of difficulties; we can count on the Spirit for that, but in the heavenly city as in the millennium, everything is solved for it. It is the temple for others.
S.McC. What relation does the earthly temple bear to this? Will the light of the heavenly city be diffused independently of what there is established
{488}
in an earthly way in relation to God or will it be diffused in relation to it also?
J.T. I should not like to say independently because the names of the twelve tribes of Israel on the gates show the thing is fixed in that way, a graded position, the assembly being the supreme thought and all else graded from that. I think the gates are the links between the heavenly and Israel here below; and the nations, a wider circle, come up to Jerusalem. They bring their glory to the heavenly city, but they come up to worship. The idea is, one, two, three, in the temple, in the tabernacle, and in the ark. The idea is, one, two, three, the assembly is the first place, then Israel, and then the nations.
A.E.H. Does this most inner thought of the temple related to the infinitude of divine Persons suggest the fulness of God in verse 19 of the next chapter?
J.T. Just so, that we might be filled to all the fulness of God. The assembly is perfect in itself as regards its official place here below in the dispensation of the fulness of times. The dispensation will terminate, but the assembly goes on.
N.W. God shows through the assembly now His all-various wisdom in the heavenlies.
J.T. That is exactly the thing in @Ephesians 3. The angels see the all-various wisdom of God.
A.E.H. How far do you think that we of the assembly will be guided in our thoughts in the dispensation of the fulness of times by the consciousness of our part in the eternal counsels of God? Will we still be governed that way in our thinking in the millennium?
J.T. I think so. We will be able to come down to that. The Lord came down to Jewish thinking, down to man's thinking too. I think the heavenly city in character would be very much like the Lord in its intelligence -- coming down to things in
{489}
priestly grace and naming things. So you have the idea of one set over ten cities. What a man he will be! He will impart intelligence to those cities. The heavenly will be there.
H.P.R. Does the heavenly city and what is in it go beyond the fulness of time?
J.T. The heavenly city is complete as it is seen coming down. There is nothing to be added. It is capable of coming down into the time scene just as the Lord came into time and the Spirit came into time. Even now the saints as viewed in Ephesians are heavenly. As we considered yesterday in @Exodus 24, the saints typically are brought up to see the God of Israel and then you get the material for the tabernacle. The pattern comes down; the material comes down. In @Ephesians 2 we are seen as taken up to heaven and then Paul speaks of the position on earth, as if it came down from heaven, like the vessel coming down to Peter and then going up and remaining there.
C.H.H. In the eternal state the assembly is spoken of as adorned as a bride and in that form it is the tabernacle of God with men.
J.T. Just so. It is capable of that. I suppose eternally there will be a condition like that in which God is in touch immediately with men in His tabernacle.
J.W. Paul speaks of its being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets. Is that a present matter?
J.T. I think what is apostolic is in mind. The twelve had to do with it. You have to go inside to understand what Paul's part is. That is an eternal idea. The consummation of all the dispensations is seen there. The assembly is the product of them.
A.R. Is there anything of interest in that it is said that "night shall not be there"?
{490}
J.T. It would not be mentioned at all unless there was darkness down here. We get other Scriptures that bear on that: in @Isaiah 60, to Israel it is said, "Arise, shine! for thy light is come, and the glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee". The light is radiating from Jerusalem and that passage is quoted in Ephesians. It enters into our position too, and our light is now shining. Of course, it is a relative thought. When it is seen in its fulness there is no darkness, which would mean that the darkness is to be dispelled from the universe. We have very little idea of what God has in mind for us; we have this great thought in the first chapter of Ephesians of the dispensation of the fulness of times.
S.McC. In the life of the heavenly city will there be occasions of serving God in the matter of song? How will the service proceed in the heavenly city, in the world to come? Now we have the formal service on Lord's day. In the heavenly city will there be certain occasions of serving God in a particular way through the channel of song?
J.T. I would think so, glory to God in the assembly in Christ Jesus. It is service Godward; whether it is taken up on the principle of time I do not know. We surely merge into an endless or eternal state of things. But what goes on in the millennium, in which the heavenly city has part, is what is taught in Scripture. The service of God will be resumed on earth, as Ezekiel shows. Ezekiel should be studied in relation to the heavenly city. There is great correspondence between the two cities. We are to learn in what Ezekiel teaches us as to what goes on in relation to the Israelites or Jewish nation in the future.
C.H.H. We have allusions in Revelation to certain kinds of service going on in heaven. I suppose that gives us some idea of the service going on?
{491}
J.T. Just so. It goes on. It says in the passage read, "And no curse shall be any more; and the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him, and they shall see his face; and his name is on their foreheads. And night shall not be any more, and no need of a lamp, and light of the sun; for the Lord God shall shine upon them, and they shall reign to the ages of ages". All this is in view of the millennium. What is eternally to continue is somewhat left, but we can see that we are merging. The whole universe will merge from a flesh and blood condition to what is spiritual, because the new heavens and new earth are yet to come in.
J.W.D. It mentions here the thought of glory in the assembly whereas the early part of chapter 1 speaks of the counsels of God, speaks of love. @John 17 is full of the idea of love. Is this thought of glory more in relation to the public service of the assembly?
J.T. I think so. We are now dealing with the dispensation of the fulness of times. We read from the end of @Revelation 21 and the first part of chapter 22 where the service goes on, and it looks as if we are still in millennial relations. In @Matthew 25 we get another view of what will be in that day. Speaking about glory, the Lord says in verse 31, "But when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then shall he sit down upon his throne of glory, and all the nations shall be gathered before him; and he shall separate them from one another, as the shepherd separates the sheep from the goats". I was thinking of your allusion to glory shining out. He comes in His glory and sits on the throne of His glory. The Spirit is putting together for us an immensity of display in the dispensation of the fulness of times. All that God has been working is in view of this display, when
{492}
He will show what He can do here on earth in men in flesh and blood. In some He has wrought, and the Son of man will come in His glory and deal judicially with the nations, segregating those who have loved, and served, and cared for Christ's brethren, and those who have not of whom it is said "and these shall go away into eternal punishment, and the righteous into life eternal". I only refer to that to show what glory is going to be seen in the judicial services of the Lord. His glory and the throne of His glory. There is to be glory shining out in administrative services, even judicially; how much more when the wicked nations have been disposed of, and only the righteous left. What a glory it will be with all the great prophetic announcements of the Old Testament, especially those of Isaiah, coming into it. It is God making the greatest possible display in the dispensation or administration of the fulness of times.
C.R. "That God may be all in all". Is that the climax?
J.T. That is the eternal state of things, but the throne of Christ's glory in Revelation is to have its place. God has appointed a day when He will judge the world in righteousness, by that Man whom He has ordained. That throne is to become a part of the display. There will be a gradual merging from that into a new city, new Jerusalem, and all will be spiritual.
A.R. Would verse 5 in @Revelation 22 suggest also a merging? The state of things in the millennium will merge into an eternal state, to the age of ages.
J.T. Well, it is ages of ages there, which seems to be a continual duration, a number of ages, but @Ephesians 3 is the age of ages; the age which is the sort of culmination of all the ages.
{493}
C.H.H. The King over all the earth comes into view in the last chapter of Zechariah, and all nations come up to worship Him in Jerusalem.
J.T. Just so. That will be the King on earth, but then who is the King of the ages? The apostle in @1 Timothy 1: 17, clearly has God Himself in mind according to what he says in his doxology: "Now to the King of the ages", not simply King, but of the ages. Can you leave out any? "The incorruptible, invisible, only God"; it is an immense thought, somewhat amplified in chapter 6 of this epistle in which the apostle says, "I enjoin thee before God who preserves all things in life, and Christ Jesus who witnessed before Pontius Pilate the good confession, that thou keep the commandment spotless, irreproachable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; which in its own time the blessed and only Ruler shall shew, the King of those that reign, and Lord of those that exercise lordship; who only has immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see; to whom be honour and eternal might". The apostle is breaking out into a doxology here, having God in mind, not only the mediatorial services of Christ, but God.
C.H.H. Would "the King, Jehovah of hosts" in @Zechariah 14: 16 be Christ? Zechariah also says, "And Jehovah shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Jehovah, and his name one".
J.T. Well, I suppose it would in some circumstances or connections; it is Jehovah who is reigning. The dispensations are in movement, but there is finality, and that is eternal, a new heaven and a new earth. As Peter uses the expression, the day of eternity.
H.P.R. Are "ages of ages" necessarily connected with time?
{494}
J.T. They are connected with time, but it is a question whether time expressions are used to meet our limited understanding. Ephesians indicates plainly that we must always recognise creature limitations. That we might know breadth, and length, and depth, and height, is creature limitation, but the Lord God and the Lamb involve Deity, what is unlimited. Christ is said to have gone beyond all the heavens. That is Deity and we are in touch with it. How immense it is! God deals with us in the limitations in which we are. We use the word 'eternity', but are we capable of taking it in?
C.DeB. Does the apostle in @1 Corinthians 15 sum up into finality when he says, "That God may be all in all"?
J.T. That is finality, that is fixity. He is all, and He is in all. We have the expression, "one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". So that fixity is that God is in us, and we are filled to all the fulness of God.
C.R. It would not be fully pleasurable to God unless His creature was blessed in knowledge of Himself. Has not God been working all through these dispensations to that end?
J.T. Quite so. The millennium has in view that "all shall know me". We cannot imagine being in a state of ignorance. Everything is to be in a state of knowledge.
A.R. It says in the first verse of Genesis, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". In @Revelation 21: 1 it says, "the first heaven and the first earth had passed away". Will it just affect the created heavens?
J.T. It is the created heavens, of course. There are no other time-created heavens. In the beginning God created heaven and earth, but the Lord goes beyond all heavens. It is an uncreated condition that belongs to Deity. To go back to @Genesis 1
{495}
there was clearly an addition according to verse 7, to what had been created at the first. "God called the expanse Heavens" -- a new thing. There were waters above and below, a present provisional state of things. There would be nothing like that in the new heaven and the new earth, a spiritual state of things will replace it.
J.W. Peter says, "we wait for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness", and then he alludes to Paul as speaking of these things in his epistles.
J.T. Peter says, "according to his promise". He alludes to @Isaiah 65: 17, and there it is brought down to what we have been saying -- the dispensation of the fulness of times, actually a new heaven and a new earth in a sense, just as we are already heavenly in a sense, but that is not final. Peter says "according to his promise". Isaiah reads, "I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy". That is the idea in principle, but not the fulness of it. Heaven and earth will be destroyed with fervent heat, so there will be a new one and that new one will be entirely spiritual.
{496}
PLACES OF DIVINE SPEAKING
@Job 38: 1 - 3; @Exodus 12: 1 - 3; @Numbers 1: 1 - 3; @Leviticus 1: 1 - 3
These scriptures record or treat of positions taken up in divine speaking. They by no means exhaust the scriptures that speak on this point. Scripture usually affords ample room for ministry aiding the minister so that he usually can make choice of passages from which to set out his thought or thoughts in any given service. God is always liberal in this respect, furnishing indeed but a tithe of what could be written, yet enough to afford the minister plenty to choose from in the way of scriptural authority for what he may have to say. So these four scriptures seem to fit in with what is in mind now. First, divine speaking in relation to discipline, and then divine speaking in the world typified in Egypt as that through which Satan holds many of the people of God, not all but many, in bondage. Then, as in Numbers, divine speaking in the wilderness, not Egypt, but the wilderness; that is, the world viewed as a contrary and harrowing scene tending to cause dissatisfaction and complaint. Then finally, divine speaking in the house of God, speaking of the exigencies of His own holy nature. He is concerned in this fourth scripture with what is due to Himself in His own house, a place of love, that He might have from us what He can accept and enjoy.
Now the first scripture will have to do directly with any persons here who are especially under discipline, who are affected by external circumstances in that discipline, external circumstances becoming the instruments of the discipline. Therefore, the position of the speaking is in the whirlwind which is audible and distinct, not as in the house where there is perfect quiet and restfulness, but the whirlwind
{497}
denotes certain divine feelings that the person under discipline needs to take account of and understand, that God is speaking to him or to us -- for who is not under discipline in some sense -- speaking to us with premeditation. There are times and seasons and circumstances in which God speaks suddenly as He did to Aaron and Miriam; but there are circumstances in which God shows great patience in waiting, but nevertheless if it is in His mind to say something to someone or to persons, to say it in circumstances which tend to uneasiness. He is in the whirlwind. Who else could be there and speak with any measure of order and distinctness? Very few of us know much, if anything, about whirlwinds. They are bad enough. Elijah experienced a great and strong wind in mount Horeb. God was not in it. But Elijah was to feel the power of the wind. God was not in that. He had great respect for Elijah, perhaps as much as for any of His servants. He was a man that could change public circumstances by prayer, making them unfavourable and then making them favourable, yet he wearied of his service, and grew fearful, and would determine the end of his own life, which is not within one's province. God alone should decide the termination of lives, and the duration of them. He asked Jehovah to take away his life. God did not do that. He had something very great in His mind for this servant, namely, that he should never lose his life, that he should never die. Hence we learn the great thoughts that God has for His servants, those who serve Him well. Woe be to those who speak ill of Him or them! God caused him to experience something of the great wind; it was a wind without God, who let it do its worst, yet no ill befell the servant. Other terrible things happened too, and then the still small voice speaks to him saying, "What doest thou here, Elijah?" @1 Kings 19: 13.
{498}
Well, now Job is not treated so respectfully. The position is in the whirlwind, and Job is to face what it was. It was a divine arrangement. Was God ever in one before? Did anyone ever see Him in a whirlwind before? We cannot say. It was in existence, but God was in this one. The whirlwind is one of the agencies in God's hands. The mind focuses on the believer who is being disciplined. There is nothing to fear really, because the whirlwind will do him no harm, but it is intended to affect him. It does not evidently cause such commotion or such a noise as to hinder the divine voice penetrating and reaching the ear of the disciplined believer. What a moment for him! He had to do with his three friends. They were not really friendly, but none of them spoke out of the whirlwind. None of them could. Nor did Elihu speak out of the whirlwind. He had no thought at all of causing fear in the heart of Job. He said, "Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid", @Job 33: 7. He represents human sympathy, speaking on God's behalf. But now God is taking on the finishing process. The result is to be reached and He begins most drastically in the position He takes up. Can Job get away from the force of it? He does not attempt to. The idea is that one is to be held whatever the cause or necessity of the speaking and forced to listen to it. If there is a disciplined person here such as Job, one specifically disciplined, and most of us, if not all, experience it, do not turn a deaf ear. God is saying, There are other things, other instrumentalities I have. He is armed with the whirlwind. It belongs to God. He would have Job to be as a disciplined person, not as a self-vindicated person. How eloquent we become in self-vindication! I do not think Job was so eloquent in any of his speeches as he was when he talked about what a great man he was, but now the words of Job are ended because all such words have an ending. God has His way and
{499}
He says to Job, "Gird up now thy loins like a man", @Job 38: 3. That is the word. That is, you are not like a child in your waywardness, your wilfulness and your disobedience. Use manly feelings and listen to God. Answer Me. He says. God is not shutting him up by any means, not formally. He is giving him full scope to answer, but he does not. He answers according to chapter 40, verse 3, but God pays no attention to his answer. I do not want to be like that, that God should pay no attention to what I am saying to Him. Jehovah went on. We are told in the second discourse that He was still in the whirlwind and He was successful. If we are in the place of discipline, or in need of it, let us afford God the satisfaction of overcoming us. We may as well, you know. "That thou mayest be justified when thou speakest, be clear when thou judgest", @Psalm 51: 4. It is His right. God looks for that, but He has pleasure in it. He has reached His object.
Well, now, the second scripture treats of Egypt. There is a certain order in these scriptures as I have read them, for in truth, if we turn away through self-will or worldliness or sin, such as the world is full of, there has to be a new beginning, as the nazarite had to begin over again. We have to go back to the beginning and begin over again. That is the point in this second scripture, as you have often doubtless observed. "Jehovah spoke to Moses and Aaron", for now it is a question of the mediatorial position; there was none with Job; out-and-out discipline is a question of God and the person: "but now mine eye seeth thee", @Job 42: 5. No one else but God, but God has taken up a mediatorial position, to serve us so that we might in our measure begin over again. After all that long weary discourse-making with Job, he really had to go back to the beginning of the book where God was speaking so nicely of him. My servant, He called him; "my servant
{500}
Job". Let me go back again to chapter 1 and begin all over again with God; not indeed the awful miseries of the discipline; let us pass over chapters 3 to 38, as it were. Let me begin over again with God. We cannot afford to miss the instruction even although it may have been through the whirlwind. Job began over again and that is the point in the recovery of a sinful person. And so it is with Moses and Aaron. The people said to Moses, "Speak thou to us". God does not care for that, but He would say, 'If you want Moses, you can have Moses. I have the fullest confidence that Moses will be faithful to Me in dealing with you, and Aaron too'; our Moses is Christ and our Aaron is Christ. So the word is, "Jehovah spoke to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying, This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you. Speak unto all the assembly of Israel, saying, On the tenth of this month let them take themselves each a lamb, for a father's house, a lamb for a house. And if the household be too small for a lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls", @Exodus 12: 1 - 4.
Now we are having to do with Moses and Aaron and with a lamb, and in your own house. The Lord said to Zacchaeus, whom He would have to begin spiritually -- there was some beginning with him before undoubtedly. He wanted to see Jesus who He was. He did not get that impression in the school, nor in the play-house. He got it elsewhere. He got it from God. He could not have told you that, but he did. He wanted to see Jesus who He was. What a Person He must be! he says to himself. The Lord says, "Today I must remain in thy house", @Luke 19: 5. He is to have Jesus in his own house. That is, God in his own house. Well, that is the position here, but it is in Egypt where you have been
{501}
at home. There are some here, perhaps, from some external or natural influence, waiting for the meeting to be over. God is speaking to us through these scriptures. It is a question of Moses and Aaron, men known to you; they are your own people. God speaks of a lamb, a yearling. He looks for something in principle of manhood in us; a year old. A yearling lamb is really a sheep, but it is called a lamb, and it is to be in the house. It is a household matter. It is not the whirlwind, but outside it is Egypt. Many a young Israelite in the land of Egypt that night would be questioning in his own mind, 'Why cannot I go out tonight?' The answer would be, 'No, you cannot go out tonight'. Happy it is that some night has come when you are debarred from your own will. It is pointed out to you that you must not, and the danger is too great. The house is the place, but what a house! These communications came through Moses and Aaron to every father in Israel in the land of Egypt. It is all a young people's matter, and Moses comes to deliver the message directly to the people. He epitomises it. He reduces it to six or seven verses and stresses the little ones.
Well now, it is a new history. How many of you young people here have had a new history since you were born. Each of us usually has his birthday. It is a great idea. I wonder how the Israelites kept their birthdays, because the passover was a movable feast. It was governed by the moon. God does not act automatically. God is God. He made the days and He is the first to use the days. He used the first day. This new day, this new month is to be the beginning henceforth. It does not refer to God. It refers to the believer. That is my second point. Egypt has such a place in our hearts and its calendars and its associations and its leeks and its garlic, whatever they may be. We are going to leave all; we are going to start again; another history, a new calendar,
{502}
new days, new months, new years. Finally time will cease altogether in an eternal day. The day of eternity; think of what a day that is! That is a scriptural term.
Well, now, the next thought is in the first chapter of Numbers. We have done with the whirlwind situation; the discipline has done its work and Job becomes a priest, and really comes on to a new history, a new calendar altogether. We have often spoken of it. God takes away the first to establish the second. Egypt is the first altogether. The only history for the believer is this new history, and it is regulated by the moon as we have had. Well, as I work that out I might make something of the assembly. The moon here has reference to the assembly. How we do speak so lightly about the brethren, and what they say and what they do; so difficult to get on with them. But the moon would have reference to the assembly. It has a place in relation to the sun. It is dependent on the sun. Of course, the assembly is dependent on Christ. As the assembly is dependent on Him, so the moon is dependent on the sun. The moon represents the assembly; the assembly has authority. If a man does not hear the assembly, what about him? "Let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican". You say, I am a listener to Christ; I want to hear about the Lord. Do not forget the assembly. The Lord will not hear you if you do not respect the assembly.
Now it is the second year of this era. "Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai in the tent of meeting, on the first of the second month, in the second year after their departure from the land of Egypt", @Numbers 1: 1. They were in the wilderness for one year and one month. How did they like it? A good question determining what the world has become to the real believer in Christ who understands
{503}
the passover; the lamb slain. He is long enough in the house for you to have known Him well. You become endeared to Him because He died for you. Have you accepted baptism to go forth to Him without the camp? "As many as have been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised unto his death. We have been buried therefore with him by baptism unto death, in order that, even as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so *we* also should walk in newness of life", @Romans 6: 3, 4. Do you like that? That is christianity. That is the christian path. This is a year and a month, the first month of the second year; all that year in the wilderness. Do you want to go back again to the world? The devil seems to get great advantage sometimes. There is commotion abroad in the world. "Many ... went away back", we are told by John, and he has his own way of telling everything. He would say to us in it, 'How can you turn away from Jesus?' Why should you turn away from such love as Jesus love? "Many of his disciples went away back and walked no more with him". So it was in the wilderness they wanted to go away back. They told Moses and they told each other of the wonderful times they had. Things were not nearly so good as they were saying they were. They were telling lies to each other. When we get away from the Lord, things become exaggerated in our minds, and we are not truthful. A low state of soul is never a truthful state of soul. We cover up our mistakes by lies or partial lies. God says, You have been here for a year and a month in this new life, new associations, and now I am taking account of your troubles. I am taking account of the contrariety of the wilderness. I am speaking to you in the wilderness, but I am in My house. God's house is not in heaven; it is here, in a contrary scene. When we sit down to the Lord's supper
{504}
on the first day of the week, we sit down in an externally contrary scene, but all is peaceful within. God is saying to you, I know what the wilderness is. I know you had trouble with your children before you left. I know you may have had to work on Sunday, but you have overcome it, and you have sacrificed double pay to get here. Numbers contemplates persons who are worth numbering. God is saying, I am speaking to you in the contrary scene, but I am speaking to you in the place of love; that is, in the tabernacle, and I am saying to you that you are to be numbered. God says to Moses, "Take the sum of the whole assembly of the children of Israel, after their families, according to their fathers houses, by the number of the names, every male, according to their polls; from twenty years and upward, all that go forth to military service in Israel" (verses 2, 3).
Now, dear brethren, this is a most touching matter. As standing against evil here we are worthy of heaven's recognition, and God is saying that He is taking account of you. He has books. He knows your father and grandfather. He has your pedigree. He is saying to you, 'I know your history'. This type refers not to those who draw back but those who go forward. Numbers will not tolerate going back at all, no more than a soldier's defection is tolerated in the army. Death penalty goes for that. You are reckoned as a real person -- twenty years old. We have been speaking today of full growth. God is saying, I know all your history, I remember when the wind blew in like a hurricane; it blows where it lists. It is very often gentle, especially southerly winds which are not like a hurricane. "The wind blows where it will, and thou hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it comes and where it goes: thus is every one that is born of the Spirit", @John 3: 8. God says, I know that, and I have been with
{505}
you in that; I know your history, because pedigree is the point here. You have distinction in heaven. That is what is meant in Numbers. What good is distinction on earth after all -- medals and the like, what good are they? We have to face matters. It is only what counts in heaven that matters. God is taking account of twenty-year-old people, but real ones, full-grown persons, full-grown men. God says, I know all about your pedigree and I have a place for you. I am depending on you for a certain position. You are a necessity for Me. Six hundred thousand of them. I want every one of you. I am speaking to you. I know exactly where you are. That is the idea. He spoke in the wilderness but in the tabernacle. He had spoken in the wilderness before without the tabernacle, but now it has been built. That is to say, the assembly is the place of affection. God says, I am making the thing attractive to you. So one is greatly concerned about young men and young women who come to the meetings. God is speaking to you in your business, at the office, or on the battlefield. Nothing can hinder God's speaking to you. But He chooses at certain times to have you in the assembly, where you will find out how great you are. What a pedigree you have! What a designation you have! God says, I have you down in My book and I know all about you -- your history, your pedigree, your forefathers. Is it not attractive? I think it is. Christianity is really becoming effective to us as we come together where the Holy Spirit is operating, where divine love is operating through the Lord, and through the Spirit in one another. It is the place of love, the residence of what God has down here. How can I afford to be absent when I can be there?
The next scripture is in Leviticus written by the same person, that is. Moses. "And Jehovah called to Moses and spoke to him out of the tent of
{506}
meeting, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them, When any man of you presenteth an offering to Jehovah, ye shall present your offering of the cattle, of the herd and of the flock. If his offering be a burnt-offering of the herd, he shall present it a male without blemish", @Leviticus 1: 1 - 3. God is saying to us just now that He regards us as people that have some wealth. He says, I know what you have, but "I seek not yours, but you". It is a spiritual matter. The book does not begin with poverty. It begins with wealth and why should we not be wealthy? Numbers contemplates the age of twenty which means that one has the Holy Spirit; that I am indwelt by the Spirit of God, a full-grown person. I am not a babe any more. We are not to be babes. We are to remain as short a time as possible in that state. Not that God does not take account of babes. The Lord Jesus said, "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and has revealed them to babes", @Matthew 11: 25. Matthew contemplates more than that. He contemplates the assembly formed of men, not of babes. God is thinking that we have something. If we are in fellowship we shall soon be tested as to what we have. God knows exactly what we have and He is saying, I know what you have and I want what you have. He is not merely wanting our money, but He does say in this respect, "I seek not yours, but you". It is what we are spiritually, that God has in mind. As in the fellowship we shall soon be tested as to what we will be able to give. So that, dear brethren, God is speaking out of the tabernacle -- He is not speaking in the wilderness here -- that is Numbers -- He is saying in Numbers, I know what you are suffering but I value you all the same; your suffering and contrariety do not detract from your personality. You belong to the
{507}
assembly of the first-born ones registered in heaven. That is what Numbers is teaching you. But in Leviticus God is saying that He is in a house; it is the tabernacle according to all that it is spiritually, and God is saying that He wants us there, and He knows we have what belongs to this place where He is. He wants you to enrich it. He says, I am telling Moses about you. I am regarding you as a well-to-do person. I am not dealing with the poor, I am dealing with you. Persons who are well off. God takes account of what you have. God says, I want that. I can use that. It is pleasurable to Me.
Are we going to deny Him that -- the best we have, given from the heart? It all refers to formation in us. God is just saying a word to us from these four portions that He might have results out of these meetings and finally that He might have what you have for Himself. He says, I want you for heaven but I want you now where I am, and that you should bring up the best you have. He tells you how to come and what to do when you come. He has the priests ready there to assist you, so that you might bring everything to God, and that He might be everything to you, and that you might be a lover of God and bring forth fruit unto God. He wants you to come not in a mere formal perfunctory way, but to come feelingly as a wealthy person with something you have by the Spirit of God that God likes and would have according to His own way and etiquette in His own house.
{508}
SWIMMING
@2 Kings 6: 5 - 7; @Acts 27: 40 - 44; @Ezekiel 47: 5
I use these three scriptures in the gospel testimony, and especially because they all use the word 'swim', which points to experience in the water, and *energetic* experience. The idea of *energy* is essential to salvation, and so it enters into the gospel both from God's side and from the side of the sinner. A lethargic condition is painful indeed to heaven, as it is to us who are interested in souls; and the energy with which God approached the matter of salvation and the cost are intended to affect us, so that there might be a corresponding movement with us.
In the first passage, it was not simply an iron tool, a manufactured article, but it was the iron that fell into the water. It was a *borrowed article*. Men generally are borrowed. Satan uses men. They are not his. He cannot give life; he cannot raise from the dead, but he uses men, women, and children who from the creative side belong to God. And so we are enjoined to remember our Creator in the days of our youth. Satan is not that: God is, and any one taking us on, taking us out of His hand, is interfering with His rights. This type of the iron follows upon Naaman, a well-known character in Scripture. He had been employed. He was a warrior, a soldier of high rank (of which there are many now) and a successful soldier. He was not lost in battle; indeed. God had used him in battle as illustrative of what has come before us, of God's right and activities among men as such -- a distinguished Syrian, a successful warrior. God using him for Syria's deliverance. We may say in our minds, Is God delivering Syria or other countries today? Well, we have to discern and see what God is doing in these matters, for He sometimes goes out of His way to do things that we often think He cannot do. He is always
{509}
sovereign, and many are looking to Him for deliverance of present Syrians in difficulties. And He uses whom and what He will, and always with success, too, but He may be using leprous people. The generals and presidents are leprous men; they cannot be otherwise, yet they can be used. Naaman had been used of God but used as leprous. We may marvel at that if we stop to think of it -- but he was a leper -- as we have often heard -- and he had to do with Jordan. He had to be washed in it. He had not *fallen* into the Jordan, but he had to do with it. He shrank from it, ridiculed it, but be was advised strongly and affectionately to dip into it, not fall into it. Woe to the man that falls into it! The iron here had fallen. It was borrowed, and it had gone out of sight. Naaman had not gone out of sight, certainly not out of his own sight. He was a great man with his master, but he was a great man in his own estimation, leper though he was. In truth, the cause of leprosy is self-will and pride. He is one of the distinguished lepers. He was not lost in battle, as I said, nor in any way. He was still listening to his men. We have the account of his master, the account of his servants, and the account of the handmaid of his wife. It was well for him that there was such a person as this captive maid! She became an evangelist, and through her advice the light was afforded, and he finally reached the Jordan. He did not fall in; he plunged in. He had some energy. He was not like the axe-head loose from its handle. It was helpless, as it were, to save itself, and fell in.
And this brings up the question of energy in swimming. Naaman plunged in. He had hesitated to accept the evangelical word, the word of God. How many are like that, declining to hear the word of God, ready to hear other things, but not the word of God? It is a great advantage to be here ready to
{510}
hear, for affectionate, gracious, intelligent sympathy surrounds you and would persuade you to change your mind since you came in. The current is in the right direction; get into it, submitting your mind to the whole economy of the Spirit of God in this evangelical meeting. And so it was that Naaman came under influence, prophetic influence. I hope this meeting is not wanting in some prophetic influence; that is, what comes from God in the way of persuasion. Naaman got under that influence, first in Elisha, and then in his own servants. They called him "father" reverentially, and he plunges into the Jordan. He had thought that the rivers of Damascus were equally virtuous, if not more so, but there is no river like Jordan. There are many large rivers, but none with the same virtue, none with the same distinction as the Jordan. It has a great distinction in this connection, and Naaman had to do with it and got what he needed. He had energy, but the iron did not; for it is a person symbolised in the iron who did not have energy and went to the bottom. If believers go into the water, they do not go to the bottom. The Egyptians went to the bottom; they sank as a stone, and that is like this iron, too. It had been borrowed, and it had a history. There were obligations connected with it, and so it is that most people get blessing because obligation has been connected with them -- parental obligation, brotherly obligation, neighbourly obligation. The iron had no energy in itself; it sank to the bottom as the Egyptians did, like a stone. How awful it is when death overtakes you and you have no power to meet it at all, no swimming power! Death for the unbeliever is simply agonising, breathing out his last, and then what -- no power after that. A terrible outlook! Therefore the need of energy, and I am hoping that most here have some energy. It is essential to salvation. It is said of
{511}
christians that we are raised from the dead by faith -- not yet literally, but by faith -- of the operation of God, that is, the energy of God; so that we do not sink as a stone when death comes. Think of the energy of the Lord Jesus in death! He delivered up His spirit. And this raises the whole question of resurrection.
There can be no salvation without resurrection, and so the Lord entered into death; He delivered up His spirit. He said no one could take His life from him. No one else could say that. "I lay it down of myself" (@John 10: 18), He says. What a glorious fact that is as to Christ, as to our Saviour! "I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again". He had power, energy in Himself. "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up", @John 2: 19. And so it is if all of us should die. The Lord will come to the grave's mouth, as He did to Lazarus grave. "Now it was a cave, and a stone lay upon it", @John 11: 38. He says to them, "Where have ye put him?". That is what Elisha says, Where is it? We must get the spot. "Where have ye put him?" says the Lord. Martha says, "He stinks already, for he is four days there. Jesus says to her, Did I not say to thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?" (verses 39, 40). It is an evangelical matter. The glory of God enters into evangelical meetings, "Where have ye put him?". Why should the Lord have to ask? He knew, but He would have us to know. Where did this iron fall in? A person might say, It fell into the river. No, that will not do. Heaven requires much more detail, and so it is the graves of all the saints are known there. All the epitaphs have remembrance in heaven. Let us be careful what we put on! "Asleep through Jesus" -- "Unknown, and well known". Heaven knows them. The Lord knows where they are. Abraham, typically Christ, bought a
{512}
burying place for the saints. The Lord knows where they are, and gives a great touch to the burials of those who fall asleep through Jesus. "Where have ye put him?". There it is. It is a cave and there is the stone. There is the Machpelah of each one. That is the burial place of the saints. The Lord will come there; the chapter says so. The Lord shows He is really most sympathetic and inquires of us as to what we know about our dead.
Well, Elisha cut down wood and cast it in. The iron had not been cast in; it fell in. It was a borrowed iron. Elisha would not have a borrowed article. He was used of God according to the divine right of property. Where has it fallen? Well, the stick of wood was cast in there, and the iron did swim. What a triumph! There is nothing more about the stick of wood. It is not said that the wood swam. "The iron did swim", the Spirit of God says. We come out in power, but it is the power that worketh in us already; so the Lord, as I said, knows all those who had been buried in Machpelah, that is, the burying place of the saints. He knows where they are. It is an awful thing to be cremated. It is an unnatural thing to have it done. Nobody who is a christian should do it. "And many bodies of the saints fallen asleep arose", @Matthew 27: 52. They arose. How did they arise? -- from the energy in them; and so it is, if there is to be an arising in a spiritual sense, there must be energy there. Energy is available. The iron did swim. It was a vicarious matter. There is no possibility of any of us swimming in this sense save as a vicarious matter. The death of our Lord Jesus Christ is vicarious, but His resurrection is as vicarious as His death is. "Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures; and that he was buried; and that he was raised the third day, according to the scriptures", @1 Corinthians 15: 3, 4. He has been raised for our justification (@Romans 4: 25).
{513}
Paul goes further in Colossians. We are "also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead" (chapter 2: 12). It was faith in us, so we swim in the light of resurrection. The power of swimming is what I am seeking to stress. On the fifth day in creation, the fowls flew in the air, and the fish swam in the sea. They are living souls. So it is that going back to the chapter that asserts the rights of God in His creation, we find that those that have fins and scales are clean. The fins enable the fish to go through. They do not float, nor did the iron float. It is the swimming; that is the point; the energy typically in it. One looks for some little energy in souls here, lethargic naturally but the power of the evangelical spirit in the meeting stimulating to a little bit of energy which you perhaps have never yet exercised. It may be there now, and the Spirit of God would just stir you up to a little bit of energy. They say to Peter, "What shall we do, brethren?" @Acts 2: 37. That is the question. That supposes energy. Peter did not say, We can do nothing. No, because they could do something; and what they did first was to repent, and that needs energy. Do not be ashamed of it. If there is anything to be repented of -- and let nobody say that there is not, for if he says that, that man is not telling the truth. Peter says, Repent. "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit". You will get greater energy. It needs energy to repent. Unrepentant people just float down the stream. The river down here, the Genesee, is just thick with mud right now. People falling in will go out of sight; but you can escape that. Keep your head above it; that is the point. The stream may be murky, indeed the world itself is corrupt, but the fins enable you to go against it, and the scales shut out the evil, the
{514}
filth that it carries down in its flood. So the iron did swim; it did not float. That is all, and the man who lost it is told to take it back. That is salvation.
Well, now, this links on with what I read in the Acts. It is a well-known scene in the great apostle's life. The ship was fairly big, not quite so big as Noah's ark, but it accommodated two hundred and seventy-six souls, and they were all in danger of being lost. The word 'swim' is brought in twice in the saving process. The soldiers were the killing element there. It is an awful time at the present, killing elements that exist among men. Human life is cheap, it is an awful thing to contemplate the killing power of the present time; and so it was in Paul's day -- human life was cheap, too. There were not so many living in those days as there are now. The population of the world was not nearly so large then, but there were a good many, and the soldiers were here with Paul, and all the persons (we do not know who they were, but Paul was there and Luke and a few others), but the killing element was bent on destroying them because they were prisoners, and the devil was behind it because they were God's servants. But God had His eye on His servants, and they are to be saved. The soldiers would appoint them to be killed. We do not want to have anything to do with the killing business. The saving business belongs to us, and so it was that the saving business in this instance belonged to the centurion, although he was ordained to order them to be killed. He was a Roman military officer. It was a killing time, but the sailors remained with them. The only hope of the ship, Paul said, was the presence of the sailors. Sailors are not necessarily killing men. They are very essential for marine service, but they wanted to save themselves and let the others die. Christians are not like that. The sailors pretended to do so-and-so but they thought to escape out of the ship. Paul,
{515}
however, was a saving person. We are here on the line of salvation. "For this is good and acceptable before our Saviour God, who desires that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth", @1 Timothy 2: 3, 4. He is a Saviour God. The Son of man came to save men's lives, and so Paul was on the saving line. There were two hundred and seventy-six souls on that ship, and I have no doubt he preached to all on board, and God said through His angel, 'You are going to have them all; God has given to you all them that are in the ship'. I do not mean to say they were saved spiritually, but they were saved anyway physically, and that was because of Paul who was on the saving line. Christians should not be on the killing line; they are to be on the saving line. Paul says to the soldiers, 'Do not try to kill me, but if you do not watch those sailors, they will leave the ship, and we shall all be lost'. Paul was on the saving line, and even the sailors served and the officers, the master of the ship, too. The soldiers did their job, though as far as the sailors were concerned, their attempts would have meant destruction.
We are not to be inattentive to the needs of men around us, whatever they be. "Let us do good towards all", @Galatians 6: 10. If you can do anything to save, do it. That is the idea of christianity. The saving principle pervades the whole system of christianity, and the time came when things looked very bad. Paul had the light in his soul. What a comfort it is to care about and obtain the salvation of christians. You say, If they are elect, what is the need of bothering about them? But Paul would say, "For this cause I endure all things for the sake of the elect, that *they* also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory", @2 Timothy 2: 10. What a fine accompaniment! What great and glorious days he had! These so-called 'gospel meetings' are so that we may secure
{516}
"as many as were ordained to eternal life", @Acts 13: 48. Paul knew that two hundred and seventy-six souls were to be saved, but he is going to see that they are saved. God in His operations is in mind. It is what God can do at any time -- change minds to accomplish His purpose. So this is no accidental matter, no mere disaster in the Mediterranean Sea, near the island of Malta. No, it is governed by the sovereign arrangement of God, and so is this meeting. If there is one here elected to be saved, you will be saved; but it is my business to see that you are saved, and saved *now*. The devil does his best to hinder you, but I am here to remind you of that. It is a preacher's business to see that his hearers are saved, that you may receive into an honest and good heart "the implanted word, which is able to save your souls", @James 1: 21. It is a question of present energy in souls that they may be saved; to know how to throw off the things that hold you down, so that you swim instead; you have the power of life in your soul. What a great victory it is to see a person swimming, who has been lethargic and worldly, now using the energy that belongs to christianity to go against the tide. That becomes your salvation, for that is what happened in Noah's time. They were saved as through water. It was their own doing. I am pressing now, What about your own doing? Perhaps once there was energy that you felt a little of when you repented, but you need to keep on repenting for you need to do it all the time.
"He that believes and is baptised shall be saved", @Mark 16: 16. If there is anybody here unbaptised, there is a word for you. It is essential to salvation. It is your matter. You cannot do it yourself; another has to do it, but you can see that it is done. It belongs to salvation. "He that believes and is baptised shall be saved" -- whether before or after conversion, it holds good. It is taken on as essential
{517}
and becomes virtue -- a very important matter. See to that! It is a matter of energy. There is much carelessness in these days, whereas God is most energetic all the time, and the preachers are too, if they are worth the name. They are energetic, praying or speaking, agonising, visiting to get people saved. "Be saved from this perverse generation" (@Acts 2: 40); that is, save yourselves from this world, and be a saved creature. Keep out of it, because getting in it, you are just in the stream floating down, as I might say. The energy is in the stream, not in you; but in swimming, the energy is in you and not in the stream, and that is where salvation lies. And so the centurion commanded those who were able to swim to cast themselves first into the sea. Salvation is with them. He had no idea that departing from the ship is a means of salvation. He was not an ecclesiastical man at all. The centurion was not on that line. He knew the power of water, so he says, 'As many as can swim'. Who is there here that can swim that has not begun again? As far as I know, once you have learned to swim, you never forget how; you can always do it. You may not have done it for years. I do not know that I have done it for years, but I know I could do it. The centurion says, It is a question of how many men here can swim; you just get into the water. And they did. The soldiers said, Let us kill them all. They think nothing of human life. They said, "Lest any one should swim off and escape". Satan would hold them there so that they might go down and be engulfed in the waters of death, the Mediterranean waters where Jonah was, too. It does not say that he went down like a stone. He was cast in. That is remarkable, too. The time comes when Jonah is cast in. He is brought down by another. He had been doing his own will to get away from Jehovah. Think of him using his energy to get away from
{518}
Jehovah! He told his shipmates that, too. They knew it, and he told them what they had to do. He was cast in, but he did not go down like a stone. He went down to the bottom vigorously. The great fish was living. It was energetic. He went down to the bottoms of the mountains, the weeds were wrapped about his head, he says, but energy was there, and he cried to Jehovah out of the belly of Sheol, and he ends up by blessing Jehovah. And Jehovah commanded the fish, and it vomited up Jonah on dry land. There would be nothing without energy in these matters. Carelessness in these matters is abominable to heaven, and I would urge every one here, that if you have ever so little energy, use it now. *Now* is the time. Those that can swim, says the centurion; and they swam ashore. Others got something out of the ship, something from the ship, whether boards or not it does not say, but something from the ship, meaning ecclesiastically some assembly principles. Ordinary christian assembly principles help you to get ashore, but *swimming* is the thing, energy to get out of the thing that is endangering us, if we are not saved. I hope I have said enough to show you the power of energy spiritually.
And so it is with Ezekiel, according to the third scripture. He followed the increase of depths or measure. It is a remarkable experience, only he reached the impassable period. There was plenty of water. It was all experienced by him. It was no question of losing his life. These waters have to be taken account of differently from the Jordan. The Jordan is the river of death, but this river that Ezekiel saw is the river of life and has its origin in the house of God. It is a living stream. Young christians come into things gradually, first to the ankles; then they get a little further to the knees; and then to the loins; and then finally waters to swim in, living, fructifying, vivifying waters. Presently
{519}
Ezekiel sees trees growing by the banks. There is not time to say anything more, but these waters are waters to swim in. Nobody can pass over it. When we come to waters to swim in, we feel we are in the very centre of things, where the river of God's grace flows in the Spirit. We are happy to be here. I am. There is always refreshment in the meetings. It is no mere pool. It is moving waters where there is oceanic depth and breadth. I could not pass over it and neither can you nor can anybody. We have come to infinitude, and that is christianity. You do not want anything more. Everything the soul desires is in this river, the water of life.
What I am saying now is to lead us into still greater depth of waters to swim in, actually through the use of your vital powers to make progress, to go forward, for that is the idea, to have the energy to go forward.
{520}
THE LORD'S THIRD APPEARING IN JOHN
@John 21: 4 - 17
This chapter, as most of us will know, is an appendix or a postscript. We all know how postscripts of letters are of great interest and this is not an exception. The gospel is complete at the end of chapter 20. This, therefore, is, as I said, an afterthought, but a full thought. It is a dispensational chapter indeed, as if the Spirit through the apostle were to compare the dispensational idea, saying, "This is already the third time that Jesus had been manifested to the disciples, being risen from among the dead". So that the showing to the disciples is found in this afterthought or postscript. The other two occasions are in the body of the book; they are found in chapter 20. This third occasion is found in this appendix. It must not be overlooked in this great composition known as the fourth gospel.
A dispensational idea comes in, for the third time alludes to the millennium, or what immediately precedes it, what is intended to make it up; that is to say, not only the Jews but the nations. The Jews will lead, will have the first place, but the nations come in too, for indeed, primarily the Jewish nation was intended to be in the very centre of the earth, of the circle of the nations. They are essential, therefore, to the divine scheme on the earth, and these one hundred and fifty-three great fishes are symbolical of the nations. They are viewed as great at the end. The Israelites, that is, the Jews as we speak of them now, come into chapter 20. That is, they are seen where Thomas appears, having been absent at the first great meeting of the disciples with the Lord after He rose. The first meeting is on the first day of the week. It has a great place in this chapter, and it is signalised by being the day of the first great
{521}
gathering of the disciples with the Lord after He rose from the dead. What a day that was! The day of chapter 20. The first day is inaugurated by the glory of the Father. The first day of the week is signalised as representing the gathering of the assembly, the greatest thought in the universe outside of divine Persons. The Lord Jesus came where the disciples were. They were first in His heart as He arose. He came where they were. That was the first appearing. The second was when Thomas was present eight days afterwards. What occupied the Lord during those eight days we have to leave, but He was occupied well. Luke would say, Those eight days have to be deducted from the forty. There were thirty-two days more, but those eight were between the first gathering in the upper room and the second when Thomas was present. Luke would say that the Lord was engaged with His own even in those eight days during what we call the week-days, the week-nights. We have enjoyments from the incomings of the Lord on those days on the same principle as we have it on the first day of the week. The first day is supremely the day in which the Lord is known in the midst of His own; but Luke would say and does say, that during all those forty days He appeared to His apostles. Here we are told that this is the third time in which the Lord showed Himself to His disciples -- the third time.
Now, there are many other times; there are several mentioned in @1 Corinthians 15 and we know that there are some mentioned in Luke and some mentioned in the early days of the Acts, but these three are particularly in mind at this time in this postscript, as I said, in this afterthought of John which is yet a full thought, a precious thought, a spiritual thought, a Spirit-inspired thought. It is the third. Therefore, it is bound up with chapter 20 in this sense. It is the third of three occasions in which the
{522}
Lord showed Himself to His disciples characteristically. He showed Himself to Mary, by herself, but that is not included here. He showed Himself to the two on the way to Emmaus, but that is not included here. The Spirit has in mind that it is a characteristic showing to the disciples. They were not all present. There are a good few of us here now, so that this has a characteristic bearing as to the times of the appearings to the disciples. You can well understand, dear brethren, that these meetings are much more important than any experiences we may have ordinarily in an individual sense. The appearings to individuals are not mentioned in these three. These are three singled out as characteristic appearings to the apostles or the disciples. The word 'disciple' here is more than simply that they were believers. It is really tantamount to the fact that they were apostles. Peter was there and Nathanael was there and John was there. It was a characteristic time, and so was the season on the first day of chapter 20, and the eighth day. So an occasion like this is a dignified occasion, and those who miss it miss something that they will never get afterwards. There is always something distinctive. In each of these appearings, there was something distinctive. The first was the greatest, and there will be a last one of these meetings on earth, and I should not like to miss it, if I have not gone to the Lord before. I certainly should not like to miss the last occasion such as this. Many will, I am afraid, and we should be warned.
Well, now, I wanted, in making these remarks, to show how the occasion here, this third appearing, has peculiar dignity attached to it. The phrases and the words and thoughts all bear this thought, this suggestion that it is a time of dignity. It is at the sea of Galilee; not a large sea, but it was large enough for the Lord to bring out great thoughts, from the
{523}
standpoint of the sea. It is nothing, you might say, as compared with the Atlantic or the Pacific or the Arctic or Antarctic. It was small, but it was large enough to be called a sea and enough to bring out thoughts of the sea, and miracles belonging to the sea -- one hundred and fifty-three great fishes -- great fishes in a small lake, for it really was a small lake. What size these fishes were we are not told, but they are called great, and the word 'great' is intended to convey to us that they were great. Whether they were normally in the lake, who can say? We read of one that had a piece of money in its mouth. The Lord knew that one, and He knew the piece of money was there. We read, too, of a fish that had Jonah in it. It was not an ordinary fish of the Mediterranean. It was prepared of God for that purpose. We must not forget that God can do things for a purpose, for an occasion, for an emergency, and that fish was for an emergency that swallowed Jonah. God prepared it. It was provided by Him for the occasion. And may I not add those one hundred and fifty-three great fishes? One would like to have seen them. How long were they? And yet there would not be much in seeing them. They were just fishes, but they were great; quite a good many, one hundred and fifty-three. Why did they stop to count them? Well, I have alluded to the idea of dignity, and surely the word or phrase "great fishes" belongs to the great phrases or terms in this chapter. It is a chapter of dignity.
Well, the first thing that might be thought negative to what I am saying is that it was a fishing scene and those who were engaged in it had been engaged in fishing before. It was their trade, and the Lord found them in that trade. He found two sets of them in that trade. That was the beginning. Now the question arises spiritually, Is there any change in these men? Of course, Nathanael was not in the
{524}
first fishing scene. He is seen in @John 1, but is there not a change in these men? They are turned aside to fish when they should have been fishing for men, but nevertheless they had not lost their discipleship, nor had they lost their apostleship. The Lord is not quick to discard us, you know. He is very patient with us. He holds on to us. There is no idea that these men lost their apostleship in the fact that they went off fishing. There is no thought that Peter lost his apostleship because he denied the Lord. There is not a word about that. The Lord never brings it up. I am speaking thus that we might come to regard the Lord even in the service. He does not discard us quickly. He values us and He never forgets our best moments, what we used to be; in our darkest moments the Lord never forgets the brightest moment. Did He forget the brightest moments of these seven in this expedition? No. He is not saying to them. You are all wrong. No. He said, Children. "Children, have ye anything to eat?" (verse 5). You will not assume for a moment, I am sure, that I am in any way minimising the fact that they turned aside to fish when they should be waiting for the Lord to appoint them their work after He arose. The Lord knew well how to deal with that. In fact, there is something here to show that He was dealing with it. The fact that He raised the question of whether they had any meat, knowing well they had not, was just to remind them they had been working for nothing. They had got nothing for their night's work. If we are not catching anything, then there is something wrong with us. It is a fine thing, when a person is a little away, however little, to call a halt and challenge himself or herself why it is I have no results.
When I speak of results, I do not mean simply persons who are converted through me or make confessions through me. No, not that at all. That is
{525}
only one result. There are many others that are open to the levites, but in this case there was none. They said, No. They had to say it. The Lord meant them to say it. The Lord did not say it Himself. He could have. It was evident. He could have looked at their boat and seen it was empty. Fishermen always look at the depth of the boat; the draft of the boat will indicate. If they go shell fishing that is the way they determine at a distance whether the expedition is a success, the draft of the boats. These shell fishing boats draft heavily. The Lord knew that, but He asked them to tell whether they caught anything, and they said, No. We have no meat. But the Lord said, "Children". Very beautiful, I think. The link of affection is established at once. John says, "It is the Lord" (verse 7).
Well, now, I do not wish to spend all the time before I get to my main point, but I wanted to bring out this point of dignity in these one hundred and fifty-three fishes and how they point to the dignity of the nations as they come into God's possession in the future. There is no moral dignity attached to the nations now. Not that I want to say a word against them, but there is none. There is none where there is not a full recognition of Christ. But then when the Lord gathers the nations they will be worth gathering. He is going to have them. "And the nations shall walk by its light; and the kings of the earth bring their glory to it", @Revelation 21: 24. That is a clear indication of what they will be. How rich, how wealthy, how valuable, how worth having. That is really what is meant dispensationally. You can see the importance of this after-thought, that surely the Lord would not want to leave the nations out. His earthly people, that is, the Jews, are involved in Thomas in the second meeting in chapter 20, and the assembly is in the first meeting, and it would look as if the Lord were to say, 'Well, I must not
{526}
leave the nations out. I must bring them in'. And, hence, the postscript, as I said, is added.
So, we have one hundred and fifty-three great fishes. They are counted. Whether they are all the same size, I cannot say, but they are worth having. The Lord said, "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken". They are recognised; they are owned as having taken them although the Lord had directed how it should happen, saying, "Cast the net at the right side of the ship and ye will find". As I was saying a moment ago, was it not a miracle? Were they just fish that were usually caught there? Who can say? Why not say they were prepared for the purpose. So the nations will be prepared for the purpose. They are not in evidence now. The nations *now* are represented in ourselves. God is gathering His people out of the nations and is placing them in the assembly, so that we have to understand what these fishes really are. They are great. The nations as they are today are wanting. God is owning them, and they are here today, but they are not the ones that are pictured in that one hundred and fifty-three great fishes. They are the product of the labourers, of the Israelites, the twelve, whoever they may be; the working people of that day. They will be honoured in the nations being gathered together for their service. "And the nations shall walk by its light". It is a very beautiful phrase. They walk in the light of the heavenly city. That is to say, they walk in the light of the assembly in heavenly glory, and also, they bring their glory to it, showing how entirely they are secured for heaven.
So, as I said, these one hundred and fifty-three fishes, great fishes, point to dignity in this part of the gospel. They point to a dispensational result in the future, but then, as the Spirit of God says, "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching" (@2 Timothy 3: 16), and this is profitable
{527}
now for more than I have said. It is profitable for ourselves, because in these last days I believe God is aiming at dignity among the brethren. Of course, we have to own that there are very few persons of value coming in among us. We may as well accept that. There are some. Thank God there are some among us who have not come in in that sense. They are born and brought up among us and, of course, they are the best. And yet, surely, there is something for us as to persons of value in the service and ornamentation of the assembly through those coming in through the gospel. There are many of them abroad, and the Spirit of God shows that in the early days there were distinguished men. Some distinguished in this world like Theophilus and Paul, and many others; but there are others distinguished as converted through spirituality and that is the great point. There is no value really in what a person may have been before. It is what he is after his conversion or through his conversion. The great fishes must represent those that are the fruit of the work of God, and we must admit, dear brethren, that we have very few. But we thank God for what we have, at least, I hope we do. I do for the number here today. The dignity, the spiritual dignity manifest in a number of persons such as are sitting here listening to the word of God, and valuing it; valuing the fellowship we are in today. Surely it is a great matter, but it could be greater and it may be greater. It can be greater. God can make it greater. And so I go on to the sheep. The great fishes are one idea. They represent quality and value, value in the eyes of heaven. And the apostles are seen as capable of catching them, although the Lord really did all the work, you might say. He told them where to cast the net. But they drew the fishes in and the Lord says, "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken". That is a beautiful thought. If the brethren have
{528}
any dignity through conversion, coming into the assembly, bring them. Let them be seen. The Lord is waiting to see them. "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken". They are already great. Conversion will make a man great right away, if it is a real conversion. But a real conversion, like the conversion of Paul and many others that are mentioned, constitutes the converts great, so that they are able to work at once. Paul was able to go to work almost immediately. The subject of his first preaching was that Jesus is the Son of God. That was the great point, too, for the moment to the Jews, that He is the Son of God. And so, as I said, one is exercised about getting some like that; great by their conversions, an evidence of the power of God. Their conversion and then their subsequent formation so that there is ornamentation and usefulness. There is the word 'great' which is applicable. They are really great. It is only the work of God that can really make a man great. Why not have an eye for it, dear brethren? Aim at something. Fishermen aim at something. All workers of that kind aim at something. What we aim at we may count on God to give us. Not that the apostles were aiming at anything. They did not really know much what they were doing. The Lord did everything. But He says, "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken". And they brought them, and we are told then that they were great and that they were counted.
Well, that is one thing, and the first thing I mention is that these men were fishers before. They had gone through this experience before, and now they are greater men than they were then; although some of them failed and were now failing in some degree, yet they had not lost their apostleship. They had not lost their greatness. They were all men of God abstractly. They were levites, workers, and part of the assembly. They had not lost their greatness,
{529}
and the Lord knew they had not lost their greatness, and as far as He was concerned they were not going to lose their greatness, and He at once emphasised their greatness. "Children", He says. And, "the fishes which ye have now taken". So that this is the third time. We are not left in this dispensation without this picture of what will mark the coming glories of Christ when He appears in the gathering in of the nations. It is exhilarating to think of the nations. What they will be as depicted in these one hundred and fifty-three great fishes.
And, now, the Lord says, "Come and dine" (verse 12). It is a dining time. It is not simply, 'Come and eat; you are hungry'. That is not the point. The point is it is a dignified time. The Lord would never fail to add dignity to our position. It must be a spiritual thought, and so He says, "Come and dine". There is no word of reproaching Peter until he dined. His dignity stays. The dining is only to re-establish it in his soul; what he is to Christ. He is the real Peter that Christ had in His mind. He had named him; he has not lost his caste. The Lord would emphasise that he is the same Peter, and dining surely is to add to that. He is more dignified now than he was in the morning when he was naked. When he heard it was the Lord Jesus he said, I have nothing to put on. That is really what he meant. I have nothing to put on. Well, he had something in a coat and he put it on. The idea is, if we are to dine we must be dignified. The dress-suit. So to speak. Pardon the allusion. That does not carry much with it but it is right. It is the idea of something. Peter had to put on the best he had. It was not much but he had the sense that he must appear in clothing. We must not be found naked, and we must not be found without a wedding garment. Paul says that "we shall not be found naked" but it is also serious to be without a wedding garment.
{530}
You might be clothed without a wedding garment, but in the full dress affair we must have on our wedding garment. If the king comes in to inspect persons he knows what is suitable in the presence of royalty, so that he says, "Bind him feet and hands, and take him away, and cast him out into the outer darkness", @Matthew 22: 13. Most solemn! That is persons who pretend to be christians and are not. So that, here we have the idea of dining, it is a dress time, but then it is a dining time. That is the point. "Fish laid on it, and bread". That was all that was necessary. The word 'dine' means a full meal. It was not what we call dinner, but it was breakfast really; it was early morning. But it was a full meal. The Lord had it and they dined.
And then the question of heart comes up, which I am not going to enlarge on. It has often been spoken of, but the Lord raised the question after they had dined. In verse 15 it says, "When therefore they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?". All that is just to challenge in a very mild way the boasting of Peter. I might go on and speak quite a little on that point, but it is well known, only it is noticeable that the dining comes first. It is after they had dined. It is no question of the clothes now. It is a question of love, whether you love more than others. And, dear brethren, this is a challenging thing, because there is always this tendency to rivalry in one way or another. Peter said, "If all shall be offended in thee, *I* will never be offended", @Matthew 26: 33. He would profess that he loved the Lord more than others. Perhaps he did, but any way, the Lord would bring it out, and the Lord brought out from him finally that Peter had to say, 'Lord, I do not count on You just believing that I love You because You are a divine Person. You are God and You know what is in my heart'. He really meant
{531}
to say, 'Lord, there is evidence in me that I love you'. That is very challenging. Is there any evidence in me that I love the Lord Jesus? He says, 'Lord, You know all things; You know that I love You'. That is, you know by what you see, not simply by divine power, but by what you might see in the sense of evidence. So that Peter says, 'Lord, You know that there is evidence in me that I love You'; that is, really what he means in the last word as to this matter of love. And the Lord is satisfied about that. If you can say to the Lord that you love Him, the Lord would say, 'I am satisfied; I am not going behind that. I am not going round the corner to see what you have been doing. I am satisfied by what you are and what you do. I am satisfied by the tone of your voice and the way you speak. I am satisfied that you love Me'. The Lord settles the matter Himself by accepting Peter's remark. He could see that Peter loved Him. The next matter is the sheep. There is no question of dignity when we come to the sheep. They are the same persons, of course, but they are sheep and they are lambs. The point in sheep is largely that they are defenceless persons. Figuratively, they represent the saints as defenceless. "He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and was as a sheep dumb before her shearers, and he opened not his mouth", @Isaiah 53: 7. That is the idea, and that is what the Lord was. He brings in now the lambs and the sheep in addressing Peter as to his love. It is no question of love as to fish. The sheep represent the Lord in a most peculiar way. They have the same characteristics as the Lord Himself. They are like Himself. "They shall hear my voice", @John 10: 16. They would not hear the voice of strangers. They will not follow a stranger. That is what the Lord brings out. And so, when they had dined, this matter of the love of Peter comes up, then He says, 'What is in My heart are these sheep'.
{532}
David says, "But these sheep, what have they done?" @2 Samuel 24: 17. And the Lord is thinking of "these sheep" in talking to Peter. Who can tell how many He had? He says, 'They will never perish. I have laid down My life for them. They are the supreme object of My care now; not the nations, but these sheep. Now Peter, feed My sheep'. First He says, "Shepherd my sheep" (verse 17). He would say in effect, 'You know you have strayed yourself, Peter, and you are a real sheep. You strayed, so that there is no guarantee that others may not stray'. Who is there here who would not admit the liability of straying, especially young people? How ready to take advantage of an opportunity to do what you should not do -- the idea of straying, turning aside. The first word is, "Shepherd my sheep". Peter is entrusted with that, possibly the Jewish sheep. That was possibly the immediate application of the word, for he was the apostle of the circumcision, but nevertheless, they were sheep. And then, "Feed my sheep". Feed them. You say, Where shall I get the food? Well, that is for Peter to determine. He had been with the Lord for a long time and he knew what the Lord did and he ought to know, and the Lord implies that. He would say, 'You know what you needed, and what I supplied to you. Now you do the same'. First, "Shepherd my sheep", and then "Feed my sheep".
That brings out, dear brethren, the generality of the saints; not simply the distinguished ones I have been speaking of. That is an important matter, the distinguished ones. I have been thinking of the elders. We may call the elders when we are sick. They are the distinguished ones; not the ordinary ones. Therefore, what is in mind here is the generality of the saints: old and young, rich and poor, lame and halt, sick and well. That is the idea. Every one of them is to be the subject of love and care that
{533}
flows out of love, and that flows out of experience with the Lord Jesus as to what He does; how He has dealt with one; how He would have me to deal with the brethren viewed in their generality as sheep and then also as lambs, the diminutive thought, little sheep. The Lord does not say to Peter, Shepherd them. It is for their parents to look after them, for that is the inference really. Not that the Lord did not, for He took little children in His arms, but where He omits care of the lambs He has in mind that parents should have some care for them. Never let them out of your sight, if you can. Be an example to them. But then, the Lord does not tell Peter to shepherd the lambs; He says, "Shepherd my sheep". The grown-ups need shepherding. He finishes with the word, "Feed my sheep". And Peter takes it on. He is given that charge. He had a charge from the Lord. He had the keys of the kingdom. The Lord gave him the keys, not of the house, but of the kingdom. Peter had those keys, a very great charge; and now, alongside of that charge, he has the care of the sheep and the feeding of the sheep and the feeding of the lambs. It is the generality of the saints, and so it is that the Lord is helping us in these general meetings and in all our meetings. They are a provision that He has made Himself in His wisdom, and the brethren are taking advantage of them under the merciful sovereign care of God. The brethren seem to have awaked to the value of these meetings; they are occasions of dignity and good and care. So, I commend all this, dear brethren, to the saints for consideration, so that we may proceed on these lines.
