{1}
*Pages 1 to 359 - "The Assembly in the Close of the Gospels", U.S.A., 1945 (Volume 192)*
THE ASSEMBLY AS SEEN IN THE CLOSE OF THE GOSPELS (1)
@John 14:15 - 28; @John 17:1 - 26
J.T. The thought in mind is the assembly as seen in the endings of the gospels, first the family link as in John and then the link of grace as in Luke, so that we may see the working of the assembly in view of the conditions that have arisen on the earth, the violence that has come in. God may help us to see what is in the assembly, not simply so many persons, but what God has in the assembly as an offset to all the evil here; that He has something He can go on with and use in view of the end. It is thought that we should begin with the Spirit in this inquiry. John begins early with preparation for the new order of things in Christianity and chapter 14 introduces the Spirit. We shall see Him later, of course, in chapter 20, as breathed into the disciples. The Lord is taking the subject up here in view of chapter 20, to prepare us, or the disciples, for the great fact of the Spirit's coming and His operations with a view to the assembly. It is thought that God has taken account of conditions that have arisen on the earth, unparalleled conditions, bringing out the wickedness of man here on earth, and then offsetting it by what He has here in the assembly, not simply the persons, but what is in the assembly viewed as an organism. The order of man that God has secured would show what He has in the assembly before He begins to work in Israel and the nations. The verses read begin with love for Christ and the keeping of His commandments, and the Spirit given.
H.G.H. Is the suggestion that the assembly is the scene of the Spirit's operations in our day?
{2}
J.T. Yes, it is the greatest thought operationally, I suppose, and the greatest thought familywise. God has it now, not simply persons, but over against the awful development in man that has come about in our time, He has actually, in the assembly already, the new order of man that is according to His mind. We are on a high level here leading up to chapter 20. What is going on in the assembly in the way of divine visitations brings about response to them, over against the awfulness of the conditions that are abroad. We have every advantage in the presence of the Spirit, the Father and the Son coming in and the Spirit operating, indicating visitations -- coming and going -- the active service of divine Persons.
A.E.H. The word "the Comforter" used by the Lord in speaking of the Holy Spirit conveys the idea of managing our affairs. In the early part of the chapter does it have reference to managing our affairs inwardly, so that we might be restful and full of comfort and grace in the presence of all these awful things around, not so much making way for us through these things but helping us inwardly in them?
J.T. Yes, divine Persons are carrying on, the Lord Himself being in evidence, telling us all about it by instructing us as to how things are to go on, the coming and going of divine Persons and the effect of it inwardly and outwardly in a family way. I think there is the evidence of all this in a little way throughout the world. God is going on with it in the midst of the turmoil and violence.
A.R. What do you mean by coming and going?
J.T. The Lord says, "I am coming to you. Yet a little and the world sees me no longer; but ye see me; because I live ye also shall live". It is a wonderful thing that we are directly in touch with heaven through divine Persons being active in coming and going. The effect of that is to be known among us.
{3}
C.N. The Lord says, "The Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him; but ye know him".
J.T. That is good. The Lord calls attention to what they and we have to do with -- the rulers who have no part in Him at all, but we know Him.
H.H. It raises the question of what knowledge we have of the assembly and how much attention we are giving to it.
J.T. We have been holding it theoretically, perhaps, and not apprehending its origin, character, and testimony, what God has in all this dispensation, what He is going on with in an unseen way, although the effect is seen outwardly. Hence, I think the Lord has sought to remind us that the assembly is not a mere servant to us or something to be resorted to at times. It is the chief thought of God. So it has been remarked many times, "Let not the assembly be charged", (@1 Timothy 5:16). Take care of it, do not make it common.
J.H.E. Being an organism, it needs the Spirit's help.
J.T. That is right, organism is the word; indeed, it is active in that sense.
A.N.W. Does the reference to the individual in verses 21 and on give the character of the conditions to which the divine Persons will come?
J.T. That is good, I am sure. The word 'assembly' is not used in John, but the persons who form it are spoken of; but it is not forgotten that it is an organism. We begin here, "If ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter". We cannot think that that Comforter is given to each of us severally. It is a collective thought. The Lord says, "That he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him; but ye know him". The *ye* is
{4}
emphatic; it is a plural thought. It is a matter of what we have together, "Ye know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you". That must be a collective thought.
A.N.W. Judas, not Iscariote, confirms that as he asks the Lord, "How is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us and not to the world?". He evidently takes it as a collective matter.
J.T. Yes, and a love matter too, not a mere theoretical, or doctrinal thought; it is the persons that are in mind, and what is said of them shows it must be a collective thing. There must be an organism involved.
C.A.M. Would you say the word 'orphans' in verse 18 stresses the idea of family?
J.T. You can see how it touches us. The family is in view in that sense. The Lord's word implies fatherhood in the sense in which John speaks of it. He tells us that the Lord called them "children"; they were 'His own'.
C.N. Does the position of the Lord Jesus on high and the presence of the Holy Spirit down here make up for all that would make us orphans as regards the world conditions which you have in mind?
J.T. Yes, and as the worldling comes in touch with those of whom the Lord speaks, he finds something there that he did not know of before.
R.W.S. Would the orphan conditions for the ten days only give emphasis to the reality of the Comforter when He came?
J.T. Yes, the ten days would bring that out. The ten days, which we shall see in the Acts, brought out what they were and how much they could do for one another. Peter could take a lead and propose what should be done, before the Spirit came, but how great the effect when the Spirit actually came, and began to function, and *they* began to function in His power. So you learn by contrast, but still the ten
{5}
days brought out remarkable results, the working of Christ alone among them.
F.S.C. Were only the disciples left orphans?
J.T. I think so. I do not think there would be any in the future having that status.
A.P. Do you think that the teaching of the Holy Spirit here forms part of the great provision the Lord has for us? The Lord said, "Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe on God, believe also on me" (@John 14:1). In His service here, the Spirit is meeting the idea of restless hearts. It would set us at rest in regard to the realm of divine things.
J.T. Yes, He would put everything right. The Lord is anticipating that, but He is doing it, too, while He is with them; He is telling them of greater things.
A.M. The Lord said, "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him"; that is divine manifestations to individuals.
J.T. In the first reference to it we get the order, the love first. "If ye love me, keep my commandments". In the other one that you speak of the Lord says, "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him". Verses 15 to 17 are the ones for us to dwell on now; what the Spirit is as among us, as secured by love and prayer; secured by the Lord's intercession for us. The Spirit has to be viewed by Himself first as worth having, and then there are the activities of the Son and the Father that the saints might have Him.
A.E.M. The Spirit would require a realm of active love and obedience in which to operate.
J.T. I think we want to get on to that. We are touching now the operational side, and the conditions for operations. The conditions must flow out from divine Persons, but can we not be brought into
{6}
them? It is a question now of whether we desire this. The Lord makes the suggestion as to whether we desire these conditions, or are we content to be grovelling along to think little or nothing of them. The Lord is intimating that these conditions are there. "If ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him; but ye know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you". The Lord is throwing it back on them, as it were, in an abstract way, saying these things are so and are attainable. What brings them about is indicated; that is, love. If there is not love for Christ, there is no value in talking about it at all. If there is not love for Christ, there is certainly none for the brethren; but if there be love for Christ, and then the keeping of the commandments, what will not the Lord do under those circumstances?
H.G.H. Does the word, "He abides with you, and shall be in you" suggest the Spirit's operations in the assembly?
J.T. That is the idea. He is going to operate, not simply with you, but in you, and that implies the assembly as an organism. So that the greatest possible operations are going on, and conditions are there for them too. Men are going on too, of course, and God is with them in mercy and we pray for them, but they have no part in this at all. It is an inner matter and belongs to the highest realm. The Lord is saying it is for us; it is a matter of prayer, love, and keeping the commandments.
H.B. Would you say what these commandments would be for us?
J.T. Well, such as the Lord would give. He is not telling us what they are to be, but it is a question
{7}
of being ready for any commandments at all. He is ready to give whatever is needed.
A.E.H. Would there be more spiritual character to these commandments than the commandments in 1 Corinthians, for instance?
J.T. I think we have to consider whence they come. Paul is giving them in 1 Corinthians and he is saying they are the Lord's. What he is giving, I think, is specified, but what is mentioned here is not specified. It is a question of what the Lord will give.
A.E.H. I was thinking of certain things coming out in current ministry by the Spirit. Eventually they take the character of a commandment although we may not be able to find a verse.
J.T. Well, I think we shall not get much help from the ministry unless we take up the specific ones stated by the apostle.
A.E.H. I was thinking we might look for something more spiritual at the end than that.
J.T. I do not think we shall get help unless we take up the specific ones, because we are apt to be too high in our attitude in what we call the ministry meeting or prophetic meeting. They are not quite as high, you know, as we think they are.
A.E.H. Then perhaps we ought to look more at 1 Corinthians.
J.T. I should certainly say that, to see what Paul has said. The Lord had certain things to say, but Paul says much more. It is a question of level. For instance, the Lord goes up to heaven Himself and gives gifts to men. What is the level there? He went beyond all the heavens we are told, and in Corinthians, what is the level there? It is not hard to see.
A.P.T. It says in Acts the Holy Spirit is given to those who obey Him. Would that include all that you suggested?
{8}
J.T. Yes, that is the attitude of the soul, those who obey. They get the Spirit, showing that the idea of the commandments must come in here. "If ye love me, keep my commandments".
J.H.E. Would Rebecca help? After the presentation of the servant, the question was put, "Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go" (@Genesis 24:58).
J.T. Yes. That is what the parents ask. It was not the servant of Abraham, not that it was not a good question. It was a good question, but it brought out what was there. They must go back to the beginning of the family. That principle must be in the family of God, and Abraham was the head of the family. The thing originated there.
J.H.E. I was thinking the Holy Spirit does not command such, but His presentation was so wonderful that she was prepared to go on further.
J.T. Yes, she said, "I will go". There is not much in that, you know. The details there do not help much spiritually. It is a question of the point of origin that God is operating from; that is, Abraham.
F.C. In relation to @Acts 13 the conditions of love are operating among the brethren and certain are prophets and teachers,, persons who are on different social levels naturally; and they are ministering to the Lord in prayer and fasting and the Spirit says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul" @Acts 13:2. Is that in line?
J.T. That is very good, a divine Person actually speaking Himself. We are not told who the medium was. Now the conditions were there, the time had come. He could have said the same before, but the conditions were not there. "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". It is a rare occasion, in which the Holy Spirit is speaking directly, although I suppose there was a medium, but it is put directly, as if it is Himself.
{9}
That is a good point to get to, the level where divine Persons are acting themselves.
J.T.Jr. The level of the local meeting is really determined by the state of the leaders.
J.T. Well, it is a question of what there is. Of course, there is no doubt that each meeting might be measured, and that is what one was thinking, that there might be deliverance from all things that are interfering with the operations of the Spirit; so that there should be always a year of release, all complaints dealt with so that the brethren are released and happy together. Otherwise you do not get what is contemplated here.
J.T.Jr. In @John 5 we have the state of the pool, but the Lord would correct the state. We do not want a continuation of a pool condition. The Lord interfered there. It was a question of a season, the angel disturbed the pool every year. We should rise out of that condition to something higher.
J.T. Quite so. That poor man had to wait a long time because the conditions were not there. Of course, we cannot compare these with conditions in Rochester or New York, but these things ought to be looked into, what conditions are in assemblies because divine operations are dependent on these conditions.
A.B.P. Are the conditions in chapters 9 - 13 necessary to reach this condition of things in chapter 14?
J.T. No doubt. The Lord's word here is a new suggestion, no doubt dependent on what preceded it, because things are built up systematically in the gospel. The Lord says, "If"; He is raising the question with the disciples as to whether love is there. I am sure that is the point just now as to what conditions there are in local gatherings.
A.E.H. At the end of the previous chapter we have a very self-confident attitude taken by one of
{10}
the disciples and the Lord manifests how dangerous it is to trust or have any confidence of that kind by saying, "The cock shall not crow till thou hast denied me thrice" @John 13:38. There is self-confidence in Peter which the Lord deals with.
J.T. Quite so. No doubt these chapters lead up to what we are dealing with and it is quite clear that it is a question of state; conditions in a locality enter into it, whether there is love for Christ. If there is not love for Christ, there is not love for one another; but if there is love for Christ, there will be the keeping of the commandments. Then we see what the Lord will do. "I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter". It is the beginning of this subject of the Comforter, "that he may be with you for ever". So we have a new thing here entering into the operational system - the Comforter. Therefore, we have two sides to this important line, namely, the Comforter down here, but the first is, the Lord Himself coming in to open the matter up.
A.MacD. The Lord says, "The Spirit of truth". As we recognise Him thus, we would be helped to arrive at a good state, as over against what is in the world?
J.T. Quite so. It is a regulating idea that is introduced, not only the Spirit, but the Spirit of truth. That must be understood. He is the Spirit of truth, and He comes because of certain conditions. If we get the great operational thought of God, we shall see the force of what is said here. The operations are to proceed now in the face of the most terrible conditions among the nations and among men. Divine Persons are coming in and going out among us; and the element of truth is introduced among us which is a corrective thought, for we are to be adjusted in all matters. Matters are constantly coming up which should be answered locally and
{11}
would be if conditions exist such as the Lord has in mind. The Spirit of truth is here to deal with conditions, and we are to be speaking truth one to another. "Do not lie to one another", @Colossians 3:9.
J.H-tt. Does the state exemplified in Judah when he is prepared to give himself as bondman in place of Benjamin, influence the others and make way for this? Joseph was prepared to make himself known.
J.T. Very good, one ready to sacrifice.
R.A. The Spirit of truth would seek to preserve the position in connection with Mary in @John 12, that she may have the liberty to bring forward the pound of ointment.
J.T. The only great obstacle or darkening influence there was Judas. It would seem as if things went well in that meeting at Bethany and the Lord knew it. The great darkening influence was Judas. We are apt to have that sort of thing.
A.B. You were referring to hindrances to the operational side. In 1 Corinthians there are many hindrances, but in the last chapter we have, "Let all things ye do be done in love" @1 Corinthians 16:14.
J.T. Quite so. We could hardly grasp what is in mind in specific commandments save as we study 1 and 2 Corinthians. They would lead us to higher levels. The incident spoken of in @Acts 13 shows there is nothing to interfere. The Spirit of God is now free, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them" @Acts 13:2. There is nothing to interfere. Paul and Barnabas had been there for a year teaching in the assembly. That showed how great the need was for that, that a crowd of people being taught should be developed into an assembly. Assembly conditions are brought about in chapter 13, so that the Spirit of God is free to act and direct what is to be done.
{12}
J.B. Would the movements of the Holy Spirit and the Spirit of Jesus towards Europe in @Acts 16 be seen with them in their movements?
J.T. Just so, they would have gone elsewhere but the Spirit of Jesus did not suffer them. That all bears on what we are saying, that conditions are brought about so that divine operations should proceed, and the divine operations had no less a scope than the western world. We must not interfere with the scope of divine operations. The nearer we get to divine Persons the more we shall get the scope of Their commandments. Even between the Father and Son there are commandments. The Lord says, "I have received this commandment of my Father" (@John 10:18). He was going to carry it out.
H.H. They were characteristic lovers of Christ in Antioch in @Acts 13.
J.T. I would say that. The testimony is built up in that way and as John Mark was lost to the sphere of operations, we reach a Timothy; Paul finds him and makes inquiry about him. The nearby meetings know about him and Paul circumcised him, whatever that meant, he did it so that that young man should be secured for the operations of God.
J.A.P. Do you think cutting in a straight line the word of truth would help in matters in our localities?
J.T. Quite so, it is a question of making room for what proceeds from God, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
C.N. Does verse 21 show the workability of the economy? You said earlier that these commandments are not specified, but verse 21 shows that persons who have them and keep them are loved by the Father.
J.T. I think that is a good way to touch it, that the persons are under the influence of the Father.
R.W.S. Allusion has been made to the beginnings in Europe and the Spirit that was in those who were
{13}
operating; is the thought that the same spirit that was in Paul and others should be in us now as we come to the end of the dispensation?
J.T. That is the idea, whether God's work can continue in this way, however small we are, that men of that kind, that are there and available, are not allowing conditions that would interfere. If there is a need for the year of release, let it be put into operation, that old feelings are dispelled so that God may continue to work.
A.R. What do you have in your mind as to the year of release?
J.T. It is in Deuteronomy. We are apt to have wrong feelings toward one another, which are not removed. That is the idea, I think. If they are not removed, the operations of God are interfered with; and if they are removed, we shall have more from God.
W.J.W. Would that be on the line of quenching the Spirit -- holding things against one another?
J.T. That is right.
A.P. In @Psalm 132 the Lord had His place and in @Psalm 133 the brethren are together in a right way. I was thinking of that providing conditions to bring in the peace.
J.T. You come to another point there. That is the psalm where the Lord commands the blessing. You can see that the blessing is commanded, but it appears that nothing is in the way, because conditions are being reached in unity among the brethren. Conditions are reached so that the divine commandment is proclaimed. That is how the millennium will begin; the commandment of God is the divine thought, with a view to the working out of eternal life.
H.H. The ark has come to Zion in @Psalm 132, hence brethren can dwell together in unity.
{14}
J.T. Judas, not Iscariote, raises the question, "Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us and not to the world?" That is a good question. "Jesus answered and said to him, If any one love me, he will keep my word". Not the commandment, but the word, the divine *mind* expressed perhaps in ministry. "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him". What a thing that is! The way is quite clear for the Father and Son to come to a brother. Then, "He that loves me not does not keep my words". Notice the *words* now; persons are not keeping them. Some are apt to say, I do not see this matter of covering or some other thing. First He speaks about one who keeps His word, and now in verse 24, "He that loves me not does not keep my words". People mention actual words of Scripture and say I do not see that. Well, it is there. The Lord is saying that it is a serious matter not to keep His words, because we are to go by the words. Just one word is necessary to clarify the position, and if we object we are standing in the way.
A.R. Certain ministry is hindering certain localities. In some places they do not see the idea of the city reading; in other places they do not see the idea of uniting together. What causes these hindering elements?
J.T. Well, you can see that here, "He that loves me not does not keep my words". That just meets what you are saying. Ministry the Lord is giving is not accepted in certain localities. The Lord's word ought to be understood and accepted. If we set up our wills against it, things are not kept. That is what the Lord is alluding to. "The word which ye hear is not mine, but that of the Father who has sent me". Now we are coming to a thing of importance - delegated authority. We have to make
{15}
room for that too. And again, "These things I have said to you, abiding with you; but the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name", that is the Lord's name. We see here wonderful suggestions that the Father sends in the Lord's name, *"He* shall teach you all things, and will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you". Why should we have any difficulties? The Spirit of God is here to teach us, and if will is not working everything will be intelligible.
A.E.H. Is there something in the fact that the word the Lord uses in regard to knowing the Holy Spirit is the word referring to objective knowledge? Do we get a lot of gain in objective knowledge?
J.T. Much more could be said on this passage, but I thought we should go on to chapter 17 which is the very essence of everything. It contains the words which proceeded from the Lord's own mouth as looking up to heaven. We get wonderful communications from the Son to the Father in this chapter. One has felt hesitant to introduce it at all in a substantial way because the chapter is so wonderful, but it is necessary that we might have before us what a time we are in. The Lord Jesus lifted up His eyes to heaven and speaks to the Father about certain things committed in this chapter. He says in the closing verse, "And I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known; that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them". This is the very topmost thought, I would think, in an objective sense, that we should have the Father's love for the Son in our hearts not simply love for one another, but the Father's love for the Son in our hearts. "And I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known; that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them". I would say that verse constitutes persons in it as fit for the very topmost
{16}
part of heaven where the assembly is going. The Father's love for the Son in our hearts -- there is a lot to be cleared away for that, you know; if we revert back to earlier thoughts, there is a lot to be dealt with so that we should have this, that the Father's love for the Son should be in our hearts.
A.E.H. "I in them" -- is that characteristic, that Christ is formed in us substantially in the degree in which we appreciate the Father's love for the Son?
J.T. Yes, the Father's love for the Son should be in our hearts. The Lord said in chapter 14, "Yet a little and the world sees me no longer; but ye see me; because I live ye also shall live. In that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you". That is the level of chapter 14. "Ye in me, and I in you". That is in view of what we have in chapter 14, but in chapter 17 we have "I in them". That is, the Lord is now anticipating being in us because the Father's love is in us. That quality of love is in us making way for the Son in placing His love in our hearts.
A.R. Are we brought into the fellowship of divine Persons, the same love that existed between divine Persons? "I in them and thou in me".
J.T. "And the glory which thou hast given me I have given them, that they may be one, as we are one; I in them and thou in me, that they may be perfected into one and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and that thou hast loved them as thou hast loved me". This is leading up to what we have in verse 26. It is the climax of what we are dealing with now. "And I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known" meaning He is looking forward to permanency in this thought. It is this dispensation of grace that is contemplated, "the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them".
{17}
C.A.M. Would you say that the chapter commences with eternal life and would bring us to the end of all the world of need, where need is experienced, and therefore it brings in these wonderful conditions? Do you think most of our exercises are concerned with the need side?
J.T. It seems to me that chapter 17 is the climax of the teaching. It really affords us a wonderful scope of things beginning with chapter 13, the teaching the Lord had in mind for them in view of the place above, nothing less than that. This last verse would make us fit for the topmost; our part in heaven, the Father's love for the Son, not simply for us, but for the Son, in us and He in us. That is a fixed thing that we have to apprehend and reach.
A.B.P. Eternal conditions brought into the present?
J.T. Just so.
H.H. Certainly you could not add a word to that. It is the topmost stone.
J.T. This is what the Lord has in mind for us. It is no millennial thought; it is far beyond anything else. It is a course of instruction from chapter 13 right on to this. This verse is the top note, the top stone, that we are made fit for the highest place, with Christ in heaven, but not indeed where divine Persons are. The Lord is gone beyond all heavens, but we are speaking of heaven itself, that which was created. This, it seems to me, is the top stone of it. Paul speaks about the third heaven. We are not told there are any more in number, but the Lord Jesus has gone beyond all the heavens. That is His own personal distinction as a divine Person. This verse contemplates the very topmost part of it where the Father's love for Christ is in us, and He in us on account of that. There is nothing to add to that.
A.B. Would it synchronise with Paul's thought in Ephesians, "filled even to all the fulness of God"? @Ephesians 3:19
{18}
J.T. I think it would.
A.P.T. I would like to ask whether that is as far as we can go as creatures?
J.T. I do not know that we can go further. The Father's love for the Son in us, and He in us you can hardly add anything to. It is God's thought that we are brought to that, the Father's love for the Son in us and He in us.
A.B. The operational side is wonderful. The Lord says, "And I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known". So that the heavenly side is beyond all that has preceded.
{19}
THE ASSEMBLY AS SEEN IN THE CLOSE OF THE GOSPELS (2)
@John 20:14 - 31; @John 21:1 - 14
J.T. We are not only in the dispensation to which the assembly belongs but we are actually in assembly circumstances, and the understanding of what we have already considered is possible. It is thought, that having looked at the earlier chapters read, especially chapter 17, which we but lightly touched on, we should now link on the operation of the Spirit, the sphere of it and conditions of it, with that wonderful prayer in which sonship as applied to ourselves is contemplated. The Lord said, "And the glory which thou hast given me I have given them", referring to what we have as sons of God. Then the last verse of the chapter, which we were able to speak of a little, contemplates a condition fit for heaven; we might say the highest. We read of glory in the highest and that glory is involved in what is said about the Father imparting His love for the Son to us. "The love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them"(@John 17:26), contemplates our being in the highest heavens; that is, those heavens into which we shall enter, to which the creature has access. Now it is on the same principle that we are in assembly circumstances. Mary represents the feminine side of our position, involving the sisters, but with a view to the assembly as feminine herself. The assembly circumstances can hardly be viewed as confined to brothers, for there is the sisterhood as well, and the conditions contemplated being found in them.
A.E.H. On the line of the Lord coming to us as we were saying this morning, does it not seem remarkable that although the masculine element had been in activity, the Lord is attracted to the spot in relation to the feminine side first?
{20}
J.T. Well; that is suggestive and the references to Him in this gospel are not without importance in view of this very matter. That a woman like Mary Magdalene, who was freed of what was so terrible, out of whom seven demons went, should be in mind is significant. She sets out the assembly as attractive and loved by Christ and marked by intelligence, not only by what is sisterly but by intelligence.
A.E.H. Does it suggest the need of working out moral issues in order that the true feminine grace and charm should be seen?
J.T. Well, I think the difficulties in our localities are often linked up with the sisters. The enemy knows that they are essential to the thought of the assembly, and the fact that they do not have any formal part in the assembly services may seem to militate against their formation. How many sisters think of what they can contribute to the meetings, or whether they can carry any burdens? If they do not, to that extent, the meetings, and conditions in localities are weakened. Mary Magdalene represents a person who progressed speedily. She really was dark at the beginning, but she grasped the thought of learning, calling the Lord, "Rabboni", my Teacher; that is, she committed herself to Him. Her instruction came that way, from Him.
A.E.M. Where do you find out how the sisters stand?
J.T. Well, the brothers talk to the sisters; the question is, what is underlying our conversations. Are sisters regarded as able to look into and follow up what is before us spiritually? We should recognise that they are here to do so, but then do we follow that up? I was thinking that the sisters ought to take on some intelligence and rely on their intelligence. For instance Lydia, the Lord opened her heart, we are told. She was a practical woman. She had a business, and a house. She calls it her
{21}
house. The Lord would say to us all, that though we are occupied with ordinary things, He would constitute us fit for having part in spiritual things. The Lord opened her heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul.
T.E.H. Would you help us as to the women at the riverside? They play a large part in the testimony coming into the western hemisphere.
J.T. Quite so, and in Philippians Paul speaks to two sisters, saying that they should be of the same mind in the Lord.
H.G.H. Would verse 13 show Mary's need of intelligence? She said, "They have taken away my Lord" @John 20:13.
J.T. Where was her intelligence? No one had taken Him away, of course; He moved of Himself. She was defective, but she learned quickly as she came into touch with Him.
J.K.P. Does the manner in which the Lord speaks to Mary indicate the idea that you are setting out? He addresses her first as woman, and then more intimately as Mary. Does this help as to how we converse with sisters to find out the extent of the work of God in them?
J.T. The Lord was undoubtedly intending to bring out what was there. He knew well what was there and He will bring it out. First of all it says, "But Mary stood at the tomb weeping without. As therefore she wept, she stooped down into the tomb, and beholds two angels sitting in white garments, one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain. And they say to her. Woman, why dost thou weep? She says to them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. Having said these things she turned backward and beholds Jesus standing there, and knew not that it was Jesus" @John 20:11 - 14.
{22}
J.K.P. Following on that, the Lord addresses her as "Woman" and later as "Mary", as though He would bring out what was there in feminine quality.
J.T. Very good. "Woman" is the word we should keep in mind. The Lord said in chapter 2, "What have I to do with thee, woman?" @John 2:4. It is a solemn thing that He has to say that. Then the Lord spoke to the woman of Samaria, saying, "Woman, believe me" (@John 4:21). He had the feminine side in His mind, and she yielded wonderfully to Him; so did Mary Magdalene. The thing now for us to see is how the yielding marks the sisters, because in the reference to His own mother, she is speaking as if she is the important person at the marriage.
A.P.T. In 1 Corinthians the help comes from the man's side if a woman wishes to learn anything.
J.T. Let her ask her husband at home.
A.N.W. Is there not scope for the sisters through asking their husbands at home? Philip's daughters probably prophesied at home. Is there not more scope for them there?
J.T. Well, the Lord brings out in John's gospel the place the woman has, and how she comes into view in His approval. Chapter 19 helps us in this inquiry for it is said, "And by the cross of Jesus stood his mother, and the sister of his mother, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary of Magdala. Jesus therefore, seeing his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, says to his mother. Woman, behold thy son" @John 19:25,26. Now we must bear in mind that the Lord is pointing to John, and not asking her to behold Himself. Then He says, "Behold thy mother", meaning that the disciple is capable of regarding this sister as his mother in the house. They can be in a house on a holy principle, the woman as a mother and the other as a son. It says therefore, "From that hour the disciple took her to his own home" @John 19:27. So that the link is to be there while they are both on
{23}
earth; that is remarkable and demonstrates the holy links which can be between a brother and a sister who are not related naturally according to flesh. They are related by the Lord Himself asserting that relation, that Mary was John's mother and John was her son. John took her to his own home. This is to show how a holy, wholesome state of things may be established among us, if the sisters and brothers were on that level.
F.S.C. What teaching would you get out of that, the Lord transferring His mother to John?
J.T. It shows what the Lord can do, how He can use the saints. He valued her as a mother, but now that relation was going to cease. She was to remain on earth in the flesh and He was going to provide for her, not merely in the sense of ordinary accommodation by a home for her, but holy, wholesome relations between herself and John.
A.R. There is an exercise among us now, about young sisters seeking husbands outside. I wonder if there is underneath that an unholy state of things.
J.T. Well, quite so; there is something in that. There is enough in what we have said to arouse serious concern as to conditions. As in assembly conditions or circumstances how much do the sisters contribute to those circumstances? All that is in mind, because we have to look at the assembly.
F.K.C. John would have a good influence through Mary being in his home. She would be able to tell him about the Lord, when He was younger, and of His intimate links with her all through His life.
J.T. Undoubtedly she would tend to help him spiritually about things that no one knew but herself. But then another thing comes out, that John was remarkably efficient spiritually in dealing with sisters. He writes to one of them in his epistles, "The elder to the elect lady and her children, whom *I* love in truth" @2 John 1. Notice that, an apostle loving a sister in
{24}
the truth and her children, "and not *I* only but also all who have known the truth, for the truth's sake which abides in us and shall be with us to eternity. Grace shall be with you, mercy, peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love. I rejoiced greatly that I have found of thy children walking in truth, as we have received commandment from the Father. And now I beseech thee, lady" @2 John 1 - 5. One has to call attention to the respect of the address. "I beseech thee, lady, not as writing to thee a new commandment, but that which we have had from the beginning, that we should love one another" @2 John 5. Then he proceeds to tell her about the antichrist and how she is to exercise discipline in view of him. Therefore he says, "For many deceivers have gone out into the world, they who do not confess Jesus Christ coming in flesh -- this is the deceiver and the antichrist. See to yourselves, that we may not lose what we have wrought, but may receive full wages. Whosoever goes forward and abides not in the doctrine of the Christ has not God. He that abides in the doctrine, *he* has both the Father and the Son. If any one come to you and bring not this doctrine, do not receive him into the house, and greet him not" @2 John 7 - 10. Notice the woman's position in the house and how she exercises discipline. "For he who greets him partakes in his wicked works" @2 John 11. Now we cannot afford to spend much time on this point, but we would do well to think of all this and the place the sisters have even up to the point of using discipline and that in a most severe way, in refusing a false brother any access at all into the house.
D.P. Would the disagreement between two sisters in Philippi affect the local position?
J.T. It would; apparently it was not too serious but it was enough for Paul to call attention to, that they may be of one mind in the Lord. There is a
{25}
great deal of friction in the local gatherings because of these things, particularly among the sisters.
T.S. If the sisters are functioning rightly, would there be more and better singing assemblywise in our service?
J.T. Yes, quite so. Their voices should certainly merge there.
A.E.M. It seemed to require the Lord's personal attention to adjust Mary, but there was some measure of adjustment with the men, at least one of them. It says John believed after the evidence of the empty tomb and the clothes.
J.T. I think it brings up the difference God has put between man and woman as to intelligence. A man will learn quicker, and so both John and Peter laid hold of the position in the sepulchre quickly, whereas Mary did not. That arises from the difference between the sexes, and we ought to recognise this. In the world the woman is regarded as having the same ability, but that is not true and we might as well face that. Peter and John laid hold of the situation more quickly than she did, but on the other hand she remained at the sepulchre because of her affection. The affection is stronger in a woman than in a man, but the intelligence is not and we see it coming out here. If we accept these facts, then we should seek to operate on these lines. Therefore we have a woman here who lingers at the tomb. The great hold that the Lord is able to secure in her is because she has affection. She was ignorant but she had great affection.
J.A.P. Do we need both sides?
J.T. Certainly we need both; we need affection, but intelligence too. The epistles to the Corinthians contemplate those two things. "I do not suffer a woman to teach nor to exercise authority over man" (@1 Timothy 2:12), but at the same time the Spirit of God makes great allowance for them and when it
{26}
comes to the subject of marriage in @1 Corinthians 7 you see how it may work out in the sister who does not marry at all, that she does better.
J.T.Jr. In @1 Corinthians 11 he speaks of directions, praises them for keeping the directions but then he introduces the "but" in verse 3: "But I wish you to know that the Christ is the head of every man" @1 Corinthians 11:3. That is, the "but" seems to allude to something missing; is that correct? "As I have directed you, ye keep the directions. But I wish you to know that the Christ is the head of every man, but woman's head is the man, and the Christ's head God" @1 Corinthians 11:2,3. That is, the "but" seems to introduce the subject you have in mind in stressing the woman's place in relation to man.
J.T. So it runs down, because the woman is in mind in all that instruction and the whole matter of womanliness in the woman as to how she represents authority in her house. It is a question of something on her head that shows she has a head. It is not hers exactly, but authority is delegated to her husband and she is to show that in her attitude, that she is under authority.
H.H. Have we two good examples in @Romans 16, where we have good assembly material? We get Phoebe, and also Rufus, well spoken of by Paul, and Paul speaks of Rufus¬ mother as his mother too. That would be suggestive of good assembly material.
A.N.W. Then too, John says to the elect lady, "But hope to come to you, and to speak mouth to mouth" @2 John 12. He evidently has a sense of mutuality there.
J.T. Then another illustration on this subject is Peter's using a figure or expression similar to what we have in 2 John, "She that is elected with you in Babylon salutes you", @1 Peter 5:13. That raises an inquiry as to who the "she" is, that she should be brought forward with such distinction in a great epistle like Peter's. You feel how you are reminded,
{27}
as if it is his own wife for instance, that it is comely that she should have such regard for the brethren, so that she salutes them.
A.B. In regard to the word 'elect' it is most interesting as bearing on what you have already said in regard to Mary Magdalene out of whom went seven demons. That must have intimated the state in her.
J.T. Well, she and the Samaritan woman are remarkable as potential assembly material. They were both evil, but the evil had been dealt with; it was not there any more. Then the Samaritan woman understands how to use her body. She left her waterpot and went away to the city which means clearly that her own body was to be that; it was to be the vessel of living water.
A.MacD. Was it not the woman lying at Boaz¬ feet that stirred him?
J.T. That is a very important and delicate subject which can only be handled by spiritual persons. It shows the moral power that was there that maintained seemliness under those circumstances and so it led up to a holy bond according to God. It is a thing that is to be guarded lest we be found in unseemly circumstances of that kind.
H.H. In @Revelation 12 where Satan is cast out of heaven, it is said that there is no more room for him; he never can go back. Is it not important for us to have done with a thing? Mary Magdalene was free of those demons for ever.
J.T. Satan would never have scope with the woman again.
A.R. The Lord's working in John seems to connect with @Genesis 2; a man and a woman. It says Eve is taken out of man and shall be called woman.
J.T. I think that is a good suggestion, because John's gospel has many references to women. The idea of man and woman that we get in chapter 20
{28}
must lead up to the assembly, because we must not forget that John is the writer of Revelation. Possibly he wrote it before he wrote this book, but he is the one who deals so largely with the Spirit, with Christ and the assembly -- Christ viewed as the Bridegroom and the assembly as the bride. He depicts her coming down "as a bride adorned for her husband" @Revelation 21:2, a magnificent thought, that the Husband has His full place and that she was adorned not for herself but for Him.
R.A. Do you think that in saying "Mary" the Lord has in mind that there is something to correspond with the name?
J.T. The name Mary, I suppose, works out in the thought of suffering, and no doubt she would represent that and the assembly represents that too. She is a partaker with the Lord, as at the Supper. She is qualified to be called the Lamb's wife.
J.B. In @Ephesians 5 you have the man and woman as the great thought in that chapter. The apostle could say, "This mystery is great, but *I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly" @Ephesians 5:32. Would that be in keeping with what you have in mind?
J.T. Very much, because it is a suggestion of a right subject for conversation. "*I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly", @Ephesians 5:32 as if it were one of the main themes of conversation in the apostle's mind. If you meet the brethren, you bring up that subject.
A.B.P. In @Acts 1:14 certain of the disciples "gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren". Would that show the conditions you have in mind?
J.T. I think it does. That whole passage contemplates suitable moral conditions as the Lord went up to heaven, as it were conditions that could be trusted. It was an upper room, a private place for
{29}
them, as if the Lord would say the persons who are here are reliable; I can trust them. Anyone who brought anything derogatory to Christ would be disallowed. So we have the word 'several' used as to the women in @Acts 1:14, meaning there were more than Mary but she is mentioned specially, "Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren", a holy circle whom the Lord could rely on to look after His interests; that entered into the ten days of which we have spoken.
J.W. The Lord said to the assembly at Thyatira, "Thou permittest the woman Jezebel" (@Revelation 2:20). Would that stand in contrast to Mary who is amenable to the teaching of the Lord?
J.T. Quite so.
R.W.S. Is Mary governed by her instincts and then by the instruction furnished by the Lord's own words to her? It says first she turned backward, and then she turns round and then the Lord speaks with her.
J.T. Yes, the movements are remarkable and evidently governed by right instincts and you might say by some supernatural power. "Having said these things she turned backward and beholds Jesus standing there, and knew not that it was Jesus". She turned in the right direction. "Jesus says to her, Woman, why dost thou weep? Whom seekest thou? She, supposing that it was the gardener, says to him, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away. Jesus says to her, Mary". What a moment it was! What a spiritual moment it was! He is laying the foundation of the assembly really, without mentioning it, in this woman's soul. She is to be a messenger to the assembly; the most august company in the universe is in that upper room and she bears the message to them.
{30}
C.DeB. Would that answer to @John 10:3, "the sheep hear his voice". The moment He mentioned her name she responded immediately.
J.T. Chapter 20 has the assembly in mind. It is not the sheep, as in @John 10, but the assembly that is in mind. Our readings are with the assumption that we are in assembly circumstances. We are able to understand assembly matters and call them by name when we meet them. We have a sister here now who is intended in the Lord's mind for the assembly.
A.P. Would arriving at the thought of Rabboni, my Teacher, be added to the idea of instinct, something more to be learned in the way of divine teaching? Does all this experience and exercise that Mary passes through tend to bring her to that point?
J.T. That is right. She is ready for it, and she had never used the word before, my Teacher, Rabboni.
H.H. It is evident that she carried this message correctly, which is not always done. "Go to my brethren".
J.T. Quite so. I do not think she carried it verbatim; she carried it in her own estimate of the thing. In verse 18 it says, "Mary of Magdala comes bringing word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her". It would look to me ass if she would put them in he own words.
H.H. But she would convey the right sense.
J.T. She certainly did. It is more to one's credit, not to put things verbatim, as we have heard them from others, but to put them in our own language. If we are to graduate into assembly speaking we ought to put things in our own language, name them in our own way, and speak of them.
H.H. That is very helpful and suggestive.
J.T. If a sister who has been at a meeting tells you what is said, she puts it in her own language if
{31}
she understands it. We have now come to what the word 'therefore' alludes to. "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week, and the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus, came and stood in the midst, and says to them. Peace be to you". The thing in the instruction is turning, and she has done her part in it. The Lord will see that her part is to be there (and running through). We are now dealing with assembly matters and assembly formation, and this woman has her part in it and it will be an eternal part too.
A.R. Bringing word is a most important thing, is it not? It is not news, it is an expression of what the Lord had committed to her rightly conveyed to the disciples. Her communication paves the way for the Lord to come.
J.T. Just so. We ought to notice the use of the word 'came'. We began with the idea of coming and going in love, an order of things, divine Persons having part in it. The deliverance from the present situation is involved in this, that we have something that leads us outside of what is current. So we must not forget to notice the Lord saying, "Touch me not". She would be ardent and touch Him, but He forbids her, "for I have not yet ascended to my Father". The Lord is telling us that the idea of ascension comes in at this point, not simply going up, but ascending; and the relation in which we are set, to "my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". Therefore, we are at the very top, so to speak, of the family thought, in the elevation of it, for His Father is ours and His God is ours.
J.T.Jr. She had these things in her. It would be a similar thought to what we had this morning, the Father's love for the Son *in us*, and now this great
{32}
thought, "I ascend". She has to take a journey with these great thoughts in her heart.
J.T. Yes, what a merging thought, "My Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". It is ascending. It is an upper region to which He is going, and all these precious family relations are there. It is an out-of-the-world condition of things. Mary Magdalene comes bringing word, meaning that there is intelligence in what she is bringing to the disciples. It is not simply a message, but word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord and that He had said these things to her. The next point, already alluded to, is that the day is mentioned, "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week, and the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace to be you". There is the time and the place, and what a time! The first day of the week is mentioned twice in this chapter, a hallowed day that is to run through, indicating an eternal state of things. Then there is the Lord coming, not simply as in Luke, where it is said that the Lord stood in their midst, but John says, "Jesus came".
A.B.P. In regard to Thomas, it says he was not with them when Jesus came.
J.T. What a miss that was! It shows that the Lord is not present permanently, but that there is a coming and going, and that marks this present time. God is going on with us, and building us up in our constitutions by this coming and going, these appearings of the Lord. They are the great events of this time. The more we understand it, the greater it is. In @John 20 there is the inauguration of the assembly in principle, and the whole idea is brought in awaiting the assembly principles that we have in the Acts.
{33}
A.E.H. The word "Mary ... comes bringing" conveys a living thought that is characteristic of the whole assembly history.
J.T. Scarcely a woman came with such an impression as this. It is a present event, but the importance of it is the message, what she said, what she could carry. It is really the inauguration of the assembly.
J.V.S. Further impressions follow as He shows them His hands and side.
J.T. Let us read it, "The doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you. And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side". These things are mentioned in a certain order. He came, and stood, and said, "Peace be to you. And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side. The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord. Jesus said therefore again to them, Peace be to you". It looks as if the Lord is intent on our understanding that these things are wonderful; it was the inauguration of the assembly, and we are told of the movements that enter into the matter.
A.N.W. Does the tense of "came" in verse 19 imply what is inaugural; in verse 26 the word is, "Jesus comes". That seems to emphasis the inaugural character of the first coming.
J.T. Yes, quite so. I think that it is good to see the distinct character of the first coming; the second is not so important. Chapter 21 brings out how the assembly in these circumstances leads up to what is coming historically or prophetically, namely, the Jews being brought in. The assembly's part is finished in the first passage in @John 20: 17 - 23 -- the Lord's first coming, but the second coming in verse 26 has in mind a state of unbelief in one. Thomas is there when the Lord comes "eight days
{34}
after" and attention is called to his unbelief, but attention is also called by this to what is to characterise the coming situation, the introduction of the Jewish period. The millennium is to be a period of sight. The Lord teaches us by Thomas who represents the Jews, and shows how they will be established in the truth by the facts, by sight. The Lord "says to Thomas, Bring thy finger here and see my hands; and bring thy hand and put it into my side; and be not unbelieving, but believing. Thomas answered and said to him, My Lord and my God. Jesus says to him. Because thou hast seen me thou hast believed: blessed they who have not seen and have believed". The Jewish period is there indicated. Thomas is established by what the Lord *shows* to him, and Thomas acknowledges and confesses Him as "My Lord and my God". The Jewish position is confirmed in all that, and then what *we* have is also touched on, which is very precious for us to carry in our hearts. "Blessed they who have not seen and have believed". I suppose in the millennial period it will always be understood that we are those who have been brought into being and into the assembly on the principle of faith. It is a faith period now, but then it will be a sight period. What is effected in the faith period is touched on here, and we should be encouraged to have faith as the Lord says, "Have faith in God" (@Mark 11:22). How can we stand at the present time if we have not faith in God?
H.H. "To whom coming, a living stone, cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious" (@1 Peter 2:4).
J.T. Quite so, blessedness now is to those who have not seen and yet have believed. They saw Him going up and the faith period began then. "A cloud received him out of their sight" (@Acts 1:9). Two men stood by them as they gazed into heaven. It is not
{35}
that now, but going back into the upper room and learning to see things spiritually. The upper room stands for that.
A.R. We do not see, and yet we do see, the Lord coming among us; we never see Him bodily, but we know He is there.
J.T. It is on the principle of faith.
A.B.P. The Lord says in @Revelation 22:16, "*I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star". Does that link on with the incoming we have been speaking of in regard to Thomas, and should that fill the hearts of the saints in this dispensation especially as being at the end of it? Would that all go to develop sentiment to fill out and intensify assembly service?
J.T. Exactly so, to intensify the thing. The Lord has helped us greatly as to assembly service and what we say when He comes in.
F.N.W. Would the word in the first of Acts, "a cloud received him out of their sight", @Acts 1:9 help us to get on to spiritual lines?
J.T. It does, that is what is intended. Now we have the third manifestation; we have just spoken of the first and second and it says in chapter 21, "This is already the third time that Jesus had been manifested to the disciples, being risen from among the dead". We are in a period of manifestations, as if there is light shining around us in that sense on the principle of faith. It is the third time. It looks as if the third manifestation would lead us into millennial conditions to be apprehended now on the principle of prophecy. It is wholesome and sanctifying to come into things on the line of prophecy. The brethren began with that at the revival, and it greatly affected the saints by bringing the Lord into prominence. We think of prophecy now in the sense of ministry, but we should not forget what is coming,
{36}
as set before us in the prophetic word of the prophets in the Old Testament.
A.E.H. What do you think of the disappointing first expedition in chapter 21 before the prophetic line of things is opened up?
J.T. We have seven distinguished brothers here but they move in the wrong direction. "Simon Peter says to them, I go to fish", and they are led wrongly although seven in number and distinguished, at least most of them were, and they get nothing. There must be something in that as to the possibility of wrong leading. One knows, we all know more or less, how many sorrowful things have happened, men leading others in the wrong direction; all the divisions resulted from this; 1845, 1848, 1881, 1884, 1890, 1908. These were all of that character, men going a certain way in the wrong direction and others following them. Is there not a danger at the present time of that, of being led astray? It seems to me the Lord has been very good to us in saving us from these terrible divisions for a good many years now, but is there not a great need for watching, especially among those of us who have ability to serve, lest there should be any rivalry? Here there is no evidence of rivalry at all; they are moving together. It is a great matter to have before us that the Lord might spare any one of us from becoming a leader for the wolf to get in.
A.E.H. It helps to notice that recovery starts from a real exposure. Peter had to recognise he was naked.
H.H. On the other hand, these crises have yielded much for those who have faced the thing.
J.T. Well, the encouraging thing is that the Lord had something, which enters into what we are saying. The Lord had something, and He gives it a dignified name. The food was not simply something to eat; He used the expression, "Come and
{37}
dine". It is the thought of dignity that is intended to deliver us from all this into which these seven men fell.
A.E.M. Has the Lord always watched these situations very carefully through the history? Is that why we have been saved? It is a comfort in view of possible dangers of this kind, that the Lord is the first to move when there is such a thing happening.
J.T. Yes, that is very beautiful, and then what follows, how much He cares for the sheep and the lambs, and He appoints Peter to feed them and lead them. It is all very beautiful, not only for the sheep but for Peter himself, and how ready he was to recover himself. Very few of these men who have led wrongly in our times recovered themselves, but Peter was able to do it.
J.H.E. Would this be the expression of grace on God's side?
J.T. Quite so, "Come and dine". He prepared the dinner and invited them to come. Then we must not forget there were one hundred and fifty-three fish. "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken". The Lord would say, I am going to eat them too. It is the setting up of a mutual condition out of apparent disaster, a beautiful and fruitful and mutual condition.
J.W. Why does Peter always give preference to John? In @John 13 he makes a sign.
J.T. He makes it easy for John to be first. It shows he is ready to help John. He beckoned to him. Peter acts without words, reckoning that John was spiritual, because he is the one who discerns. John could take liberty in speaking to the Lord.
F.S.C. Are you referring to what God can do in the present conditions in the world to bring about His ends in the nations?
J.T. I think the Lord would enable us to meet these awful conditions that have arisen on the earth.
{38}
God would show that He has something to work with and operate in to offset them, so there is deliverance not only for the saints, but right principles. It would be a great time truly if the whole truth might be enlarged on that the Lord has made clear to us in the ministry.
{39}
THE ASSEMBLY AS SEEN IN THE CLOSE OF THE GOSPELS (3)
@Luke 24:1 - 35
J.T. I believe we shall see that Luke contemplates a system governed by intelligence in man; lines of truth run through it showing that this intelligence is developed. It is a growth; hence angelic services are in such evidence here, but this chapter contemplates that there was want of intelligence. There ought to have been intelligence, meaning that the possibility of it was there. These women, for instance, are seen as acting unintelligently, but they are reminded of certain things that the Lord had said to them that they should have known, and indeed they had known but had forgotten. It says in verse 6, "He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spoke to you, being yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of man must be delivered up into the hands of sinners, and be crucified, and rise the third day. And they remembered his words". That is to say, they had the intelligence, but had forgotten. There can be no doubt the Lord's supper is intended to keep us rightly intelligent, because there is a tendency to forget. Then another thing that helps on this line is the presence of men toward the end. Angelic service is in order at the beginning, but we have in @Luke 9, for instance, two men who were Moses and Elias appearing on the mount, and here in chapter 24, verse 4, we have two men. In the Acts, we also find two men, as if God had in mind in His counsels to make much of men, giving them pre-eminence even over angels; so although these are doubtless angels, they are not called angels. The idea of men is kept in mind both here and in @Acts 1. Then in this chapter we have two men, one of whom is not named, but they are called senseless which
{40}
is a very humbling thought. They should have known and they did not know, so that it would seem as if the idea of remembrance needs to be kept in view. The Lord's supper is a memorial, to be kept rightly and intelligently; we are all so apt to forget.
J.T.Jr. The first two in @Luke 24:4, would have in a way, I suppose, a mutuality between them in what they were saying, and an intelligent link, too.
J.T. They recall what the women had done. There is power to recall things in us.
A.R. Do the two men represent the system of which you are speaking?
J.T. Well, I suppose systematic operations are in mind, and grace is in mind, not judgment. The human side is stressed. I suppose a man loves because he is forgiven according to chapter 7, but then the Lord has in mind that there should be systematic forgiveness and continuous, not to limit it, seventy times seven.
A.N.W. Did you say you have the Lord's supper in mind in this matter of remembrance you are pressing?
J.T. Yes, I am thinking of that. The incident at Emmaus was not the Lord's supper, but was very like it, something that was to become established as a memorial. It is not to establish what the Roman Catholics speak of as the Eucharist, which is one kind, and is false, of course. The idea of one kind is to make way for the two kinds, that is, the bread and cup.
F.S.C. The Corinthians had forgotten this, had they not? Paul said, "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you".
J.T. The word translated 'remembrance' has an active signification of recalling or 'calling to mind', as a memorial -- 'for the calling me to mind'. This reference has greatly clarified the Lord's supper. Paul said that he had received the truth of the Lord's
{41}
supper from the Lord, which only confirms what we are saying, that it was necessary to have it at Corinth. There was a remarkable work of God at Corinth but there was apparent shallowness and that is usually accompanied by forgetfulness, so the apostle evidently uses great care in recording the matter in the first letter. The fact that it was needed is clearly shown in the conduct that arose in the assembly, most scandalous conditions really. They ate the Lord's supper and called it the Lord's supper, but Paul says it is not really that at all. They were despising the assembly in what they were doing. Evidently it furnishes the occasion for him to give the thing clearly, as we often have it in our meetings on Lord's day morning. We never tire of it because it is so accurate; the wording is only found in @1 Corinthians 11. Much as to it is found in the gospels, but it is carefully worded in this first epistle to the Corinthians in order to stress the idea of the memorial: "In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying. This cup is the new covenant in my blood: this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me" @1 Corinthians 11:25. That is added in this epistle to enlarge the idea of a memorial.
A.E.H. Is there any connection in your mind between this memorial in the Lord's supper, and what Jehovah says to Moses at the burning bush in regard to His name? "This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations. Go and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, Jehovah the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, hath appeared to me, saying, I have indeed visited you" (@Exodus 3:15,16).
J.T. I believe there is. I would connect that with later communications to Moses, what is said in the giving of the law in @Exodus 20. After the law is given, Jehovah mentions the altars that they were to set up, not the ones that were formally established in
{42}
the tabernacle, but first an altar of earth and secondly an altar of stone, and in that connection, "Where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee" (@Exodus 20:24). It looks as if it is intended to be linked on in the New Testament, as in the Lord's supper, but linked on with the service of God even as in the Old Testament.
A.E.H. So that following that this suggestive idea comes in in verse 25 of chapter 20, "And if thou make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone" (@Exodus 20:25). That links on with the permanency and eternal character of the service of God.
J.T. Yes, and we sometimes find ourselves unable to go on to the heavenly side of things. The meeting is sometimes shallow and it is well to admit our weakness and God accepts us accordingly. So it says, "And if thou make me an altar of stone"(@Exodus 20:25) as if the Lord has left open whether we are equal to it. The 'if' is not attached to the idea of the altar of earth, because there can be no service at all without it.
A.E.H. If we find ourselves deficient or weak in regard to going on to the glorious aspects in the service of God, it may be traceable to our failure in this matter of memorial or remembrance.
J.T. Therefore, the memorial in @Exodus 3, you remember, is on a very high level. It is a question of the name of Jehovah involving really the mysterious name of Jah. That is the highest level in the Old Testament, I would think, where the service of God is introduced; that name is to be before them, and it is to be before them as a memorial. "This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations" (@Exodus 3:15).
A.R. Do the two men standing with white robes suggest the idea of intelligence in their standing ready for the service?
J.T. They stood in white clothing. You will notice that it is the same form of expression that we
{43}
get in chapter 2 where we have an angel standing by suddenly there. Here it is two men. It is the same expression only the angelic idea is dropped, showing it is the idea of humanity that is developed in this gospel. Angels have the first place in the service, for Gabriel, a leading angel, is very prominent in the first chapter, but the angelic idea is dropped apparently for the human idea because it is a question of counsel. Man is in the divine counsels.
A.B.P. It says, "They found not the body of the Lord Jesus". That is repeated later. Does that enter into the matter you are speaking about? At Corinth the question of discerning the body comes in.
J.T. They were really not in the right way. It was not to be found. There is some relation here, I would believe, with the conduct at Corinth. The Lord's supper could not be found in what they were doing, nor can it be found in the many religious systems of Christendom, where it is professed to be celebrated. You can hardly discern it. The Lord carefully gave it accurately to Paul. The Lord knew well what would occur in the history of the assembly in the way of controversy in regard to the Lord's supper.
A.E.M. This matter of bringing to remembrance seems to be very important. "The Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, *He* shall teach you all things, and will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you" (@John 14:26).
J.T. That is good; there is no inaccuracy there. The Lord is pleased, I suppose you would say, to put into our hands a precious memorial in accurate wording, the wording entrusted to a trusted man, to Paul. We have accurate wording doubtless in @John 20, too, in the message through Mary, but it was not verbatim. Paul spoke, I would think, in the actual words the Lord communicated.
{44}
H.G.H. Is the fact that we need to have our memories refreshed a natural weakness or a spiritual weakness?
J.T. We are reminded that it is a natural weakness of the mind, but I would think that in general it involves that the mental power a brother may have by the Spirit is essential to all that relates to the service of God, the Spirit acting on our minds. Hence we have the remarkable expression in @1 Corinthians 2:16, *"We* have the mind of Christ", which is an allusion to the thinking faculty. It is the spiritual faculty, our own natural minds of course, but the spiritual idea is the thing we have to rely on. So even when the natural powers fail the Lord helps us on the spiritual line, and so Moses was able to carry on at one hundred and twenty years of age. He would retain the idea of a memorial that Jehovah expected. "This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations" (@Exodus 3:15).
H.H. The memorial seems to be connected with holiness. This reference to the burning bush is on that line. There are several references from @Psalm 30:4 to @Psalm 135:13. They seem to stand very closely in relation to holiness which I thought connected with the Supper.
C.N. What is to be understood by not distinguishing the body in @1 Corinthians 11:29?
J.T. Well, it would mean the body of Christ. It involved the physical body of Christ, but then the spiritual body, I would say, was in mind, too. That is to be discerned. It is a question of discernment. They were failing in that regard -- not discerning the body.
C.N. This memorial rightly understood helps us then in the discerning of the body, and the mystical body, as you say.
J.T. It does, and it is most important that we should keep it in mind in the ministry. We have
{45}
been helped as to the kingdom of God, how it stands in relation to the assembly. The assembly is in mind in 1 Corinthians, in fact, "so also is the Christ" @1 Corinthians 12:12 alludes to it, to the mystical, or spirituality of the body of Christ, the assembly. It is discerned there -- in the assembly.
C.A.M. The Lord reserved the Supper to give it from heaven to Paul. Would there be in using Paul some thought as to a man's feelings so as to touch us in a special way? What brought it to my mind was the fact that you are noting that there are services angels do and then it changes to services men do.
J.T. I think so. It is not said angels are made in the image and likeness of God. It is man. "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness" (@Genesis 1:26) and that is intended to be in the mind from the start, from @Genesis 1. It is intended to be in the mind of the learner, because the Bible was written for learners; for persons who would learn by discipline as well as by experience, and so the idea of man came right down until we come to Christ. And there it is that we have the Man; and Luke is the man, the minister, who is taken up to set out the Christ as Man. There can be no doubt that the books of Chronicles are intended to link on with Luke's account; that is, his gospel and the Acts. Hence in the first book of Chronicles the first word is "Adam". It was intended to be that and so it runs down until we come to Luke, and he says he wrote with method. He makes a good deal of angels at first, but he drops the thought and stresses the idea of man. I have no doubt that the apostle Paul is intended to represent manhood in the ministry; hence he is taken up in the ministry of the gospel, and the assembly and, of course, the Lord's supper enters into that. It has its place there. The beginning of the service of God involves the Lord's supper, but the idea of manhood is there. Paul makes much of the idea of manhood.
{46}
"Quit yourselves like men; be strong" (@1 Corinthians 16:13). "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at then full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" (@Ephesians 4:13). That is in mind in the mystery, the truth of the assembly. It is a question of man, man and woman, of course, but the word 'man' covers both in Genesis.
D.P. Would it be right to say the angels were used by God to hold the ground until men were formed to take it on?
J.T. Well, I think that is good, even in the sense of sonship. The idea of sonship was held by them and applied to them. The sons of God shouted for joy, and undoubtedly it was until man should appear, and hence wisdom says, "My delights were with the sons of men" (@Proverbs 8:31), not angels. Angels are evidently in a subordinate position in the Scriptures. "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" (@Hebrews 1:14). Hebrews says man is made a little lower than the angels but crowned with glory and honour. That is beyond angels and above them.
R.W.S. Can Luke afford to bring in failure in men because of the system of grace to meet the failure?
J.T. And particularly to bring out the capability of recovery in man, the peculiar capability in Luke of recovery, particularly in Peter, for instance, and now in these two, one of whom is not named. How quickly they recover themselves, and surely that is a point for us at the present time, recovering ourselves and getting ourselves right; the Lord's supper has much to do with that.
A.E.H. Does it not seem that the Supper in this light as a memorial takes full account of the fact that we have been affected by the entrance and history of sin? It would seem that Adam, although
{47}
not in the knowledge of God in the same exalted way as we, perhaps must have had a conscious sense of God until sin came in. The workings of the devil were active in him and there was a void in his soul in regard of God.
J.T. Quite so; although Adam was really honoured in a sense -- he was not in the transgression. The second person made was not equal to the first; she is equal in material, and more than equal because she is made of man's flesh, a bone out of Adam, but at the same time she is deliberately inferior. That is to say, God had that in His mind. She can never be the first. It says, man and woman, and so Adam was not in the transgression. Timothy makes a point of that, saying that the woman was in the transgression; the man was brought into it, but Satan attacked the woman. All this is in mind in the Lord's supper; manhood suited to the assembly, because the assembly is in mind. The Lord's supper belongs to the assembly and it is necessary too, because of the recovering power of it coming round every week, the great recovering, restoring power of it.
J.K.P. This expression, "Why seek ye the living one among the dead?": should we not keep that before us in view of the memorial? I am thinking of the great preparation of the aromatic spices that took place, running along with certain customs, whereas it is the living One.
J.T. You can see how the light would be perpetuated by certain things added, these spices. It says, "They came to the tomb, bringing the aromatic spices which they had prepared. And they found the stone rolled away". That would be light dawning in the rolling away of the stone, but there was no light in the spices; it was a human thought. Then again, "When they had entered they found not the body of the Lord Jesus". It was not there. Light was dawning,
{48}
but what formation was there? It does not seem that there was any until we have these two men. The angels were men and they were shining. There was light there, as it were. "And as they were filled with fear and bowed their faces to the ground, they said to them. Why seek ye the living one among the dead?".
A.E.H. Is Luke supporting Paul's idea of all this wonderful system of things operating in a locality in that he speaks of "two men" here? It is not now "a multitude of the heavenly host" (@Luke 2:13), but the smallest number you could have, but supported, showing Paul's assembly idea.
J.T. It is right, I suppose, adequate witness. The Lord said the testimony of two men is true and the Lord applies that to the Father and the Son which is remarkable, as if the idea of two men as witnesses is intended to be impressed upon us.
J.A.P. Is that why Paul confirms the resurrection also? There must have been a defect in Corinth. "For I delivered to you, in the first place, what also I had received, that Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures; and that he was buried; and that he was raised the third day, according to the scriptures" (@1 Corinthians 15:3,4). That established the matter to the Corinthians.
J.T. Just so. It is important. The apostle reserved that until chapter 15. He intended to speak about the resurrection of Christ and the testimony to it, but chapter 11 is the death of Christ as a memorial. Christ is not presented as a memorial in the resurrection; it is Christ as in death so as to touch our affections.
H.G.H. It says of Peter that he went home and wondered at what had happened. The women received intelligence when it was called to their remembrance. Is that a suggestion for us, that we
{49}
acquire spiritual knowledge through memorial or remembrance, and by it we grow?
J.T. That is a good point. "And they remembered his words; and, returning from the sepulchre, related all these things to the eleven and to all the rest. Now it was Mary of Magdala, and Johanna, and Mary the mother of James, and the others with them, who told these things to the apostles". Notice the fact that the apostles are mentioned. Luke says as to the institution of the Supper that the twelve apostles were with Him. When the Lord took His seat He placed Himself at table, the twelve apostles with Him, as if the idea of the twelve was to be there as a witness. It has the idea that witness or testimony has come down as a refutation of all human innovations in regard to the Supper. The persons there were reliable, and especially in Luke you have things rightly attested. Hence we have two men which were Moses and Elias, and two men here, and two men in @Acts 1. Now what was the effect on Peter here? It says, "And their words appeared in their eyes as an idle tale, and they disbelieved them. But Peter, rising up, ran to the sepulchre, and stooping down he sees the linen clothes lying there alone, and went away home, wondering at what had happened". "But Peter" -- there was something there that touched him although not yet fully confirmed. If we look at John's account we shall see that Peter believed already, when he saw how the clothes were laid. He believed and so the other disciple, which was John, also believed, showing that there is recoverability in a man if God is working in him although he may go very far. We may be sure he will come back.
J.B. So that Peter in his second epistle speaks of remembrance, but not in connection with the Supper. "I already write to you, in both which I stir up, in the way of putting you in remembrance" @2 Peter 3:1.
{50}
J.T. That is a good word, I am sure.
F.N.W. Isaiah, in chapter 26, refers to "the mind stayed on thee" @Isaiah 26:3. Then in verse 8, "the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to thy memorial" @Isaiah 26:8. Then there is reference to other lords having dominion; then he says, "Thy dead shall live, my dead bodies shall arise" @Isaiah 26:19, alluding to the resurrection of Christ too.
J.T. That is all very interesting, because it points to what is current today, the things that are happening, and the great names that are mentioned every-day, whereas the Lord's people are going on with Him and His memorial. These great men will all perish as the passage says; they will not arise. Their names will not be handed down divinely, but the name of the Lord Jesus shall remain. The word in @Psalm 41:5 is, "When will he die, and his name perish?", but His name is to endure for ever. That only emphasises what has been before us in these meetings. There is what is about to die and disappear for ever, however great men may be; not that God is not using these great men at the present time in governmental matters, but what the saints are going on with is centred in the Lord's supper, in the Lord Himself, who is risen from among the dead. We recall Him as One who died. He says Himself, "I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore. Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death" (@Revelation 1:18). His going into death was His own act. That is the One to remember.
J.H-tt. Is there a connection then in the end of 2 Timothy with the idea of the two? All forsook Paul, Luke alone is with him, as though recovery and continuance are in mind.
J.T. Quite so, "Demas has forsaken me" (@2 Timothy 4:10).
A.R. Do you think the system of grace was working very slowly at Corinth? The man in the first letter was withdrawn from, but he was recovered and the brethren were slow to receive him back.
{51}
J.T. That is good. I believe that anyone who is the subject of the work of God may be regarded as recoverable and we must have great patience. The first illustrations of recovery are notable, especially Peter; what a good and quick recovery he made!
A.B.P. Do you have in mind that the bringing in of the Supper in relation to cases of this kind helps in recovery? Do you have in mind experience in relation to the Supper, or the Supper used as a means to recovery?
J.T. It looks as if induction into the assembly is almost identical with the acknowledgment of the Lord and His supper. Fellowship is a common and right word among us. Fellowship is in mind in persons seeking induction among us, and the fellowship is expressed in the Lord's supper, the fellowship of the Lord's death. It is remarkable that the cup is the first mentioned in regard to fellowship. The Roman Catholics say there is only one kind, that is, the bread; but the cup is the first thing mentioned in regard to fellowship in @1 Corinthians 10.
E.A.L. Is the Cleopas mentioned in verse 18 the same as the one mentioned in @John 19:25, "And by the cross of Jesus stood his mother, and the sister of his mother, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary of Magdala". Luke says he was astonished, and in John he is noticeable by his absence. Standing by the cross of Christ is necessary, is it not?
J.T. There is a good deal of instruction in all that and I suppose we ought to connect this Cleopas with the one in @John 19 where it is a question of the women, the place of women in the testimony; they stand out peculiarly at times!
R.W.S. I want to ask as to the adjustment of the women which appears to be more rapid than the adjustment of the "two of them". It was a different case with the two, requiring more time and more skill.
{52}
J.T. Yes, and it would appear that these were two brothers. You might think it would be a man and his wife, but there is no evidence that they were really. It would be a question of the persons, the plural, two of them. "And behold, two of them were going on the same day to a village distant sixty stadia from Jerusalem, called Emmaus; and they conversed with one another about all these things which had taken place. And it came to pass as they conversed and reasoned, that Jesus himself drawing nigh, went with them; but their eyes were holden so as not to know him". I suppose the idea is that they are "two of them", two brothers with wholesome, profitable conversation although marked by unbelief. But they are recoverable, and there is more even than what appears on the surface; their hearts burned. "Was not our heart burning in us ... ?" They are recoverable and in a very real way. They are capable of being affected by what is simple and somewhat of the character of the Lord's supper. It is to remind us that the Lord's supper is the great point if we are to be recovered and maintained, because it is not only a memorial but it is food by which we are kept going.
A.N.W. @1 Corinthians 11:26 says, "Eat this bread, and drink the cup", striking words; it is not merely to taste or sip.
J.T. Quite so, I was thinking of that. The bread and cup are food, not only a memorial. In fact, we would not have the memorial if we were limited to Matthew and Mark. Food is the idea there, whereas the *memorial* is especially spoken of by Luke and by Paul in Corinthians.
A.B.P. Is there stimulation also, as well as sustenance?
J.T. Stimulation, I should think, in the cup. It is not mentioned in the wording of the Supper that it
{53}
was wine, but there is no doubt it was that, and it would suggest stimulation.
C.N. What is to be learned by these two communications being given to women in both John and Luke?
J.T. Well, Mary's communication, as we had yesterday, is more specific and involves more instruction, the most precious instruction; indeed, corresponding to the epistle to the Ephesians, I would say. Here in Luke, "they remembered his words". What are these words? The words are, "He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spoke to you, being yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of man must be delivered up into the hands of sinners, and be crucified, and rise the third day. And they remembered his words". Now the words are not equal in bearing or quality with those that Mary of Magdala carried to the disciples according to John's gospel. Therefore, I would say we are on somewhat lower though important ground. It is a question of recovery. The message given to Mary was not for recovery; she was fit for the message. She understood how to mention it to the apostles. She went to them and said that she had seen the Lord and He had said these things to her and among them, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God" (@John 20:17). These women in Luke are not up to that, but these are important words if it is a question of recovery; the idea of the Lord's supper is therefore all the more important; it stands in relation to the recovery of the saints, and then their maintenance through food in the power of testimony.
A.P. What are we to learn from the different ways in which the Lord comports Himself with His disciples, evidently allowing time to hear what they had to say and then opening up slowly and awaiting the development of the work in their souls so as to understand His service toward them? What would
{54}
be involved in that service now, the way in which the Lord appears? First of all their eyes are holden and then later He listens to them as to the matter of what they had learned. "And some of those with us went to the sepulchre, and found it so, as the women also had said, but him they saw not".
J.T. We ought to spend a little time on it if we are to get the full truth but I am not sure that we have the time. It is just as well to get this because it is a very important matter, the idea of the resumption of teaching and the severe rebuke that is attached to it. "O senseless and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken!". Well, now we are told here in verse 13 of "two of them". They were going in the wrong direction, into the country, to a village sixty stadia away. We have to bear all that in mind in view of what the Lord has to say to them to recover them. "And some of those with us went to the sepulchre, and found it so, as the women also had said, but him they saw not. And *he* said to them, O senseless and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken! Ought not the Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory?". Now we are coming to the truth from the lips of the Lord Jesus. Here are two persons setting out to travel seven miles in unbelief, and, of course, if they went further they would be further in unbelief, but the Lord stops them. He checks the movement of unbelief in this way with this rebuke. We ought to notice that. We are not to read certain books only, but all the books, all the prophets. "Ought not the Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory?". How beautiful that is; the Lord spoke of His own glory. It is very like Luke to speak in this methodical way, "And having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself". You wonder how He could have done that
{55}
in such a short time, because it was a comparatively short time in which to go over *all* these books. "He interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself". A beautiful word, not simply going over things in a sort of educational way, but the Lord Himself. It is the Lord Himself who touches us if we are to be recovered. What a time they must have had! We can well understand when they said their hearts were burning. It is after He had left them, had vanished, and they set out for Jerusalem. The Lord Jesus had given the most wonderful exposition of Scripture, perhaps, that we have.
A.E.H. They seem to be like two believers who know nothing of the Spirit's operations and living system of things. They supposed He would have redeemed Israel, and then they constrained Him to stay *with them* , as if to say. Let us go on with the way things have been, but He is moving on to great things and we must go with Him.
J.T. We are reminded here of the religious seminaries and such like institutions. They have not the living Christ really. The Lord here points to Himself. It is a question of recovery. Some think they can stay in the seminaries and study the Scriptures, whereas the point here is that the Lord Jesus is the object of the heart, and recovery is finding an object in the Lord.
A.B.P. In relation to that certain words, in effect, shall serve as milestones in the recovery -- verse 24, "him they saw not"; verse 27, "interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself"; verse 31, "they recognised him"; and in verse 36, "he himself stood in their midst" @Luke 24:36.
J.T. Yes, you can see how the Lord is in the thing right through. He is setting them in movement in the interpretation He gives of the Scriptures from Moses onward. It is Himself. We learn presently that He vanished, but they find Him in the assembly
{56}
later in Jerusalem. That is the point that we come to, the assembly. These interpretations that the Lord gives lead us to the assembly.
A.R. Is there some suggestion in Him taking the house-father's place in Emmaus?
J.T. There is indeed, and what goes before, "Stay with us", not stay in our house but with us. "For it is toward evening and the day is declining". They give a reason why He should. "And he entered in to stay with them". An empty house would be nothing to Him; it is a question of those two persons. He has already touched their hearts, and He knew they were burning but they do not say anything about that yet. The Lord went in with them, because He is going to do something more. "And it came to pass as he was at table with them, having taken the bread, he blessed, and having broken it, gave it to them. And their eyes were opened, and they recognised him". Their eyes were holden before, but now they were opened. The assembly is largely a question of the persons whom we see. It will be that in eternity too. As they recognised Him, He disappeared from them. Notice what is going on in their heart. "Was not our heart burning". It is the singular. "Was not our heart burning in us as he spoke to us on the way, and as he opened the scriptures to us? And rising up the same hour, they returned to Jerusalem. And they found the eleven, and those with them, gathered together, saying, The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon". That is what they were saying, and then "they related what had happened on the way, and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread".
A.E.H. Is there any guide in this as to houses where you would be free to stay overnight?
J.T. Well, I think the Lord in Luke helps us in the instruction to the seventy. If they reach a city they enquire for the son of peace, and if there be one
{57}
they stay there. We have to look out for the son or sister of peace and stay there. We have the further case of Lydia, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there" (@Acts 16:15). She is entitled morally to that. She knew she was faithful, and puts it on that basis. I would say *that* is the basis of entering into a house and abiding there.
A.R. They say He was made known to them in the breaking of bread.
J.T. It helped them and it helps us many times. The Lord's supper is the suggestion in the whole matter, and they are touched by it. It shows they are recovered; the Lord had recourse to the recoverable power of the Supper.
A.P.T. The first clause in verse 33 would involve looking into the matter locally. "And rising up the same hour, they returned to Jerusalem". Recovery is taking place.
J.T. They certainly were good cases. They are turned right around; they are converted, and the Lord did it. They did not turn until He vanished, having blessed the bread, showing that the Lord's supper is the great recovering point.
F.N.W. Is our understanding of the glory of Christ dependent on this?
J.T. Quite so. We get that as we proceed in the Lord's supper. We enter into the full service of God which involves the glory.
{58}
THE ASSEMBLY AS SEEN IN THE CLOSE OF THE GOSPELS (4)
@Luke 24:36 - 53
J.T. There can be no doubt that this section is the culmination of the instruction which begins in the first chapter where we have the Babe, at least the Lord's birth, contemplated, and which involves His conception and birth in chapter 2 which we already noted, the suddenness with which the angel appeared and called attention to the sign involved in the birth of the Lord, and the reference to His condition in the manger which is peculiar to Luke. The instruction thus begun is followed up with the Lord's humanity, that is, His manhood, not simply babyhood, but manhood. The babyhood, boyhood, and manhood of Christ are contemplated in this account and there can be no doubt the Spirit of God intended that the link should be maintained with the whole account in the Scriptures, the whole testimony involving the manhood of Christ, His incarnation. What is said about Adam's creation and Eve's is to be noted, and then the reference later to humanity in the book of Leviticus, the birth of children, male and female, and how the incoming of children involved uncleanness, showing that the moral issue was raised; all that brings out the infinite holiness of the Lord's conception and birth. Luke has this in mind in calling attention, particularly in this chapter, to humanity as it is in Him. Hence it is said, "And as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst". The Man is there in these extraordinary and peculiar circumstances, but still a Man; this points to what is to abide, that is, as to physical condition in the Lord.
A.E.H. The line of instruction beginning with the introduction of that holy thing would show that we must take things up from that standpoint.
{59}
J.T. I think that is right. The infinite holiness of Christ's conception and birth are conveyed in the words, "that holy thing". In Paul's word, "Since otherwise indeed your children are unclean, but now they are holy" (@1 Corinthians 7:14), holiness is predicated of the children of believing parents, but only in a provisional way, not intrinsically so; whereas Christ was intrinsically holy, so the word refers to what was substantial. "That holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God" (@Luke 1:35). That thought is intended to be fixed into our souls as to the humanity of Christ. We have much detail about the Lord; and in this the basis is laid for the humanity of believers, not simply as baptised or converted, but the whole physical condition of humanity in the believer, as it is to be eternally. It is clear that the subject of humanity in the Old Testament is initial, whereas the New Testament contemplates it as final; hence we are told of "his body of glory", and that we are to be transformed into conformity to it. Our body of humiliation is to be changed into the likeness of His body of glory. The use of the word 'glory', it would seem, is to bring out finality in the thing; that it is finished, and we are conformed to it.
A.E.H. In the spiritual history of our souls it would seem as though we start with apprehending Christ as the Babe, holding to this idea of the holy thing, and then progress until we come to understand the full-grown man, Jesus Himself.
J.T. Luke has that in mind and in our subject it links on with Paul. The idea of humanity as it is in Christ is developed in Paul's ministry and enters into the truth of the assembly, where we have the idea of male and female continued. Luke contemplates infancy. Matthew goes a little further. In the beginning he deals with the boy Jesus, but Luke begins with the thought of infancy. Even in regard of ordinary children Luke calls them infants. The
{60}
Lord took infants in His arms which is very touching, as if we should become accustomed to the idea of humanity in its weakness, and yet in its loveliness, in infants. The Lord Himself was an infant, but the full thought is developed and comes into evidence in Him. Luke has that in mind. Paul thinks of us as transformed into the image of Christ's body of glory, so that we have the finish of the thing which I think is important at this time. We should have God's thought of man before us, because humanity has come under terrible reproach in the universe, especially in modern times. Evil has arisen from the pit through the devil, and men desecrate each other, destroy each other, and take on the work of humiliation. The Lord would have us look into it and see in what dignity man is placed in God's mind. We have in @Psalm 139:14 a remarkable touch as to this; the psalmist says, "I am fearfully, wonderfully made", as if God would, in view of the assembly, lift the thought of man into its proper dignity.
C.A.M. Would you say a further word about connecting the physical with the eternal conditions? You used the word 'physical' in regard to the Lord's body. The link with His body here on earth and the eternal conditions is a very interesting matter.
J.T. What is being said, I think, will help, as we consider it, as to how the divine thought took form in Luke. Angelic service is made subservient to it. It is a question of humanity as over against every other order of being. Humanity was the divine thought and choice. Gabriel is brought into this matter in Luke and it is he who announces to Mary what should happen to her, and she takes the ground of obedience. "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord; be it to me according to thy word" (@Luke 1:38). That was her humble resignation to the word of the angel, which was the word of God of course, "thy word". She was the chosen vessel and honour is accorded to her
{61}
as we get earlier, "the angel came in to her, and said. Hail, thou favoured one! the Lord is with thee: blessed are *thou* amongst women" (@Luke 1:28).
H.H. Would you say a word as to the connection of this with what we have in @Luke 24?
J.T. What I have been saying is preliminary, leading up to this passage where the Lord is seen standing in the midst. We shall see later that He presented Himself living. That is, He would be an object for our attention, and perhaps adoration, in a living sense, because life contemplates all the beautification that attaches to man. In Ezekiel, which is not to be overlooked in our inquiry, we have the dry bones, how bone came to bone; the prophetic ministry of the Spirit of God acting brought in a humanity usable in the millennium. It is an exceeding great army, the military side attaching to it, but still it is humanity, bone is brought to bone, and the flesh is there, as if the whole idea is in mind; but the full and complete idea of Man is in Christ, the fulfilment of what was in divine counsels, the order of being that God is taking pleasure in is in mind here in our chapter.
A.B. The Lord had already spoken of the prophets. Do you think @Isaiah 9 might be especially in His mind? Manhood is in view there, "a child is born", and "a son is given" @Isaiah 9:6. What He was in manhood is wonderfully brought out there. Then in chapter 32, "a man shall be as a hiding-place from the wind, and a covert from the storm; as brooks of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a thirsty land" @Isaiah 32:2.
J.T. That is very good. We really ought to be equal to the suggestions of Isaiah because of the peculiar pungency in all he says. He has manhood in mind from the outset and has in mind that in a moral sense it is to be depicted in the Lord Jesus. "Who hath believed our report? and to whom hath
{62}
the arm of Jehovah been revealed? For he shall grow up before him as a tender sapling, and as a root out of dry ground: he hath no form nor lordliness, and when we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and left alone of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and like one from whom men hide their faces; despised, and we esteemed him not" (@Isaiah 53:1 - 3). It seems as though we need that too, because it is this particular section that is brought into the gospel in @Acts 8. It seems as if that is the moral side that necessarily enters into what we are saying. But what we began with should be followed up, that is, what was said about the humanity of the Lord as seen in this chapter, because it is the consummation of the instruction.
A.N.W. Is there anything in the Lord's humanity in resurrection that would justify or excuse them in supposing it was a spirit?
J.T. The Lord says, "A spirit has not flesh and bones". The word is to direct our view to humanity in its physical characteristics, because the physical was there. In @Genesis 2 Adam was made, we are told, of dust of the ground, as if humiliation is attached to it; God breathed into him and man became a living soul. The physical side is important so that we may see what we are to have eternally both in the Lord and in ourselves.
H.G.H. Does the Lord's word, "Handle me and see" impress us with humanity in resurrection?
J.T. That is the idea, I think. He was there to be examined, as it were, which is an important thing; that is no scientific matter because it is outside of science. @Psalm 139, already alluded to, is outside of science but there is, nevertheless, the use of the words 'wonderful' and 'fearful' which the speaker knew right well. So the Lord is here, it seems to me, to be examined. We are to view Him with reverence,
{63}
surely, and with holiness, but at the same time the Lord was here to be examined.
H.B. Would beautification be seen in the house of Solomon in the cedar-wood being carved with cherubim and half-open flowers?
J.T. That affords the environment there. The ark was there. It is the same ark, but in glorious surroundings.
A.N.W. Would it be right to say that the forty days of the Lord here in resurrection were that we might see that condition of manhood displayed practically and actually?
J.T. That is right, but we have to reserve that for our next reading. There is really no forty days here in Luke. It is right to bring it in, but it really belongs to a further reading, because it is an extension of what is before us; Luke does not give that. It would seem as if the Spirit of God in Luke has the thought of hastening on to the divine consummation, and that involves the administration that is to be inaugurated.
C.A.M. In connection with the expression, "The second man, out of heaven" (@1 Corinthians 15:47), does that refer to origin -- He was not *of* earth? (see @John 3:31). As coming here, He took a condition of humanity in order that He might die. There is what the Lord brought out of heaven, but He came into human condition, sinless, and this is the remarkable matter that we are talking about in Luke.
J.T. "The last Adam a quickening spirit",(@1 Corinthians 15:45), Paul says; that is an enlargement of what we are speaking of, because it brings in His deity. He is a quickening Spirit, not a quickening man; that involves His deity as in human condition, and of course, it brings in a race of men quickened by Him. We are all to be quickened by Him, and that brings out how intimately we are related to Him. It is
{64}
well to look into it from its very beginning, its very essence, because it is a question of what the Lord *was*, not only as a Babe, but actually before; and how another unborn babe is moved on account of Him, showing what divine workings there are in relation to this matter of humanity in Christ, and also in believers.
C.N. Was there any difference between the humanity of Christ before the resurrection, and after His resurrection? He lived here as Man and died, and then after His resurrection He was seen again as a Man.
J.T. You are alluding to what He was here in the flesh. Well, there is a difference in the *condition* . He calls attention in resurrection to the fact that "a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having". *Before* death He was in a *flesh and blood* condition which involved His ability to accomplish redemption. He has laid that down for ever. Redemption had to be accomplished in that condition, but being accomplished, the thoughts of God can proceed; the eternal thought can be reached in a condition such as described here, and in which we shall have part, a bloodless condition, so to speak. "Flesh and blood cannot inherit God's kingdom", (@1 Corinthians 15:50). We, too, shall have part in the eternal condition of humanity.
D.P. Would you say the humanity of Christ in resurrection could be recognised by those who knew Him?
J.T. Quite so, it is the same Person but the condition is altered.
H.H. There was no change in the order of humanity either before Christ's death or after; the condition is changed, but not the order.
J.T. Quite so, I suppose you mean the order as referring to the Person.
{65}
A.B.P. That would be confirmed, would it not, on the mount of transfiguration, no change in the order of the Person.
J.T. Quite so.
A.R. Is the truth of the body a humanity idea, a formation? I was wondering if you had that in mind.
J.T. We already touched on that matter in @Ezekiel 37; the formation is accomplished on prophetic lines, the Spirit of God acting through the prophesying by Ezekiel. It is not a permanent thought; it is rather what belongs to the millennium. @Psalm 139:14 - 18 reads, "I will praise thee, for I am fearfully, wonderfully made. Marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well. My bones were not hidden from thee when I was made in secret, curiously wrought in the lower parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see my unformed substance, and in thy book all my members were written; during many days were they fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. But how precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum of them! If I would count them, they are more in number than the sand. When I awake, I am still with thee". It seems to me that the Spirit of God gives us in this psalm a prophetic suggestion that is figurative of the assembly. We get an insight into it, how it is formed, and the Lord Jesus is the beginning. He is here, as it says, "And as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst, and says to them. Peace be unto you". "He himself stood in their midst"; it is not a public matter. These are the things to be noted, what God is carrying on now privately but in view of the formation of the assembly.
C.A.M. Is that the suggestion of the deep sleep? Christ is not actively engaged in public matters.
J.T. Quite so, He is engaged with the assembly and the gospel. God is looking after the government in the world, but the Lord will take it on presently.
{66}
Outwardly He is not seen, but He is to be seen in us; He should be seen in all the saints. Hence He says to Paul, "Why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4).
A.P.T. What is to be learned from the difference in His remarks here in @Luke 24:38 - 48 and that to Mary in @John 20; "Touch me not"?
J.T. A perfect condition is contemplated in @John 20; it is abstract, but here we have the actual state they were in. John does not note that state, but speaks of things as they ought to be. Mary's message fitted in there, and the work of God would take form in view of the heavenly side of things. There is nothing to hinder it, whereas Luke takes account of the actual condition that was there. The essential thing was there; in effect recovery had already begun.
A.P. Is the thought of the Lord eating before them an extension of the teaching as to the new condition? Does it emphasise the reality of His condition as before them? It says, "He ... ate before them".
J.T. Well, just so. The state they were in, you might say, interfered with the teaching; it darkened the scene. "But they, being confounded and being frightened, supposed they beheld a spirit". They were somewhat like Mary Magdalene before the Lord made Himself known to her, and she called Him Rabboni. Conditions are not right here. That is what we ought to look into now, seeking to understand how we are to be in these things and in the condition of humanity according to the mind of God for us.
A.Pf. The Lord *Himself* stood in their midst. Would that do away with any thought that He was a spirit?
J.T. That is a historic fact. "He himself stood in their midst, and says to them. Peace be unto you. But they, being confounded and being frightened,
{67}
supposed they beheld a spirit". We have to look into this matter and seek to apprehend the humanity we have part in. John would help us to take account of the matter abstractly, but Luke would take account of things as they are and then how we come to the right thing.
C.N. In the verses you read from @Psalm 139 the personal pronoun is often referred to. Does the thought there develop into the assembly in which we have part?
J.T. Well, it is a psalm, an Old Testament scripture, and we never get the full thought. We have to come to the New Testament for the full thought of everything, and therefore you might say we have to bring the assembly into it in order to find it. It is a question of whether our minds can follow the spiritual thought and work out the psalm as dealing figuratively with the assembly, and I am sure they can. The Lord has enabled us to look at these terms and gain from them and they help us. We see how far back the Spirit of God put down the thought of the assembly, only just the thought of it, not exactly to work it out doctrinally but in thought; we can see how the writer's mind was far removed from the sinful state in which humanity is degraded now.
F.K.C. Do you think "Handle me and see" would suggest the reality of that which we are now able to examine in a holy way?
J.T. That is what it is. We are entitled to do it.
T.S. Does God's approach to Ezekiel as 'son of man' emphasise the feeling side?
J.T. It does. Ezekiel has more references to the son of man than all other scriptures together, showing that man is in mind in Ezekiel and hence the remarkable description we have of the bones coming together; but remember, that before that, we have the idea of new birth, which is another secretive thing, not applying to the Lord Jesus, but to us. The
{68}
work in new birth brings us into this humanity of which we are speaking.
A.R. In @1 Corinthians 12:18 it says, "God has set the members, each one of them in the body, according as it has pleased him".
J.T. That is good, "as it has pleased him". Your mind is directed back to Eve; what a pleasure it was to God to have Eve to take to Adam, as if God knew Adam had some ability to estimate what she was. Therefore "this time" refers back to all the other creatures he had previously named, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh" (@Genesis 2:23). So that 1 Corinthians works it out from there, and then Ephesians completes it, "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man" @Ephesians 4:13, but then the body of the assembly is contemplated as essential to that.
A.B. Is that why Luke in his accuracy here alludes to the Lord's own words, "Handle me and see"?
J.T. Quite so. I think we ought to fix our view now on Jesus standing here, although we may speak a little of what led up to this. Where was He from the time He left the house at Emmaus until He is seen here? He is not seen in the meanwhile, as far as Scripture records. We have noted that it does not say in Luke that He came. It is as if it is the mystical thought, that He is ever near to take part in what is going on in this great matter of humanity.
W.T. When David sits before the Lord, in @2 Samuel 7:19, does he get a view of this? He uses that expression, "Is this the manner of man".
J.T. It is a wonderful section in which David is greatly enlarged. It is a prophetic matter, however, because Nathan is brought into it and adjusts David, but when he is inside sitting before the Lord he is composed and says wonderful things. He is worshipful
{69}
so, I suppose, it was a question in his mind of the manner of Jehovah, not the manner of man in David, but the manner of Jehovah. That is what he meant.
A.E.H. Would you say that we hold the idea of humanity abstractly? In Christ personally all is seen concretely, here in flesh and blood, then resurrection, and then in glory, and also as in our midst. As to ourselves we are viewed as men in Christ, but there is constant need for adjustment, because of our state, to bring us to full-grown manhood; but we hold to the thing abstractly and go on.
J.T. That is right. They had to be adjusted and the passage has that in mind, and we finish with them as adjusted; they are in accord with Himself. You might say He could hardly leave them if they were not. It must be a finished matter as far as it goes. The Lord is doing the thing and He has humanity before Him, not only in Himself, but in them. That is the point, that they should be brought into accord with Himself.
A.E.H. Our considerations now are not exactly on prophetic lines, but on spiritual lines in which we handle, that is, in a contemplative sense, this idea of humanity in Christ, and we get adjustments to bring us on to the full thought in our spiritual minds.
J.T. That is right. Of course, the fact that we are priests helps us in that, and entitles us to go inside where all is understood. "Then understood I their end", says the psalmist in @Psalm 73:17, and so in a meeting like this priesthood underlies all and the Kohathites particularly are involved. They carry the ark, but the priesthood itself preceded it and the things are taken down and handled carefully and covered. We have to remember that we are dealing with the most precious things now, and it is only priests who have the right to do these things.
{70}
A.E.H. They take down the veil of separation and spread it over the ark before movement forward takes place.
J.T. Well, the veil is the humanity of Christ.
A.MacD. Is that why Luke brings in the priest Simeon? *He* receives the Lord Jesus into his arms.
J.T. Very good. Simeon was an important witness here, a man in Jerusalem, not an ordinary man, and he was under the influence of the Spirit of God. He came into the temple by the Spirit, showing how thoroughly priestly and in keeping he was with what was there in "that holy thing". Luke is the gospel that presents the priesthood of Christ really. Simeon takes the child in his arms as if he were a Kohathite. The angel had spoken about it, "And this is the sign to you: ye shall find a babe wrapped in swaddling-clothes, and lying in a manger" (@Luke 2:12). Then we have what the shepherds said; how they went to Bethlehem to see, and then we have Simeon, the priest, taking Him into his arms, as if God was taking care of that precious Babe by a suitable person, a man who was there by the Spirit, and was entirely in the hands of the Spirit.
H.G.H. It says of the disciples, "They yet did not believe for joy". Does that suggest that often our natural feelings might hinder our spiritual apprehension of things?
J.T. Well, that is what we notice here. "But they, being confounded and being frightened, supposed they beheld a spirit". In other words, they were confused and darkened, their own minds being allowed to act without light, but the Lord says to them, "Why are ye troubled?". This is how He meets this deranged situation. There is something to be looked into in each of us, why this condition should be. So the Lord says, "Why are thoughts rising in your hearts? behold my hands and my feet, that it is *I* myself. Handle me and see, for a spirit
{71}
has not flesh and bones as ye see me having". So that it is quite right to regard this as an opportunity for holy examination of the Lord Jesus in His humanity as over against what is thought of Him. It is the real Person Himself.
J.B. The apostle Paul in speaking to the Thessalonians, occupies them with the Lord Himself rather than with events that were current. He says in the first epistle, "The Lord himself . .. shall descend" @1 Thessalonians 4:16; and then in the second epistle, "Our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God and Father ... encourage your hearts" @2 Thessalonians 2:16,17, and finally, "The Lord of peace himself give you peace" @2 Thessalonians 3:16.
J.T. Showing that we are going to have to do with Himself. Under certain circumstances He is to be seen in the assembly, but I think the word "himself" here and elsewhere, means that we have to do with Himself personally, not only in the assembly.
J.H-tt. Would we be brought to the point that Samuel was brought to when David stood before him? We are told that David "was ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance and beautiful appearance" (@1 Samuel 16:12), and the word immediately is, "This is he", as though there is no mistake about him.
J.T. Quite so. It was an urgent matter because David was under reproach, even overlooked by his father. How sorrowful that he should be left out, but when he comes in Jehovah says, "Arise, anoint him; for this is he" (@1 Samuel 16:12). The great occasion had come. They had all been missing him, occupied with great people such as the eldest brother, but David was left out. What we have here is very beautiful, "This is he". Now the Lord is ready to submit to an examination for our sakes that we might be sure of Himself, His humanity.
A.R. They would watch Him eat the broiled fish and honeycomb.
{72}
J.T. He asked for that, but He says, "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is *I* myself. Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having. And having said this he shewed them his hands and his feet". The Lord is graciously submitting to an examination, but is inscrutable nevertheless and we cannot penetrate; "No one knows the Son but the Father" (@Matthew 11:27). He is, however, submitting to an examination for our sakes that we might become intelligent in what is within our range.
J.H.V. What would be the difference in John saying, "He shewed to them his hands and his side" @John 20:20? Here it is "his hands and his feet".
J.T. That is another matter. John has in mind the formation of Eve. It is a question of Adam's side, a rib from his side, not his feet; whereas Luke has the grace side in mind and that implies travail and toil, so we have the Lord's feet, for instance, in chapter 7. He is anointed there by a sinner; those feet were valued by her because they carried Him to her. Now here it is His feet, always bearing in mind what we have already alluded to, that Luke contemplates a system of operations, but we must understand the persons who are involved in the operations and the Lord Jesus Himself is. That is what He is calling attention to now, and all that follows in this passage is to open this up so as to make them suitable to see Him going up. They go back to Jerusalem and go to the temple.
A.N.W. This would be a higher character of handling than that of Thomas in @John 20.
J.T. Quite so. It is to bring out this, that real humanity marked the Lord and that it was a humanity that would be operational. He would as Man have part in the operations of God, and so when He goes up to heaven He is urgent, I would say. The forty days alluded to elsewhere are not mentioned here. It would look as if the Lord's thought was to
{73}
get to the finish of things on hand at that time in view of this dispensation and the operations of grace. Even before the Spirit came down the disciples are in the temple doing something. They are able to do something and to speak well of things in the temple.
A.B. Would John's first epistle be the outcome of this handling?
J.T. He enlarges on it further from his own point of view. "That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life" (@1 John 1:1). That is what John and others contemplated, but I think that all they had seen in His ministry would be in mind there. John would mean what the apostles had actually witnessed in the Lord's ministry, not only after He arose.
A.N.W. He uses the word 'contemplated', which would be a longer matter.
J.T. That is good. It is a longer matter.
J.W. Stephen, in @Acts 7, when suffering from the violence of the Jews, saw the glory of God and Jesus.
J.T. He said that he saw the Son of man. It is almost the only passage where the Son of man is mentioned outside of the gospels.
J.L.P. You made the remark about speaking well in the temple. Would Anna come before us as one on such lines? She departed not from the temple "and spoke of him to all those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem" (@Luke 2:38).
J.T. Quite so, she was a real servant; she did not speak simply to one sister or brother in Jerusalem but to all who looked for redemption in Israel. That is what the Lord would make all of us -- real servants. It is a system of grace and all are to be brought into it.
T.E.H. Would it be right to say that she was of the priestly family because she praised the Lord?
{74}
J.T. Quite so. She was really of Asher, but she was a priest undoubtedly. The point is to bring out that the tribes were taken account of. She is of Asher, her foot dipped in oil. She was able to go around Jerusalem and see the saints which is an important matter from the standpoint of Luke.
F.K.C. "And he said to them, These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you". Is what we are speaking of here linked with what goes before?
J.T. That is good. We are moving on now. "And he said to them, These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled". He undoubtedly alludes to what He said to the two, "having begun from Moses" (@Luke 24:27), but here He adds the Psalms, "all that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled. Then he opened their understanding to understand the scriptures, and said to them. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved the Christ to suffer, and to rise from among the dead the third day; and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem". So that He has now reached the full thought of our dispensation of grace. He has reached that, and the Scriptures have a great place in that.
A.E.H. Is there some kind of change indicated? He says, "While I was yet with you". It would look to the ordinary mind as though He was still with them, in the midst, but He speaks of it now as though it was a thing that was finished. It is another character of things now; they are to be with Him.
J.T. Yes, and they are to carry on too, because the operational system is in mind in Luke and these are the persons able to carry on. It involves a real humanity and that was absolute in Christ, but it
{75}
also belongs to us and is in the mind of God for us all as over against what is in the world at the present time.
A.R. Is it not an operational system, "repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem"?
J.T. Yes, it is a big matter at hand. The Lord is laying down a basic thing first; that is, the kind of man involved, seen in Christ, and they are coming into it.
A.M. Would you say a word as to the Lord eating? "And they gave him part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb; and he took it and ate before them".
J.T. Well, He does it here to help them, to show how real His humanity is.
A.N.W. The word is, He ate before them.
J.T. Just so, just for a witness.
R.W.S. Have not the operations of grace been accelerated to meet the activities of Satan causing the degradation of men?
J.T. That is good. You wonder how much we can take part in it. It is really affecting to see how the dear brethren in England have been able to carry on with the testimony of God in spite of all they have been through.
Rem. In @John 4 the Lord asked for a drink.
J.T. Yes, you can imagine He would be real in asking for a drink but it worked out for the truth, too.
A.B.P. Would a right apprehension of the hands and feet of Jesus prevent us from standing and gazing? In Acts two men rebuked those who were standing and gazing -- "Why do ye stand looking into heaven?" @Acts 1:11. There are things to be done.
J.T. Quite so, it is a time for doing things and they did the right things. Luke says they went to the temple, but in the Acts they went to the upper room. There the work really began.
{76}
A.B.P. Would you say the impressions we get at a reading like this would stimulate us to move in the activities of this new life?
J.T. I think we will come to that in the Acts. Here He presents Himself living. He is going to show that beautification feature, the actual, basic thought of humanity. He says, "Have ye anything here to eat? And they gave him part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb". I suppose it would be mutual; He would not eat all. "And he took it and ate before them. And he said to them, These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you". Then it says He opened their understanding. Now we are coming to another side of our instruction - the idea of understanding. "Then he opened their understanding to understand the scriptures, and said to them, Thus it is written". That is, we have in operation now what is essential to the work of God, that things are to be done according to intelligence.
F.K.C. This intelligence must be there basically in our souls before we can use the Scriptures, and then there is the promise of the Father -- the Holy Spirit.
J.T. I think the Lord had in mind that the thing should be done quickly so that He could go up to heaven. It is essential to the inauguration of the new system of things. He must go up there, and He was urgent as to it. The forty days are not mentioned, but they are to bring out what was necessary on the part of the apostles, that they might contemplate things presented in Christ risen. Luke is to establish the system of grace; it is enlarged in detail in Acts. The Lord hastens to go up to heaven, so as to establish the system down here. They were here and ready to wait, for they must have the Spirit. The Lord's mind is set upon setting up the system of grace which would be effective throughout the whole earth in view of the assembly.
{77}
J.St. Would it involve that there should be here for the Holy Spirit to take over, as He came, that which would make the whole dispensation wonderful for Him?
J.T. Quite so. @Acts 2 contemplates that they were ready for it. They were all there and were seated. They were not bustling about now but were ready to proceed when the Spirit came.
H.H. Your use of the word 'hasten' reminds me of @Isaiah 60:22, "I, Jehovah, will hasten it".
J.T. That is a good word, God is presented as hurrying to meet the prodigal, He ran.
H.G.H. What is the suggestion of remaining in the city until they receive power?
J.T. I think it is to maintain the idea of grace. It is a grace time, and Luke makes much of His going to heaven so that the system should be established properly, so that there should be no confusion in it. Therefore, they are to tarry in the city of Jerusalem until they are imbued with power from on high, which is a beautiful touch -- that Jerusalem is still held to.
C.DeB. "And *ye* are witnesses of these things. And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high". Is that peculiar just to them?
J.T. I think it is. It is the inaugural position that is in mind, but we may learn details as to our position, and the levitical principle would say you are to recognise your locality and the brethren. There are things that we may learn from these facts, but these facts are viewed by themselves here. They are not repeated. It is the inauguration of the divine system in Luke.
R.W.S. Would Jerusalem be a great test as to whether grace could operate in such a city as that where they crucified the Lord?
{78}
J.T. It is supreme grace that the work should begin there in a place where there was such wickedness. It seems to me that is the idea that we begin with -- grace.
F.S.C. Would leading out here as far as Bethany be like beautifying the temple?
J.T. I think it is rather to beautify the position of grace. Bethany was the love scene, not Jerusalem. The Lord used to go to Bethany, a beautiful thought as to the place of love entering into the divine order of things.
F.K.C. Does this link on with @1 Timothy 3:16? "God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory".
J.T. That is possibly a verse of a hymn. It is a beautiful tribute to the deity of Christ as He was operating in grace.
A.P.T. In @Luke 13:34 the Lord said, "Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those that are sent unto her". Now grace is expressed in telling them to remain in the city.
J.T. I think it is to finish up this position. The grace system was to be established and it would imply that God is still waiting on Israel in spite of its guilt. Grace operates in spite of things and wonderful things were done too. According to @Acts 1 the most successful testimony was there.
A.B. The *"ye*" in verse 48 and *"they*" in verse 52 are emphatic. We see there a development of the system to which you have been referring.
J.T. Very good. "And *they*, having done him homage, returned to Jerusalem with great joy". It is suitable that they should be joying at such a time, and continually in the temple, not for a day but for a long time, showing God is merciful.
{79}
A.B.P. Is the initial thought seen in Anna? She departed not from the temple. Now the system is here.
J.T. Quite so.
A.P. Is there a suggestion that what God had in mind as proper to Jerusalem is secured now by virtue of the Lord's work in the disciples?
J.T. Yes, the service of God, but the throne of grace is in mind. Matthew gives the thought of the great King, but the point in Luke is the grace system set up. So it is said, "And he led them out as far as Bethany, and having lifted up his hands, he blessed them. And it came to pass as he was blessing them, he was separated from them and was carried up into heaven. And *they*, having done him homage, returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God". It is really a priestly system and the service of God carried on in it.
R.A. Does Bethany suggest what we had in our first reading, "If ye love me, keep my commandments"?
J.T. Just so, but it is very fine to see they are there. Grace was there and began there and God is showing how grace is abounding. It is a grace system set up, grace reigning through righteousness unto eternal life.
J.T.Jr. Do you think the separation involves heaven's movement in it: "he was separated from them"?
J.T. Of course, Paul's ministry would come in here to fill out the whole matter. We have often noted that the tabernacle was set up and everything in it was functioning. That is the idea here. The Lord is gone up to heaven and He has left them here and they know what to do. They are joined and wholly expressive of what is inaugurated.
{80}
THE ASSEMBLY AS SEEN IN THE CLOSE OF THE GOSPELS (5)
@Acts 1:1 - 26
J.T. What was intimated at the outset was that Luke has a system of grace in mind with which the assembly is identified, and this chapter bears out the thought. The Lord is again seen here upon earth before His ascension so as to keep in mind manhood in Him, and so it is seen in its beautification of life, not simply in the basic thoughts of it which are most important. What an opportunity is given for examination of humanity according to God, to be used systematically in view of the testimony of God in a world-wide sense! Now we have Luke's point of view, but still with Jesus on earth, but risen and seen in life, presented indeed in life. So that our thoughts are, as it were, lifted to the beauty of life in Christ and that in operation, for operation is in mind in the system, not exactly what we shall have in eternity, but what is here in the Spirit; although we do not propose to look into the thought of the Spirit in the second chapter, but only to pursue the idea of humanity in the Lord as seen finally in this chapter. It was in mind to call attention, at the outset, to how early the thought of the Lord's ascension is seen in the gospel of Luke. The time of His receiving up is mentioned in chapter 9 confirming that there was haste, as it were, in reaching the position in heaven, the position contemplated. Peter later says in @Acts 3:21, "Whom heaven indeed must receive". He is there, received, but carries on in view of the assembly, not in view of the prophetic feature of the testimony, but of the assembly; not in view of the millennium, but the assembly, and so there is the completion of the twelve, the administrative side of the position in the twelve apostles.
{81}
A.E.H. How do you reconcile the waiting forty or fifty days until the Spirit came with the idea of haste?
J.T. The idea of haste is not stressed in the Acts, but rather, levitical principles are seen more in the Acts and carried out in the apostles and even in the Lord Himself. The book of Acts is intended to convey for the whole dispensation the principles by which service or administration is to be governed. I was thinking that we have to make allowance for time in the book of Acts so that things should be properly done, and we also have much said of geographic position as well as time.
A.E.H. The chapter starts with the eleven, but soon we have others added reaching one hundred and twenty. The system is expanded and time brings it to ourselves.
J.T. Quite so, and also the idea of life is pursued in the chapter, for the idea of names alludes to life. There is the distinction that life gives, involving names. All that is in keeping with this preliminary chapter.
A.B. What have you in mind in setting the prophetic side against the assembly?
J.T. Peter says in Acts, "Whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things, of which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets since time began" @Acts 3:21. The allusion to the prophets "since time began" is a remarkable statement; that order of things is held in abeyance to make way for the assembly. What the prophets have to say is held in abeyance; it has not the first place.
M.O. Is that what the Lord has in mind in @John 17, "I sanctify myself". Is that His service in relation to the assembly period?
J.T. Yes, that chapter relates to the assembly period. We can name it, because we know enough
{82}
of the assembly to do so, but this matter of "since time began" is literally 'holy since-time-began prophets'; they belong to time whereas the assembly takes precedence now, and the Lord is received in heaven in view of that. The prophetic period is held in abeyance, but is of great importance, and the Lord is actually waiting on high until the time for that, as @Psalm 110:1 says. The book of Acts and particularly Paul will tell us what is occupying Him now.
A.E.H. In the verse following your reference to the prophets, Moses is spoken of and the prophetic ministry in that dispensation. "Whatsoever soul shall not hear that prophet shall be destroyed from among the people" @Acts 3:23. That is in abeyance for the operations of this system of grace.
J.T. Yes, it is. Peter was setting out the faith period so he says in chapter 3:16, "And, by faith in his name, his name has made this man strong whom ye behold and know; and the faith which is by him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all" @Acts 3:16. Faith is greatly stressed there, in that which Peter is now engaged with, the present period, what we have ventured to call a sort of nondescript period or dispensation awaiting the time of which the prophets spoke since time began. The Lord will take all that up presently, but in the meantime He is going on with the assembly.
A.B. Is that the import of @Acts 1:7, in regard to the times and seasons?
J.T. That is the idea; that is put off. They were preoccupied with their own matters, whether the kingdom would be restored to Israel. The Lord says that is the Father's matter. Your position is to wait for the Spirit and I will carry on certain things in which you are being engaged. The gospel was to be preached when the Holy Spirit was sent from heaven.
{83}
A.R. Prophecy in relation to the future is connected with time, whereas there is no time limit to the feast of weeks which foreshadows Christianity.
J.T. Yes, it refers to Christianity. The first of Acts refers to what is brought out of our houses (@Leviticus 23:17).
R.W.S. In regard to the beautification of life which you spoke of, is the assembly period to be filled out by the living movements of the Lord Jesus, His coming in and going out?
J.T. I think so. How attractive He is in life! He is attractive in all settings, but notice that He *presents* Himself as if He would be known in a certain way, which I think is very suggestive. The book begins, "I composed the first discourse, O Theophilus, concerning all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach, until that day in which, having by the Holy Spirit charged the apostles whom he had chosen, he was taken up; to whom also he presented himself living, after he had suffered, with many proofs; being seen by them during forty days, and speaking of the things which concern the kingdom of God". We can understand that there would not be the same haste here as in @Luke 24. In @Luke 24 there is the idea of reaching the administrative period so that the gospel should go out without delay, according to God, from Jerusalem. The geographic position is stressed. Now we are dealing with how Christ is presented to us, beautiful and attractive in life, so that the dispensation might be set out accordingly, the Spirit coming in after this, but the beautiful thoughts of life developed in the Lord Jesus must belong peculiarly to this dispensation.
C.R. It was so attractive to Luke that he presents Him to Theophilus at this time. In @Luke 1 he is addressed as "most excellent Theophilus".
{84}
J.T. All that is meant is that Theophilus is a more spiritual man now. Luke did not have to use terms of courtesy and respect for he is ready to learn that greater things attached to the Lord Jesus in life.
H.G.H. What is the difference between receiving the Holy Spirit and being baptised with the Holy Spirit as referred to in verse 5 of our chapter?
J.T. Well, the reception is spoken of in @John 20. He breathed *into* them, but reception, I suppose, is a right word. Paul says, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" (@Acts 19:2) It was a gift, spoken of in Luke. "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" @Luke 11:13. That is the ground of the reception of the Holy Spirit, but the baptism is an external matter. It is taken up from the idea of baptism, which is immersion. John the baptist says that it was said to him, "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit. And I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God" (@John 1:33,34). It would connect with the cup of the Lord's supper. We have all been made to drink into one Spirit, for in the power of the one Spirit, we are all baptised into one body. The baptism of the Holy Spirit brings in the body.
A.E.H. The note to the word 'with' in @Matthew 3:11 gives the meaning as 'in the power of; be it external or simply the nature and character of, but always including the latter'; it is the nature and character of the thing as well as the outward public exhibition of it.
J.T. I think that is helpful. The baptism of the Spirit would be the idea of immersion, that is, that it covers us. It is a question of power but includes the formation of the body. "So also is the Christ" (@1 Corinthians 12:12). "The Christ" is the public idea involving the body.
{85}
H.G.H. Does the thought of baptism suggest that the Holy Spirit takes control?
J.T. I think so. John contrasts the Lord with himself. It is well understood that John baptised with water, but the Lord Jesus would baptise with the Holy Spirit. It was well understood that the idea of baptism meant immersion, whether by water or by the Spirit. The idea is carried forward in the epistle of Corinthians, "so also is the Christ" (@1 Corinthians 12:12). It is the public position of the assembly, as in baptism. In the power of one Spirit we are all baptised into one body.
M.O. Would it link on with @Acts 1:8, the idea of witnesses in the public side of the testimony?
J.T. Well, it does. That is what the Lord is stressing among the disciples. He says, "But ye will receive power, the Holy Spirit having come upon you, and ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth". That is the position. Instead of the kingdom being restored to Israel, what is set over against that is the position of the Spirit, and the disciples had to come to that, to make way for that. That would be the great dominating thing in Christianity -- the presence of the Spirit.
A.B.P. It says, "And there came suddenly a sound out of heaven ass of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house where they were sitting", (@Acts 2:2). They were engulfed in the thing.
J.T. Just so. It was the Spirit, really God, taking charge of things in chapter 2.
A.N.W. In connection with Cornelius and his household it is a lavish idea, poured out upon the nations. The gift of the Spirit was poured out.
J.T. I suppose the thought would be to stress the lavishness of the gift of the Spirit and how full is the provision made in Him for Christianity. We have, of
{86}
course, something like it in the millennial day according to the second chapter, but it is not just what we have in Christianity. We have the outward thing in the Spirit poured out and given in that sense, but the inward too as in @John 20.
T.E.H. Do you link the suggestion in Ezekiel? "And he said unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Come from the four winds" @Ezekiel 37:9.
J.T. Well, it is a question of prophesying which is hardly the thought in the incoming of the Spirit, which is an inward matter. Speaking reverently, I believe the inwards of God are involved in the breathing, impetuous blowing or breathing. That is the idea and it refers to Christianity. Of course, at Pentecost it is the public side, "sat upon each one of them" (@Acts 2:3) and the house was filled, but it was Christianity. God is saying that He is coming in in His own way, and with adequate means of setting up and maintaining Christianity, involving the assembly.
A.E.M. Is there some significance in that, after the reference in @Acts 1:5, to the baptism of the Holy Spirit; we read, "After now not many days. They therefore, being come together". Is that the response in the disciples coming into evidence, the organism taking shape?
J.T. Would you not link it with what we had already in @Luke 24? We do not get it in @John 20:19, for there it is said, "where the disciples were"; but in @Luke 24:33 when the two come back from Emmaus, it is said, "They found the eleven, and those with them, gathered together". John does not say that, but, "where the disciples were". "Being come together" makes way for the public administrative assembly, because the eleven were there, meaning the twelve would be there in principle. That is what is meant, and so the idea of *together* is of note in
{87}
this chapter, and in the next; in fact, in the whole book the idea of "together" is notable.
F.N.W. Paul says in @1 Corinthians 12:13, "For also in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body". Would you help us as to how we come into this baptism with the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Well, it is one thing, a great general thought. Of course, we come into it individually. I do not know that I would consider myself as baptised by myself, not that I would say much about that, but I think it is a great general thought, one idea as marking the dispensation.
C.A.M. Would you say a further word about this matter of being gathered together. The fact that we sit down at a certain time, that we are all here, would in itself, I suppose, involve the idea that some mystical thing takes place that causes us to be assembled. I mean that the mere physical fact that we are all together at a certain time does not mean we are assembled in this way.
J.T. No, but it is implied in chapter 2, "And when the day of Pentecost was now accomplishing, they were all together in one place" @Acts 2:1. That is governing thought that runs through the dispensation, I would say. In the end of the second chapter all who believed were together, meaning that they were together in heart, wherever they were, which is important. To be gathered together suggests the assembly in its functioning capacity and so Matthew says, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them" @Matthew 18:20, which is another side of the position; where the Lord is when we are gathered together. I think what you mean is that there is a sort of unseen power that acts upon us to gather us and where that is the Lord says, "There am I in the midst of them" (@Matthew 18:20). But we see here at the outset of Christianity that first the apostles were together. They were all together when
{88}
the Spirit came, but afterward there is the preaching and the gathering of three thousand. It says that all that believed were together, meaning that wherever we are we should be in spirit together. We should never lose the sense of being all of one company.
J.T.Jr. Do you think the apostle in writing to the Hebrews would have this sort of thing in mind, partaking of the Holy Spirit, and tasting of the heavenly gift and the powers of the world to come? He is alluding to this very thing, what is going on among us at the present time.
J.T. Quite so. It might be that persons externally with us, who might fall away, are contemplated; they might even be partakers of the heavenly gift, and fall away, but still the allusion is to this very thing, when together.
A.N.W. "Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together" (@Hebrews 10:25).
A.B. In @Genesis 49 Jacob says, "Gather yourselves" but then he says, "Assemble yourselves". Jacob rightly in his place says, "Assemble yourselves" in view of their hearing -- to listen to Israel their father.
J.T. That is a very orderly and prophetic position, which really runs into what we are saying. I am glad that matter of *together* came up, but there are certain things we should notice in the first paragraph that enter into the special word that the Lord was there forty days. "I composed the first discourse, O Theophilus, concerning all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach, until that day in which, having by the Holy Spirit charged the apostles whom he had chosen, he was taken up". I thought we might pay attention to the idea of being charged, how the Spirit is brought in here in a peculiar, definite way, that as risen the Lord acts by the Spirit. It is an element of the dispensation, that things are done by the Spirit and the charge is by
{89}
the Spirit and the persons charged are the chosen ones; that is, we are on elevated ground, as it were, the full platform on which Christianity is set. The Lord charged by the Spirit the apostles whom He had chosen.
A.B.P. Does that link on with @John 20:21, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you"?
J.T. Yes, the charge involves certain solemn responsibilities placed on them. In verse 6 they dropped to a lower level in talking about the kingdom of Israel. It seems as if the Lord would tell us that Christianity began with great dignity. All that we have said about humanity in Christ is involved in this, but in this chapter we are in the presence of dignity, and rich beautification, and choice of persons, and the authority of the persons; the apostles whom He had chosen and then the presentation of Himself living after He had suffered. All these thoughts are most beautiful, I think, and present the dignity of the dispensation even before the Spirit came, showing the vessel is great enough to receive the Spirit and retain Him, as it were.
H.B. Would it be right to bring in the thought of Aaron's rod that budded and blossomed? It was to be a testimony before the people night and day.
J.T. It would. There was a great result after the uprising of Korah's company. All that was the outcome of Korah's rebellion. What an order of things God set up in the power of life, for that is what is meant.
T.S. Does this matter of beautification that you referred to earlier go with 2 Chronicles in connection with Solomon's regime?
J.T. Quite so. You mean what the Queen of Sheba saw.
D.P. I want to ask if the presentation of Himself living would be to set out the idea of victory over death.
{90}
J.T. Well, it would be. I think the word 'beautification' is good. The beauty is involved in life as seen in Christ. It is man in Christ, but in view of the dispensation in which we are. It is all presented here as inaugural, carrying beautification, carrying what is necessary to accentuate the greatness and beauty of the moment and what is going to result from it; that is, the great thought of the assembly is coming into it.
A.E.H. Peter says in chapter 3 verse 16, "By faith in his name, his name has made this man strong whom ye behold and know: and the faith which is by him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all" @Acts 3:16. Would you connect that with @Ephesians 4, the full-grown man that we are to arrive at?
J.T. Well, quite so. The full-grown man is undoubtedly a full-grown person, and the idea is set out in Peter and John. It is the Peter and John chapter. This man in @Acts 3 is added to give fulness to the position, the result of faith operating, so that Peter says, "Look on us". It is a question of what is to be seen there.
A.R. The carved half-open flowers in the temple would represent that? Half-open flowers suggest life.
J.T. Very good. It is a beautiful thought meaning that they are fresh, opening up, not stale or fading fruit, but fresh and beautiful. The temple was marked by that.
A.MacD. Do we see some of this beautiful fruit in the Song of Solomon which we feel the Lord is opening up to us in these last days in a beautiful way?
J.T. It sets out the assembly, how it operates in the Lord's supper. God is only mentioned in the song under the name of Jah, which is an abstract thought, and hardly the feature of the book. It is a
{91}
question of Christ in the assembly as introducing the service of God.
A.B.P. When Lazarus came forth from the grave, bound feet and hands and the napkin over his face, the loosing of Lazarus and the movements that would result in life would be similar to what we have in this chapter.
J.T. Quite so, the point is to show what was there, the living condition that was there; he became a testimony to those who came to see him.
J.T.Jr. Peter refers to the Lord as the Originator of life. Would that be the idea of life set out in persons? The Lord set it out Himself and then others.
J.T. That is good. It seems as if we should now proceed to examine the chapter. We have reached verse 10. It says, "And as they were gazing into heaven, as he was going, behold, also two men stood by them in white clothing, who also said. Men of Galilee, why do ye stand looking into heaven? This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven. Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called the mount of Olives, which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath day's journey off. And when they were come into the city, they went up to the upper chamber, where were staying both Peter, and John, and James, and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus and Simon the zealot, and Jude the brother of James. These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren". What is to be noted is, that after the earlier remarks, we are shown the whole number of the apostles and their companions, we may say, in an upper room, as if the Spirit would show us the basis of Christianity in the upper room;
{92}
that is, what is there and what is to become enlarged in the sense of authority, and then in the sense of personal acquirements in the knowledge of Jesus and the brethren; as if we are to understand what we have come into in Christianity, what was set there by the Lord to inaugurate and conserve what was in His mind, to preserve it in an out-of-the-world state of things. There is no religious building or anything such as that would enhance us externally, but what was there was enough to preserve what is of God and promote it and keep it going.
A.P.T. These two men seem to be cognisant of the Lord's movements. They know something about Him.
J.T. It seems as if it is in keeping with what we have remarked on the idea of man, not angels, in this setting; then in keeping with that, the position which marked the company, "in those days Peter, standing up in the midst of the brethren, said (the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty)". The idea of names would refer to life which was there, and which gave distinction to them, and then there is Peter's position as giving a lead indicating what should be done, which is a matter of great importance in a crisis, to know what to do and to do it in a dignified way. The names point to dignity or distinction among the brethren. What are we unless there is some spiritual distinction attached to us, not simply so many persons, but persons with distinction?
C.A.M. Would you regard the upper room as a moral idea?
J.T. Just so, because it is a conservatory of all the Lord Jesus had done. It says He "began both to do and to teach", and then the company of persons, not simply official persons, but the persons generally are distinctive in their names. That is, we ought to know one another. "Greet the friends by name" (@3 John 14).
{93}
We ought to know one another even in these general meetings. We appreciate one another by our names. Affection runs in that current.
C.A.M. Regarding the upper room, Jerusalem too, is a moral idea as I understand, but it is a city with boundaries at the same time.
J.T. We have measurements taken from it to Emmaus.
C.A.M. As to practical matters in our localities, do the dwellings of the saints stand relative to some boundary line, and is the boundary line in regard to a city, rather than to the upper room idea? It becomes a practical matter because you measure the distance from your home to the meeting room.
J.T. I think Jerusalem would be measured from the temple. It would be the centre of gathering, where the people were. The walls in themselves are nothing. It is where the people are, where the disciples were.
J.K.P. Is that borne out in verse 8? The matter of witnessing comes in there, "in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth". Would that be the idea?
J.T. I think so, that is where the people were. When Paul and Barnabas went to Jerusalem to see about matters, they were received by the apostles. It is a question of people; there would be something in the walls of the city of course, from a military or political point of view; but as regards the fellowship and the enjoyment of things, and the light, we must have the people. The Lord comes to where the disciples were.
A.P. Would these persons carry forward characteristically the manhood features of Christ?
J.T. Just so. Every name there would be some reflection of Christ, as for instance. Peter, his name Cephas would suggest something of the assembly.
{94}
A.B. Would verse 14 bear on that, "These gave themselves all with one accord". There were no reserves. All the principles of life were there in beautiful character.
J.T. Yes, in dependence on God and leadership. "These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren". I think the feminine side is usually a modifying feature. There is no evidence that there were any women at the Lord's supper when it was instituted. The apostles were there, but here we have the women, the feminine side, and it would look as if the divine intent was that the assembly should be composed of women as well as men. There is a modifying influence by the feminine side which runs through Scripture.
T.E.H. In the matter of the cities they were to measure to the nearest city in connection with the slain man in @Deuteronomy 21.
J.T. But what would you do without a people? When Boaz had something in mind, he called for the people. The matter necessitated the people.
J.K.P. You were speaking of the matter of distinction. Does that thought go beyond the upper room idea, carrying into the sphere of public testimony?
J.T. That is right, because we have not the idea of the upper room there so much, of course, but what we read is, "And in those days Peter, standing up in the midst of the brethren, said, (the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty)". I would think the crowd of names would imply what was public, and worth looking at. Of course, they were inside. No doubt the meeting was there, but still there is the idea that it would be a public testimony, the distinction that marks the brethren: for instance, no one with any sensibilities
{95}
coming into this hall would fail to see that there is distinction marking the persons of a kind that is not seen in any ordinary people of the world.
J.B. Would you have the same thing in chapter 13 at Antioch where you have those together and the names mentioned?
J.T. Yes, it is not a crowd there, but certain names known by their distinction. The last one is Saul. The point was they were ministering to the Lord and fasting. They carried the idea of the dispensation strikingly in Antioch, from the Jewish position to the nations in Antioch. The service of God was transferred among the nations. That is what marked that situation. The service of God was carried out among the nations in these distinguished persons.
J.B. What was set up at the beginning is carried through in that way, is it not?
J.T. Well, it is, and what was at Antioch was equal to what had been at Jerusalem. The scattering had already taken place but the thought was carried on by Barnabas and Saul particularly, because they had ministered in Antioch for a whole year, showing that dignity was maintained outside of Palestine.
D.P. The distinctive features that marked the disciples here would be a distinct advance on what had preceded.
J.T. It is a question of intelligence here really; the handiwork of the Lord Jesus personally is seen there in the upper room, and the word 'names' implies that each had a distinction, some ray of glory in each of them, I believe, in the sense of life. Not that the Spirit had come, but the idea of life in the Spirit. The work of Christ had that character.
F.K.C. I think you have said that the hundred and twenty represent what is greater in quality than the three thousand. Did you have that in mind?
{96}
J.T. I think so, because it was the handiwork of the Lord personally, which is a very precious thing, what the Lord Himself did before the Spirit came.
A.R. It would affect the whole earth, would it not? It speaks later in the Acts of turning the world upside down.
J.T. Just so, the handiwork of the Lord there is seen in one and another. How much each could tell them, and his brethren, how much they, who were there before the Spirit came in, could tell the disciples about the Lord Jesus.
M.O. Would not Peter's skill in taking up this matter of Judas suggest the Lord's handiwork too?
J.T. Well, that is another thing, not so attractive as what we are speaking of now, but it is remarkable that Judas is brought in here. We have awful conditions of humanity in the world at the present time, degraded, murderous humanity, and life made so cheap. It is the same with Judas, a remarkable product. There was nothing at all commendable about him and now we have the terrible kind of thing that happened to him. Peter says, "Brethren, it was necessary that the scripture should have been fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before, by the mouth of David, concerning Judas, who became guide to those who took Jesus; for he was numbered amongst us, and had received a part in this service. (This man then indeed got a field with the reward of iniquity, and, having fallen down headlong, burst in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. And it was known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that that field was called in their own dialect Aceldama; that is, field of blood.)" It seems to me it is a terrible thought brought in by the Spirit here in the introduction of Christianity. That kind of thing had to be contended with, and the names are over against that. It is over against what God has and the fruit of Christ's own handiwork, the kind of
{97}
humanity He brought in and which alone stands the test at the present time.
A.E.H. Is there a warning in it in regard to association with what is religious? He was guide to those who took Jesus.
J.T. Well, it shows what is possible within the scope of the assembly publicly. How incorrigible the flesh is under the most favourable influences. While the Lord Jesus came in and went out among them, Judas was there.
A.B.P. Is it not delightful to heaven now that there should be a vessel here concerned about the fulfilment of Scripture? The Lord opened their understanding, but there was care in their hearts, that it would be fulfilled.
J.T. Peter makes that point in his address. What the world is full of now, accentuates the need for maintaining the kind of humanity that is set out in Christ, and the apostles too. They were capable of being developed in the highest order of humanity. It brings up the necessity of distinction which belongs to Christians, those who have the Spirit, the distinction that belongs to Christians and the assembly too.
R-. Would that distinction be seen in what the apostle says in Colossians, "Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved" @Colossians 3:12?
J.T. Quite so, so that Peter's address takes up the question of the Scriptures and leadership, and then the exposure of the thing that brought in all the sorrow; that is, Judas. Then the Spirit turns to the idea of the person needed to make the apostleship complete. "And they appointed two, Joseph, who was called Barsabas, who had been surnamed Justus, and Matthias. And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord, knower of the hearts of all, shew which one of these two thou hast chosen". It is a question of choice. At the beginning of the chapter it says,
{98}
"The apostles whom he had chosen" and it is a question of choice now. "To receive the lot of this service and apostleship, from which Judas transgressing fell to go to his own place". That reminds us of antichrist really. He is going to his own place. "And they gave lots on them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles". That is, the apostleship is complete, which points to the new order of things and involves administration.
C.R. Probably Peter remembered the night the Lord spent in prayer over his selection.
J.T. You can see here what the tutorship of Christ really meant and how essential ministry is to us, because of the need of instruction among the brethren, each one taking up the need of being instructed.
A.E.M. Is the lot falling on Matthias wholly a sovereign matter, or is there some distinction between the man who has three names and the man who has one? I was wondering if the Spirit, with the greater knowledge that pertains to Him, might indicate some refined distinction with the man whose name indicates more simple life and ways, with only one name. The Spirit would have more liberty where there is greater simplicity; perhaps there are more complications with a man who has so many names -- relatives and business interests.
J.T. Especially if he changed his name for business or social reasons or had a hyphenated name.
H.H. Verse 20 uses the word 'overseership' and verse 25 'apostleship'. Would the thought of overseership reach down to the present time, such as spoken of in @1 Timothy 3?
J.T. Well, of course, Peter was an elder, that is, an overseer, I suppose, but then apostleship is really the issue here; that is, authority, and the lot fell on Matthias
{99}
A,P.T. They say, "Thou Lord, knower of the hearts of all". There may be something in this as a heart matter.
J.T. It is a sovereign matter too. It is a sovereign matter to name the apostles. The Lord named them and took great care; He spent the night in prayer before He named them. Here the idea of sovereignty must enter into it. Sovereignty implies that we are not now dealing with novices or beginners, but we are dealing with a great person called an apostle. We are thinking of him not simply as having an official name but his actual state must be known. Not only is God sovereign in making the selection, but it is necessary that his state be known. Judas¬ state in the wisdom of God was never really known by the apostles. They never seem to have known him, but we should know one another and especially those in a position of trust or responsibility.
H.H. @Psalm 109:8 says, "Let his days be few, let another take his office". After all, Judas was only with the Lord a few years.
A.P.T. This matter of service among the brethren, involving a responsible matter such as an address or any service among the Lord's people, necessitates that those who have it in their hand should be acquainted with the moral state, as well as the ability, in the one selected.
J.T. Quite so. It is very important, and to take the best advice you can get. Timothy had a good name, a good report among the brethren; and when it is a matter of a large number, it is all the more important that any person who is to be entrusted with a service should be reliable, not simply the brother who can speak well, but who is reliable as to the truth. That is the principle that is to be set out.
{100}
J.K.P. Is that the reason for service preceding apostleship? It says, "Shew which one of these two thou hast chosen, to receive the lot of this service and apostleship".
J.T. So that the word is earlier, "The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole decision is of Jehovah", (@Proverbs 16:33). They follow that here. Matthias had been there during all the time in which the Lord Jesus had come in and gone out. Justus was too, but Matthias was selected, meaning God knew better than the brethren. Of course, we have to trust one another and it is certainly important to get reliability in ministry, not simply those who can say things o give addresses, but those who are reliable in what they say.
{101}
THE THRONE OF GRACE (1)
@Luke 4:16 - 22
J.T. The throne of grace is in mind as a suggestion to start with and it is hoped it will be carried through as to its meaning. The throne of grace has been suggested and chapter 7 is thought of after chapter 4 and then several chapters running on to the last chapter in the book where we have the fullest thought of our subject.
It is in mind now that we should consider the Lord from the standpoint of grace and how the idea is presented in Himself. The idea of the throne is taken up to stress the thought, and show how it should be dominant and carry authority. The gospel is to be enforced and in authority, and this directs our minds immediately to the Lord and how things are presented and spoken of by Him. We have to learn from the Lord in everything.
S.P. Is Luke outstanding in his presentation of this feature?
J.T. I think so, although the phrase is not found here but in Hebrews, "Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace", @Hebrews 4:16. We are to come boldly to it according to Hebrews and then according to Romans "... so also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life", @Romans 5:21. It is as if the end in mind carries the thought of grace reigning through righteousness unto eternal life. All these thoughts, we can readily see, point to the Lord. It is a question of what marked Him, whether it be the throne of grace or other features.
J.W.D. When we speak of the throne of grace are we to bear in mind what you say, it is the Lord Himself?
J.T. That is, the throne of grace is static - we come to it, come boldly to it. The active side is in
{102}
us. The active side is in Christ in this passage, and so with all the activities in the gospel. The static side of the throne is there, but it is a question of the activity being in us, our need producing it. The activity in the gospel is peculiarly aggressive, but the throne is there always accessible.
C.T. The outcome of the activity of Christ in this chapter is that all eyes are being fixed upon Him.
J.T. Just so, but it is the effect of what He said and what He was and how it impressed the hearers. It is not a question of a static condition in Him; it is active. Because it is said, "And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up; and he entered, according to his custom, into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up to read". That is. He is doing it. And not simply what He is doing, but *How* He is doing it.
L.E.S. Would the bringing forward of Isaiah suggest the embodiment in Christ personally of the grace found in this section?
J.T. I would think so. Luke represents the whole idea. He was taken up by God to do it according to his own words. "Forasmuch as many have undertaken to draw up a relation concerning the matters fully believed among us, as those who from the beginning were eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word have delivered them to us, it has seemed good to *me* also, accurately acquainted from the origin with all things, to write to thee with method, most excellent Theophilus, that thou mightest know the certainty of those things in which thou hast been instructed", @Luke 1:1 - 4. Attention is called to eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word. So that the thought in the Word is clearly presented in this section. Just what He was in activity.
J.W.D. Then action is the prime feature in the system.
{103}
J.T. The Lord is presented here active, but in @Hebrews 4 He is presented as the great High Priest and we come to Him; we come to the throne of grace with boldness. We should be able to get at what Luke has in mind. It is the attack on Satan's domain and how the Vessel of the attack is skilled, the skill that marks Him. He overcomes the enemy because Luke presents Him as overcoming. We are told, "But Jesus, full of [the] Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit in the wilderness" @Luke 4:1, not 'into' but 'in'. It is a scene of contrariety and the devil is overthrown. "And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit to Galilee", @Luke 4:14. That is after the devil had completed every temptation. "And the devil, having completed every temptation, departed from him for a time" @Luke 4:13. He is silenced and the Lord is thus free to go and carry on His service.
H.B. "Where sin abounded grace has overabounded", (@Romans 5:20).
J.T. That is the point -- overabounded. Sin is there but grace has overabounded.
S.P. Luke begins immediately to introduce the thought of the throne. We have the throne of Herod in the first chapter -- the Lord as over against that would exercise His influence, that men may know the meaning of grace.
J.T. The idea of the throne is there, which is important, but for the moment it is a question of the Person.
J.G.V. Grace is mentioned very early, "And the child grew and waxed strong [in spirit], filled with wisdom, and God's grace was upon him", (@Luke 2:40).
J.T. Even at that early age!
H.B. Why is this enacted in Nazareth where He was brought up?
{104}
J.T. It is to bring out the importance of the local cities where God is pleased to set up His testimony. The Lord was brought up in Nazareth, which is in keeping with what has just been remarked, that God's grace was upon Him even as a Boy at the age of twelve. He grew up in His place, we are told in the prophets, a very important thing implying that each is to be in his place in the locality, not going away.
C.T. The whole verse is local -- "... and he entered according to his custom".
J.T. Yes, to bring out what already marked Him. He is no novice; of course, you could not think of such a thing about the Lord, but very often young brothers are novices, they have no custom at all; they seem to think that anything will suit, but that is not according to the Lord's method.
J.W.D. Timothy had a good testimony in his locality.
J.T. Quite so. The apostle noted that and he took him and circumcised him to relieve him of any unnecessary hindrances.
S.P. Here it is not merely the custom of the place, but *His* custom, which would mark Him wherever He served.
J.T. Well, it is *His* custom. Paul had a custom. He says to the Corinthians, "But if any one think to be contentious, *we* have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God", @1 Corinthians 11:16. We all know how customs have grown up. There are customs wherever you go. If you go on the continent of Europe you will find certain features there which would be customs. And so in Great Britain, in Ireland or in America here. The local position develops custom. But the Lord stands over against all that; it is *His* custom. He has the pre-eminence - we have to learn everything from Christ. We have even
{105}
to learn how to pray from Him. Teach us to pray, one says in this gospel.
A.B.M. Speaking of the throne, have you in mind the authoritative side is represented in the throne but in the activity of it, it is grace?
J.T. Yes, at the beginning it is not much stressed, it is more the Person of the Lord as the Vessel of grace. But it will come out in time as we proceed There was the authoritative side.
C.C.T. Would 'standing up' bring out the thought of authority?
J.T. It is more what is suitable when one is ministering the word of God, that one should read it standing, "... and stood up to read".
J.W.D. You were saying that different countries have different customs, but these would all be subservient to the Lord's custom.
H.B. In @Psalm 45 the Vessel of grace is spoken of as the One who is "... fairer than the sons of men; grace is poured into thy lips", @Psalm 45:2.
J.T. The Psalms yield much in that section, dwelling on the Messiah. But Luke is properly the gentile in relation to its customs, they are not Jewish customs, they might be coloured by heathen, or Romish customs, or by Babylonish customs. We are to know how to unload whatever attaches to us in these matters and begin with Christ.
L.E.S. Would the thought of custom be adjusted by the current features of the testimony?
J.T. Just so. See what the Lord did Himself and how He asserted Himself in the temple. "Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" (@Luke 2:49). Did ye not know? He says to His mother, inclusive of His father, He meant to convey the same thought to both parents. "Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" (@Luke 2:49). I *must* be. We begin there. But He goes to Nazareth and is subject to them, so
{106}
that He is true, for the idea of subjection to parents is not hindering Him in the service He is carrying on.
C.C.T. Do you think the thought of custom is in @1 John 1:1? John speaks of what they had seen and handled of the word of life.
J.T. Well, it was what they saw in the Lord. It is all a question of life and, of course, that idea enters into what we are speaking of now. We are not exactly speaking of life, but of grace. But it is a question of what is living. Even with grace it is a question of what is living.
J.W.D. Would you say that when the Lord says, "I ought to be occupied in my Father's business? (@Luke 2:49)". that that was His custom?
J.T. Well, it is rather the Person there because He asserts His conscious sonship, showing how early the relation of Son entered into the Lord's mind and how consequently it must have entered into the lines of His service, His way of doing things. The family thought is dominant in everything, and it is much better to be characterised by the family idea than the priestly, because priestliness is something acquired for a certain need, but the family means that you are a son all the time. Therefore John's gospel is the great gospel in a general sense. It precedes all the others, it is the family idea. The Lord begins with that thought in Luke, "Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business? (@Luke 2:49)".
A.H. At Philippi the apostle Paul joins himself to those of whom it is said, "And on the sabbath day we went outside the gate by the river, where it was the custom for prayer to be, and we sat down and spoke to the women who had assembled", (@Acts 16:13). Do you get the thought of the throne of grace there?
J.T. Quite so. That is good. Especially as linking it with the thought of Lydia, what she was; and how the apostle calls attention to the women who
{107}
laboured with him. All these thoughts enter into what we are saying, because we are dealing with Paul really. If we want to work out what grace was here according to Luke we must follow on to Paul because Luke follows Paul in the second treatise. We have him at the end in his hired house. It is the thing to note.
A.E.J. As they listened to what Jesus said, "all bore witness to him, and wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth". Would all this connect with what Paul wrote to Titus about the grace of God that carries with it salvation having appeared? It appeared in the Lord Himself as He taught in the synagogue, and spoke these gracious words. "Grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ", (@John 1:17).
J.T. Quite so. Subsists, all is in the Person of Christ. Luke has in mind that the whole testimony from Adam onwards is laid out and worked out in the gospel, that grace might be effective in our souls, not simply in our minds, but in our *souls* . It is remarkable how Luke links on with the record in Chronicles. The first word in Chronicles is Adam, and Luke embraces men from Adam onward. The Spirit of God by him confirms each individual taught of God through the gospel. All is carried down by Luke, finishing in the Acts with Paul in his own hired house in Rome preaching the kingdom of God. So that the gospel is carried down into the gentile world in Paul and the whole testimony of God is involved. That is the idea we are to get into our souls that God is with us in this matter.
S.P. In @Acts 3 you see how a customary "hour of prayer" was turned into an occasion of grace to the lame man reaching the soul of the person. It shows the availability of grace.
J.T. That is very good. Luke presents the thing in persons. The propagation of the truth universally
{108}
is seen in the second treatise. There is no mention of the term 'excellent' in speaking to Theophilus in the second treatise, because he is speaking to a believer from among the gentiles who has been brought into the current of grace in Christianity.
L.E.S. In Chronicles the first family named is that of Japheth. Would not that link with Luke?
J.T. It refers to the spreading abroad of that family into the Western world, and that is what is indicated in Luke's second treatise, that we are to go to the West. That is another thing -- the matter of geography. The Spirit of God recognises geography and uses Luke and Paul; so we have to learn there are limitations in our calculations, and to eliminate certain parts of the world spiritually. The gospel of God is designed to proceed towards the West.
Rem. We have the Spirit of God anointing Christ for His service; that is, the service of grace, and the power exercised was to bring in grace.
J.T. That is how the matter stands. It is said, "But Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit in the wilderness forty days, tempted of the devil" (@Luke 4:1,2). And then we are told in @Acts 10:38, "Jesus .. . how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power; who went through all quarters doing good, and healing all that were under the power of the devil, because God was with him". In chapter 4, Luke speaks of that. He says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor". In Luke it is the peculiar thought of grace. Grace itself reigns. The thing is personified. It is, of course, the Person that is in mind, the Lord Jesus, but grace is personified. The thing itself is an active matter, not static, although it may be at times, but in a general way throughout this
{109}
gospel it is the activity of grace and how it overcomes all opposition.
J.G.V. It is said of Paul in the end of Acts, "And he remained two whole years in his own hired lodging, and received all who came to him, preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, with all freedom unhinderedly", @Acts 28:30,31.
J.T. "Received all who came to him", no retinue of servants! Probably chained himself, but there serving. The Lord Jesus says, "But *I* am in the midst of you as the one that serves", (@Luke 22:27).
L.E.S. You were saying something about certain sections of the earth and geography?
J.T. The allusion to Chronicles and Japheth brings out the matter of geography; that is to say, where the gospel was to be announced. From Paul's missionary journeys one is forced to conclude that there are limitations upon *our* activities. The missionary associations generally make a way into the East, but the Spirit of God in the Acts does not direct that way. After three hundred years of missionary work in the East there is very little accomplished for God. We cannot be sure if the persons numbered as converts are converted at all. The societies have ignored the Spirit's reference to geography in Paul's service; he is directed to go to the West, not the East.
J.W.D. "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation", (@Mark 16:15). What would that include?
J.T. That has all to be taken up. You are quoting Mark, "Go into all the world; and preach the glad tidings to all the creation"(@Mark 16:15). The moral side is the world, but all creation is in God's *mind. We* are not to limit that, but we are to be subject to direction in limitation in *our service* . We have rather to
{110}
follow Luke as to *where* the gospel is to be preached, for through him we learn how the Spirit of God directs and controls. The facts of the case are seen in Acts.
S.P. Is there not a suggestion of this in @Acts 16:6 - 8? "And having passed through Phrygia and the Galatian country, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia, having come down to Mysia, they attempted to go to Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them; and having passed by Mysia they descended to Troas". Does it not suggest limitations for that moment?
J.T. Certainly, "the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them" (@Acts 16:7) not the Spirit of Christ, but the Spirit of Jesus, the Man, and the testimony of that is to work out into the West. The kind of Spirit that is to appear in Christianity in the West. Because the Spirit of Jesus is, of course the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of the anointed Man. You may say, How is it, that the Spirit of Jesus would prohibit the preaching of the gospel anywhere? Let us see how Paul finds things. He had a vision. Peter had a vision too, but Paul had this vision and saw a certain Macedonian man, standing and beseeching him. The Macedonian man was in the West, because Paul was in Asia at that time. And this Macedonian man says, "Pass over into Macedonia and help us" (@Acts 16:9). Paul would have to go through Asia to Europe to get there. We have to pay attention to these things in regard of where the gospel is to be preached. We have to regard the fact that there is no record of great activity towards the East. We have much said as regards the gospel going towards the West.
H.B. @Colossians 1:23 says, "... and not moved away from the hope of the glad tidings, which ye have heard, which have been proclaimed in the whole creation which is under heaven, of which *I* Paul became a minister". How would that fit in?
{111}
There is a great deal in that chapter about the Lord creating everything.
J.T. That is the general fact as stated by Mark in the end of this gospel. We have *subdivisions* in service. The whole idea in Mark is "all the creation". But the subdivisional limitations asserted in levitical service apply to Europe, as the Acts shows.
J.W.D. I am sure what you are saying is right, but how do you account for those who are converted?
J.T. We know about the magi. The magi from the East came westward. The Lord is said to have bought the whole *field* . But when we come down to the idea of that field, what the Lord really bought is a particular one. We must make allowance for what has been remarked about Japheth, and how the gospel spread into Europe and the outgoings of Europe. We get the full thought of grace here, and the Vessel through whom the gospel of the grace of God comes to us. He is the Person to learn from, also Paul and others.
Ques. The Lord speaks of Himself as having been anointed to preach glad tidings.
J.T. Quite so. The mind of God as to the whole matter was there, but then it is going to spread out. The second treatise by Luke deals with that, a wider outlook to what he had in the first one.
J.W.D. Why does it say that Jesus came to Nazareth, where He was brought up?
J.T. Well, let us see what is said, "And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up; and he entered, according to his custom, into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up to read. And the book of the prophet Esaias was given to him; and having unrolled the book he found the place where it was written, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor; he has sent me to preach to captives
{112}
deliverance, and to the blind sight, to send forth the crushed delivered, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord". He finishes and He rolls up the book. *We* have to *learn* where to stop. Now the question raised is, Why Nazareth was so adamant, and indifferent to the Lord? He was brought up there. Is it not a warning to us as to what may be in such a situation. We have to see that we have to go back to Christ and learn everything from Him. "But *he* , passing through the midst of them, went his way, and descended to Capernaum, a city of Galilee" (@Luke 4:30,31). Those hard-hearted Jews that were in the town where the Lord was brought up -- He passed through them, "... passing through the midst of them, went his way"(@Luke 4:30,31). See what feelings the Lord had as He carried through. What opposition there was, but the Lord passed through the midst of the opposition and came on His way and as coming said a great deal about Elias and Elisha. It reminds us, that what we learn in our youth from religion in Christendom, has to be discarded.
L.E.S. In contrast to the callousness of Nazareth we have in @Isaiah 66:2, "But to this man will I look; to the afflicted and contrite in spirit, and who trembleth at my word". And then further on in verse 5, "Hear the word of Jehovah, ye that tremble at his word: Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let Jehovah be glorified, and let us see your joy! but they shall be ashamed" @Isaiah 66:5.
J.T. Yes, that helps us, for we have to disallow and unload, what may have been taught us as coming out of whatever 'isms' we have been in. We have to learn everything from Christ.
A.B.M. How far would you carry the thought in relation to our households, those reared amongst us?
J.T. You mean young people? We have to test everything by Scripture whether we may not have
{113}
adopted things that will not stand the test of Scripture. It is worth while bringing it up -- will these things stand the test of Scripture? But what we are saying in a general way is that we are so apt to carry with us what we have learnt from our forefathers, carry it in amongst the brethren and retail it without testing it out. The Bereans are always an example, "daily searching the scriptures if these things were so", (@Acts 17:11).
C.C.T. Speaking of Timothy, he received his training from his grandmother and his mother. We never hear of there being anything amiss with it.
J.T. There was apparently no fault to be found with their teaching. We all have to come to the point eventually that we learn everything from Christ. There is authority in the Lord. The verses read impress us with the Vessel through whom the gospel has come; it has come through that Person. Have we begun to admire the glory of the Person -- the Vessel of grace. While learning how to preach yourself, you are admiring the marvellous glory of the expression of it all in Christ. It is the idea of the Vessel -- how Christianity has come to us through the gospel.
C.C.T. The whole occasion stands out as unique -- the reading of the book and the rolling of it up.
J.T. "And having rolled up the book, when he had delivered it up to the attendant, he sat down". Meaning that is the point to stop. And then it goes on to say, "And he began" that is a characteristic word to note in Luke. "And he began to say to them, Today this scripture is fulfilled in your ears". The word 'began' in this connection would suggest that there is so much to learn that you have to stop, because the beginning is the thing we are at for the moment. John's gospel gives us the beginning of life, but in Luke it is the beginning of grace. The kind of thing grace is, is the point in the gospel.
{114}
S.P. In @Revelation 5 there is another book which the Lord opens.
J.T. There is; only that is the book of the inheritance. There is no idea of anyone else but the Lamb opening that. It is the book of the inheritance and involves all the suffering of the book of Revelation. It is most interesting to see the book in the fifth chapter and the throne in the fourth, and then the little book in the tenth. The end of Christianity or Christendom is in view in Revelation, but in Luke we are dealing with the beginning of Christianity. It is an evangelical scene and there is nothing more interesting. We are seeking to do a little preaching and we *are* doing a little preaching here and there in our meeting-rooms and heaven is interested. The Lord sees there is a little faith to go on, and faith to pray more so that there will be progress, for we are dealing with Christianity in this small way. We are coming to the end of the Christian dispensation, and there is another dispensation coming in that will bring in Israel. The Lord is getting ready for something else and would have us to know. Things appear little with us, but God is with us. The things that will be great to sight are coming. John tells us that in the visions of Revelation, *he saw* "a great crowd, which no one could number" @Revelation 7:9. Young people may say, You are only a few. Nevertheless God is with it, and God would have us to go on with the preaching of the word.
But now let us look at the Lord. The Spirit of God would direct us to fix our eyes upon this Person, to see where He was brought up, and how He does things there, and then what He says. But what a result after these things! so that the Lord went through their midst -- through the midst of them, just the kind of people we are preaching to, and how adamant they are; that is the reason there
{115}
are not many converted. Apostasy is rampant in this city and everywhere.
A.J. This book of Isaiah is not sealed. The Lord opened it and gracious words proceeded out of His mouth.
J.T. We have the same book that He opened, and He is in heaven, the same Person who opened the book. You and I are to learn from Him the way, as we seek to preach the gospel in our little meeting-rooms.
L.E.S. In contrast to the preaching of Christendom, it is on a high level.
J.T. And God is in it too, and in our prayer meetings for the gospel.
S.P. We are to be not simply accepting the Nazarene position, but conformed to it.
J.T. From verse 23 to 27, is presented the sovereignty of God in such conditions as that. How God moves sovereignly; that is what He is doing now with a few who are preaching. The Spirit does not despise a day of small things; they are small nevertheless. We want to get the idea of the Vessel of grace that laboured in this dispensation, the present one, that we are in now. The words of grace come out of His mouth. The reference is to the Person. "And having rolled up the book, when he had delivered it up to the attendant, he sat down; and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed upon him. And he began to say to them. Today this scripture is fulfilled in your ears". I would say 'today' is this dispensation. "Today this scripture is fulfilled in your ears". Speaking of the dispensation, at the very beginning of it is Jesus.
Ques. What do you say about His sitting down?
J.T. It does not say that He sits on the throne of grace. Grace reigns but it is active. Sitting down here would refer to His personal influence, not so much the activity of administration. As you look
{116}
into these things you come into the full thought of what they are worth. In the gospel of Mark, which is characteristic, the Lord says, "The time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God has drawn nigh; repent and believe in the glad tidings", @Mark 1:15. Not believe it, but believe *in* it. We get a primary thought of believing *in* there. However much there may be, go into it.
C.C.T. Do you find an order here in regard of the way things take place, the reading, the rolling up of the book, and the sitting down?
J.T. The Lord would have us admire the opening of this beautiful thing. We hear of half-open flowers in the temple. There is the presence of life in this connection; how grace is set out in the beginning, how it is set out in the Lord, in His deeds, we want to contemplate and admire it. That is what is intended; that we should be admirers of Christ as the Preacher. It is the appeal of the Person, all here in the synagogue heard Him. It is remarkable that "... all bore witness to him, and wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth".
L.E.S. Is the personality of the preacher a counterpart of the preaching?
J.T. I should think so. In the seminaries of Christendom, there is no idea of beautiful persons morally, but of oratory. We are getting here something of grace itself, absolutely original, there was never such a Person like this before.
L.E.S. Would you suggest that this is to be the model for all who serve in a small way in the preaching?
J.T. We have the preachings in the little rooms and the brethren come and a lot of children come and the mothers come; that is smallness marks it, but sometimes a brother gets up full of the grace, full of these thoughts from God. He is thinking of
{117}
the Person through whom Christianity has come to us. This passage is to show how beautiful Jesus is, and to show the effect on every one.
A.D. It is remarkable to take account of this matter of witness. "And all bore witness to him, and wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth". But they discount His words.
J.T. That is a good point. We may get persons in the room to hear the gospel, such as those from the religious systems; they may come in and go out, and not come back again because they do not see what we are engaged with. The point for us, nevertheless, is to be engaged with *this* Person and what the preaching was as presented in Christ.
J.G.V. When the Lord refers to their ears it would bring in the thought of responsibility.
J.T. He puts the responsibility on them. The whole position is exposed, because the grace is there and they turn away from it.
Rem. "Today this scripture is fulfilled in your ears", that holds good today, too.
J.T. It is what happened in Dublin when they began to preach the gospel, and this gospel of Luke began to open up to the brethren. They were not many, they began to preach in a furniture store. Not many attended, but the people of Dublin had the thing fulfilled in their ears and the whole country began to speak of it after a while because the false religious position was attacked. God has stood by the brethren ever since, although they have never been very large. God has kept to the real thing and is going on with it now.
A.B.M. Does Luke suggest the bringing to light of persons who would be the nucleus of the assembly in the Acts?
J.T. They are coming to light, one here and one there. It is remarkable the smallness of it, but the
{118}
genuineness of it too, and God is going on with that. It is a beautiful picture here -- the kind of preaching Christianity started with.
J.W.D. It is said of Paul, "And straightway in the synagogues he preached Jesus, that *he* is the Son of God. And all who heard were astonished", (@Acts 9:20). Is that something like the refusal you get here -- nobody converted? There was grace in personality with Paul.
J.T. And that is the case with us. But the thing is of God notwithstanding the smallness of it. God is standing by the thing and making it impressive to others. If you get a conversion like the woman of Samaria or the eunuch, it is worth while. It is remarkable how little you get of large numbers in the book of Acts. The first three thousand increased during the initial period to five thousand and showed what God could do, that He could get numbers. But there is never any repetition of that.
L.E.S. Paul's preaching although it did not yield much at that time, must have been a marvellous setting forth of @Luke 4.
J.T. There was little effect and that is so with us, but I think God is standing by it. I am certain of it. Although one generation is passing away, there is another coming and you want that other to be right, too, and to get some impression of Jesus, the Vessel of grace that is presented here so beautifully by Luke, whom God used for it.
L.E.S. So you would encourage the brethren to go on with the preaching.
J.T. That is what I am saying, "eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word" (@Luke 1:2); we are witnesses of what we are saying. Whatever we may be doing, we are to be attendant on the Lord. It is the Word there, the Logos, the Person saying the thing. I must be attendant on Him. It is sorrowful how the smallest things, a shower of rain, keep people at
{119}
home from the meeting. God says, "Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease" (@Genesis 8:22). The seasons of the year are His ordering, and yet a little rain is made an obstacle to coming to the meeting. We are to be "eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word"(@Luke 1:2). Are you looking after that? Do you see the Person who is speaking?
A.E.J. The aggregate of all that is seen in the wonderful results in the western world. Christ is beginning to preach in @Luke 4, and the preaching is now continued by those here too.
J.T. Quite so. God is attending to that. But if you consider the whole history how poor the attendance is. It is not simply the listening to the thing, but the going after the Person from whom it comes, "eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word"(@Luke 1:2). Luke is telling us that these men he is writing about would listen to the Lord Jesus and be attendant on Him as well.
{120}
THE THRONE OF GRACE (2)
@Luke 7:1 - 17,36 - 50
J.T. The brethren will bear in mind that we are not taking up the gospel of Luke but the throne of grace as the subject. What is in mind now is to show that as the narrative proceeds we have favourable conditions and therefore we have to bring in the Spirit and His work, particularly to see how the Spirit appears in relation to that throne, in relation to grace, otherwise there would be no result. The chapter brings out results from the gospel. They are seen in the persons who are brought forward, especially the centurion, and then the widow of Nain, and then the woman of the city who was a sinner, of whom it is said, "she loved much". So that while we are touched by the comparative barrenness of the gospel service of the present time yet this chapter would show that there are results and that these results are brought about by the Spirit, the Spirit being here on earth in relation to the throne of grace.
S.W.P. Is the Spirit here producing a subjective work contemporary with God's movements?
J.T. In this section there are good relations with the Jews. Actual antagonism, or pure negligence, or opposition to the Lord as in chapter 4, are not seen, but we have something going on in the section which is favourable to the Jews, and something going on in the woman as a sure witness that the dispensation is fruitful. Our gatherings are to have fruitfulness; there is fruitfulness and we are to expect it.
L.E.S. Would there be a link in Luke with what is said by the prophet Zechariah referring to the day of small things; "Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts", @Zechariah 4:6. And then there is the thought of the headstone, and the shoutings, "Grace, grace unto it!" @Zechariah 4:7.
{121}
J.T. That helps us as to the possibilities, for we are not working for nothing; grace is not in vain. The work of the Lord goes on, and it is not in vain, so that Zerubbabel would be the responsible or governing side in that he would set up the corner stone; that is, the faithfulness of the Lord would come in there. That something would be done according to the divine mind is clear; the designed and certain sequel of that enters into what we have in the chapter.
C.C.T. This is the thought of doing. This morning we had the thought of the Lord beginning to say; at the opening of this chapter we have the Lord completing His words.
J.T. That is something that we should contemplate. It would involve the importance of what the Lord had said in the interval between chapters 4 and 7, because the teaching of the Lord must run parallel with the preaching. The Lord's sayings would fill out what would be expected in certain circumstances of the dispensation.
L.E.S. What is the difference between preaching and teaching?
J.T. Well, preaching is a gift and it is a gift involving power, peculiar power. While we are considering that point, there is also the charm of the Preacher, that is of the Lord Himself. Luke is particularly the preaching gospel. And then the teaching which also involves gift goes with that. That includes the opening up of the minds of the brethren as alluded to already, "Then he opened their understanding to understand the scriptures, and said to them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved the Christ to suffer, and to rise from among the dead the third day; and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem", (@Luke 24:45 - 47). The operations of grace to save come out in preaching. The
{122}
Lord also said that the Spirit should guide us into the truth. As the truth has its way these men are able to meet conditions; that is, the servants, who are teaching.
C.C.T. Would teaching help to bring us *into* what we are brought *to* in the preaching?
J.T. Just so. The teaching is the working out of things in the mind. The preacher, I think, suggests the power that applies the truth of the gospel in the way of grace, the preaching of grace, but the teaching is to open it up in detail and give the why and wherefore of it. If we had nothing but preaching we would have poor intelligence and no instruction; there may be conversions but the mind is defective. Preaching is sometimes called announcing or proclaiming. Sometimes you have such words that strike the mind, affecting it in the sense of wonder, by things that are wonderful. But teaching is more sober and gives the answers to the questions of the mind.
L.E.S. Where you feel you have no gift in the preaching in a locality how would you proceed in regard to the gospel?
J.T. I would say, Preach the word; that is to say, the mind of God, the announcing in that sense. Let us see how the matter is found in @2 Timothy 4:1, "I testify before God and Christ Jesus, who is about to judge living and dead, and by his appearing and his kingdom, proclaim the word; be urgent in season and out of season, convict, rebuke, encourage, with all longsuffering and doctrine". I think I would work on those lines if we have no one that can preach as having gift. It is a matter of the knowledge of the word of God. If we are Christians at all we have some knowledge.
H.B. "Do the work of an evangelist", (@2 Timothy 4:5).
J.T. Showing that the actual gift of evangelisation is not contemplated and yet the work can go on without it.
{123}
C.C.T. "How beautiful the feet of them that announce glad tidings of peace", (@Romans 10:15). Is that the same line in connection with the preaching?
J.T. Well, it is announcing, but the word 'preaching' has more force in itself. The thing called preaching is something more than announcing or setting out facts. Should we look at @1 Timothy 2:5 - 7? "For God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, the testimony to be rendered in its own times; to which *I* have been appointed a herald and apostle (I speak the truth, I do not lie,) a teacher of the nations in faith and truth". I think you get the thing we are speaking of now in what Paul says about himself. There is the revelation of God being one, and the mediator between God and men one, and then by the gift that Paul had, "the testimony to be rendered in its own times; to which *I* have been appointed a herald and apostle (I speak the truth, I do not lie,) a teacher of the nations in faith and truth" @1 Timothy 2:6,7. I think that the apostle takes account of all that we are speaking of, as to the way, the proclamation or preaching or teaching. The word 'heralding' is used here.
S.W.P. Does the teaching show there is a result? I was thinking of @Deuteronomy 4:5,6, "See, I have taught you statutes and ordinances, even as Jehovah my God commanded me, that ye may do so in the land into which ye enter to possess it. And ye shall keep and do them; for that will be your wisdom and your understanding before the eyes of the peoples that shall hear all these statutes, and say, Verily this great nation is a wise and understanding people".
J.T. Well, that is a point in what we are saying too. The prophets are filled with the thought of teaching. For instance, Hosea says, "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge". @Hosea 4:6. And then it says further, "And we shall know, -- we
{124}
shall follow on to know Jehovah: his going forth is assured as the morning dawn; and he will come unto us as the rain, as the latter rain which watereth the earth", @Hosea 6:3. So that the condition of the people, the intelligence of the people, keeps pace with what they know by preaching. The preaching is powerful and affects them both as to their minds and sentiments or feelings. But then if we do not go on, if we do not keep pace with it in the sense of teaching, we shall not have understanding. So to the Corinthians Paul says, "I speak as to intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say", @1 Corinthians 10:15. Corinthians is full of that -- it is the assembly in its formation; the why and wherefore of things. Hence the Lord's supper is the very centre of assembly formation and witness. We know what we are eating and why we are eating it.
L.E.S. The book of Ecclesiastes having the preaching in view has in mind the matter of the assembly.
J.T. "The Preacher" is the title of the person who is the author of the book. But he is a former of assemblies as we have often noticed. The preacher would have that in mind, that the persons who are affected by his preaching are formed into assemblies. He would set out suitable words, words of truth, so that they may know why this is so. It is of prime importance with the coming generation. There is always the question of generations coming and going. What should mark the young generation is that youth should be brought up with their elders, not left to themselves. Therefore the idea of youth ministry, preaching or teaching for the young people alone, has not been found fruitful. The elders having the knowledge of the thing would confirm what is taught to the young and therefore things should be carried on on those lines, the elder and the younger together. The youth is then brought up with a knowledge of what is done and why it is done. Hence in the types
{125}
you have the thought, When your children shall ask you why are these things so, the coming generation asking the going generation. The going generation have the thing in their souls and they communicate it to the youth.
S.W.P. Children should be with their parents in these meetings. Young children are influenced and take things on.
J.T. I notice how young children who are thoughtful do take account of what is being said. But we have @Luke 7 before us. Chapter 4 is necessary to bring out the Person of the Lord Jesus as the Vessel of grace and how He carries on in setting out the gospel, but we get no results; although in His own town, where He was brought up, yet we get no results. In chapter 7 we *have* results, and of course we must allow for, in relation to chapter 4, the results which follow, through God's work by the Spirit.
N.B. Is there a link between grace and sovereignty? Luke says, "And a certain centurion's bondman who was dear to him was ill and about to die".
J.T. Yes, the man was a gentile mingling with the Jews, and of good report among the Jews; there is an element of virtue in that. It is not like the social relations that Christians join in with the neighbours; there is no virtue in that, but the contrary. But here in the relations there is virtue, God has something in the matter.
L.E.S. Say something more as to links outside.
J.T. Take the position now, there are a great number of brethren abroad in the Forces. Persons like the centurion have links with the young brothers, who mingle with these persons in military circumstances. We have to consider whether these circumstances may be conducive to the gospel, and in that way have virtue in them, as compared with ordinary social circumstances in business or among neighbours
{126}
which may be detrimental to the saints. The great point is what might be conducive, or virtuous in human relations. Whether we are Christians or not, we are human persons; that is, men, women and children. So it is whether these circumstances are conducive to good or bad, whether there is virtue in them or otherwise. This chapter contemplates the military class and persons who are respectable religious people. The question is if in such relations there is much real virtue having a bearing on the gospel. It is important whether we are going to get anything out of them, whether with the young brothers in these circumstances there is anything coming out for the testimony.
H.B. We hear of them being approved by those over them.
J.T. That is the general testimony that the young brothers in the Forces commend themselves to their officers.
J.G.V. This centurion has some idea of authority.
J.T. What kind of a man is he? He is exceptional. "Not even in Israel have I found so great faith" -- something that is in humanity that God can use, because that is the way the Lord takes it on. First of all, in verse 4, the Jews give a good account of this centurion, "he loves our nation". Luke says, "And a certain centurion's bondman who was dear to him was ill and about to die". He was a bondman dear to his master -- another point to note. "And having heard of Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, begging him that he might come and save his bondman. But they, being come to Jesus, besought him diligently, saying, He is worthy to whom thou shouldest grant this, for he loves our nation, and himself has built the synagogue for us. And Jesus went with them". That is to say, from the divine side, there is virtue in this. Such is commended to the Lord's own attention. "And Jesus went with
{127}
them. But already, when he was not far from the house, the centurion sent to him friends". It does not say he sent the military, but his own personal friends, "saying to him, Lord, do not trouble thyself, for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof. Wherefore neither did I count myself worthy to come to thee. But say by a word and my servant shall be healed. For *I* also am a man placed under authority, having under myself soldiers, and I say to this one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my bondman, Do this, and he does it. And Jesus hearing this wondered at him, and turning to the crowd following him said, I say to you, Not even in Israel have I found so great faith". Well now, that is a wonderful fact. You might say some are interested today to some extent, and consequently we can count on some result from it.
L.E.S. Do you not think that in dealing with men we should seek to discern some evidence of the work of God in them?
J.T. That is something to have our eyes open for. Not only at the Sunday evening preachings and the Bible readings, but at all times, for the fact is that the work of God is going on all the time while the Spirit is here.
S.W.P. The bondman is about to die; he is dying. The Lord is looking for affection. The centurion loves his bondman and the widowed mother loves her son, and the Lord sees that.
J.T. It is a wonderful scene, and it expresses the dispensation we are dealing with; that love is there in whatever measure it may be; there is evidence of the work of God, which is indispensable to what will happen. For something *will* happen for God. We are not looking at the Lord Jesus now, in these verses, but at the work of God. The centurion's bondman, and his military men, and the man himself, and other
{128}
elements seen here in persons, all bring into evidence what God is doing by the Spirit. It is the Spirit operative in man, and if we do not get them in the gospel, there will be no assembly; but if we do, then the fruit is formed in the assembly.
A.B.M. The preaching in the room would be in view of bringing to light the work of God.
J.T. Look at this scene -- the Lord exclaiming: "Not even in Israel have I found so great faith". The Lord saw that in that man. He is not referring to what He is doing, but what the Spirit is doing. How many are brought into it! The friends of the centurion, for instance. Who are these? "And they who had been sent returning to the house found the bondman, who was ill, in good health". Why did the centurion not let the Lord come to the house? Is it to bring out the magnitude of the Spirit's work in this centurion that he describes the position so perfectly? His own position under authority corresponds with the Lord's position. These friends of his are sent to the Lord. "Lord, do not trouble thyself, for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof. Wherefore neither did I count myself worthy to come to thee. But say by a word and my servant shall be healed. For *I* also" (the 'I' is emphatic), "am a man placed under authority, having under myself soldiers, and I say to this one, Go, and he goes; and to another. Come, and he comes; and to my bondman, Do this, and he does it". That is the story. Well, now what is the effect on the Lord? The Lord says, 'It is wonderful!' Think of the Lord Jesus saying that! It is not His own work He is talking about, but He is talking of what happened in the centurion, which is the Spirit's work.
Ques. When he says, "*I* also am a man placed under authority", had he not seen something in the Lord in regard of His power?
{129}
J.T. He must have seen something and what affects the Lord is that the man can say that. The Lord Jesus is a lone Man, not a military man, or a man of society, but this centurion is able to see He is under authority, a delegate from heaven. The man is there representing the Roman empire and its authority over the soldiers, so the Lord Jesus has come down from heaven having authority. Outwardly he saw a Man like himself. The Lord is greatly impressed by what he said and we are to look for something like that in men brought to the truth. Can we not look for something like this to happen? I think we can.
L.E.S. The possibilities in what exists around us are very large.
J.T. I believe we may expect in a small way what corresponds to what has accrued from the gospel testimony in all these happenings.
J.K. People are impressed by the way things are done rather than by the words: the man in @1 Corinthians 14 saw that things were to be done in a certain way.
J.T. It says there, "And thus, falling upon his face, he will do homage to God, reporting that God is indeed amongst you" @1 Corinthians 14:25. I think we may see something like that.
H.B. The Lord entered into Capernaum, we are told in the commencement of this chapter. Are we to look therefore in preaching and visiting for the work of God to come to light?
J.T. A man under exercise should see *how* things are done, and as affected he will contribute something. If we get anything like that we are encouraged to go on, for God is in it.
A.H. The work of God in the centurion was brought to light by the bondman's sickness.
J.T. Just so. It is remarkable that it is a military man, and that he loved his servant. The idea of love
{130}
is almost foreign to that relationship in society, but not in this man's case. He was exercising his authority in love. "Love is of God, and every one that loves has been begotten of God, and knows God", (@1 John 4:7).
Ques. Is there anything in the centurion in @Acts 10, by way of correspondence?
J.T. There is great correspondence; the pious soldier is remarkable there. This man or his servants in @Luke 7 are not said to be pious. But still there is a great correspondence and they are centurions in both cases. The details and reports we get are remarkable as to how the young brethren are able to speak to officers and those above them. Most affecting are the things that come to light.
Rem. It also says, "He loves our nation", would that indicate the work of God?
J.T. Yes. Compare that with what has happened in Europe in the last five or six years. You could hardly say there was a good reason for the antagonism to the Jews. Here the man loves the Jews. Any one that loves the Jews in this sense, shows the work of God, that love is of God.
J.W.D. What would you say of Lydia as a seller of purple?
J.T. Well, she was a merchant. One has often thought of persons engaged in merchandising. One has thought of Rachel; she was a shepherdess. There are the five men that Joseph selected to bring into the presence of Pharaoh; he insists that they should specify the kind of business they were engaged in; they were shepherds. Oh, one might say, the king of Egypt will not care much for shepherds, better try and say they can do gardening or farming, but no, Joseph insists that that is their occupation. He knows Pharaoh is going to say something about their occupation, and he does and then Pharaoh says,
{131}
I have got cattle and I would like some to care for my cattle. Persons who are Christians are commendable because of their occupation. We need not be ashamed of it, even if it brings us into reproach. There is nothing to be ashamed of in what is of God. This matter of occupation is important. What kind of occupation do you follow? Lydia was a seller of purple -- I suppose the word refers to a kind of dyed stuff.
J.W.D. It must have been a difficult business -- you would not sell much purple save to the very rich. Yet it is remarkable how Paul links himself on with her. "Let each abide in that calling in which he has been called", (@1 Corinthians 7:20).
J.T. Is it worth while going into another calling? Is it worth while for a Christian who is going in for heavenly things? Abide in what you have with God. Why move away from my occupation? Suppose you want to become a doctor, it takes from four to six years to become a doctor. Why change your occupation as long as you can go on with God in it? It is a question of time. There is no time to spare as going on with what you have with God.
C.C.T. Satisfied with your present circumstances.
J.T. We have no time for anything much, because so much is to be done with God and His things.
J.K. Is it not notable that, when the centurion sends to the Lord begging Him to come and save his bondman, it is those who are sent who speak of his worthiness? He has no thought of it himself, he is *begging* the Lord to come.
J.T. It looks as if the whole scene is intended to convey that it is not hardness as in Nazareth, but that there is the work of God coming in. There was not in Nazareth but there is here. This passage was selected because it gives such a remarkable outlook of the results of the gospel. These are to be attributed
{132}
to the work of God by the Spirit not the throne of grace, but the work of God by the Spirit. In the assembly itself is the testimony to the throne of grace; we see there that grace is greater than any difficulty, so that it can exist even although the difficulties are existing, too. This woman of the city who was a sinner was a difficult case, but grace was greater than the difficulty.
Ques. Is she born again? Is there new birth there?
J.T. That is the point. There is something going on that no one knows, but we are supposed to know these things. As we see them here, Luke puts them down and we are to name them. That is, the centurion is born again -- the mighty work of God was there, and we are to notice it.
L.E.S. We are to discern these things.
J.T. Luke contemplates that we are to be able to name these things. Grace was seen in the end of the chapter in forgiveness. Two persons are contemplated; one is said to owe five hundred pence and the other fifty. Well, we are able to name the person who is the five hundred pence debtor. If that person is to be forgiven it is grace. Grace must overcome the difficulty. The centurion gave a cause for the Lord to wonder; he spoke of things in such a way that he causes the Lord to wonder, like the servant of Abraham who wondered at what he saw in Rebecca.
J.W.D. Your suggestion is that the difficulties of the brethren in any locality may yield much as the Spirit is recognised.
J.T. The very thing going on alongside the throne of grace is the work of the Spirit. The work of the Spirit is to be viewed by itself, of course, but it is seen here in the centurion's conditions, and what surrounded him.
J.W.D. What about the widow of Nain?
{133}
J.T. I should think what is seen there is the circumstances of humanity. We are to have the whole of humanity in mind. The first set of circumstances is connected with the centurion and then the woman also sets out humanity, humanity as bringing out divine compassion -- the weakness of humanity, of humanity affected by sorrow. God can be affected by the sorrows of humanity. The facts are, "And it came to pass afterwards he went into a city called Nain, and many of his disciples and a great crowd went with him". How are they affected now? They were not going with Him at Nazareth, but here they are. "And as he drew near to the gate of the city, behold, a dead man was carried out, the only son of his mother, and she a widow, and a very considerable crowd of the city was with her". Well, now what happens? "And the Lord, seeing her, was moved with compassion for her, and said to her". This is not the Spirit, it is the Lord Himself. It is a question of divine compassion for humanity in its sorrow. And what sorrow there is now! What has been seen in these recent years is behind nothing that has been seen in humanity. And surely God would call us into it. "And the Lord, seeing her, was moved with compassion for her, and said to her, Weep not; and coming up he touched the bier, and the bearers stopped. And he said, Youth, I say to thee, Wake up. And the dead sat up and began to speak; and he gave him to his mother". There it is, a marvellous scene. It is God. Not a friend of God, but God in Christ, it is Jesus, God come down into humanity to see it, so close, to see all its sorrow. And see how He is moved by it. Surely it is a wonderful thing to be capable of being moved by such scenes, and see how God can come into them. "And coming up he touched the bier" -- He came so close -- "and the bearers stopped. And he said, Youth, I say to thee, Wake up. And the
{134}
dead sat up and began to speak; and he gave him to his mother". Surely now we have something to affect us. Something that God is doing. There is death in a young person and the mother is a widow; he dies before his mother. There are much people affected by it. It is a question of people being affected by it. God would approve of human beings being affected by such circumstances, and He comes in and gives them deliverance. The dead sat up and spoke. What will he say? What kind of conversation will he carry on? It all shows that the Lord had feelings of manhood in Himself; that is to say man as covering the human race; that kind of being. How God is affected by the sorrow of humanity. Then we have the youth sitting up and speaking because he is told to 'Wake up'. What will he speak about? What will he read? What kind of conversation will he carry on with the neighbours hereafter? That is the idea Luke has in mind.
S.W.P. In the first instance with the centurion it is "when he was not far from the house" and in this section it is, "as he drew near to the gate of the city". Not far from the house and near to the gate of the city, would suggest the activities of the Spirit, of the work of God, that grace is moving in the closest concert with divine operations.
J.T. The whole scene is moving. There is considerable movement on parallel lines, but the result is condensed with the whole scene in mind; that is to say, the young man sat up. "And the dead sat up and began to speak; and he gave him to his mother". I think that has to be worked out in a sense in the youth amongst the brethren, the coming generation. "He gave him to his mother". Where are young people to get things? In their parents. "He gave him to his mother". That is to bring out what was going on, not simply that the young man is made to live, but the family link is re-established.
{135}
N.B. Is the thought of administration in localities, seen in the gates of a city? It says, "As he drew near to the gate of the city".
J.T. It was where administration should be, but there was nothing there to meet the situation. The gate is where things are carried on. If there was anything for God at all it should be there, but there was nothing there; it was all in Christ. And everything is there in Christ, and more, because the boy is delivered back to his mother.
J.W.D. In Timothy we get what happens in the last days, "disobedient to parents, ungrateful, profane, without natural affection", @2 Timothy 3:2. Is this the way grace meets these conditions?
J.T. Very good. You do feel in moving about amongst the brethren the need for the parents to take on responsibility. How much need there is for the parents to take account of their youths and get them under their influence, "he gave him to his mother".
C.C.T. "Wake up". How would that fit in with our children today?
J.T. Well, "Wake up" means something, only the point is power. The word, "Wake up", means something as though God has already moved to bring about life. As Paul says of the young man who fell from the window -- "his life is in him". Now in Elijah's case the son of the mistress of the house died and Elijah asked Jehovah to cause the soul of the boy to come back into him. It had left him. It is God's way to thoroughly take account of what the matter is. If the soul has left him, it comes back, for God brings it back. And so here the boy wakes up. There is something in him which can be retrieved in that way.
J.G.V. It is evidently right to feel this in a great way, the mother being a widow.
{136}
J.T. Quite so. Who can tell what the Lord felt about the widow being left without her only son? How the Lord felt that! And thus God would create in us right feelings for men, feelings of compassion.
H.B. It is the dying out of a generation.
J.T. Yes, there would be nothing left. If she died that would be the end of it.
J.K. He is called a man first and then a youth. Does he start over again on a new basis?
J.T. I believe so. The powers today make much of youth. The powers that be will do anything for the children. They do not care anything for the old people. The food is given to the children more than the old people. What is in men's minds is in God's mind -- the value of the youth.
N.B. The true spirit of motherhood is seen here.
J.T. The word here denotes humanity not simply Jews, but men in the abstract. The Lord is affected by the scene, what man has come to through sin. She is not called a Jewish widow, but just a widow, "the only son of his mother, and she a widow".
A.B.M. The mother is equipped to provide for him. There is nothing said about food. When the Lord raised up the young maiden He told them immediately to give her something to eat. Here the Lord turns the young man over to the mother.
J.T. I think the suggestion is that the boy was able to provide. He is a youth, a young man. The Lord calls him, "Youth". A young man like that should be able to provide for himself.
Ques. Does the thought in Philippians of fulfilling my joy enter into this matter -- the bowels of compassion?
J.T. I think that is good. The Philippian epistle shows the working out of the life of Christianity. So if it be the women helping the apostle, they are *to* be looked after.
{137}
Rem. The only son of his mother. Is there the thought of sonship in that way?
J.T. Quite so. Only it is what we were saying: he should be able to provide for her. God does not intend humanity to be destitute. Look at the resources of God today, so that humanity is not destitute of food. God comes in in these things and we should see what would come in to help men.
H.B. This matter of the youth speaking is important. One finds sometimes in meetings a lack of this. Many are not free to speak in their localities, in the various meetings.
J.T. Yes, you wonder about the dumb brothers. How much there is of that kind of thing in Luke. Zacharias was dumb for a season. So that in @Luke 11 the Lord is casting out a demon and it is dumb. "And he was casting out a demon, and it was dumb; and it came to pass, the demon being gone out, the dumb man spoke" @Luke 11:14. That is what you mean. Young brothers in the meetings not saying anything and if they do say anything there is not much in it. Not only that we can say something, but what is there in what we say. "I speak as to intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say", (@1 Corinthians 10:15). Because the idea of speaking must enter into the assembly. The Lord stands in the midst of the assembly, and that implies this power of speaking in the assembly.
C.C.T. The man sitting at the feet of Jesus, his mind right, was able to speak rightly. We will not be dumb if we are found at the feet of Jesus.
J.T. It is very striking that the young man began to speak. The Lord did not tell him to speak, but he began to speak, showing that it was an assembly man that was coming to light. That is a priest, "For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they seek the law", (@Malachi 2:7). He is giving the Lord his mouth, so to speak. That reference is to the administrative side of the assembly, not the
{138}
service side. I am sure the present circumstances are intended for help in that. We are to understand the meaning of the very expression 'humanity' as being of God; that order of being, man, was intended to be representing God. "God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness", (@Genesis 1:26). That was in the mind of God and that involved all these features of humanity. Sin having entered has brought about all this weeping, and what is found in the widow in these circumstances. We are in the midst of such circumstances to a degree beyond anything that has been in the world before, and surely God would affect us from the standpoint of humanity!
{139}
THE THRONE OF GRACE (3)
@Luke 14:7 - 24
J.T. In considering the throne of grace and what is attendant on it, we have so far read in chapters 4 and 7. The house of God is before us in chapters 14 and 15, but on a higher level in chapter 15. Possibly later we can look at the last chapter which deals with our subject directly and literally, not parabolically. So we can see how much has entered into Christianity. Chapter 7 is of particular moment in our subject as showing how the gospel works out in subjective conditions amongst men favourable to the truth, favourable to the work of God. We looked at the centurion yesterday at some length and I believe profitably, we failed to reach the woman of the city who is said to be a sinner, but she is a very important part of the picture. She represents love, not as it was seen in the centurion and his servant, or as to the Jews, but love begotten because she was forgiven; it arose from grace operating in herself and hence she becomes a representative of the truth. She is among the persons who love, of whom there may be many or few, but those who have love in their hearts, love begotten because of forgiveness. She loved much because she was forgiven much, a very happy basis on which to have love -- the basis of forgiveness. And this is sure to work out in qualities that would make for the assembly. The next chapter, eight, deals with those who form the assembly, the man, and the woman, and the child. The woman is conscious of virtue entering into her; she becomes something; she has something she had not before, and that something comes from the Lord. The Lord Himself discerns that virtue had gone out of Him and this virtue involves her. So the chapter gives us in type the constitution of the assembly as we may say, formed of men, women
{140}
and children. So young people of twelve years are clearly involved; a twelve-year-old girl may be in fellowship, but the work of God must be there. It is secured in chapter 7, for chapter seven is primarily the work of God by the Spirit, which affects certain things in men, women and children. These things may be seen in actual formation by the Spirit and also may be seen in things working in a hidden yet real way in souls. For the moment that serves our purpose to enlarge on what serves God in making the position favourable. This may be seen in a peculiar way just now, because certain governments allied together are in general favourable to the truth, and make a way for it.
S.W.P. What are we to look for in young persons desiring to break bread? Are we to consider for their tender years and the simplicity of their desires, or rather a distinct work of the Spirit in them?
J.T. The work stands in relation to the work in their parents. The person in question (chapter 8) is a young girl, Jairus¬ daughter. The matter of the woman comes in between the man and the child. "And it came to pass when Jesus returned, the crowd received him gladly, for they were all expecting him. And behold, a man came, whose name was Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue, and falling at the feet of Jesus besought him to come to his house, because he had an only daughter about twelve years old, and she was dying" @Luke 8:40 - 42. This is important to notice, that in chapter 7 it was an only son of the widow; here it is an only daughter. Well, that is the case of the child so far, and then the woman comes who had the flux of blood for twelve years. Her case offers much material for the subject of the truth generally, because it is a full grown person who is suffering from an inward condition. It is a question of inwardness in her condition. She intervenes between the beginning and end of Jairus¬ case. The
{141}
Lord said as to her, "Some one has touched me, for *I* have known that power has gone out from me" (@Luke 8:46). The Lord is now speaking of virtue in dealing with men, man or woman, and the result was such that she could not hide. The feminine side is generally secretive. "And the woman, seeing that she was not hid, came trembling, and falling down before him declared before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was immediately healed" (@Luke 8:47). The Lord calls her, 'Daughter', which means that she is taken into the divine family, a very important matter. Taken into the divine family as subjectively equal to it, because she had faith. The Lord therefore says, "Thy faith has healed thee" (@Luke 8:48). It was what she had. And then we are told, "While he was yet speaking, comes some one from the ruler of the synagogue, saying to him, Thy daughter is dead" (@Luke 8:49). Then they say, "Do not trouble the teacher" (@Luke 8:49). They give it up as a hopeless matter. "But Jesus, hearing it, answered him saying, Fear not: only believe, and she shall be made well. And when he came to the house he suffered no one to go in but Peter and John and James and the father of the child and the mother" (@Luke 8:50,51). That is both parents are in this matter; that is something for the brethren to note -- the kind of persons that have to do with these young people. Who are they? The parents of course have their service, and then the kind of servants eligible for the service. The Lord "suffered no one to go in but Peter and John and James and the father of the child and the mother" (@Luke 8:51). That is, two parents and these three brothers; the others have to be put out. Some in the house "were weeping and lamenting her" (@Luke 8:52). This weeping is of no help at all. The Lord says, "Do not weep, for she has not died, but sleeps" (@Luke 8:52). The report was a deception. It is not as serious as it looks to others. It may have gone very far, but still there is some sign of life; very dim
{142}
perhaps, but there is something there. Therefore the case is not abandoned. The people said she had died, but they were deceived. "But *he* [the Lord], having turned them all out and taking hold of her hand, cried saying, Child, arise" (@Luke 8:54). "Having turned them all out" -- these persons who have not the right view or understanding of the matter are put out. We have to take notice, if we are having to do with young people, what kind of people are useful, and those who are useless. "But *he*, having turned them all out and taking hold of her hand, cried saying, Child, arise" (@Luke 8:54). He calls her, Child. "And her spirit returned, and immediately she rose up; and he commanded something to eat to be given to her. And her parents were amazed; but he enjoined them to tell no one what had happened" (@Luke 8:55,56). The parents are not told what to give her to eat, just that she must get something to eat eventually. The Lord here tells Peter, James and John and the parents that something must be given her to eat. It is characteristic of the Lord. "Have ye anything here to eat?" (@Luke 24:41) the Lord says; young people are to have enough to eat profitably.
J.K. Is there any thought of adjustment for the parents having to stand by and wait for the woman to be healed?
J.T. It was not an interruption, it was all one work. The whole chapter is taken up with humanity in the man, woman and child. The first is the man, the demoniac, the woman is the inward condition, having in mind the affections, and finally the child, the girl.
N.B. Who would correspond to Peter, James and John in a locality today?
J.T. The brethren whom the Lord is using. Because there are useful men whom the Lord is using in the localities. I suppose Peter, James and John are outstanding in that sense.
{143}
C.C.T. According to this chapter, it seems that parents would be thankful to have Peter, James and John come in, men who would look after the child?
J.T. Yes, and they should be.
L.E.S. So the thing is participated in on the part of both mother and father.
J.T. Well, the father gives what we might call the moral standing or status in which the child is brought up, and, of course, he is responsible. Ephesians gives directions for the fathers. "And ye fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up in the discipline and admonition of the Lord", @Ephesians 6:4. The moral qualities are so important, and the mother is nearest to the child and is more with it; she is the person to watch what it is given to eat, to watch what they read, to oversee it. I am sure we do not realise enough what dangers there are in what they read. They tell each other what they read and lend books to each other.
C.C.T. No doubt the magazines went out of the jailer's house very quickly.
J.T. Quite so. Elisha took up the Shunammite's boy, who was sick and had died, and put him on his own bed, and then went around the house, as if to look around and see what he had been reading, what was lying around the place, in the bedrooms and the like.
H.B. Matthew mentions the flute players.
J.T. He does, that is the extension of what is here. Matthew is generally severe in an instance like this because he outlines the Jewish condition and system.
L.E.S. Do you not think our young people sometimes are damaged by the influence of neighbours and companionship of that sort?
J.T. Yes, what you might call Moabitish neighbours. Affiliation with them because they are neighbours. There is no virtue in that at all. They may
{144}
be Jewish, or Unitarians, but they are still neighbours, that is where the damage is.
A.B.M. In this case that we are considering everything is clear on the surface, but there are people inside the house and the Lord only takes in these three and puts the others outside. Would that speak of outside connections and the damage in them?
J.T. We are to seek to promote truthfulness in our young people. It is one of the main things with them to be deceptive as regards their companionships and it is the vocation of the mother particularly to watch that.
C.C.T. How does the Lord deal with the thing?
J.T. He puts the thing right. The Lord does not take much account of the girl coming into it at all, but much is made of the parental thought, but there is really some life there, some spiritual life that can be counted on in the girl.
S.W.P. Peter, John and James are elements that are watchful over this spark of life; they do not allow it to go out; they nurture it.
J.T. Just so. You can understand that. These men are outstanding, men exemplary of the divine system. We shall see that they have part in the upper matter in the next chapter; that is to say, the mount of transfiguration. Let us see what part they have in that. @Luke 9:28 says, "And it came to pass after these words, about eight days, that taking Peter and John and James he went up into a mountain to pray". That is, they are honoured in that way, the same persons. So we are now coming to the system the Lord is inaugurating to care for things and look after things. And these men are distinguished, touching the matter. We could read the whole gospel but it would take too long to get through at this time. But there are men, women and children; that is a most important matter, because in all our gatherings we have these elements
{145}
and we are to know how to deal with them, especially the young around twelve or so. Chapter 7 brings out how conditions may be favourable. Chapter 7 is very extensive, including persons not really Christians, but who are favourable to Christianity. That is important to bear in mind, because God in His government can use such conditions -- favourable conditions. That is, the governments of the United States, or England or Australia, or even heathen countries, are at times found to be favourable in a remarkable way to Christianity. There is not much there, perhaps, but it is simply that God in His government has ordered it to be such. It helps the brethren in going around, even through heathen countries. We are to bear that in mind in regard of chapter 7. And in chapter 8 here, just touching on the period of the assembly, is the idea of virtue going out of Christ to a person who needs help. This woman really refers to assembly material which is to be secured in the same way. And the man with the mind set right -- what an influence in the care of divine interests are men with right minds! God has given us the spirit of power and love and right-mindedness. In chapter 9 we see the upper trend in Luke, these three, Peter, James and John, taken up and honoured in a most remarkable way; it would mean the whole assembly, because the Lord is inaugurating and fitting out the system. The whole system is to be affected by this position on the mount, for they come down to meet the demon below. The idea is what they met after coming down from the mount. It was actually the devil, a child demoniacally affected, one of the most sorrowful things we have to do with. And we have to do with it. The next thing after chapter 9 is the matter of where the Lord is going to proceed. They were to go into every city and place. "Now after these things the Lord appointed seventy others also, and
{146}
sent them two and two before his face into every city and place where he himself was about to come"(@Luke 10:1). Now that gives a wide range of things, because it is *every* place, every city and place; it is the universal position and the Lord is about to proceed. It is a wide range of things and the Lord is proceeding -- He is not in one place, He is proceeding, moving about. These thirty-five pairs of men are moving about before the Lord, but He is about to come and they know it and therefore they are concerned that these places should be right that the Lord might be free to go about in them.
S.W.P. This is the beneficent sway of grace over men.
J.T. It is ourselves, what we have in our hearts, the magnificent thought of it. That is the throne, not a material throne, but a figure of speech. Not a literal throne, but a figure of something. And that figure is grace and grace in power to enforce its operations.
L.E.S. Would Luke link on with Paul who says to the Corinthians: "Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ, by God's will, and Sosthenes the brother, to the assembly of God which is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints, with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours", @1 Corinthians 1:1,2?
J.T. Just so, "both theirs and ours", the universal thing, all brought into it. The Corinthian epistles work this out.
N.B. In regard of these three brothers handling matters, they go together, do they not? Sometimes in our localities one goes and another by himself.
J.T. Better two to go, then there is combined witness if there are two together.
N.B. One brother going and later on another brother going separately.
{147}
J.T. This chapter is authoritative in that matter, they go two and two. The apostles are mentioned sometimes two by two and sometimes one by one; it is a question of the context. The context here would mean that two brethren should go together. There is combined witness and they can tell the brethren confidently that this is so. Such and such is so, and you have two witnesses.
L.E.S. The two is a happy matter as binding the levites together in their service. Two and two would save us from clericalism.
J.T. The best examples are Peter and John, Paul and Barnabas, Paul and Timotheus. They are examples of the power of two and two. So here it says two and two.
H.B. This thought of two would be heralds to provide conditions for the Lord coming and being happily there.
J.T. The setting in the chapter is most important -- what the Lord says. The point is, sons of peace. You look for a son of peace. The whole chapter bears on sons of peace, the kind of people they would link up with, which shows that God is working -- for the sons of peace are a result of God's work.
C.C.T. The assembly is in view.
J.T. Yes, that is clear from chapter 8, as speaking of the assembly, in the principle of virtue going out, and operating here as in chapter 9, bringing out what is there. Then the honouring of the three apostles of the Lord and what was to be seen there and their influence on what was below. It shows how the work of God, the influence of heaven, is asserting itself. In chapter 10 these thirty-five pairs of persons go about universally where the Lord is intending to go. Chapter 10 branches out into the precious and important truths of the relations between divine Persons, and our being brought into
{148}
them, our names being written in heaven. The incident in chapter 9 shows that the names of the brethren are known up there; and then down here -- the influence of the brethren down here is moral, what kind of people we are, how we behave ourselves.
L.E.S. Would the levitical system link the local position with what is heavenly?
J.T. Heaven is stressed in what is going on here. It is a remarkable scene. These men are coming into it, Moses and Elias -- these are wonderful men coming out of heaven. Christianity is formed of wonderful persons and we want to belong to it and take character from it, to know that we belong to heaven.
A.B.M. Would that serve to adjust a great deal that needs adjustment amongst us?
J.T. We are to think of the power of heaven. We are to know that heaven affects real persons. We know how heaven affects the earth physically. The same is true spiritually -- what power heaven has! And now to go on. Chapter 11 is also very interesting, as to the way things are done by divine Persons. A divine Person comes in here, and things are to be done, and He does them. You learn how things are to be done. If prayer is to be made, a divine Person prays and when asked teaches others. It is a wonderful thing to see the power of prayer in chapter 11, "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" (@Luke 11:13). The Holy Spirit is the great point subjectively, because the subjective work is with Him and by Him. It is necessary to have the Holy Spirit to have part in the work at all.
J.K. Would you look for that in any asking their place?
J.T. Certainly I should. How do they speak of things? You can tell the way they speak of things.
C.C.T. People can tell by living with them.
{149}
J.T. The basis comes out in chapter 7. It is a question of affection. Is the person, whether he or she, an affectionate person? And if they love, they will love the Lord and the saints too. They do not want for their companionship other than the saints.
L.E.S. It may be a good thing to ask a young person, if he is a brother, to pray. Would you say that?
J.T. If he is young brother, certainly. The word to the young man is, "Youth, ... Wake up", in chapter 7. And he sat up and began to speak. If he can speak at all he should be able to speak to God.
S.W.P. "And her parents were amazed" (@Luke 8:56) would indicate they had not followed closely what had taken place in the young person, consequently they say she is dead. We have to understand that we have in our households a lot of potential material, and we should see that the work of God goes forward.
J.T. It is a good thing. We are generally trained to take things too much for granted. We should be amazed at things, because they are wonderful. One of the names of the Lord Himself is 'Wonderful'. @Luke 12 is very long, but should be paid attention to, the thirteenth too. The fourteenth is a landmark dealing with the house. In the twelfth it is said, "In those times, the myriads of the crowd being gathered together, so that they trod one on another, he began to say to his disciples first, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy; but there is nothing covered up which shall not be revealed, nor secret that shall not be known; therefore whatever ye have said in the darkness shall be heard in the light, and what ye have spoken in the ear in chambers shall be proclaimed upon the housetops" @Luke 12:1 - 3. That is important, as to what is said in secret and whispered about, even creating hard feelings. So transparency is the important thought here.
{150}
J.W.D. I was very struck with what you said about chapter 11, and now transparency is a most important matter and has an important place in the spiritual life of the meetings.
Rem. Hypocrisy may not always be in taking account of another. It may be a hidden matter, a person assuming to be something they are not. "But there is nothing covered up which shall not be revealed" (@Luke 12:2).
A.E.J. In each gathering should there not be discernment about persons and matters?
J.T. Just so. In one of our meetings we have been reading about the persons standing upon a sea of glass. You can look around and see everything. Another thing coming out in @Luke 12 is godliness. "Fear not those who kill the body and after this have no more that they can do" @Luke 12:4. If we have this element, we are not liable to turn aside from persecution, denying the truth -- it is very practical. "Fear him who after he has killed has authority to cast into hell; yea, I say to you, Fear *him*" @Luke 12:5. And then godliness worked out in our weakness and dependence on God. "Fear not therefore, ye are better than many sparrows" @Luke 12:7. We are coming to the idea of the value of a Christian, the importance of Christians personally, and their value. Chapter 13 is also very important in reference to what happens abroad, railway accidents or the like, whether they are instances of the government of God or not. They may or may not be. The government of God is inscrutable. Sometimes the point is only that people report that this is a big matter, a great happening in the minds of men. But, God, what is He doing? We have to challenge ourselves as to whether we need to repent. "No, I say to you, but if ye repent not, ye shall all perish in like manner" (@Luke 13:5). So in the big happenings in the government of God, including those happening
{151}
to us, we are to challenge ourselves as to whether we are going on rightly or whether we need to repent.
A.E.J. They call on every one to repent.
J.T. It is just the voice of God which is speaking. These men say these are terrible happenings involving so many. God is speaking in it all, and thus the wonderful thing is that the testimony of grace can go on.
C.C.T. The woman with the spirit of infirmity was able to glorify God.
J.T. She had been bound by Satan for eighteen years, thus bringing in the need of remembering things that have happened.
H.B. The woman said to the prophet, "What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? Art thou come to me to call mine iniquity to remembrance ... ?" (@1 Kings 17:18).
J.T. Sometimes it is better for them to be remembered. God has in mind their removal. He says, "Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more" (@Hebrews 10:17). There are certain things which do not need to be disclosed or confessed, but others have to be dealt with.
C.C.T. The Lord addressed the woman, saying, "Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity" (@Luke 13:12). She was made straight immediately and she glorified God.
J.T. So the Samaritan woman is not addressed by the Lord as "Woman" until the time of her being exposed; the Prophet exposed her. The Lord says, "Woman". It is a direct word to her; it refers to humanity according to God.
A.B.M. Would you say grace reigning through righteousness is the basis of repentance?
J.T. It is, only repentance springing from love. She loved much because she was forgiven much. We shall see more in relation to it in our last chapter because repentance and remission of sins is to be
{152}
preached. Now coming to chapter 14, we read in verse 7, "And he spoke a parable to those that were invited, remarking how they chose out the first places, saying to them, When thou art invited by any one to a wedding, do not lay thyself down in the first place at table". The lesson here is humility; there is a great lack of it. Peter says, "Bind on humility", and "humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God", @1 Peter 5:5,6.
L.E.S. Under grace the whole man is morally changed. The texture is changed. This chapter would enter into our public relations. Beginning at the scripture we started from in the consideration of grace, the work of God would have in mind that the whole moral texture would be changed.
J.T. Yes, the whole man, not simply one thing put right, but the whole man is put right -- the man is healed. There needs to be humility particularly.
C.C.T. We have no thought here of the wedding garment, it is rather the place at table.
J.T. "When thou art invited by any one to a wedding, do not lay thyself down in the first place at table, lest perhaps a more honourable than thou be invited by him, and he who invited thee and him come and say to thee, Give place to this man, and then thou begin with shame to take the last place. But when thou hast been invited, go and put thyself down in the last place, that when he who has invited thee comes, he may say to thee, Friend, go up higher: then shalt thou have honour before all that are lying at table with thee; for every one that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that abases himself shall be exalted". This parable is the outcome of the case of the dropsical man in the beginning of our chapter. Dropsy is a disease which had a tendency to inflate, and we are prone to it, because of what we think we have in the knowledge of things, of the Scriptures, of the light. We may have the dropsy, in
{153}
spite of our great knowledge. In fact, it might be through having that knowledge that we have dropsy. We have to learn *not* to make allowance for it.
J.K. Why does it say, "When thou art invited by any one to a wedding"?
J.T. Well, I believe it is a festive occasion, it is brought up here parabolically because much feeling, and right feeling, enters into weddings. The question is whether we are going to allow the feelings to inflate us, to turn the wedding into a time of inflation. Our ideas in Christianity are to be taken from the assembly and not from the world. Marriage is a time of display in the world -- unequalled display -- the clothes that are worn. We ought to discern these things and put away what is worldly. Women's clothes cause a great commotion in the business world -- they form a great place in commerce. The money spent on wedding garments is very great. We have to understand what is here to deflate us. The Lord says, 'Do not take the first place', do not have personal distinction in mind. Learn not to be worldly; you are in fellowship and your clothing is to denote that. Do not go in for what surrounds a worldly bride and the like.
A.G.V. Grace would produce this humility.
J.T. It is the calculated way to work the thing out. Luke is a methodical man, a physician, a trained man. He is taken up by heaven to write two remarkable treatises, ending with Paul in prison.
J.W.D. Paul speaks of himself as "the least of the apostles" (@1 Corinthians 15:9), and "less than the least of all saints" (@Ephesians 3:8). A man trained in the divine system should be marked by the greatest humility. It is impossible in connection with the first man.
J.T. I think this chapter bears that out. The dropsical man appears at the beginning. "And behold, there was a certain dropsical man before him. And Jesus answering spoke unto the doctors of
{154}
the law and Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath? But they were silent. And taking him he healed him and let him go" @Luke 14:2 - 4. Notice that. He can be trusted, a man that can be let go. He could be trusted; it was all right to let him go, like Lazarus. "And answering he said to them. Of which of you shall an ass or ox fall into a well, that he does not straightway pull him up on the sabbath day? And they were not able to answer him to these things" @Luke 14:5,6. So the Lord has the last word.
N.B. What would you think of going to a wedding of those not in fellowship?
J.T. I would not go. You would not want to go to an ungodly wedding, nor a funeral either. It is worth our notice at this point. Many say, Well what harm is there in it? Well, what good is in it? The Lord says, Let the dead bury their dead. And also, God is not the God of the dead. He makes a difference.
C.C.T. With relatives, too.
J.T. Yes. There are differences, of course, for the Lord attended a wedding in Cana of Galilee.
A.E.J. You would not hesitate to go to a wedding where the bride puts on the apparel which Peter speaks of.
J.T. The hidden Man of the heart. I would not, I would seek to be there. The first parable here relates to humanity, but the Lord is leading up to more than that. "And one of those that were lying at table with them, hearing these things, said to him, Blessed is he who shall eat bread in the kingdom of God" @Luke 14:15. That is something, a remark that you can build something on. It is really something like we have -- young men make remarks and we work the truth out of them, make something out of them. So the Lord says, "A certain man made a great supper and invited many. And he sent his bondman at the hour of supper to say to those who were
{155}
invited, Come, for already all things are ready. And all began, without exception, to excuse themselves" @Luke 14:16 - 18. Now this parable is evidently alluding to the beginning of Christianity, to an ordered condition of things in which men are satisfied with themselves, such as were in judaism. They are satisfied with themselves; they can get along without the Lord, without the gospel. How much there is around of that. People can get along with this means or another means.
J.K. Would it be right to say that legitimate things might turn us to Egypt where we are likely to be overcome?
J.T. That is so. That is what you get here. But what does the Lord Himself say? "Then the master of the house, in anger" @Luke 14:21. These things seem to be very legitimate, but the Lord is angry about it. They are resisting the master in his anger. It is not so severe as Matthew -- they are called murderers and are destroyed, which is serious. But Luke modifies things, yet the anger is there. The psalm says, "Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, though his anger burn but a little", @Psalm 2:12. These excuses are all ordinary matters. You may say. Why should he not attend to his oxen, attend to his wife, and so on, but the anger of the Lord is seen. Who is going to attend to Him? How is this anger going to be appeased?
H.B. @Numbers 32 speaks of Jehovah's anger. Is it the same principle?
J.T. Quite so. These excuses are common amongst such people. You understand they have some link with God, and you ask them to go to a meeting for prophetic ministry, they cannot go. They have that place or the other place to go to, they excuse themselves. That should not be found amongst ourselves. We have been given the light of the Scripture, "not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the custom is with some",
{156}
(@Hebrews 10:25). It has become the manner of some, which is to be deplored.
S.W.P. "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work", (@2 Timothy 3:16,17). All these things are to help through grace in that light.
L.E.S. The glory of the throne of grace is based upon the idea of sacrifice. It is more blessed to give than to receive.
J.T. Another thing here is that the master of the house accepts the degradation of the persons he is obliged to ask. "Then the master of the house, in anger, said to his bondman, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring here the poor and crippled and lame and blind. And the bondman said, Sir, it is done as thou hast commanded, and there is still room" (@Luke 14:21,22). The Lord is brought into the thing beautifully. How He is descending, accepting the reproach attached to the persons whom He is inviting. But there is still room and therefore the Lord does not stop, He says, "And the lord said to the bondman, Go out into the ways and fences and compel to come in, that my house may be filled"(@Luke 14:23). The leading thought in this section comes in here -- "that my house may be filled" (@Luke 14:23). It is not here the great house as in 2 Timothy, it is "my house". How the Lord regards His people, and that house must be filled. Really meaning that He is going to have suitable persons there; His own selection. Outwardly it may involve reproach to Him, for the apostle says, "For consider your calling, brethren, that there are not many wise according to flesh, not many powerful, not many high-born", (@1 Corinthians 1:26). That is to say, reproach in that sense is attached to us as brethren, but at the same time they are such as the Lord would have. You can understand it must
{157}
be so; being God, He is entitled to have whom He will, and to give the very best, the most honoured distinctions, for this is a question of sonship, and you cannot have anything greater in the house.
C.C.T. Is the house the full thought of God's joy fulfilled?
J.T. Exactly. He is not ashamed of these persons who are brought in from the highways and hedges. We know God in accepting us has in mind sonship and redemption, so He has the very best persons in the universe.
H.B. Would @Acts 10 suggest persons coming from the gentile nations? Paul says to the Colossians, "Christ in you".
J.T. Peter would make excuses about them. He did not care about these people represented in the beasts, and creeping things, but Peter is to go on. Everyone is to come to it. The house is to be filled with God's own selection; "he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world", (@Ephesians 1:4).
A.D. Is the contrast seen in the close of the previous chapter where the Lord says, "Behold, your house is left unto you" @Luke 13:35.
J.T. Just so, but God's house is not left like that. I think we might end with that -- the idea of the house -- because it is a question of the place of affection -- the family place.
{158}
THE THRONE OF GRACE (4)
@Luke 15:11 - 32; @Luke 16:1 - 13
J.T. It is thought that these chapters relative to the house embrace particularly the subject before us; that is the subject of grace, peculiarly chapter 15 -- the excess of grace. And then it is thought as having this in mind to note the relation of money or wealth to this subject, hence chapter 16 -- how money may be used to prepare for the future. What we have so far, relates to the present, what is current in this dispensation, but the verses read in chapter 16 relate to the future. The brethren will discern the stress laid in chapter 15 on the value of repentance and salvation. We have already noted how with many the idea of value is small as applied, and these chapters bring out the importance of certain values or commodities. Another thing that enters into this section is discipleship as bearing on our subject; that is, bearing on grace. For while what is implied in the throne of grace is gratuitous, yet there is in the end of chapter 14 the idea of discipleship. "And great crowds went with him; and, turning round, he said to them. If any man come to me, and shall not hate his own father and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, yea, and his own life too, he cannot be my disciple; and whoever does not carry his cross and come after me cannot be my disciple" @Luke 14:25,26. It seems as if that should be taken note of as we proceed -- discipleship.
L.E.S. Would you say the operation of grace in our hearts works out in repentance and that in view of discipleship?
J.T. I thought of that particularly in chapter 15. The value of repentance comes in immediately after this matter of discipleship at the close of chapter 14. Certain things render discipleship, as applicable to
{159}
certain ones, impossible, for it is said, "He cannot be my disciple" @Luke 14:26.
S.W.P. What is covered in your thought by repentance?
J.T. Well, it is a change of mind as to certain things. Hence in chapter 15:7 it is said, "I say unto you, that thus there shall be joy in heaven for one repenting sinner, more than for ninety and nine righteous who have no need of repentance" @Luke 15:7. And again in verse 10, "Thus, I say unto you, there is joy before the angels of God for one repenting sinner" @Luke 15:10. It comes under the heading of values -- how heaven values repentance. It is not a thing by itself, but is applied to a sinner, a repenting sinner. What a repenting sinner is, the value of a repenting sinner to heaven.
J.K. What is your thought of putting discipleship first before the repenting?
J.T. I brought it in in the order in which it is found in Scripture, because in chapter 14 where the house being filled is specially stressed, there were crowds, as it says, "And great crowds went with him" @Luke 14:25. The idea of discipleship is brought in to meet the crowd situation. That is to be diminished, and the way of diminishing it is to bring in what it costs to be a disciple and most have not enough to pay what it costs. The thing is very severe and exacting, namely: "If any man come to me, and shall not hate his own father and mother, and wife and children, and brothers, and sisters, yea, and his own life too, he cannot be my disciple" @Luke 14:26. We have to face that -- what it means.
C.C.T. So that discipleship is a costly matter. They are to sit down and count the cost of hating even your own life.
J.T. The severest test would be the hating of one's own life. It is a question of bringing down the number, and the way it is done is by increasing the
{160}
charge, so that it is too high, people cannot pay it. The next suggestion is that of building a tower, "For which of you, desirous of building a tower, does not first sit down and count the cost, if he have what is needed to complete it; in order that, having laid the foundation of it, and not being able to finish it, all who see it do not begin to mock at him, saying, This man began to build and was not able to finish?" @Luke 14:28 - 30 And then the warfare. "Or what king, going on his way to engage in war with another king, does not, sitting down first, take counsel whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him coming against him with twenty thousand? and if not, while he is yet far off, having sent an embassy, he asks for terms of peace. Thus then every one of you who forsakes not all that is his own cannot be my disciple @Luke 14:31 - 33". The word given is very striking and how many it shuts out, reducing the numbers.
S.W.P. A disciple has a good sense of valuation.
J.T. Quite so.
A.B.M. Why is it so severe here in comparison to the general character of Luke's writing - the grace character?
J.T. I think the Lord is putting it so severely so that we might face the matter and see that we do not trifle with Christianity and treat it lightly. We have been touching a little on values -- whether I come to the meetings or not, whether I be a Christian or not, whether I want to or not, it is just optional, but the Lord hates that with us.
L.E.S. All this shows the need of a repenting spirit.
J.T. I thought that. The person is in mind. It is not the thing by itself, but the person who is marked by it, the repenting sinner. That kind of person -- a sinner who is repenting, not simply one who has repented, but one who is repenting all the time, it is to be a characteristic matter.
{161}
N.B. Speaking of the cost, if one has not the cost, how is it obtained?
J.T. Well, that raises the whole question as to this section: whether we have the means. It raises the whole question as to the section which involves the Spirit. The Spirit answers to all these things. It is a question of the Spirit, a characteristic matter in all these demands. The Spirit is a divine Person, He is God, and has the means for meeting these demands. Discipleship is the great point in the gospel. For instance in Matthew the Lord says, Have you understood all these things? And they say, Yea, Lord. And He says, "For this reason every scribe discipled" (discipled is the word) "to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old", @Matthew 13:52. That is he is a householder and able to bring out of his treasure. He has the means, he is a man of wealth; but as to the kind of things he has, it is what is new first and then what is old.
A.B.M. In @John 6 we read that many walked no more with Him because of what He said to them. Would that indicate they were not putting a proper value on the position?
J.T. Just so. They do not value being followers of Christ. Many are seen in @Luke 14 -- it implies great many at first. Great crowds of would-be disciples, but the Lord says, 'That is not enough. It is not enough that you want to be a follower of Mine, but the question is. How do you regard others? Are others put before Me, or am I put before others in your valuation?'. "And great crowds went with him; and turning round, he said to them, If any man come to me, and shall not hate his own father and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, yea, and his own life too, he cannot be my disciple" (@Luke 14:25,26). The price is high for most.
{162}
Rem. Moses counted the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt.
J.T. Quite so. He valued the reproach of Christ as greater riches. That is the idea here. You value being a disciple of the Lord Jesus. He is first and last with you.
L.E.S. The reason of the matter at Corinth was because the state of a "repenting sinner" was lacking with them; it accounted for the state that existed there.
J.T. Yes. Take the instance when the Greeks would come up to see Jesus. They were not seeking to be disciples of Jesus. Greece is famed for persons who are leaders, whether of thought or feats. Greece is famed for them. And so it was at Corinth where the apostle says, 'I hear there are divisions, schools of opinion among you'. That is characteristic of the Greeks -- schools of thought -- they were saying one was of Paul, one of Apollos, and one of Christ. They were giving Christ a place with the others. He is absolutely, and uniquely alone. He is to be everything to us. Hence the apostle deals with the whole matter of schools of opinion. Where we have special friends, special brethren, special likes, we are in danger of putting them in the place of Christ.
J.W.D. What is the link between the Lord Jesus and the disciple? Is it teaching?
J.T. The word 'disciple' would give the thought. That you regard Him as pre-eminent, resulting from His teaching. Teaching is most important in Christianity. It is said of the three thousand that were converted at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost, that they persevered in the apostles¬ teaching, showing that the teaching was the prime thought. And thus it is today, in what we are going on with. They persevered in the apostles¬ teaching, and that, of course, implied Christ's teaching, for they were representative of Christ.
{163}
C.C.T. Will you say a word in regard of 'hate' in chapter 14.
J.T. Well, it has to be understood in its setting. It is very plain here, hating his own father, then mother, then wife and children and then brothers and sisters and then his own life. It certainly is severe. It is a test. Can one go on? The word should be applied. We certainly have to look into the matter. It is a prime matter with the Lord in His teaching. It is a question of Christ's teaching.
Rem. It was a great test to the Jews at Pentecost.
J.T. But they stood the test; they persevered, meaning they appreciated the position in their own souls -- in the face of opposition they persevered.
H.B. It is said of Levi in @Deuteronomy 33:8: "And of Levi he said. Thy Thummim and thy Urim are for thy godly one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah; who said to his father and to his mother, I see him not, and he acknowledged not his brethren, and knew not his own children; for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. They shall teach Jacob thine ordinances, and Israel thy law".
J.T. A very good connection.
S.W.P. Paul was eighteen months in Corinth teaching the word of God. Was it necessary because of the national characteristics to spend all that time teaching what disciples should be?
J.T. It is a remarkable word. In the next chapter it was a question of teaching the word of the Lord. But in Corinth it was a question of the "word of God". It brings up the whole matter of assembly service and testimony involving whether we are going on with the word of God. Corinth was marked by that. Ephesus is the word of the Lord; the Lord is stressed there. It is the word of God at Corinth -- what God is to us. At Ephesus it is more what
{164}
the Lord is to us, the great marital side. Paul ministered in his eighteen months at Corinth the word of God, as if that is the great matter that a young Christian should grow in, his knowledge of God through His word -- the word of God.
J.W.D. Why has the word 'disciples' grown into disuse amongst us? We hardly ever speak of one another as being disciples.
J.T. Why do you not begin to call us disciples?
J.W.D. I am quite interested in this. The word, "he cannot be my disciple", (@Luke 14:26) may not mean very much today in the way of exercise with us.
J.T. That is a good question to raise. The scribe in @Matthew 13 whom we have already alluded to is said to be discipled into things. A scribe *discipled* to the kingdom of the heavens; he has become initiated into the idea of the kingdom of the heavens. The chapter is full of mysteries and parables too. And the Lord says, Have you understood all these things? I would say that is a good question. Well, we are talking about grace, but what do we really understand? We have Bible readings here every week, perhaps twice a week. Well, what are we learning? Can we talk intelligently about what we hear at the Bible readings? The one *discipled* into the kingdom of the heavens, the one who is a householder, he knows. He brings things out of his treasure -- he has things.
A.E.J. Persons that Luke has brought before us previously, who have been responsive to the grace that came from the Lord, are able to estimate the value of discipleship and count the cost.
J.T. Well, that is just what appears here. There is much said in relation to the crowds; of course, we cannot speak much of crowds at the moment for we do not have crowds generally, but at the same time even although we are but a few these matters come up. And if we are asked as to what is taught in the
{165}
weekly meetings, the readings, and we cannot say, and yet we say we have excellent meetings, well there is something wrong. The idea of discipleship is not there. The persevering in the teaching is not there.
L.E.S. The Cushite in @2 Samuel 18 stands in contrast to Ahimaaz who could not tell David anything. He could say we had good meetings, but could not tell any particulars. Whereas, the Cushite was under a charge and could tell the king, "Let my lord the king receive good tidings, for Jehovah has avenged thee this day of all them that rose up against thee. And the king said to the Cushite, Is it well with the young man Absalom? And the Cushite said, The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise against thee for evil, be as that young man", @2 Samuel 18:31 - 33.
J.T. He could tell the king what had happened. That is a good illustration.
H.B. Luke, in the beginning of his gospel, sets forth the principle of being able to relate what had been heard and seen, and he writes with method.
J.T. I thought that. He is heaven's special man to meet the occasion, and refers to those who had been eye-witnesses of the Word. The Word here is the *Logos*, so the mind of God is set forth by Him. The Lord's very position, here told forth the mind of God, and Luke writes about that. "Eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word" (@Luke 1:2). Luke wrote about it with method. One is impressed with the negativeness of these days; there is a great deal about good meetings; we had a wonderful time, which is more or less true, but what we want to hear is what is said. That is what we want to know. What the brethren get out of meetings, out of special meetings.
C.C.T. In @Luke 4 where we began, they heard Him speak, heard the words from His mouth.
{166}
J.T. One marvels at that and yet they hated Him and afterwards would have cast Him headlong down the hill on which their city was built. One would impress upon the brethren that the Lord does not like this great talk about meetings, and what we have had being good, but yet not able to tell what we have tasted on that occasion.
A.B.M. Would all this test us in bringing to light what is inward, the operations of grace within, rather than what we have outwardly in meetings together? The Lord Jesus is to be exclusively the supreme Object of the heart.
J.T. Chapter 9 of this gospel illustrates what you are saying. We get to the acme, to the top of things. Three brothers were brought up there, and two others meet them there from heaven, that is Moses and Elias. Well, what came out? Well, the three brothers went to sleep. Are we like that? Moses and Elias were there. It was not a mere vision; the actual persons were there. Moses and Elias were there, and they were speaking to the Lord Jesus, speaking to Him about His decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. Well, what about Peter, and John and James -- what can they tell? They cannot tell anything really. They would not be able to give an account of what happened. The happening was what was in the minds of Moses and Elias, His decease, or exodus, which He, Christ, should accomplish at Jerusalem, that is to say, His death. That is what they were talking about. That is affecting! Well now, the test is all that comes out in chapter 10. Mary and Martha complete the chapter, and it is said that Mary was sitting at the Lord's feet and hearing what He was saying. Now that is the point in this gospel -- that we sit there - and what has been alluded to is, *"This* is my beloved Son; hear him" (@Luke 9:35). That was the principle that came out on the mount of transfiguration. The great
{167}
principle to rule in the new order of things, that Christ was to be heard, not Paul or Cephas or any one, but Christ. *Hear Him* . And so I was saying that this matter of discipleship -- this matter of excellent and good meetings, and travelling long distances to get to the meetings, and taking risks as to not being able to get back, what enters into all that is that you are going to hear about Him, what He is saying and what He is teaching. Christianity is a real thing and emanates from Christ; it is not a mere society, but it is a heavenly matter, and Christ is expounding things to us. He is the Word. He not only relates it, but brings it out in you in life. And we are sitting down -- we are here for three-days¬ meetings. Well, the point is whether we have something from them that we can speak to others about, and show we are characterised by it. That is what is in the mind of the Lord here in discipleship.
J.G.V. Peter speaks of that occasion afterwards.
J.T. Showing the value of the Holy Spirit. The Spirit became a known Person by Peter. He never, according to Scripture, speaks of the Son of God in his ministry until he is putting off his tabernacle. But then, speaking of the Lord Jesus, he says, "For we have not made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, following cleverly imagined fables, but having been eyewitnesses of *his* majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom *I* have found my delight; and this voice *we* heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain", @2 Peter 1:16 - 18.
A.D. Does this exercise which the Lord raises as to discipleship, test us as to separation?
J.T. Well, just so. And how much we make of natural relations. Is Christ more than all relations, even your wife and your children? If you look at it
{168}
in the full sense, there is nothing else but Christianity. Everything else is going to pass away. But the Lord says, "My words shall not pass away" (@Luke 21:33). We want to keep that. Therefore the Lord is saying, 'Me first', if you would be My disciple, and a real Person who knows what I am saying, then I am helping you to be characterised by it. That is the issue.
A.E.J. Are the four daughters of Philip the evangelist examples of such ones as profit by hearing the word? It says they prophesied.
J.T. Just so. They are not called prophetesses, the word is that they prophesied. They did the thing, though not called prophetesses. And, of course, we have meetings for prophecy and they enter into what we are saying. The Lord intends we should be hearers.
H.B. Is the thought of the crowd the number, while the thought of disciple is quality?
J.T. That is what I thought. Hence when they are coming from the mount, the scene of glory being passed, Mark says it is "Jesus alone with themselves" @Mark 9:8. Are we ready to go on with Him and be content with Him and no one else? "Jesus alone with themselves" @Mark 9:8.
J.W.D. If we do not understand the truth that is coming out, it is not a matter of resisting it, but of judging ourselves. Are we putting anything before the Lord?
J.T. A man's own life is mentioned too: "and his own life too" (@Luke 14:26). Hating one's own life. It seems to be a matter that would reduce the numbers. From a natural viewpoint it would be the last thing to do. And yet it is necessary; Christianity calls for it.
C.C.T. What would you say is generally the cause where brethren are tested in hating their own lives? Is it that so many are taken up with work?
J.T. Top salaries and the like. That brings up the next point and that is the matter of money, and
{169}
what use we make of it. There is discipleship in chapter 14 and we have dealt with repentance in chapter 15, not repentance in the abstract, but repenting persons, persons marked by repentance which goes on all the time. We are coming to this matter of the prodigal. It is Christianity effected through the gospel on the highest possible level. God has graciously restored this level and we have part in it. The prodigal has a great place in it, and perhaps more in an evangelical sense, it reduces the circle evangelically, for it is the high level of Christianity which is in mind, so the prodigal comes back to his father. He tells us what went on in these verses: "And after not many days the younger son gathering all together went away into a country a long way off, and there dissipated his property, living in debauchery. But when he had spent all there arose a violent famine throughout that country, and he began to be in want. And he went and joined himself to one of the citizens of that country, and he sent him into his fields to feed swine. And he longed to fill his belly with the husks which the swine were eating; and no one gave to him. And coming to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father's have abundance of bread, and *I* perish here by famine. I will rise up and go to my father, and I will say to him". Now we have to remember that we are reading a parable, but the parable speaks of the father, that is, of God as Father. And it goes on to say, "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee; I am no longer worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants. And he rose up and went to his own father. But while he was yet a long way off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran, and fell upon his neck, and covered him with kisses. And the son said to him. Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee; I am no
{170}
longer worthy to be called thy son. But the father said to his bondmen, Bring out the best robe and clothe him in it, and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet; and bring the fatted calf and kill it, and let us eat and make merry: for this my son was dead and has come to life, was lost and has been found. And they began to make merry". We are in the presence of the most wonderful type of Christianity throughout the gospel, and one would confess that one would like to have a true apprehension of it. It is given in this chapter. Christianity is presented in it, and the character of the thing that the believer is brought into, and particularly how he is affected in the sense of repentance. It shows the scope of repentance in his mind, and what should be repented of. You say, Repentance, of course, is repentance, but he says, "I have sinned against heaven and before thee". We have not had that yet, and what sinning against heaven means.
Rem. He does not just say these things in his heart as a result of exercise but he rose up and went to his father. The father does not move until the son moves.
J.T. Quite so. But when he was a long way off the father saw him. The son does not run, but the father ran. Touching matter!
J.K. The son goes through all these exercises in an intelligent way.
J.T. How has he sinned against heaven? Why does he not put his father first? "I have sinned against heaven and before thee". I believe, that it is the gentile that is in mind. It is the great product in certain parts of the earth which is in mind and we are in it. God has reserved this country to meet the food crisis, for humanity. I believe the prodigal had that in mind, he had been sinning against that -- heaven's provision for humanity.
{171}
S.W.P. Does the sense of proper valuations, as we have been having it, come in in the thought of sinning against heaven?
J.T. Yes, the heavens are set up according to what we had yesterday in regard of seedtime and harvest. God has ordered that that is to continue all the days of the earth. I believe that what God is saying to humanity is in that which the heavens have contributed -- the evidence of it in the great wealth of the earth, and we are in it. But are we affected by it? There is the matter of giving thanks to God. You hardly ever notice people in a restaurant stopping to give thanks to God for their food. The prodigal in the far country had never given God thanks for his food.
S.W.P. Do we get the thought of what is providential in the heavens?
J.T. Providence is a good word. People use it. The prodigal was quite intelligent in saying, "I have sinned against heaven", meaning that he had sinned against God, because God is in heaven. At the same time the heavens God has made have a bearing on the earth.
J.W.D. Is there a kind of representative repentance, and should we take it on? Especially we, of this great country with all its super-abundance. We are part of it. We are not only to repent for ourselves in that way, but in a general sense to cover the whole situation with the spirit of repentance.
J.T. We are to be thankful to God. We are made priests unto God and unto Christ and in a large measure the priest's ministry is the giving of thanks, to give thanks. It is summed up in @1 Timothy 2:1,2 "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men; for kings and all that are in dignity, that we may lead a quiet and tranquil life in all piety and gravity". And then @1 Timothy 4:1 - 5, "But the Spirit
{172}
speaks expressly, that in latter times some shall apostatise from the faith, giving their mind to deceiving spirits and teachings of demons speaking lies in hypocrisy, cauterised as to their own conscience, forbidding to marry, bidding to abstain from meats which God has created for receiving with thanksgiving for them who are faithful and know the truth. For every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, being received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by God's word and freely addressing him". Now all that is of prime importance in this particular period of our service, and this country lends itself to this very thing. There is wonderful wealth and it is always so, for God intended it to be in view of the crisis in the history of humanity that the food supply is here. Well, what is the result for God from it? So the word in @1 Timothy 4:3 is brought in expressly to bring out this matter of thanksgiving -- "which God has created for receiving with thanksgiving for them who are faithful and know the truth". That is to say, those of us who know the truth and are faithful will be marked by thanksgiving. It is a time of thanksgiving for this great matter of food that is so scarce. The whole world is calling for it, needing it and waiting for it. But who are giving thanks for it? The priests will give thanks; and we are made unto God priests. The question is, How much thanksgiving is there?
L.E.S. Are you suggesting that means have been prepared to make room for greater scope of priestly feelings and exercises?
J.T. That is just it. The wonderful way that God has come in, is intended to affect people. The whole human race is benefiting from divine intervention in connection with the supply of food, and thanks is to be given to God for it. We are to have part in thanksgiving, in the service of thanksgiving to God. The prodigal recognises it, he says, "Father, I have
{173}
sinned against heaven and before thee; I am no longer worthy to be called thy son". God is looking for his sense of unworthiness to be called son, and yet he *is* called son. How can he be called son? God has recovered His son, but recovered him in thanksgiving.
C.C.T. So that this would have a direct bearing on us.
J.T. In this country hardly any of the brethren have suffered through the terrible war -- in Europe a lot of our brethren have. What is God getting out of it? Are we acting as priests to God, genuine priests who act in His interests in humanity? It is a question of His priests because God is committing Himself to the priests and the priests¬ lips keep knowledge. These things are to be carried, the service belongs to the priests. How does this affect us, and how much of the prodigal character is there with us? This is the higher point of Christianity in the gospel as it is presented in this wonderful period. The Father is presented, and each one is in direct relation with Him. And the happy conditions of Christianity set up here are to continue. "And they began to make merry". God is saying that is what He is taken up with -- His delight in the returning prodigal. It had already begun. He has committed Himself to the priests. Persons who know and love Him and are ready to talk of Him and His love.
S.W.P. Melchisedec, King of Salem, brought out bread and wine and blessed Abram. "And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the Most High God, possessor of heavens and earth" (@Genesis 14:19). Does that link the possessor of the heavens and earth, and the bread and wine -- food available, and the priest?
J.T. The allusion to @Genesis 14 is very beautiful, we get the principle with Abram there, and Abram is supported by it. Abram was a real son.
{174}
C.C.T. Is the heavenly clothing suggested in the best robe?
J.T. That comes in in this chapter. We have a magnificent representation of the gospel here, and how it is to go on -- "they began to make merry". The Father is in it.
J.W.D. You said elsewhere that the features of this clothing speak of the features of Christ in heaven. What relation has that with the thought of heaven and material superabundance? You were stressing material superabundance and priestly thanksgiving; what relation has this thought of being clothed with Christ as belonging to heaven with that?
J.T. Well, I thought it proceeded with our chapter. In 1 Timothy Paul is touching on it, and here it goes on, "They began to make merry". And then the elder brother, the elder son is not able to enter into the house of God where there is thanksgiving, but would remain outside. "And his elder son was in the field; and as, coming up, he drew nigh to the house, he heard music and dancing. And having called one of the servants, he inquired what these things might be. And he said to him, Thy brother is come, and thy father has killed the fatted calf because he has received him safe and well. But he became angry and would not go in. And his father went out and besought him". Wonderful display of grace! "But he answering said to his father, Behold, so many years I serve thee, and never have I transgressed a commandment of thine; and to me hast thou never given a kid that I might make merry with my friends: but when this thy son, who has devoured thy substance with harlots, is come, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf. But he said to him, Child, *thou* art ever with me, and all that is mine is thine. But it was right to make merry and rejoice, because this thy brother was dead and has come to life again, and was lost and has been found". Now I think the
{175}
dear brethren will do well, if we can together face this matter -- the father is not quarrelling with the elder brother, he is not raising the question as to him. He is so pre-occupied with what is going on, what we are carrying on. The father says, I am going on with this. The merriment has begun and the Father is in the thing, and He is not turning aside to quarrel with persons who complain. He is so occupied with the greatness of the moment, with the recovery of his son. "This my son". He recognises him as his son, the elder brother as child - a very small thought as compared with the greatness of sonship. This clothing of heaven -- the best robe brought out. It would really cover what we had this morning -- the house is filled with such as the Master would have; and so this chapter pursues the principles of greatness and grandeur in much of the external side of it. The prodigal is really symbolical of Christianity -- the real thought of Christianity. What God has in His mind for all prodigals, for all the saints, is the music and dancing. So we have come to the prime thought -- not simply everlasting life but sonship in the house. The Father wants sons, and can we get that thought into our souls, and have it before us, and look into what Christianity really is?
S.W.P. What sonship really is. This best robe and ring and shoes. Are they for display or for the house -- what is in the house?
J.T. This is more an inside scene. The father wants the elder brother to come in, to be in keeping with what is going on, but he will not go in, and the father is not stopping to quarrel with that. For God has enough to go on with. Christianity in Christ is enough for God. Sonship is the point. The Father brings it out at this very point, "For this my son was dead and has come to life, was lost and has been found".
{176}
J.K. Why does he say to the elder son: "This thy brother"?
J.T. It is the end of the Jews and the beginning of Christianity that is in mind, the full thought of Christianity.
L.E.S. Is there a link with @John 17:1? "These things Jesus spoke, and lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee".
J.T. Just so, and the Lord Himself says, "And the glory which thou hast given me I have given them" @John 17:22. It was the glory of divine Persons in verse 5, but in verse 22 it is a given glory and Jesus has given us glory, involving the prodigal's best robe. "And the glory which thou hast given me I have given them" @John 17:22. One hopes the brethren are getting this. God has brought in Christianity, and it is enough for Him. He is giving sonship to the gentiles, the nations, and the knowledge of what He has in Christ, sonship in Christ. Christianity is enough for God.
{177}
THE THRONE OF GRACE (5)
@Luke 24:36 - 53
J.T. We read yesterday a section of chapter 16 which we did not touch afterwards. It refers to having money. We read there of the unrighteous mammon, and how it may be turned into account now with a view to the future. We may be helped to dwell a little on that passage because of the place money has acquired, the place it has acquired generally in the world through the prominence of high wages, and especially how it has affected the brethren, at times interfering even with the service of God. The passage will be remembered by the brethren as what is called the parable of the unjust steward. The Lord sees fit to enter into this matter immediately after what has taken place in chapter 15. It is said, "There was a certain rich man who had a steward, and *he* was accused to him as wasting his goods. And having called him, he said to him, What is this that I hear of thee? give the reckoning of thy stewardship, for thou canst be no longer steward. And the steward said within himself, What shall I do; for my lord is taking the stewardship from me? I am not able to dig; I am ashamed to beg. I know what I will do, that when I shall have been removed from the stewardship I may be received into their houses. And having called to him each one of the debtors of his own lord, he said to the first, How much owest thou to my lord? And he said, A hundred baths of oil. And he said to him. Take thy writing and sit down quickly and write fifty. Then he said to another, And thou, how much dost thou owe? And he said, A hundred cors of wheat. And he says to him, Take thy writing and write eighty. And the lord praised the unrighteous steward because he had done prudently" @Luke 16:1 - 8. Notice
{178}
the word 'praised'. And then we get the Lord's remarks. "For the sons of this world are, for their own generation, more prudent than the sons of light. And *I* say to you. Make to yourselves friends with the mammon of unrighteousness, that when it fails ye may be received into the eternal tabernacles" @Luke 16:8,9. And then again He says, "He that is faithful in the least is faithful also in much; and he that is unrighteous in the least is unrighteous also in much. If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who shall entrust to you the true? and if ye have not been faithful in that which is another's, who shall give to you your own? No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and will love the other, or he will cleave to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon" @Luke 16:10 - 13. So that we are clearly confronted by the problem of money and how it affects the service of God. The fact is that if it rules us we cannot serve God. Many are disqualified, and others are becoming disqualified, because of the temptation to ignore, or pass by, the service of God, for the sake of gain -- high wages. It is a matter the Lord would lay upon us so as to save us.
S.W.P. You mean wages taken on account of extra time. The people of God are in abnormal conditions just now, and special demands may be made upon our time. Is your thought that as an employee I should seek to preserve myself from undue demands upon my time above normal conditions?
J.T. That is what is in mind. The Lord deliberately uses words to belittle money. The thought runs through the chapter into the well-known parable of the rich man and Lazarus; it is the same line of thought. The parable shows how wealth may lead to hades, or torment -- sorrowful thought that money may lead in that direction.
{179}
L.E.S. Do you not feel that we need to be honest in the facing of a matter like this, because so many bring in the idea of the requirements of the government, instead of facing the necessity of bringing out our motives, and putting them before God, as to whether they are pure, or tainted by the principle of vanity?
J.T. You are struck by the government requirements, the urgency of them. How it enters into the calculations of the government that they demand a citizen to give up his time, whatever he may regard as his pleasure, for the sake of the government's requirements or needs, but the temptation is that there is large money at stake. When it becomes a question of wages, the temptation of larger wages especially for working overtime, we are tempted to take it on and deny God His rights.
J.K. To seek first the kingdom of God would be a help.
J.T. Well, godliness would come into that. Chapter 12 involves the principle of godliness: "But seek his kingdom, and all these things shall be added to you", @Luke 12:31. We may be set for these things, but when it comes to high wages we are affected, and may simply ignore that we have an eye on the high wages and are tempted to pass by the service of God.
C.C.T. "Let your conversation be without love of money, satisfied with your present circumstances; for *he* has said, I will not leave thee, neither will I forsake thee", @Hebrews 13:5.
J.T. Quite so. This is a matter of overtime, and the temptation attached to it. The demands by the authorities to secure their ends are bowed to, whereas God is neglected, the service of God neglected. It reminds us of the end of Malachi, "Will a man rob God?" @Malachi 3:8.
{180}
A.B.M. Have you in mind by robbing God, that some for higher wages take themselves out of their normal occupations and encroach upon the Lord's time by working on the Lord's day?
J.T. The Lord has been pleased to take certain time, not all time, not all the days of the week. He has been pleased to take the day that the Spirit of God calls the Lord's day, and He certainly is jealous as to that, and He has first right to it. The first day of the week is slightly different in meaning, but still carries on the same idea because it is the same day; it involves the same day called the Lord's day. The Lord's supper, applying to the same day, raises the question of the Lord's rights. Take the matter of higher wages being paid on that day, and the premium which is put upon that day by men. Nevertheless God has made time and the Lord Jesus has a right to do what He pleases, for there was not one thing made that He did not make. In raising the question of the claim He has to one of the days of the week, we must see that He is jealous as to that, as to having it.
A.E.J. Would the tendency for high wages cause men to become like the Pharisees, who were covetous, who went in for all they could get, and so the service of God was set aside.
J.T. Nothing of that ever marked the Lord.
J.W.D. It is a good thing for us to get before the Lord and find out what portion of our time is due to Him. So with money given us; then we would assess things rightly. What portion should I put into the box? What portion of my time should be set aside?
J.T. That is a good point to raise -- it is raised by the apostle Paul. God is pleased to raise the question of wages, and how it affects the service of God. In @1 Corinthians 16:2, the apostle has in mind the contributions of the saints in view of the collection and he says, "On the first of the week let each
{181}
of you put by at home, laying up in whatever degree he may have prospered, that there may be no collections when I come". Now the point is, if that would include the Lord's day, or part of the Lord's day at double wages. One wonders how the conscience would be affected, because you are going to use some of the time which is the Lord's, and is to be dedicated to His service.
J.W.D. The primary thought is, what is my valuation of the Lord's things?
J.T. Well, there it is. The first day of the week is a good day to devote part of it to the calculation as to how God has prospered you. The word mentioned there, 'prospered', would take in what you are getting from your regular employer, it hardly alludes to what one may get as a levite which would include the tithes. I think the word 'prospered' alludes to something accruing to one in business, and from that he has to assess his obligations to the Lord's service. He has to assess this on the Lord's day, do it on the Lord's day. That is, you would lay by at home, which would imply that the wife and children are cognisant of what is being done. It is an open matter and clearly you would not leave the Lord out in assessment of that kind.
L.E.S. In remnant times in the Prophets, the matters of the sabbath and the valuation put upon it all enter into the discerning of that day. Does it not have its answer in Christianity?
J.T. I think it does, and the question of our conscience before God. It is not in view to enlarge on this subject, but just to get the touch of it which the passage implies, that is the valuation of money if that is what is in mind; that one may be set in the position to use that to promote something for the future, to purchase that which would stand him in stead for the future, that he may be received into their houses. By extension it is applied by the
{182}
passage to the eternal tabernacles, that is what the truth of the gospel involves, that we are to have eternal tabernacles, have part in them, not in the lake of fire, although this is treated of in the latter part of the chapter. Eternal tabernacles, not alluding to the houses of the persons who are debtors, but using the money to the end of buying eternal privileges.
J.G.V. That is what this verse implies? "Make to yourselves friends with the mammon of unrighteousness, that when it fails ye may be received into the eternal tabernacles" @Luke 16:9. That is, use money rightly.
J.T. That is how it is dealt with in this chapter. The Lord says in verse 9, "Make to yourselves friends with the mammon of unrighteousness, that when it fails ye may be received into the eternal tabernacles" @Luke 16:9. And then He says, "He that is faithful in the least is faithful also in much; and he that is unrighteous in the least is unrighteous also in much. If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who shall entrust to you the true? and if ye have not been faithful in that which is another's, who shall give to you your own? No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and will love the other, or he will cleave to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon" @Luke 16:10 - 13. That is the wages we are getting. If we are not faithful in relation to the service of God, who shall entrust to us our own, or the true riches which would mean spiritual things? So we have to face valuation as we have already had it. We are to go in for the best available and acquire that, using the wages we may have to acquire that.
Ques. Who are these debtors, that are in the mind of the Lord, one owing one hundred measures of oil, and so on?
J.T. All this helps to bring out what is in mind to impress us. What is said by the master of the
{183}
unrighteous steward helps us. He praises the unrighteous steward because he has done prudently. Whether it is a question of these other persons or not, the simple fact is that he had done prudently in having these persons write, because the object he had in mind was to acquire their friendship, or their houses, in the future when out of the stewardship.
J.W.D. What would be the basis of your calculations to be faithful in material things? What comes before you as the basis?
J.T. Well, we have to see what is said in verse 10, "He that is faithful in the least is faithful also in much" @Luke 16:10. If he is not faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who shall entrust to him the true? We say we have the money, we take the wages and these are our own. Now what are we going to do with it? Are we going to be faithful and make the best use of it in promoting divine interests? This is a small matter in itself. Money is a small matter in itself, and it is called the mammon of unrighteousness. It may be used for the things of God in some way, and then the Lord follows on that alluding to one being faithful in much. You may get a gift from the Lord, great increase of spiritual wealth. He is entrusting you with these things, because you are faithful in the least and therefore will be faithful in much, which works out that the present situation requires faithfulness. If it is a question of money you use it rightly in relation to divine interests, making the most of it.
Ques. One that is faithful would realise that it belonged to the Lord and he was only a steward of it. That would greatly affect him in the use of it.
J.T. It should do. The Lord is showing here that there is a way of using it, but He is belittling it. The way *you* use wealth or money may show that you are entitled to something else, something more. You
{184}
may be entitled to a gift and there is need for that -- men who can help the Lord's people spiritually.
A.D. Would Paul's word to Timothy help in this regard? "Enjoin on those rich in the present age not to be high-minded, nor to trust on the uncertainty of riches; but in the God who affords us all things richly for our enjoyment; to do good, to be rich in good works, to be liberal in distributing, disposed to communicate of their substance, laying by for themselves a good foundation for the future, that they may lay hold of what is really life", @1 Timothy 6:17 - 19.
J.T. That is a good passage and works out in this matter of faithfulness in the least. For that is exactly what the faithful have in mind, in using their money. And in due time they may get something more. Everything that the world has may be taken on by others, but they would go in for this -- the ability to serve the saints spiritually perhaps. That is the way the thing works out. Hence the first reference to Paul's service is in regard to material things, because he was one of those that carried something to Jerusalem; something that those who worked would have provided for those who needed it. Those wealthy at Antioch met the matter by giving, giving out of their money, the means they had. There is no doubt that God, in time, used these men in a spiritual way.
Ques. The widow with the two mites recognised that the two mites belonged to the Lord Himself.
J.T. Well, it goes beyond what we have here. The Lord recognises much in her, she gave it to the house of God, and she gave greater than them all, He says.
L.E.S. It is remarkable the great place money has covetously with Ananias and Sapphira, in the beginning of Acts.
J.T. It is remarkable. The beginning of the matter in the Acts is that no one regarded anything
{185}
as his own, but under Paul you have another principle; that is, you have what is your own, and you can sacrifice it.
S.W.P. I was just looking at that scripture: "and great grace was upon them all" (@Acts 4:33). There was power in the appreciation of the great grace operating in them. If the claims that our employers make upon us are understood in faithfulness, they will be given to see that they cannot have the time that God has a right to.
J.T. We show in this matter of time that it belongs to God. It is very important because He uses time, and of course He lays it upon us too -- we are to redeem the time. We are to redeem it; that is to say, that we are certainly not to use time that is allotted to us by God for use in His service, in order to make money. That is the matter of wages. Are you using the time that belongs to God, and that He has allotted to you for His service, are you using it for that purpose? It becomes a matter of faithfulness. You may be faithful in these things and God will allot to you further things; that is, spiritual wealth. It might be a gift to help the saints.
H.B. It was the much cattle of the two and a half tribes that hindered them moving into the land.
J.T. Just so -- they lived away from Jerusalem, whereas they should have been living in nearness to it.
J.G.V. It is a matter of which master we are serving. What you are speaking of as to the service of God, would not only allude to the Lord's day, but all the time.
J.T. The idea of the mammon is personified. That is one of the things in Luke. It is as if it were a person, and you are under the control of it.
C.C.T. Would the thought of hating come into this scripture in the same line as we had in the previous chapter -- hating the mammon?
{186}
J.T. And hating one's own life. We must have a right view of these things, money as well. Well, it was only to touch on that, our main thought now is the throne of grace and how it appears in chapter 24; and how it is linked up at first with the temple. The Lord is seen as risen from amongst the dead. The day of grace is now the peculiar day in question. It is as if the Lord is saying, I am in great haste to get to heaven, because of this matter of grace, this matter of the exercising of grace. It is a question of the administration of it now, involving the throne. So that there is no reference to the forty days in this chapter. Luke in his gospel does not mention the forty days that the Lord was on earth after He arose. It would appear from reading this chapter, as though He arose and He went to heaven, and it is left that way. Of course, the forty days comes in in @Acts 1, but this is the way Luke treats of it in this chapter. It would seem as though the Lord is telling us that He is in haste, so to speak, to get to heaven, because He wants to go forward and take up His office involving the administrative side of grace; to make it world-wide in its distribution beginning at Jerusalem. Before we get the actual terms of grace in the chapter, we have what involves the assembly. As if the Lord is saying to us, if we are going in for the gospel which is stressed and stressed greatly, Do not forget the assembly. Hence on the Lord's day we have the assembly privileges and added to these is rightly the gospel service. So that the passage we have just read beginning at verse 36 implies the assembly and the reality of the thing. It is not a parable. They are really conscious of the Lord's death and resurrection and the reality of His humanity in resurrection. It is a real thing, not some figure or form. It is the thing really, not a parable. All these things are mentioned as applicable, and involving the Lord's resurrection, and these
{187}
things bear on grace, on the throne of grace, and those who are to have part in the service of grace are essentially of the assembly. That is what is in mind in verse 36.
J.W.D. Do you think that what the servant who stands up to preach the gospel on the Lord's day evening has springs out of the Lord's supper?
J.T. That is what I thought. This chapter contemplates that. In fact it is the dispensation that is in mind. In @Acts 1, as has been noted, the forty days are treated of, but this chapter is confined to the elements of the assembly involving the Lord's supper and the reality of the Lord's humanity, the real thing in resurrection, not flesh and blood but flesh and bone. It is a real Man in resurrection, and thus He proceeds to impress them with His reality, the reality of His humanity; and thus it is said there, "And having said this he shewed them his hands and his feet. But while they yet did not believe for joy, and were wondering, he said to them, Have ye anything here to eat? And they gave him part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb; and he took it and ate before them. And he said to them. These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled. Then he opened their understanding to understand the scriptures, and said to them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved the Christ to suffer, and to rise from among the dead the third day; and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem. And *ye* are witnesses of these things. And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high". Now I appeal to the brethren, is not this particularly stressed? They are particularly charged with this, by the Lord, as though
{188}
to impress His apostles with the matter of grace. That this is what is in His mind, that the assembly service alluded to is preparatory to this matter of the gospel. They were to preach it; we are to preach it.
A.D. Why does He stress that they were to start at Jerusalem?
J.T. That comes in in the detail which is, of course, important too, because it involves the operations of God with His earthly people, and the promise to them. He is not forgetting that. He is keeping it in His mind, but the prime matter is that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in His name to all the nations. That is to say, this gracious dispensation is in mind, and this added as to Jerusalem is to show He is not forgetting the peculiar position of the Jews. They are in His mind. But the main thought is this matter of repentance and remission of sins preached to all the nations.
L.E.S. So the apostle in Romans begins with the Jew first and then the gentile.
J.T. Of course, that was dropped afterwards. The kingdom of God was sent to the nations and they received it. God is showing here that He is not forgetting His promises to the nation.
S.W.P. Does Luke speak of the service of the Lord to His disciples as taking them out of their novice character? We get in the Acts, "Men of Galilee" spoken to them by the two men in white clothing and Peter says, "Brethren", literally 'Men, brethren'; it is the thought of real maturity in the matter of grace to be carried forward.
J.T. Very good. I would urge on the dear brethren the words I have chosen to use in regard of this passage -- it is a matter charged upon them. It is a passage involving a real charge from Christ Himself under which they are to serve -- an authoritative passage to set forth what is in the dispensation as governing the gospel of grace, not simply assembly
{189}
service, but gospel service. The assembly is the centre of it.
C.C.T. Have you any thought why the understanding of the Scriptures is brought in here?
J.T. It is one of the things to be noted. It says, "These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled. Then he opened their understanding to understand the scriptures". Giving them understanding was part of the thing in His mind. He would arm Himself with these men, and tell them, 'You are to be intelligent, and know the Scriptures, but the great point in My mind is that the *gospel* should be preached and Jerusalem should be the beginning, the start of what was to be preached to all nations'.
H.B. Is it part of the armour of God? "And shod your feet with the preparation of the glad tidings of peace", (@Ephesians 6:15).
J.T. That enters into this. The Lord in Matthew says with less force or emphasis: "Go, bring word to my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there they shall see me" @Matthew 28:10. That is not what we get here. He is not making them go to Galilee. He is at Jerusalem Himself. He is ready to go to heaven and tarries on the way to express what is in mind to His disciples. He would say, 'I am employing you; I am with you absolutely; I am going up there to look after this matter. I am going to heaven'. There is the principle of emphasis in it. This chapter has nothing about the forty days, but is full of the gospel of grace.
L.E.S. And we are to preach like this.
J.T. Exactly. What could you get greater? It is one thing to have it and another thing to use it. The apostle says, "For it is woe to me if I should not announce the glad tidings", (@1 Corinthians 9:16).
{190}
"Cursed be he that doeth the work of Jehovah negligently", (@Jeremiah 48:10). That is, negligent in the things of God.
N.B. Is the reference here to the hands and the feet a reference to the service of grace?
J.T. Quite so, Luke refers to it, rather than John. Luke refers to the feet with the woman in chapter 7; she anointed His feet, because they came in grace to her. How she regarded those feet! She wept upon those blessed feet, the feet of a Man, because of affection for Him. She claims Him in that way. If you were to ask about her love, she would say, 'My love is measured by my forgiveness'. She knew the true value of things, she did not simply admire the Lord, but she had affection for Him. She would say, 'He went into death to bear away *my* sins'. It all brings out the action of grace, and we are to be witnesses -- exponents of it, not failing to preach the gospel; it is our responsibility that we should preach it.
C.C.T. "How beautiful the feet of them that announce glad tidings of peace ... !", (@Romans 10:15).
L.E.S. Is the link with the present dispensation that the Lord has been carried up into heaven?
J.T. Heaven is henceforth aglow. All aglow over that One, that is heaven's viewpoint. So the Lord is carried up there. Peter says, "By the resurrection of Jesus Christ, who is at the right hand of God, gone into heaven" @1 Peter 3:21,22. That is his gospel. He alludes to the fact of the Lord being gone.
A.B.M. Applying this to the preaching of the gospel, would it involve all?
J.T. It would involve all, in the sense that the assembly, according to Philippians, had fellowship with the gospel from the start. The whole assembly at Philippi had fellowship with the gospel. Here it is not simply the assembly as such, but the persons who form it, as the apostles, who are witnesses. The
{191}
bearing of this is apostolic testimony. That is what made it authoritative as to the gospel.
L.E.S. Would the bearing of this be reflected in our service? I mean this matter of the nations, referring to what is apostolic? You referred to certain sections of the earth. Is there any link here?
J.T. The subsequent history comes out in Paul and, of course, has its force, and there is much to regulate this question of missionary work - whether we should merely go where we like, or whether we should be regulated by Paul, at the present time, as to the geographical principle. I do not know whether what I am saying is clear to the brethren, but I am certain that this is a most important matter, and if we could only see the force of this chapter, and how it is filled up with matter from the Lord in relation to the preaching of grace. "That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem".
L.E.S. Does this have a peculiar bearing on the last chapter of Revelation? "And let him that is athirst come; he that will, let him take the water of life freely" @Revelation 22:17.
J.T. Just so. That fits in very well.
H.B. Is the authoritative side in the beginning of Acts? "Concerning all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach, until that day in which, having by the Holy Spirit charged the apostles whom he had chosen, he was taken up". @Acts 1:1,2.
J.T. There the thing is not so forceful because it is *recorded* there. Here it is a forceful statement, in fact the most forceful you can get as conveying the authority of the Lord Jesus, not authority He has alone, but His apostles and what they were to be.
L.E.S. So the throne of grace is very much in evidence at the present moment.
J.T. That is what we are dealing with in a small way. Men may say we are small and we want to be
{192}
small; there is no disadvantage in being small; but we want the government to let us go on with this testimony of grace, because if they do not, we will have to suffer, because it must go on. So the Lord is not saying anything of forty days, but I am going *now*, that is what is implied. He is ready to go, in haste, as it were, to go to the place of authority, where the power for these things is. "And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high".
A.E.J. So there was great joy when Peter preached and three thousand souls were converted. They asked Peter what they should do and he told them, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit", (@Acts 2:38).
J.T. And will receive the promise, the gift of the Holy Spirit. That address of Peter's enters into what we are saying, it is the complement of it. Still keeping the Lord's words before us, let us see what is going to happen. Ten days after the Lord goes up, the Spirit comes down. Let us see what Peter has to say in @Acts 2. Peter does not begin to speak until after there are certain complaints and sarcastic remarks. "But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice and spoke forth to them, Men of Judaea, and all ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and give heed to my words; for these are not full of wine" @Acts 2:14,15. Speaking to these cavillers, Peter says, "these are not full of wine, as *ye* suppose, for it is the third hour of the day; but this is that which was spoken through the prophet Joel, And ... saith God, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh" @Acts 2:15 - 17. Now that is clearly the end of the chapter in Luke, because the Lord intended them to be powerful. And Peter's position in the second chapter of Acts is central; Peter was prepared for
{193}
all that. First Peter. No one else was to be the first preacher. Peter is the first preacher. It was divinely arranged. What a preacher he was! And what a result!
A.E.J. The Lord intended that the preacher be found in power. "And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but do ye remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high".
J.T. All that is very interesting and instructive as to what the Lord gives them, as we had in the passage read from verses 36 to 53 -- all that is interesting detail. You are speaking of this power that comes from above, and it is called clothing. It is not religious habiliments, or mere religious power such as can be gotten from the seminaries, certain religious power; that is not power at all. The power of the Holy Spirit is called clothing here. These men are clothed with power from above. They are preaching in His name as in power. That is, the power of the whole thing is in Christ's name.
S.W.P. Why does it say, "I send the promise of my Father upon you", not 'to you'?
J.T. It is characteristic of the Luke side. John shows the Lord as being concerned with what is inward -- the affections as inward. But Luke shows what the personality of the preacher is -- not just the preaching but the preacher. He is in power.
J.W.D. The responsibility of the gospel is then a very serious one. We need help as to that. The brethren are taking up the thing with a tendency to apathy. You would get us to see the glory of the position.
J.T. That is what I understand. How can one preach unless he is sent? The idea of being sent is a great word in preaching. You can see in Peter that he was a sent person as he stood up there with the eleven. Just a matter of a dozen men left here
{194}
by the Lord and that is this chapter -- the Lord is going on high and leaves them with the responsibility of the gospel.
H.B. In @Luke 4 the Lord started out in that way.
J.T. And thus the dispensation is set out as coming in in Luke's first and second treatise. Room is made for Paul to come in, making way for where the preaching is to be; it is the Spirit of God who directs here. The Lord Jesus is dealing with the whole matter in @Luke 24. He is going to heaven to be over all things. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand" (@John 3:35). These things are in His hands, this matter of the gospel.
L.E.S. If the brethren who serve in the preaching do it rightly, as we are with God, it will go on.
J.T. I am sure the Lord fully confirms that. The work was begun at Thessalonica -- Paul laboured three sabbath days over the beginning of that particular work. Referring to this matter of each brother preaching, if there are half a dozen brothers and they take it in their turn, that is not what the Lord is at here, nor what Peter was at. Peter stood up with the eleven, all real men on that occasion, but as we saw it is Peter who carries on the preaching. It takes the best man you have. Use the best man you have for the occasion, not just anybody, but the brother who can do it best.
A.B.M. Do you make a selection?
J.T. We make a selection because it is a question of being qualified. Therefore it is said of Philip, "And Philip, going down to a city of Samaria, preached the Christ to them". (@Acts 8:5).
A.B.M. The selection involves a sent one -- wisdom enters into it.
J.T. He shows that he is a sent one, because he is sent to do it.
{195}
C.C.T. The brother in charge of the gospel in selecting a brother to preach would understand his measure.
J.T. We are forced to use the word 'select' in relation to the brother who is appointed to look after the gospel and the Lord says, I know the conditions under which you have to do things, but this does not affect the primary thoughts of Christianity. Let us leave out for the moment the details of things as they are found today, and go back to the beginning of things as appointed by the Lord.
J.K. The force of it here is that it is a command: "that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all nations beginning at Jerusalem". You would say it is a command?
J.T. Well, it is. "That repentance and remission of sins should be preached". If I understand the word 'should' it has the force of a command. It must be done. It is in the Lord's mind that it *must* go on. Of course we are dealing with the apostles, as we were saying a moment ago, the primary position. Let us leave the details out, which we have to face because of conditions, and go back to the beginning to get our beings impregnated with the thing. What was going on in these days, what heaven was cognisant of, how aglow it was! The Lord opens up what He wants to be done, because it is the inauguration of a great dispensation and it gives the sense that we are stagnant today, because we are not aglow, not affected by it.
L.E.S. The greatness of it is to be seen in that we are empowered from on high. We are not to set out some scripture, in order to present it in the preaching, but to present the gospel of God as occupied with what took place at the beginning.
J.T. Getting the full light of it. Putting on the right clothes. They come from heaven, it is not the best robe, but clothing from on high to preach the
{196}
gospel. That is not the best robe, it is the power. The best robe is to wear in the drawing room, so to speak, but the gospel is in mind here, the working principles of it, the workman's clothes.
Ques. Is the anointing in mind here?
J.T. The anointing is in mind. The Lord is seen in that way, as we began with in chapter 4: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor ..." @Luke 4:18. Well now, we have the anointing of the apostles. They are anointed. Hence Peter stands up with the eleven, not with the hundred and twenty. The hundred and twenty would have only the sense of being in the assembly. The twelve are anointed to preach.
A.D. What about open-air preaching?
J.T. Well, that is a good point. We started it in New York and a good few went out -- brothers and sisters. No doubt the Lord is pleased with it.
L.E.S. What would you say if we have not any one able to preach or having a gift in regard of the preaching in our localities?
J.T. Then we have to see that we have no one to preach, and we must wait until we get someone. Our prayers come into that. That is the way it stands here.
L.E.S. We do not bring the Lord into these matters sufficiently.
J.T. That is so. I speak feelingly, the Lord would have us ask for help in these matters, be concerned about them.
J.W.D. It is deplorable if there is no gift for the preaching, because the gifts are with the Lord Himself; the Corinthians came behind in no gift.
J.T. That is exactly it. See how the Lord gave an example to His apostles. He spent the whole night in prayer. How He would ask the Father for each one of those apostles: He told Peter that He had prayed for him.
{197}
L.E.S. The testimony here in our public position is really the preaching.
J.T. Well, it is. However small it may be, if there is power someone will be converted by it. We hear of one here and there. Elijah put his face between his knees when coming to the final issue, because that involves prayer, praying with prayer. He prayed with prayer for rain and it came. He sent his servant to see what was there, to look out westward towards the Mediterranean, the western world, and he saw a cloud as big as a man's hand. Not much, you say, but it soon came. He sent to Ahab, "Go down, that the pour of rain stop thee not" (@1 Kings 18:44).
C.C.T. What about the lifting up of His hands? "And he led them out as far as Bethany, and having lifted up his hands, he blessed them".
J.T. The Lord would say, I want to make you happy, and bring you into the gain of what is in My mind, because it is a happy scene, a happy time; the Lord is just filling it up, an evangelical time. "And having lifted up his hands, he blessed them", having led them out as far as Bethany.
Ques. Is that priestly service?
J.T. That is just so. And all this, dear brethren, rouses Him to act in a spirit of blessing, because Christianity is a period of blessing. Aaron was told what to say when he blessed. "And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel: saying unto them, Jehovah bless thee, and keep thee; Jehovah make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace" (@Numbers 6:22 - 26). And this is the true Aaron lifting up His hands and blessing them. And then it is said, "And it came to pass as he was blessing them, he was separated from them and was carried up into
{198}
heaven". The word 'carried' there is remarkable. It shows how much heaven thought of Him. Not the thought of ascending as in John, but here the Lord is carried up into heaven, showing how much heaven thought of Him.
Ques. Did not Zacharias become charged with this in the beginning of Luke?
J.T. He was really a priest in the end. That is what is connected with the gospel, this priestly function. Preachers are happy men. It is the blessed God. It means the happy God -- it is the idea of God as seen in the gospel. The glorious gospel of the blessed God.
J.W.D. "For which cause I put thee in mind to rekindle the gift of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands", @2 Timothy 1:6. That is connected with the testimony of the Lord in the glad tidings.
J.T. "Rekindle" -- it had got a little bit dim, it had to be rekindled. You have to keep on using a gift; it is given for use, you know.
J.W.D. As we are listening to what is coming out this afternoon there should be rekindling going on, as to the importance of the gospel amongst us. It should have to say to apathy, this going on with the gospel from week to week in an apathetical sort of a way. It is to be *preached* in power as it was at the beginning.
S.W.P. Luke is the only evangelist that tells us that they returned to Jerusalem with great joy. Is that in keeping with what has been said?
J.T. Very good. Paul has it too, in his first journey: "And the disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit", (@Acts 13:52). That is a wonderful chapter full of evangelisation. And the end is the disciples filled with joy, and the Holy Spirit. We cannot say much more, the time is gone, but the word here is, "And it came to pass as he was blessing
{199}
them". Notice it is as He was doing it. That is the attitude in which He went into heaven. "He was separated from them and was carried up into heaven. And *they*, having done him homage, returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God". Now it is significant that all this was done at Bethany, not on the Mount of Olives but at Bethany; it was the place of love. Bethany was the place of love. "And he led them out as far as Bethany". So there was the proper sphere there, the sphere in keeping with what was in His mind and they were left behind Him in happy conditions. And they go to the temple at Jerusalem as though they are powerful enough to claim it with this thing. They go to the temple at Jerusalem before the upper room is mentioned.
N.B. What would be the application to us today?
J.T. The brethren are in happy circumstances. We are to be in the local meeting as happy people. The brethren must go along and carry on the idea of the gospel preachings. Carry on the gospel with what is available, the best available. Carry on the gospel in free happy conditions. So that the persons who are listening will say, 'These people have something'.
A.D. It is significant in relation to the joy attached to the gospel what the angel says at the outset: "Fear not, for behold, I announce to you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all the people", (@Luke 2:10). He evangelises to them.
J.T. Very good. "To all the people; for today a Saviour has been born to you in David's city, who is Christ the Lord" (@Luke 2:10,11). And then there is the chorus from heaven, the place He is given up there: "And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men", (@Luke 2:13,14)a very significant opening to Luke.
{200}
L.E.S. There is a great correspondence with Paul in the end of Acts where it is said, "Be it known to you therefore, that this salvation of God has been sent to the nations; *they* also will hear it" @Acts 28:28. And then the last two verses, "And he remained two whole years in his own hired lodging, and received all who came to him, preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, with all freedom unhinderedly" @Acts 28:30,31. Would that be the climax of the throne of grace presented in Paul's ministry?
J.T. It is remarkable, it is in his own hired house at Rome. One has often thought of the closing verses of the second treatise of Luke. It is his own hired house -- it is his own -- it is in the hands of Paul, that is what the significance is. It was his own hired house where he received all that came to him.
{201}
FEATURES OF THE ASSEMBLY (1)
@Matthew 10:40,41; @Matthew 13:43; @Matthew 3:13 - 15
J.T. There are certain features that belong to the assembly that we might consider: the first is righteousness, which is in mind for this meeting; then sowing, leading up to the assembly, the formation of the assembly; and then the functioning of the assembly.
It will be understood that the theme is the assembly, but in a somewhat limited sense -- the assembly seen in Matthew, the only gospel in which it is found formally. It is thought that to get a true understanding of the assembly we would begin with Matthew. There will be other features, all in a limited way, as we remarked, such as chapter 13 in which we have the ministry of the kingdom of God, but the idea of sowing governs the chapter. And then it is hoped that we shall come to formation of the assemblies, to which these other scriptures are introductory. Formation begins properly in chapter 16, and then the idea of the function of the assembly is found in chapter 18.
J.McK. You were remarking about the assembly being based on righteousness in this section. Would you open that up a little?
J.T. Righteousness is a great governing thought in the gospel of Matthew and we see it particularly expressed in chapter 3 in the verses read, in which the Lord, when He was baptised, came from Galilee to the Jordan to John to be baptised of him. He was very definite. He did not come casually as many doubtless in different parts of that region came to the Jordan to be baptised of John. "Then comes Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptised of him". It was very definite. John is the baptiser; and his protest was met by the Lord saying, "Suffer it now; for thus it becometh us to
{202}
fulfil all righteousness. Then he suffers him". The Lord quieted his thoughts, using the expression "all righteousness".
J.McK. Is baptism one feature of this righteousness?
J.T. It is. Righteousness is just what is right and baptism is right. John was sent to baptise, and it was right that the Lord came to John to be baptised. It was coming in the way of righteousness. John had come in the way of righteousness, and the Lord had come in the way of righteousness and baptism belonged to that way.
S.McC. Matthew being the administrative gospel, was it in your mind that it is essential that we should be basically established in the pursuit of what is right in view of having part in the administrative vessel?
J.T. Quite so. If we are not in the way of righteousness how can we talk of the assembly?
S.McC. It is important especially in these days when we are inclined to be deflected from the pursuit of what is right.
J.T. Questions arise among us and we do not know what to do. We may inquire of others, whereas the Lord would tell us if we looked to Him. He would direct us, so that we might find the way ourselves.
J.McK. Is that seen in Joseph? It is said of him he was a righteous man.
J.T. Exactly. He is a model man, I would say. He is called a son of David, which is remarkable.
R.W.S. The Lord introduces the thought of comparative righteousness in chapter 5, but this is "all righteousness", a greater thought.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. One has often thought how comprehensive it is. The Lord uses the plural; He says, "thus it becometh us [Him and John] to fulfil all righteousness". And, of course, as
{203}
the Lord's circle became wider, the "us" would be much wider, and would embrace all who learned from Him.
E.G.McA. What is the significance of baptism in connection with righteousness?
J.T. It is said, "Now in those days comes John the baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judaea, and saying. Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh. For this is he who has been spoken of through Esaias the prophet, saying. Voice of him that crieth in the wilderness: prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight his paths. And John himself had his garment of camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins, and his nourishment was locusts and wild honey. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and all the country round the Jordan, and were baptised by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins" (@Matthew 3:1 - 6). I should think that opens up the matter: it had in view the "confessing their sins".
J.McK. With the Lord it would not be for confessing sins, nor merely an external matter; it was an inward matter, for He loved righteousness.
J.T. He had joy in the service, and in John performing it in righteousness. Then in verse 7 it says, "But seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he [John] said to them, Offspring of vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from the coming wrath? Produce therefore fruit worthy of repentance. And do not think to say within yourselves, We have Abraham for our father; for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham. And already the axe is applied to the root of the trees; every tree therefore not producing good fruit is cut down and cast into the fire. *I* indeed baptise you with water to repentance, but he that comes after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not fit to bear; *he* shall baptise you with the Holy Spirit and fire; whose
{204}
winnowing fan is in his hand, and he shall thoroughly purge his threshing-floor, and shall gather his wheat into the garner, but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable" @Matthew 3:7 - 12. So that Matthew is certainly opened up on the plainest terms, and the persons who are not right are exposed and rebuked, and of course we are in these circumstances now; and so in order to enlarge on this inquiry that is made, Luke tells us about John the baptist and says, "The word of God came upon John" @Luke 3:2. That is very noticeable. "The word of God came upon John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness. And he came into all the district round the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, as it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet: Voice of one crying in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight his paths" @Luke 3:2 - 4. And then it says, "And persons engaged in military service also asked him saying. And we, what should we do? And he said to them. Oppress no one, nor accuse falsely, and be satisfied with your pay" @Luke 3:14. These are all practical matters; they all attach to the baptism of John, which the Lord Jesus identified Himself with. So that as considering this matter that God has inaugurated, and we are in it now, the question arises. How are we doing in it? Presently we will have to say to the assembly, and how we are doing in it. How are we facing things? Are we facing them righteously?
E.G.McA. Is there any significance in the fact that all these things spoken of in Luke pertain to love amongst men rather than love to God?
J.T. That is very good. You mean we are tested by our neighbours, especially among our brethren.
R.W.S. Does that lead up to ecclesiastical righteousness?
J.T. That is a fine phrase. That word 'ecclesiastical' of course, refers to the assembly; the word is
{205}
taken from the assembly. You are undoubtedly referring to things that are happening in the assembly normally, and whether they are right.
R.W.S. I thought that matter of body coats and military service is one feature, but Matthew is more concerned with righteousness in the assembly.
J.T. Well, he is.
C.A.M. Do you think that righteousness in assembly matters would be perhaps suggested in the fact that the baptism of John came from heaven. There was the heavenly control in the matter.
J.T. A good suggestion. It came from heaven. The baptism of John -- whence was it? of heaven or of men? That was how the Lord met matters. They did not answer that.
G.MacPh. Have you something to suggest about the confession of their sins in coming to John, as if the matter had to come up in a current way in relation to righteousness?
J.T. Confession of sins is a very real thing. Another matter that comes up in connection with all this is the matter of currency; what currency are we using in meeting our obligations?
G.MacPh. I was thinking of it in relation to your remark about ecclesiastical righteousness. Practical righteousness has to be worked out practically in our souls before we arrive at that.
E.G.McA. What do you mean by what kind of currency we use?
J.T. Because there is such a thing as depreciated currency, and if it is used it has to be used at its market value. Hence, if I make confession of sins, for instance, ecclesiastical sins, what is the value of the confession? We are dealing with the currency of heaven. It is heaven that values repentance. There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents.
S.McC. What you are saying about currency is important. We are having a good deal of trouble
{206}
about mixed marriages: young men going out and getting married and then coming back and saying they are sorry for it.
J.T. They consider that settles the matter, and the young man or young woman that is not in fellowship at all is introduced into fellowship on values that are not according to the currency of heaven.
C.A.M. The matter of currency came up later with these critics, and the Lord's answer was that we are to render to God the things that were God's.
A.S.B. Does the Lord in @Luke 19 speak of the bank in relation to money?
J.T. Quite so; that was real money; money of the merchants, current among the merchants. That is a scriptural term.
E.G.McA. Would the superficial confession of one doing wrong by marrying outside, and not carrying the conscience of the brethren, be a conversion without baptism?
J.T. Quite so.
E.F. Even if the assembly is satisfied with the confession of such a wrong, does it not lie with the assembly to deal with the matter?
J.T. We will come to that, God willing, where the assembly is seen in function; that matter of currency will come up too. We are just touching things now in order to make our points clear.
Ques. Paul seems to be clear as to the matter of what is right. You were speaking of not writing letters to someone at a distance, but getting light from the Lord ourselves.
J.T. Why should we not? We have our Bible readings; we have our morning readings and our private readings, and we are to pay attention to reading. We ought to be able to get the right view of a thing even if we have not a brother at a distance to write to. As looking to the Lord we get something
{207}
to guide us, so that we do not let things go by, as if they were right, when they are not right.
Ques. "For with the heart is believed to righteousness; and with the mouth confession made to salvation", @Romans 10:10. It seems that if the heart is right inwardly, confession is made publicly.
J.T. Quite so. I thought we ought to just get a model. Scripture has its own way, and Matthew is certainly in front in that, as to the idea of a model. The Spirit of God refers to Joseph in Matthew as "her husband, being a righteous man" @Matthew 1:19. It was a most delicate matter, but he is found to be righteous in the matter; a righteous man. So far he was doing right, and then the Spirit of God came in to help him, to confirm him in what he was going on with. In our local positions these things are mentioned, especially the Scriptures and the temple of God. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" (@1 Corinthians 3:16). We surely ought to have some way of getting light, no matter what it may be that comes up. We should have some hope of getting light if we turn to the Scriptures according to what is being said; and then the Spirit of God would lead us. It says in @Matthew 1:19, "But Joseph, her husband, being a righteous man". You see, he is a righteous man, and that man will get something anyway. He is already righteous. He is so far doing what is right in this most delicate and holy matter, he was unwilling to expose her, it says, but he purposed to have her put away secretly; he was so far right. "Behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream" @Matthew 1:20. That is what I want to touch on: how we get help from Him as we are using what we have ourselves; and we have a great deal to go by, but if we come to a point where we cannot go further, then the Lord will come in; the Spirit of God will come in, and we will get adjusted ourselves, so that we are not found sinning.
{208}
That is the point just now, that we should not go on sinning. If we are confessing our sins we should have done with them.
C.A.M. If the enemy does everything possible to disrupt the saints by spoiling the handiwork of God, we can bring heavenly light to bear on the difficulties, even the complex things. Heavenly light would preserve in our souls the great value of what belongs to the assembly, and its perfection in the mind of God.
J.T. So many questions have been raised in all parts of the earth, about this, and that and the other thing that ought to be settled, but in the local positions there is surely something that we should go by. If necessary, ask somebody that may know a little more, but do not forget to ask the Lord. The Lord will give you understanding in all things, and you will get something from heaven.
<blockquote>'And heav'nly light makes all things bright, <br> Seen in that blissful gaze' (`12:3) </blockquote>
If there is a problem, heavenly light will shine and you will see things you have never seen.
C.A.M. Do you not think that as problems came up at the end of the Lord's life, we can expect these things to come up at the end of the assembly's history here? There is a sort of parallel.
J.T. Well, there is. You find that in the end of Matthew, and so in all the gospels; there is the question time. They should be guides to us as to all these current matters that are coming up. If you get a ray of heavenly light it is surprising how many things will become clearer.
Ques. It says of Joseph, "while he pondered on these things" (@Matthew 1:20). This heavenly light comes to us as pondering over these things.
J.T. Joseph is a righteous man: "while he pondered on these things"(@Matthew 1:20). He was not in a hurry. He evidently took counsel with himself. He did not
{209}
write to anyone; he is like Nehemiah. "While he pondered on these things" (@Matthew 1:20). This is a most precious and holy matter. It is only as priests that we should talk of it, and it relates intimately to this subject of the assembly in Matthew. "While he pondered on these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, son of David" (@Matthew 1:20). The salutation here ennobles him. He is honoured as pondering the matter himself. Why should I not look into things myself? I am a son of God; each one of us is. There is a way to get something ourselves. Abraham's servant said, "I being in the way, Jehovah has led me" (@Genesis 24:27).
J.McK. Are you stressing the importance of what is in the local assembly position?
J.T. The local assembly; yes, that is what I am thinking of. Do you not think that we have in Joseph here, a real assembly man, you might say, anticipatively. Of course, he would not call himself that, but looking back you can see he was that, and all is written for our instruction.
R.W.S. The note to 'unwilling' in verse 19 says, 'The expression is characteristic:'being a man not willing', etc'. We are so willing to spread things abroad and exaggerate them. This kind of man is not willing to expose another.
J.T. We are so ready to talk about things, and spread them abroad, and holy things are made unholy by that method. Joseph did not do that. It was a holy exercise, and we are dealing with holy things that call for such concern; the assembly calls for that. We should be most careful how we talk about the brethren and what involves the assembly.
J.McK. Should we be on the line of David as Joseph was? It Says he was the son of David; he was a righteous man. We are to be on that line.
J.T. See what a man he is now, because heaven attaches to him this great dignity, and he had zeal to
{210}
look into the matter again. Why should I not get light; I am a son of David? He had perhaps never thought of himself in that way before, but now applying it to ourselves, we are sons of God.
A.S.B. It would encourage our hearts that heaven has a detailed interest in us and we can readily approach there and find an answer.
J.T. We are going to heaven; we belong to heaven, and we are being trained for it, and it is well to look into the matter now even in an initial way. It is the time of training, the learning time. I think Joseph is a model here; the Lord Himself is a Model in chapter 11, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest to your souls" @Matthew 11:29. He is a Model.
E.G.McA. In verse 22 it says, "Now all this came to pass that that might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord" @Matthew 1:22. God makes room in His ways for the righteous man.
J.T. Just so. He is a reputable man in the line; he is in the forty-two generations. See the place he has! And now it is not only that an angel speaks of him, but we have the Scriptures also speaking of the matter. So it says, "Joseph, son of David, fear not to take to thee Mary, thy wife, for that which is begotten in her is of the Holy Spirit. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus, for *he* shall save his people from their sins. Now all this came to pass that that might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord, through the prophet, saying, Behold, the virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel" @Matthew 1:20 - 23. The Scriptures themselves are now engaged in this; it is a great theme in them. We are sons of God and we are entitled to speak of the things of God, to know and to understand them. We have the means of knowing them too.
{211}
We should endeavour to clothe these things in right thoughts, so that we do not tarnish them in speaking, but remember that we are dealing with the most holy things.
Ques. David must have suffered a great deal in his spirit.
J.T. Heaven knew what he went through in his meditations and how comely he was in all that he would say.
A.S.B. Is there something important in the fact that the angel is speaking directly to Joseph, and then the Spirit of God comes in with the confirmation from the Scriptures, in verse 22?
J.T. The confirmation, as you say, is already alluded to. This is Matthew's way, that the Scriptures should be verified; not only that the Scripture would verify a truth, but that the Scripture itself should be verified. It is Matthew's way that Scripture should be made to speak; let it have its own voice. So it says, "Now all this came to pass that that might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord, through the prophet, saying. Behold, the virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which is, being interpreted, 'God with us'. But Joseph, having awoke up from his sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had enjoined him" @Matthew 1:22 - 24. All is beautifully confirmed and there is not a word that can be said against him. The devil with all his machinations cannot bring a word against this wonderful matter, although he has attempted to do it many a time.
E.G.McA. That puts emphasis on the word 'all'; 'all righteousness'. The righteous man refers to the word of God and acts on it.
J.T. We might look at verse 13 again. "Then comes Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptised of him". It was a public matter. John was a heaven-sent man to administer baptism, and
{212}
Jesus confirmed the fact that it was in his hands, because He came all the way from Galilee to be baptised of him. He explains the fact to John that it was right that they should fulfil all righteousness. John would never forget that, I am sure.
A.S.B. In chapter 2, verse 12, we read, "And being divinely instructed" @Matthew 2:12. The note to that says, 'It signifies an answer after consultation, as verse 22; hence an oracular or divine answer, not merely warning'.
J.T. It confirms what we have been saying; it enlarges on what Joseph was as a righteous man. The Spirit of God is answering him and using him; he is essentially a righteous man, and chapter 10 shows the value of a righteous man.
R.W.S. Is the tendency to inquire of brothers at a distance a universal weakness?
J.T. I think many inquiries are made before the Lord is really inquired from; before we consult our Bibles and the local brethren, because they will help us. I believe it is a very important matter. We will be helped all around.
Ques. James in chapter 5 of his epistle refers to Elias. "The fervent supplication of the righteous man has much power" @James 5:16.
J.T. That shows what a righteous man can do; and we have him where you might expect him. That is, heaven has provided this righteous man where he is very much needed. He is in nearness to a most holy thing, and has to say to it. Each brother who has to do with assembly matters should be characteristically righteous. Joseph is the model for us.
G.MacPh. Does the Lord's identifying Himself with John indicate the feature of righteousness that identifies itself with the position of the testimony, though in weakness?
J.T. The Spirit is, therefore, bringing forward and giving Joseph his place, and giving John his place.
{213}
These men are just where they are needed, and there is nothing more needed than righteous men just now in dealing with assembly matters, as our brother has said, 'ecclesiastical righteousness'. So that any application used or made should be scriptural; that we should establish ourselves as in the right position. Heaven needs us there and we are doing right; as Paul says. You do what is right; even if you call me reprobate, you do what is right.
Rem. John says in his epistle, "If ye know that he is righteous, know that every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him", @1 John 2:29.
C.A.M. In connection with what we have been speaking about, and our being enlightened by heaven, this thought of righteousness would make way for this remarkable evidence of the greatness of Christ. His sonship comes before us. I am alluding to the word, "And, lo, the heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove", and then the voice, "This is my beloved Son" @Matthew 3:16,17.
J.T. He is "Jesus Christ the righteous" (@1 John 2:1), but now we have passed Joseph and we have passed John to the One who is righteous, especially so; Jesus Christ the righteous.
S.McC. It is remarkable that the reference to "Jesus Christ the righteous" (@1 John 2:1), is brought in in relation to breakdown and restoration on our side. "And if any one sin, we have a patron with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous", (@1 John 2:1).
J.T. Very good. How beautiful is the Lord's position here. "And Jesus, having been baptised, went up straightway from the water, and lo, the heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming upon him: and behold, a voice out of the heavens saying. This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" @Matthew 3:16,17. Now we have "the righteous". Joseph and John led up to this, and now the Lord is saying to
{214}
us, "For thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". Heaven is approving Him and we see the pleasure the Father has in the righteous Man here.
E.G.McA. Is this word, "This is my beloved Son ..." not 'Thou art', but "This is ..." @Matthew 3:17 preparing for the great revelation to Peter in chapter 16?
J.McK. It is a marvellous thing that the Lord is subjecting Himself to what is administered by one less than Himself.
J.T. It is beautiful that the Lord links us with Himself in this way. I believe Matthew has that in mind. "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them" @Matthew 18:20. Then He speaks to us: you are doing the thing. Really that is what Matthew means. The Lord is saying, 'I am with you'; 'I am there'; 'I am with you always', but then you are doing the thing; and the Lord here is doing the thing Himself. He is the Model and heaven is pleased with Him in doing it.
Ques. Is that seen in @Acts 10:34,35 in Cornelius in the way he received the men? And then Peter says, "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him".
J.T. Is that not remarkable? The man is doing the thing himself. Cornelius had already built up and established a position in heaven for himself. It says of him, "Thy prayer has been heard, and thy alms have come in remembrance before God" (@Acts 10:31). He already has a memorial in heaven, and yet he has not yet received the Spirit. If a man is able to do what is right, he gets a place. The little he is doing is right. Cornelius had not the Holy Spirit yet, but he is doing what is right. "Thy alms have come in remembrance before God"(@Acts 10:31). He is the beginning of the great gentile company that God has in mind. Peter is able to lead him into the assembly.
{215}
G.MacPh. Would Daniel and his prayers be another example for us? He was a man that was greatly beloved in heaven.
J.T. "O Daniel, man greatly beloved" (@Daniel 10:11). Cornelius is most remarkable, because it is a question of the gentiles coming in and Peter about to administer to them the position of righteousness in the assembly. Cornelius is going to have a place and the Spirit of God comes in and baptises him, falls upon them, Cornelius and his company, before Peter had finished his address, showing heaven's way of admitting us. We already show that we belong to heaven; Cornelius has already shown this; his memorial is up there. Heaven is acting, taking the matter up. As seeing what would be right in our localities, proceed on these lines. If I am righteous heaven will recognise it, and I will get light.
C.A.M. Peter opens his address with, "He that fears him and works righteousness" (@Acts 10:35).
J.T. Quite so; he "is acceptable to him"(@Acts 10:35).
S.McC. What you have said as to Cornelius ought to be very encouraging to us as to the practical affairs of life. Before we reach the ecclesiastical matters of righteousness, we are apt to be careless in the smaller affairs and practical things in life.
J.T. Especially in a matter that is so important among the brethren; namely, the collection for the saints. Cornelius would be ready, whatever was needed, to contribute his part. He was already established in that way and heaven is taking him on now.
S.McC. You mean righteousness enters into this matter of giving?
J.T. He is like the widow who cast in all her living; his alms and his prayers.
G.MacPh. Do you mean the special collection?
J.T. Yes. The Lord has come in, and given us light, because we were submissive to the truth; and
{216}
the Scriptures have been attended to. Cornelius knew how to give and pray as well.
E.G.McA. In this passage on Cornelius, there was a similar situation to that in Matthew, the heavens opening, only, of course, in a lesser degree. It says, "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word" (@Acts 10:44). This kind of material must go into the assembly.
J.T. That is the way the matter stands. The chapter is full of holy thoughts; the inauguration of the assembly among the gentiles.
Ques. In the matter of the collection, should it not be kept on a high level? Love motivates us and we have to look at it in that way. What we have is to work out in the matter of righteousness in giving; if we were already adjusted would it not flow out spontaneously?
J.T. Well, we might look at the scripture that deals with this matter in @2 Corinthians 8:1,2, "But we make known to you, brethren, the grace of God bestowed in the assemblies of Macedonia; that in a great trial of affliction the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty has abounded to the riches of their free-hearted liberality", and so on (verses 1 - 15). And then again we have in the scripture in the passage in chapter 9:7, "each according as he is purposed in his heart; not grievingly, or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver. But God is able to make every gracious gift abound towards you, that, having in every way always all-sufficiency, ye may abound to every good work: according as it is written. He has scattered abroad, he has given to the poor, his righteousness remains for ever" @2 Corinthians 9:7 - 9. That is the conclusion of this subject. It is a question of righteousness.
Rem. It makes it very clear.
{217}
J.T. It does; and I believe the Lord has blessed the matter and ourselves in doing it because we bowed to the truth about it, and the brethren are united about it. We might read the verse in @Matthew 10, which is confirmatory of what we have already said. "He that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward" That shows what dignity the righteous man has in the heavenly economy.
Ques. Would you say what is in your mind about righteousness? The word 'righteous' is used in many different ways. It is a word that is used like glory; it is easily used.
J.T. The best definition I know is that righteousness is what is right. Of course, that can be greatly enlarged in the Scripture. John's epistle works it out in the most subjective way; I use that word designedly; not objective truth, but what is wrought out in the soul as born of God.
E.G.McA. What is this reward?
J.T. The result is to be taken into our minds and hearts, that you have the status of a righteous man in the divine economy. Abraham would be an example.
A.E.W. Would Paul be also in the end of 2 Timothy? He speaks of the crown of righteousness. He would have the sense that he was a righteous man. It is before the righteous Judge.
J.T. There are two crowns; one is righteousness and the other is life.
E.G.McA. Righteousness is really a primary thought in the things of God.
J.T. It is a basic thought.
Ques. Does it enter into our letters of commendation?
J.T. Quite so. The letters we sometimes hear read telling of the wonderful things a certain brother
{218}
or sister does -- you wonder how they can be written. If we confine ourselves to righteousness it is enough.
Ques. Is this a matter of our relations with one another, this matter of receiving a righteous man?
J.T. It would work out in our relations with one another. "He that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward". We have to figure out what that would be -- the man who had the status of a prophet in the heavenly economy -- what his reward would be; and then the other one: "he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward". He has the status of a righteous man and he has a name. You give him the name; the name is in the divine economy. It is a question of what God recognises in the word 'name'. It usually means 'renown'. A righteous man has renown in the heavenly economy.
Ques. It says of Abraham, "And he believed Jehovah; and he reckoned it to him as righteousness". (@Genesis 15:6).
J.T. Even Lot is called a righteous man, showing heaven is liberal in its designation; it is fair, but liberal. Lot is called a righteous man. He was grieved by the ungodliness of Sodom, and yet he was stepped in it in a certain sense. He should not have been there at all, but heaven calls him a righteous man.
J.A.P. Do you think the brethren in Corinth were benefited by Timothy's coming from Paul? A righteous man coming from a righteous man.
J.T. Had Paul gone then the test would have been severe, we are not to make the glare of the sun too severe on the saints, but to modify it a bit. The idea is modified in Timothy. It is there, but it is more suited to the position in Corinth. If you turned on the whole of the light on the state of things at Corinth it would be too great. Paul wrote a long
{219}
letter to work the thing out. Even if you consider me reprobate, he says, you do what is right. That is very practical.
C.A.M. The verse preceding those read speaks about our lives, losing our lives. If we are ready for this, the way is open for receiving the wonderful ministry and what is of Christ into our souls. We cannot be vacuums, but if we are ready to deny ourselves and empty ourselves of all these things that appeal to us naturally we would value more the things the Lord sends us.
J.T. You are referring to what precedes here, "He who loves father or mother above me is not worthy of me; and he who loves son or daughter above me is not worthy of me. And he who does not take up his cross and follow after me is not worthy of me. He that finds his life shall lose it, and he who has lost his life for my sake shall find it" @Matthew 10:37 - 39. These are words in a language that we all are to understand. A man that goes in for this natural life and what attaches to it, will lose that; and, "he who has lost his life for my sake shall find it" @Matthew 10:39. All that is taken in order in leading up to this matter of the prophet and his status and the righteous man and his status.
J.McK. Why does it say in chapter 13 that the righteous shall shine forth as the sun? The sun is a great light and has great illumination. Is that what is to characterise the kingdom?
J.T. It is the last scripture we read. "Then the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He that has ears, let him hear". So that the thought of the righteous is carried through. The idea of sowing comes into that chapter, but it carries through the idea of the righteous and what they will be in the future. "Then the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father". That is the sun of the heavens. It is alluded to in Daniel.
{220}
Rem. The sun shining in the heavens would suggest what is heavenly, in keeping with Matthew's gospel.
J.T. Just so; the kingdom of His Father. Matthew makes much of the kingdom of the heavens.
Ques. What is the thought of receiving the free gift of righteousness in @Romans 5?
J.T. It is what is proposed in the gospel. The Lord has made that effective to us. It is proposed in the gospel. This matter of the shining is so glorious, but it is only a figure here: the sun in the heavens, in our heavens, but James says, "the Father of lights, with whom is no variation nor shadow of turning" @James 1:17. The allusion is to our sun in the heavens, but the application is to our Father Himself in the heavens. He is the Father of lights, and He is our Father. We are to shine as lights. The allusion is to the heavenly bodies. We are to shine as lights in the world. The Father is the Father of all those lights. He is the Father of lights. We are told, *"Ye* are the light of the world" (@Matthew 5:14).
A.S.B. "And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse; and they that turn the many to righteousness as the stars, for ever and eve?", (@Daniel 12:3). There is a great divine system established.
J.T. It is what is alluded to in the second day of the present creation; what was added to what had been there before. It is a good thought. The word 'expanse' is a good thought. God called the expanse heavens. It is the spreading out of the thing.
E.G.McA. Would you say the previous verses in chapter 13 indicate the conditions in which we practise righteousness, against what is adverse; but when that is all cleared up then the righteous shall shine as the sun. There will be a public display of what God has worked out.
{221}
J.T. The Lord explains. "I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the world's foundation. Then, having dismissed the crowds, he went into the house; and his disciples came to him, saying, Expound to us the parable of the darnel of the field" @Matthew 13:35,36. This is the very thing we have to deal with everywhere in Christendom, this thing the devil has brought in in the way of imitation. Verse 41 says, "The Son of man shall send his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all offences, and those that practise lawlessness; and they shall cast them into the furnace of fire; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth. Then the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He that has ears, let him hear" @Matthew 13:41 - 43. These angels allude to the binding of the tares into bundles (verse 30). I believe that the present way of binding up evil conditions into bundles is by trade-unionism. They are bound into bundles for the fire. Those who suffer now as set against all this shall shine as the sun. It is very encouraging for us.
J.McK. This is an added thought, bringing in the idea of glory. The parable ends up with saying, "The wheat bring together into my granary" @Matthew 13:30, but this is an added thought in the exposition of it.
J.T. "As then the darnel is gathered and is burned in the fire, thus it shall be in the completion of the age. The Son of man shall send his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all offences, and those that practise lawlessness; and they shall cast them into the furnace of fire; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth" @Matthew 13:40 - 42. It is eternal punishment that is in mind, and the Lord is going to deal with all these unions, the angels binding these things together for the fire. How should I be in these things? Let us rather die than be in them, because this is the end of them. We are to shine as the sun
{222}
in the kingdom of our Father, as over against these bundles that are burned.
E.G.McA. "He that has ears, let him hear". That is another way of saying it is worth while to practise righteousness.
J.T. Yes, and to know what parabolic teaching is, and whether I have the right ears. We might argue for evenings about trade-unionism and never reach a conclusion unless we are subject to the Scriptures. "He that has ears, let him hear". One that has an ear like that is not going to be antagonistic. He submits to the truth as to it. He is not going to argue.
{223}
FEATURES OF THE ASSEMBLY (2)
@Matthew 13:1 - 9,24 - 30,51 - 58
J.T. Our subject is the assembly. We considered righteousness, which is an important feature in Matthew leading up to the assembly, and it is thought now that we should consider the sowing, then formation in the next meeting, and the assembly in function in the last reading. The scriptures read deal with the sowing. The closing verses from 51 to 58 call attention to the Lord's method of completing subjects in His ministry and, of course, He intends that we should learn from Him, from His example, so that the matter of sowing is finished, so to say, in this chapter and it is a subject that should now be touched in relation to the assembly. It is essential to the assembly. It is essential to the subject of the assembly. The subject of righteousness too, by itself, is essential to the matter of the assembly, as we saw last night. There are many other subordinate subjects which could be alluded to, but there is no time, because we are not pursuing the whole gospel of Matthew, but just taking up certain features of the assembly as mentioned.
The subject of sowing has a peculiar place, extending in the Scriptures to @Genesis 8 and entering in peculiarly to the provisional period of the earth's existence. It is said, "Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease" (@Genesis 8:22). It is to continue. So that sowing is a feature of the provisional period of the earth as it is. Presently we will have a new earth and new heaven; but the learning time is in the first earth and the first heaven, according to the hymn we sang in which we said that the Lord is Head of creation -- not the new creation but the present one. His great provisional
{224}
position is in view of the working out of the truth of the assembly, and then the working out with Israel too, and the continuance of the nations in testimony; and then there will be change. In the meantime it is a provisional period, the learning period, and in order to have things for God there must be sowing, otherwise there will be sterility or such conditions which would hardly be controlled. The seed time and harvest show that God is continuing to provide for suitable seed to be sown and grown, and all this leads up to the thought of the assembly and enters into the truth of it. So we have in the verses read at the beginning of the chapter: "And that same day Jesus went out from the house and sat down by the sea", alluding to the nations. Having left the Jewish position, He took up a position in relation to the nations as the great sphere of His sowing. "And great crowds were gathered together to him, so that going on board ship himself he sat down, and the whole crowd stood on the shore. And he spoke to them many things in parables, saying, Behold, the sower went out to sow: and as he sowed, some grains fell along the way, and the birds came and devoured them"; and so the passage runs on until we come to the positive result of the sowing: "And others fell upon the good ground, and produced fruit, one a hundred, one sixty, and one thirty. He that has ears, let him hear".
E.G.McA. Does this sowing indicate that what has preceded was not of right substance to bring in what would be suitable to God in the assembly? There had to be a sowing of something entirely fresh.
J.T. I would think that the whole history of Israel, extending down, we may say, from Abraham, had not yielded what was suitable for the assembly. The truth of the assembly had not been revealed. In view of it, the question of sowing comes up, and the Lord leaves the house He was in, which would be
{225}
Jewry, and comes out and sits down by the sea. "And great crowds were gathered together to him, so that going on board ship himself he sat down, and the whole crowd stood on the shore. And he spoke to them many things in parables, saying, Behold, the sower went out to sow". So that I would say the position that had been was not enough to yield what was now in mind.
C.C.T. In the last sowing fruit is produced, one hundred, sixty and thirty fold; this is on good ground. Was it your thought in speaking of this, that there might be the bearing of fruit coming forth in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. Matthew contemplates a shrinkage, a reduction in the yield from the sowing. Therefore it says, "one a hundred, one sixty, and one thirty". There is reduction in the yield in Matthew as if it would be a feature of the assembly gospel that things become reduced immediately and the fruit less and less; whereas in Mark it is more and more.
E.G.McA. Would this one hundred, sixty, and thirty -- the down-grade -- correspond with the conditions seen in the letters to the churches in the second and third of Revelation?
J.T. That is good. The reduction is indicated, too, in the fact of what is said in chapter 18 of this gospel. "Again I say to you, that if two of you shall agree" @Matthew 18:19, meaning that there will be a reduction in the personnel as indicated in the first part of the chapter, the first part which alludes to the assembly.
S.McC. In regard to this matter of sowing, according to Matthew the results have to do with assembly quality. Have you in mind sowing in that regard?
J.T. I think that is in it. In chapter 18, which we will have tomorrow, there is the idea of quality as well as quantity. The results would be produced gradually as is indicated in the addresses to the
{226}
assemblies because the addresses to the assemblies are written under the Lord's dictation. He tells John what to write and the order in which he was to write, beginning with Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, and Thyatira, which would allude to the greatest outward volume, but the least in quality. Relative quality is greatly reduced while the volume is greatly increased in the profession. The quality really comes out in Philadelphia; the quality is there but the quantity is reduced -- "a little strength".
H.B. When we come to Laodicea it says, "If any one hear my voice" (@Revelation 3:20). Great reduction!
S.McC. Take this continent and the great States to the south of us. If we read Mr. Darby's letters we find references to Kentucky, and other States are much mentioned; but as we look around there is little in the way of result for the assembly there today, and yet there has been a good deal of sowing on other lines.
J.T. I believe the governmental side comes in there. What has marked this country constitutionally does not make for increase of spiritual quality. I think that is well established on fact. The quality is poor, and although there is great activity in America in certain ways, evangelical and the like, yet the quality is poor, and it certainly has not extended below the mark of the line dividing the North and South. I believe the government of God comes in. Governmentally God is not well pleased with the treatment of the negro. There is hardly anything at all for the assembly below the Mason and Dixon line. There is very little for God even now.
S.McC. What you have said is very interesting. Going back to the negro question and the conditions which existed at one time, do you think the South has suffered because of it?
J.T. Quite so; whereas in the West Indian isles there is much for God in spite of the colour question.
{227}
That is to say, the negro race has yielded to the truth of the gospel in Barbados and Jamaica and other similar isles.
C.A.M. The idea of the nations is the broadest kind of thought in God's mind. God's attentions to man were more limited in taking up the Jewish nation.
J.T. Well, the Jewish house is left. Apparently the Lord contemplates it would be necessary to leave it to widen out to the nations. And so this agrees with the actual historical facts. Paul says, "Lo, we turn to the nations" (@Acts 13:46), and "the nations ... received the word of God", (@Acts 11:1). It is remarkable that whatever response there has been since that time has been from among the gentiles. Although there has been a good yield from the direct sowing of the twelve in western Asia and eastern Europe, most of the work is through Paul.
A.S.B. Is that why in verse 1 of this chapter we are told, "And that same day Jesus went out from the house and sat down by the sea"?
J.T. The meaning would be deliberation. He is now free to give time to that which is important. That is to say, time is very scarce but we must make up our minds to devote a good deal to the assembly. We cannot afford to neglect it, however scarce time is. It is the time for that now.
R.W.S. "And that same day" would have a bearing on the Lord's taking up assembly matters now immediately, would it not?
J.T. I would think so. It bears on what we have said as to the finishing of the subject; the beginning of a subject and the finishing of it. The finish is in the closing verses. It is said of the Lord in verse 53, "And it came to pass when Jesus had finished these parables he withdrew thence". That is, the thing is over from that point of view. The course of instruction
{228}
is given, in that particular area, and then the Lord withdrew and came to His own country, where we might expect greater attention. "And having come into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, so that they were astonished, and said, Whence has this man this wisdom and these works of power?". "This man" they say, not 'Jesus'; not the great prophet of God which this book would open up, but "this man". Where did He get these instructions? How did He get this light? "Is not this the son of the carpenter?". You see the appreciation of the Lord in His own country; and, of course. His own country in a wider sense is the Jews. But He left their house. "Is not his mother called Mary, and his brethren James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us?". See how they minimise the Lord and reduce Him to an ordinary person; and, of course, the next thing would be disregard of what He says. If He can be discredited and reduced in value in the eyes of others, they will refuse Him; as it says, "And they were offended in him. And Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honour, unless in his country and in his house. And he did not there many works of power, because of their unbelief". So that they deprive themselves of the greatest possible thing, the instruction the Lord would give, because of their attitude towards Him. That is important in dealing with our matters, to begin and to finish things, and if there is a turning away we may be obliged to turn away from them. If people do not listen they are to be turned away from. There is no faith there to do anything with.
A.S.B. It is Emmanuel, God with us. We are to take account of the origin of the thing.
J.T. How beautiful all that is! That is the point; Emmanuel, God with us. It was God Himself; and yet they say, He is the son of Joseph, and they speak
{229}
of His mother and brothers and sisters, all to depreciate Him, to reduce Him to an ordinary person.
A.B.P. The Lord had already severed His link with His brethren and mother in a previous chapter.
J.T. Yes; He brought in the moral side; they tell Him that His mother and brethren stand without, as much as to say. He must come to us; let Him come to us.
G.MacPh. Is it in your mind that the quality of the ministry should bring about assembly features in us?
J.T. That is the intent of it. The Lord has been doing much for us all these years to bring about interest, and you just wonder how much there is.
G.MacPh. He comes down from one hundred, and from thirty, to one person here: "He that has ears, let him hear".
J.B. In Numbers, in regard to the reduction, we find large numbers on the military side and small numbers in the priesthood.
J.T. Yes; quantity on the military side, small numbers in the priesthood. Well, of course, when you come to the priesthood you expect refinement. You expect reduction in volume but increase of quality. No doubt that is the intention in regard of priesthood. The military ranks were furnished by the mass, something like six hundred thousand nominated for military service; whereas in Exodus we begin with one man for the priesthood, and that one man is Aaron, and then his sons; so that it is not so much volume in priesthood. There is a reduction in the numbers; in the government of God they are cut in half because of sin in two of them. Two of the priests come under the government of God and we are left with two: that is Eleazar and Ithamar, with their father. It is in the government of God that this takes place. God cut them off. Ultimately the foundation of the priesthood lies in Aaron's rod that
{230}
budded. The question of sowing comes in there, and our subject makes way for that -- God's rights in selection. "For many are called ones, but few chosen ones". (@Matthew 20:16). It is said in Hebrews of the priesthood, that no one takes this distinction on himself, but those who are called, such as Aaron. Priesthood is a highly refined matter centering, indeed, in Christ Himself, because He is Priest; the Son is Priest; whereas the military side is a question of numbers for conflict.
A.S.B. Is the military side more a development of ruggedness and stability, and the priesthood more refinement as you are suggesting?
J.T. Yes; the military side is a question of age, but not so in priesthood. The military began with twenty years, the age of twenty, which would allude to a convert who has the Spirit. He is qualified for military service, as having the Spirit, whereas the priesthood is not governed by age. It is a question of sonship, the eternal idea.
A.S.B. How would the idea of Gideon's thirty-two thousand being reduced to three hundred come in here?
J.T. That is God showing how He can refine even, in military matters. Only a certain number is needed, three hundred, of whom it is said they lapped water like dogs; not lying down in a natural way, but just lapped it from the hand, and then were off to the fray. They drank enough for the present need, and were off to the conflict. It is to show what can be done by a few instead of by many. God is in that matter, and He shows what He can do.
Ques. Joseph brought before Pharaoh only five of his brethren. Is the thought of quality there?
J.T. Yes; it would be Joseph's selection. He brought five out of the whole number. It is a question of his own selection to set them before Pharaoh.
{231}
All of those matters are connected with what we are saying as to the assembly.
G.MacPh. As to your reference to sowing, how are we to overcome this question of the government of God in these matters in connection with the quality in our localities in this country?
J.T. The only way I see is for all of us who are left in the country here each to apply himself according to the principles governing such a position, such as Gideon's circumstances. He shows how to work it out, how a small number suffices for the purpose in hand. The end is reached by a small number; so it is a question of just facing the matter and seeing what can be done on that principle now.
J.R.H. The Lord speaks of "the word of the kingdom" (@Matthew 13:19). That is something different from the popular gospel of the day. Presenting that would help as to meeting present conditions.
J.T. Just so. We have great principles here; they say to the Lord in verse 10, "Why speakest thou to them in parables?" @Matthew 13:10. What comes out in this parabolic way is to reduce the result. The parables would bring out what was real and what was unreal. To the disciples, the Lord, "answering said ... Because to you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens, but to them it is not given; for whoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall be caused to be in abundance; but he who has not, even what he has shall be taken away from him. For this cause I speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear nor understand" @Matthew 13:11 - 13. The whole matter of parabolic teaching is in mind, and the Lord is saying to His disciples: You are to understand everything I am saying, but the crowd will not, because they are not valuing what they have. They are not making anything of it. "For this cause I speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing
{232}
they do not hear nor understand; and in them is filled up the prophecy of Esaias, which says. Hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand, and beholding ye shall behold and not see; for the heart of this people has grown fat, and they have heard heavily with their ears, and they have closed their eyes as asleep, lest they should see with the eyes, and hear with the ears, and understand with the heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them" @Matthew 13:13 - 15. That is to say, God is acting now governmentally, because the people have been neglectful and careless about the great things the Lord has been saying. God's feelings enter into this, and the Lord is going to take away the advantages they have, but the disciples are to have the full advantage of the teaching; their ears were attentive to what the Lord was saying. He says to them in verse 51, "Have ye understood all these things?".
C.B. Is the parable brought in to set aside casualness and to make it a special matter of inquiry?
J.T. That is it; the Lord says as a result of their inquiry, "To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens, but to them it is not given" @Matthew 13:11. There are people to whom it is not given; they have had the opportunity of getting it, and they have not got it, so there is a penalty attached to carelessness in listening to the ministry.
C.C.T. It is connected with the thought of unbelief in this chapter?
J.T. Yes; the great result is worked out in the end of the chapter. The Lord is rejected by the masses; it is happening in Christendom now.
A.B.P. If we attend meetings like these and if we feel we cannot get into the current of them, what would you suggest we do?
J.T. We shall see in this chapter. It is worked out in what the Lord says. It is a question now primarily of whether people are listening, and do
{233}
they understand? The Lord has to open our understandings, and that is the secret of getting on in the truth -- we must understand.
E.G.McA. Why is the thought of the kingdom introduced here? "And that same day Jesus went out from the house and sat down by the sea". And then it says, "The sower went out to sow", as though it would be an unrestricted area in view. In the kingdom we have a restricted area. Is there not light to regulate from heaven in hearing what the Lord had to say in the parables? It is the kingdom of the heavens which is to rule, and we are to know the mysteries of the kingdom -- a new kingdom has been set up, new principles and a restricted area in which the Lord is working. It is not a world-wide thought as 'Lord of creation' or 'Head of creation', but something new on the kingdom line; an area which He has under His own control and bringing in obligation for us to hear.
J.T. We shall see in what the Lord said just what you are indicating. There is the restrictive element in people that cannot understand, and God is going to expose that principle which will bring out apostasy. He is going to order the development of apostasy; it will not happen without Him. The apostasy comes about because of the attitude of the persons being ministered to. "And for this reason God sends to them a working of error, that they should believe what is false, that all might be judged who have not believed the truth, but have found pleasure in unrighteousness", (@2 Thessalonians 2:11). The thing will widen out until the assembly is removed, and the removal of the assembly almost synchronises with the apostasy being completed. It is not complete yet.
C.A.M. Speaking of sowing, there is a word of encouragement in @Ecclesiastes 11:6, "In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand; for thou knowest not which shall prosper,
{234}
whether this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good". There is great encouragement in realising that there is a remarkable answer to the ministry in these last days.
J.T. Well, there is indeed, and I hope we shall come to that. It is brought down: one hundred, sixty, and thirty. Thirty is quite a good proportion. There is that much to be said, but there is this power of God judicially. Some are just playing with the truth and God says, I am done with that. He will say it one day and the whole testimony will be withdrawn, when the time is up. The time is coming and that very soon. "Let the filthy make himself filthy still", (@Revelation 22:11). That is an awful thing.
C.C.T. It seems to be a heart matter, 'the heart is grown fat'. It is a sad thing that God has to say to a company of people that they have closed their eyes as asleep.
J.T. It is a question now of what the prophets have taught, which has to be borne in mind; to be instructed in what the prophets have taught. "For this cause I speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear nor understand ... lest they should see with the eyes, and hear with the ears, and understand with the heart and should be converted, and I should heal them" @Matthew 13:13,15. Lest that should happen. That is a most remarkable thing, but that might be going on even in this little company; there might be some who are dealing with the truth of God being ministered to them on that principle. God may say, The time is up. God will begin on the principle of estrangement so that they cannot understand.
Rem. It is remarkable that this scripture from Isaiah is quoted in the last chapter of the Acts.
J.T. It is quoted three times in the New Testament, showing how God had it in mind. The Lord said of Israel, 'Lest they be converted'. God says,
{235}
I will do so-and-so, and that will hinder people getting the truth, a terrible thing! It is because of something that preceded; some neglect or carelessness of spiritual things, or worldliness, and God is finished with such things. The antichrist is to come; his coming synchronises with the apostasy. The antichrist will not come until the apostasy is full blown. "For the mystery of lawlessness already works; only there is he who restrains now until he be gone, and then the lawless one shall be revealed", (@2 Thessalonians 2:7,8). The apostasy will appear and antichrist too; but in the meantime God is keeping the door open. That is the most blessed thing for us; and the door is still open in this country for these meetings.
A.B.P. The woman who touched the hem of the Lord's garment was conscious of the matter being completed; there was blessing through contact with Him.
J.T. You shrink from thinking of what humanity is when thrown together with little or no governing principle. Whereas God is making His selection, in the midst of all these millions and millions of people. God is choosing out, making His selection from the masses we come up against in our daily life.
J.McK. Cornelius comes to mind. Peter says, "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him" (@Acts 10:34,35). Do you think the thirty-fold is based on the principle of righteousness as being maintained for God in the assembly?
J.T. It is still thirty out of one hundred instead of one hundred out of one hundred. God is reducing, and it will be more and more so until the end. God will accelerate the terribleness of the apostasy as it is said, "And for this reason God sends to them a working of error, that they should believe what is
{236}
false, that all might be judged who have not believed the truth, but have found pleasure in unrighteousness", (@2 Thessalonians 2:11). So the thing synchronises. When the apostasy has taken place the time is ripe for the antichrist to come.
R.W.S. Is the reduction general? Generally speaking, there is more for God in Great Britain as compared with this country which has been the cradle of heresies. You spoke of the constitutional matter in regard of this country. The British Isles have been the cradle of the truth.
J.T. The area is becoming greatly reduced in which God is operating. The main part of what God is operating in is the British Isles. He is operating in New Zealand too; but the leaders in England recognise that the nation is rapidly becoming apostate. The leaders of the Church of England have said that recently. They are endeavouring to stir up an evangelical effort to reconvert England, but we know this will not happen. There is no sign of such a thing. It is not God's way that it should happen.
R.W.S. Whereas it is God's thought that we should recognise things as they are. The assembly would stand against Christian Science and all these bundles of tares.
J.T. Just so. We are to watch what is going on; not that I advocate devoting much time to the news, but just getting the mind of God in observing what is happening. God is watching what is going on in all these things, and this bundle gathering is an indication of what the angels will do presently.
E.G.McA. What is the idea in verse 36? "Then, having dismissed the crowds, he went into the house and his disciples came to him saying. Expound to us the parable of the darnel of the field" @Matthew 13:36. It is where we are this afternoon, the atmosphere of the house where we are having things explained to us.
{237}
J.T. "He went into the house; and his disciples came to him" @Matthew 13:36. The brethren are here this afternoon, but the point is the basis on which we have come. When you think of the vastness of this country, how few there are who have any interest, but still there it is: "his disciples came to him" @Matthew 13:36. That is what the character of this meeting is; the disciples are here, and we have come to learn; not only taking in the ministry but understanding it, because that is the point.
E.G.McA. As having come into the house as we are now, the Lord opens up to the disciples the mysteries of the kingdom which He did not open up outside, such as the value of the assembly to Himself; the treasure hid in the field, and the pearl of great price, and then the casting out of the wicked. All this comes out to those not just watching, but learning. The precious things that Christ has on His heart are expounded to those who are given to know the mysteries of the kingdom.
J.T. That is very important, to enter fully into what is being said. "Blessed are *your* eyes because they see, and your ears because they hear" @Matthew 13:16. But then the Lord is warning us as to understanding.
G.MacPh. The thought of the Son of man sowing good seed in His field -- does that take in the profession or does it refer to the principle of the assembly?
J.T. Well, that is the next paragraph that we should look into. But first of all there is the sowing, the actual service of sowing. The Lord tells us the different things that happened in the sowing. "Behold, the sower went out to sow: and as he sowed, some grains fell along the way, and the birds came and devoured them". That is the devil's activity, taking away the seed. "And others fell upon the rocky places where they had not much earth, and immediately they sprang up out of the ground because of
{238}
not having any depth of earth, but when the sun rose they were burned up, and because of not having any root were dried up; and others fell upon the thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them". These are all phases of this matter of sowing, the Lord's own ministry and how it affects different persons and over against that are all these phases. He then says, "and others fell upon the good ground, and produced fruit, one a hundred, one sixty, and one thirty". Now we have to have our eyes open for the good ground, persons known as the subjects of the work of God; not mere listeners, not simply attending the meetings to meet others, but to learn of the word of God; that is the good ground.
J.A.P. Would that be like the Bereans? It says of them, "And these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, receiving the word with all readiness of mind, daily searching the scriptures if these things were so". (@Acts 17:11). There is need of continuance with us.
J.T. That is the idea exactly; that is where the good ground is. We have a notable reference in @Acts 20 where we are told of the persons who accompanied Paul. They were all the fruit of his own work. You will notice that in chapter 20 they accompanied him, and it is said, "And there were many lights in the upper room where we were assembled" @Acts 20:8. They listened to the ministry of Paul; they reflected his ministry; they knew what it meant. So there was a flood of light in that hall, so to speak, many lights. Well, these men were affected by Paul's ministry and followed intently what he was saying. That is, they are listening and really getting the truth. And then we are told that one young man did not get anything, showing how we may be getting nothing, but falling asleep. This young man fell down and apparently was dead. Paul served him, showing the energy of the minister in watching the good and
{239}
watching the evil, so that the enemy may be defeated in all these meetings. Rivalry and all that is to be shut out, for one thing. Listen to what Paul says; attend to the things spoken by Paul.
G.MacPh. It is said of Lydia: "whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul", (@Acts 16:14).
J.T. Exactly. Reference has been made to the Bereans searching the Scriptures daily to see if these things were so. One is greatly impressed by the many things that are said that are not so.
A.B.P. Searching the Scriptures should be a concern to the young believer.
C.C.T. The Lord looked about to see how His ministry was being taken and He would look about this afternoon to see how it is being taken on by us.
J.T. That is how the ministry comes. It is accurate; that is, what is being said is the truth. If things are said that are not right, they should be settled so that everything should be clear.
A.C. In @Revelation 11 there are three classes of redeemed offering fruit to God. "Thy servants the prophets, and ... the saints, and ... those who fear thy name, small and great" @Revelation 11:18. Would that suggest the hundred, sixty, and thirty?
J.T. Very good. The Lord told John what to write and the order in which it should be written. And so he says in @Revelation 1:19, "Write therefore what thou hast seen, and the things that are, and the things that are about to be after these". Now that is the order in which the book is written, and in order to understand we have to follow that order. John is to prophesy again, and he has to eat the little book, indicating that we have to keep up with the need, the necessity, the exigency of the time. We have to keep up with that and know how to meet everything. It says in @Revelation 11:18, "And thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead to be judged, and to
{240}
give the recompense to thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and to those who fear thy name, small and great; and to destroy those that destroy the earth". Persons are classified here; this verse points to the conclusion of things; the day has come. That is what we are now dealing with; we are coming near to apostasy and who are to escape? Those on the earth then are exposed to the terrible judgments that are announced here.
A.S.B. The Lord is calling attention to Isaiah, who in chapter 28 says, "Doth the ploughman plough all day to sow?", @Isaiah 28:24 and "His God doth instruct him in his judgment, he doth teach him" @Isaiah 28:26. He understood the ploughing up of the ground and the levelling out of things.
J.T. Quite so. Now to proceed: "The kingdom of the heavens has become like a man sowing good seed in his field". Here we have to deal with persons, not simply the word of God, but the sons of the kingdom -- persons. That is the next thing; where this one or that one is to be. The Lord is concerned where each one is to be; where we are to be sown as persons; where we are to exercise influence as sons of the kingdom; that is, to influence others. This is a very important matter in ministry leading up to the assembly; for it is a question now of the elders; those in the various localities where the truth is to be maintained and held. They are sown of the Lord; He sets them in certain positions so that they may be used as He sees fit to exercise His influence there. There is a great dearth of elders. The platform is much more sought after than eldership. Eldership involves care of the saints. "But if one does not know how to conduct his own house, how shall he take care of the assembly of God?", (@1 Timothy 3:5). Each of the saints is to be taken care of in each assembly; so that it says of Paul and Barnabas that they made selections, they chose them
{241}
elders in every city. So that in a city the assembly should be provided for by elders, not simply teachers and preachers, but elders in every city. It is not only the ministry of the word of God in these meetings, but the ministry of persons being in right positions where the Lord can use them to the greatest effect.
S.McC. What you have said is very interesting indeed. I had not heard it put that way before as to the sowing of the good seed, alluding to our respective spheres of influence.
J.T. I see in going around among the brethren a great need for elders, and others do, too, I am sure. The point now that we are dealing with is what the Lord is doing. He is sowing persons, and the devil knows that, and puts down his own seed as much like the persons the Lord is putting down to look after His interests. Darnel is a useless weed very closely resembling wheat. It is the devil's work.
J.R.H. The good seed are really persons formed in the kingdom in subjection as sons of the kingdom.
J.T. "And the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom", @Matthew 13:38. The first idea is the word of God ministered by the Lord, and the second idea in verse 24 is, "Another parable set he before them, saying, The kingdom of the heavens has become like a man sowing good seed in his field; but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed darnel amongst the wheat, and went away. But when the blade shot up and produced fruit, then appeared the darnel also". In expounding the Lord says in verse 37, "He that sows the good seed is the Son of man, and the field is the world; and the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom" @Matthew 13:37,38. Not the word of God, but the sons of the kingdom, persons. That is, it is the Lord's work; He is engaged in sowing persons; none of us would assume to be sowing persons in our ministry; the idea must enter into what we are
{242}
saying in view of the assembly, that the Lord must have this person here and that one there, and so on. It is His own selection, because they are so much needed; persons who are to look after the truth and the saints in the various localities in which they are.
C.C.T. Is that why the apostle calls out the elders from Ephesus in Acts and instructs them as to shepherding the people of God? Is that the idea of the seed?
J.T. We are to shepherd the flock of God. The Holy Spirit had made the elders of Ephesus to be overseers. The Holy Spirit Himself shepherded; the Lord does it here.
A.S.B. Gaius and Diotrephes would be examples: one a true leader, the other assuming the place.
J.T. I am sure that is good. How great the need is for men who are reliable, who can be counted upon to teach the truth, not bringing in novelties, but that what we say can be supported by truth and the Scriptures, according to the Berean way. The saints are to know the Berean way of testing things by the Scriptures, and if it is not scriptural, they are not to accept it.
E.G.McA. If one lightly moves from one's locality in which the Lord has set him, he makes that much more room for darnel to come up.
R.W.S. It is a spiritual matter of identification. You identify the darnel and the wheat.
J.T. Just so; that is a good word: discerning the devil and what he is doing. It is not a question of our sowing, but it is most important to discern what grows up. We cannot deal with darnel - it must be left until harvest (@Matthew 13:30). We are to distinguish between sowing the word of God and sowing persons. There are persons who are sons of the kingdom distinguished by subjection to the truth. Then follow the two great parables. "The kingdom
{243}
of the heavens is like a treasure hid in the field, which a man having found has hid, and for the joy of it goes and sells all whatever he has, and buys that field. Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant seeking beautiful pearls; and having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it" @Matthew 13:44 - 46. Then we have verse 47, which is the fishing parable; and then in verse 51 the Lord raises the question, "Have ye understood all these things?". He is now challenging every one of us as to whether we understand. What has been built into your soul? Are you a person whom the Lord can sow somewhere to guard His interests? "Jesus says to them, Have ye understood all these things? They say to him, Yea, Lord". He accepts that. "And he said to them, For this reason every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old". It is a question of householders; the status they have in the economy. They are persons who understand what the Lord has taught, and have divine things in their households, so they can bring them out at any time. There are things new and old. Things new first and then things old. This householder is a connoisseur. He understands what is new and what is old. What may be classified as old is in the Old Testament, which is helpful to the understanding of the New; but he begins with the New. So the early converts began with the apostles; not with Moses. They were converted and persevered in the apostles¬ doctrine. They did not persevere in Moses¬ doctrine, but the apostles¬, which is a very important thing to understand. Doctrine must be tested first by the apostles¬ teaching and then by the Old Testament, if necessary.
C.A.M. Confirmatory of that is the way the Old Testament has been opened up to the saints. It is not that we lacked what was new, but we have been
{244}
helped on the Old Testament. It is a new book to the saints.
J.T. Quite so; new and profitable, indeed, as number two, but not as number one. That is, the Old Testament is available if necessary. It is valuable, you might say, for its age and it is valuable in its place, but the New is first. The householder puts the new first.
E.G.McA. Was that principle carried out by the Bereans? They listened to the doctrine of the apostles and referred to the Old Testament to test things.
J.T. Just so; they searched the Scriptures.
R.W.S. But in administration in the assembly the New comes first. You have pointed out how much damage can be done by giving the Old Testament preference in such matter.
J.T. We have had examples of that, the Old Testament being put forward as the means to judge a matter which was really a New Testament matter. It is a question of doctrine governing the assembly in cases of discipline. The first epistle to the Corinthians is the scripture in the New Testament which refers to it. If the Old Testament is necessary as an adjunct in the matter, good and well; of course, it is right to look into it; but the New first. The apostles first in all cases.
G.MacPh. The heavenly city is built upon the foundation of the apostles. I wondered if it would suggest the new economy treasured in our households?
J.T. Yes; the names of the apostles of the Lamb are engraved in precious stones, in the holy city (@Revelation 21), showing what the Lord thinks of them. The early believers "persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers" (@Acts 2:42). It is the whole question concerning the teaching and fellowship of the apostles. We cannot deal with these two parables about the
{245}
pearl and the treasure, but we should have them in our minds and carry them forward.
A.B.P. One has observed a number of new households established among us and this word is very timely as to where the Son of man is sowing the sons of the kingdom; as to the locality chosen for the establishment of households.
J.T. Sons of peace. Households are not of much value if not owned by sons of peace. The Lord enjoined the seventy that went out: "And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace to this house. And if a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it", (@Luke 10:5,6). Of course, we are encouraged in the marriages and the Lord is blessing them too, but we wonder about the many marriages without houses set up. It is a weakness, because there should be houses when the marriages take place. A house is a great principle in Scripture; the housing of the saints as they are married is a very important matter.
S.McC. The householder needs a house to live in.
J.T. I am sure that is right.
{246}
FEATURES OF THE ASSEMBLY (3)
@Matthew 13:44 - 46; @Matthew 16:1 - 20
J.T. The thought is to look at chapter 16, reverting back a little to chapter 13 and, perhaps, to chapters 14 and 15. These should only be touched on briefly, our main point now being the formation of the assembly in chapter 16. This afternoon, God willing, we shall hope to look at the mount of transfiguration, and the function of the assembly in chapter 18. The summit of our inquiry is in chapter 16, and the special features of glory in the mount of transfiguration to follow. In chapter 18 the assembly is seen functioning and representative of heaven here upon earth. This chapter 13 is rather important in view of what has been said, because of the special glories involved: that is, the parable of the treasure in the field, and then of the pearl of great price. These are all exalted thoughts contributory to the end we have in mind.
S.McC. Yesterday allusion was made to the geographical spheres in which the testimony seems to prosper. Would there be some indication of this in verse 44: "... sells all whatever he has, and buys that field". It is a particular field. Would it suggest certain areas which the Lord seems to lay claim to in which the treasure is?
J.T. Yes, "that field".
S.McC. It is not the world generally, but a specific area.
J.T. I think that is what is meant, pointing back to Noah and his family; God had in mind the assembly in Japheth; not in Shem but in Japheth. There is a spreading abroad of certain influences, which had come in in Japheth.
A.B.P. The dwelling place of Japheth is referred to. "Let God enlarge Japheth, and let him dwell in the tents of Shem", (@Genesis 9:27). Is that what you have in mind?
{247}
J.T. Well, just so; which would point to Asia and the part that Europe had in Asia. The early assembly developed from Jerusalem, carrying with it the metropolitan idea, so the assembly is alluded to in the singular in the Acts right up to chapter 9, and even then it is questionable that the full thought of assemblies (in the plural) was known. It awaited Paul's ministry, and it is he and Barnabas who selected elders in each city, so that the assembly should be self-contained, as it were. We have in Thessalonica, which is distinctly a Pauline assembly, an allusion to the fact that they took their pattern from the assemblies in Judaea. The brethren will remember that. It is in @1 Thessalonians 2:14 -- "For *ye* , brethren, have become imitators of the assemblies of God which are in Judaea in Christ Jesus". It is remarkable that Europe should look eastward in the early ministry of the testimony through Paul. It would be like dwelling in the tents of Shem, but eventually we know that those who were brought in through Paul's great work in Asia turned away. "Thou knowest this, that all who are in Asia ... have turned away from me", (@2 Timothy 1:15). This included the seven assemblies. So gradually there is a falling away from Shem and little or nothing through Paul after that in the east; the movement is towards the west. It is the earth of Japheth that takes in the different assemblies. We have to deal with geography in these matters. "The earth is Jehovah's, and the fulness thereof",(@Psalm 24:1). And He does with it what pleases Him, and He was not pleased to turn east much after the assembly at Jerusalem. The movement was westward and it is westward still.
E.G.McA. That is seen in the fact that the assembly is composed chiefly now of gentiles. There are not many Jews.
J.T. I suppose the idea is not only that, but that a part of the gentiles was prophetically indicated for
{248}
the assembly especially. In Paul's movements you have him attempting to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not suffer him. Then we have the man of Macedonia seen in the vision calling him over into Europe so that the work entered into Philippi. It went back to Ephesus, but in the main the movement was westward.
J.A.P. Ruth's movements were westward from the field of the Moabites to that which Boaz told her to stay in.
J.T. Well, there is a suggestion there of staying in the field that is specially before the Lord -- Boaz's field. There may be some suggestion in that which would connect with the use of the word 'field' in our chapter, "the kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure hid in the field".
C.A.M. Do you not think that the fact that this country is so large is an encouragement, and so in one sense enlargement is the word for Japheth, spreading enlargement?
J.T. Just so. There is scope for the gospel, and one of the most remarkable features is the Commonwealth of Australia. It began as a penal colony and then gold was the great outlook, and now God has turned it into spiritual results; there are a large number of gatherings relatively. Out of six millions of people, a comparatively small number, we have about one hundred meetings; but in New Zealand, with less than one third the population, there are sixty meetings, showing relatively there is movement there to the south and west.
J.McK. The footnote says the field is in contrast to a city or town. The testimony as seen in @Acts 16 was moving out into Europe -- judaism is connected with Jerusalem, the city, but the assembly is connected with the field, which God is finding for Himself in the various countries around.
{249}
J.T. That bears on what we are saying already as to the Lord going out from the Jewish house in chapter 13 and sowing in the field.
J.McK. There is another suggestion in @Genesis 2. You have the river flowing out from Eden before you have the thought of the man and woman coming to light. Where it flows it speaks of the gold of that land as good.
J.T. There is much in that as to enlargement, and in view of the woman coming in, in view of the human family. The family, the environment of the family, is in chapter 2; so that the gold of that land is good. You have indicated there that the earth is the Lord's and it can be utilised by Him. It is after Noah you have the division of the earth in view of the assembly, for Shem was the leading idea of the three; but when looking at Japheth, we see he had the second place. Shem had the honoured place; Jehovah is the God of Shem, in view of Abraham and the Messiah, in view of the forty-two generations of the first chapter. You can see Shem had a great place, and has yet a great place, for Christ has come in that way. But then we have to provide in our consideration for Joseph's part in Egypt; that is, Christ separated from His brethren. In the Colossian epistle there is an allusion to that position. The Lord is in a much more limited sphere amongst the gentiles, but a most fruitful one. He has worked there all these centuries. Luke would indicate that the movement was to be quick. The Lord goes to heaven quickly, so that the administration should begin; so that the testimony of the present dispensation would be short; but in truth it was large and so the second treatise of Luke makes for enlargement, as if there is a change of mind; not as though there is a change of mind in heaven, but a change of mind in the second treatise as Luke refers to it. The forty days of the Lord's sojourn with them are alluded to, whereas Luke's first
{250}
treatise does not make provision for that. As far as facts are narrated we might think He went up immediately after He rose, but there is delay in @Acts 1 and that delay is extended and extended, extended to Paul. Much had to be brought out and worked out in view of the assembly. So the time is gradually lengthened out and it is lengthened out still; so that the mind of God should be fully unfolded. There is plenty of time devoted to it, so that Mark says, "The Lord ... sat at the right hand of God" @Mark 16:19: sat, as if to indicate intent and deliberation. "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation", @Mark 16:15. That would take time.
C.A.M. We often connect the epistle to the Colossians with the forty days, and what you say shows how that was needed to make room for all Paul's ministry.
J.T. What should we do if there had been any haste developed by the twelve? So there was plenty of time given. The book of Acts shows that Paul had full scope. As it says, "For I have not shrunk from announcing to you all the counsel of God", @Acts 20:27.
S.McC. Do you regard the treasure and the pearl as referring to the Pentecostal assembly, or do they both find their answer in Pauline ministry?
J.T. I would think so. It is just what we are saying as to the Acts, the second treatise written to Theophilus. There are notable additions to what you find in Luke; and especially in the suggestion of the extension of time to have things opened up. The Lord Himself delayed forty days and Paul touches on that, so as to link the whole matter on with his position, his ministry. He speaks of the Lord appearing to Cephas first and then to the twelve, and then to James and then to all the apostles, "and last of all ... to *me"* (@1 Corinthians 15:8). It would appear that all the appearings in @1 Corinthians 15 would include everyone but Paul: "and last of all, as to an abortion",(@1 Corinthians 15:8) he says, and obviously it did not
{251}
enter into the forty days. It was long after, "last of all". It is linked up with what the twelve had; the five hundred brethren, for instance.
J.R.H. In connection with the treasure hid in the field, I was wondering if Paul entering into Europe and finding the man of Macedonia sets out the treasure hid in the field there. He had to find him.
J.T. Yes, that might be right. I think we should include Paul in the appearings, because there is a long lapse from the last appearing of the Lord to the apostles, if that was included in the forty days, and a long period of delay until Paul arrives, "last of all, as to an abortion",(@1 Corinthians 15:8). Whether he really entered into the Lord's relations with Israel in the future, or whether he just came in, born out of due time, out of the apostolic time, but he had a time of his own really. The Lord has given him wide scope. So He says of him, "an elect vessel to me", (@Acts 9:15) as if the moment is deferred for him. Though coming in late, he is the most important of all, opening up the truth of the assembly as it has not been opened up before or after. He has that in ministry, the mystery of the assembly.
A.B.P. I wondered if the long discourse at Troas, speaking until midnight, would have any connection with the imparting of this doctrine to the saints?
J.T. Yes; just so. That would be prophetic, I would think.
A.C. He could say he had laboured more abundantly than they all. He comes in as an abortion and yet is measured above all the others in his activity, as feeling the thing and entering into it.
J.T. The brethren are to be reminded of the need of studying and looking into matters intelligently. The historical side has to be taken into account, also the geographical side and the prophetical side. Paul's long discourse at Troas rather alludes to the need of further instruction as to the Lord's supper. The long discourse of Paul would mean they needed more
{252}
instruction than they had; they were deficient. And this applies to our own times. That is to say, the ministry God has provided to bring out the truth of the Lord's supper and assembly service.
J.McK. Paul says He "was pleased to reveal his Son in me" (@Galatians 1:16). Is that the last feature of revelation God gave to man down here?
J.T. Quite so. He completed the word of God. The completion of the word of God was in his time. All this is instruction for us so that we may have a right view, each of us, as looking into the Scriptures, like the Bereans, searching the Scriptures daily.
A.S.B. Is there something in the fact in @Acts 16 in regard to the call of the man? The principle of treasure, as the apostle meets those gathering at the river to pray and the women assembled sitting down?
J.T. A most interesting account; what was opened up in the vision to Paul, and how he answered to it; what he met at first, the awful cruelty he met in the jail, but then what results, what a prize, what wealth was gained! So he says later, "because of your fellowship with the gospel, from the first day until now", (@Philippians 1:5).
A.B.P. Was the appearing to the five hundred during the forty days or after?
J.T. I think we should have to say it was during the forty days. It is not easy to say where there were so many, but, of course, there were a great many in Galilee, and if the Lord intended to fit it into the forty days He could easily provide five hundred brethren. There is another suggestion of what the five hundred may mean. We cannot number them in this country, but in Great Britain and Australia they can number them without any difficulty. If the Lord intended it. He could have them there; but He is restricting us here, because there must be something in the idea of numbers. According to
{253}
@Acts 2 we have the actual number given, never again presented in that way as results; the whole work of God at a given time: three thousand at one time.
G.MacPh. Is this a remarkable idea of the assembly: the thought of treasure and how we should regard the ministry of the assembly as coming from our ascended Head through human vessels, that we may be adorned by the ministry?
J.T. The idea of treasure should be before us. Clearly it should be connected with the saints, God's inheritance in the saints, and whether numbers enter into that. It is said of Reuben, "Let Reuben live, and not die; and let his men be few" (@Deuteronomy 33:6). The suggestion there is that they are easily counted; not vast numbers, seething in the cities, who have nothing in mind at all about heaven; but these are persons who are easily counted. A crowd of names would be suggestive of easy counting, one hundred and twenty persons.
C.A.M. Would the list of names in the end of Romans fit in? That would be the setting for counting. There is a very accurate matter in mind as to each one. In Ephesians there is no counting, is there? I mean, it is all one whole. Would you say that that is the point; it is more the pearl in Ephesians?
J.T. Yes, quite so; because He brings in intelligence in regard to the pearl, as to the man: "Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant seeking beautiful pearls". I think Paul's ministry would indicate that he was aiming at something, not exactly on the line of numbers, but of quality in Ephesus. So that he has it, the assembly. The ministry of the apostle discloses what is in the mind of God really, in the way in which it is set out. The book of Revelation is laid out by the Lord Himself for John. We get a clue there as to how Scripture was written, and if applied to Ephesians then we see a great deal
{254}
is left to the divine side. Even the matter of gift is not enlarged on until we come to chapter 4. The gifts come down from the heavens above from the Lord Himself. "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men", (@Ephesians 4:8). The main thought in the epistle is the laying out of the divine counsels in chapters 1,2 and 3, particularly, and then the gifts in chapter 4, as if we are brought into it, that is, the working out of it intelligently in the assembly, everyone doing his part, "with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ", (@Ephesians 4:12). The gifts come in there; but chapters 1, 2 and 3 are more the divine side, the divine plan as to the assembly, and then in chapter 3 Paul shows what his knowledge of it was. Someone had to understand it to write about it. This is worthy of attention, because it lays the basis for many opening up the Lord's mind to the assembly which we are undertaking now. We are dealing with the matter in a restricted sense. Ephesians opens up the whole matter; it is a question of counsel.
H.B. In @Acts 18 Paul does not stay at Ephesus but goes back again and Aquila and Priscilla come to light.
J.T. Well, Apollos went to Corinth, meaning the Corinthian side was secured. Paul passed through the upper quarters, meaning the heavenly side, God preserving His full thought in that light. He had a man who knew that, and could expound it to us; and then the room made for the gifts so that up till now we have this working out in the assembly, the formation of the assembly as already mentioned in chapter 16 of our gospel.
A.S.B. Is that why it says in chapter 19, "And all the men were about twelve"? @Acts 19:7 Not exactly the rigid application of twelve but all the principles entailed in the working of it out
{255}
J.T. Very good; so what you have is, as it were, the unexpected suggestion of the outgoing to the gentiles in Ephesus; and the twelve -- the number that is used habitually for administration in the Scriptures, for the unfolding of -- heaven's way of dealing with matters.
G.MacPh. The apostle says of Timothy he had no one likeminded who would care with genuine feeling how the saints got on. A beautiful pearl! There is the idea there of the beautiful pearl.
J.T. What has been said about Ephesus is true; there are certain reservations in the divine mind until we reach that point, and the whole matter is disclosed. Paul spent three years in Ephesus; and it was to indicate that there is time enough with God to deal with that matter as was necessary. It was necessary so that there should be the unfolding of the divine mind at Ephesus. It was necessary there should be persons to take care of the treasure, the precious thing, and therefore the elders are called over to Miletus. The elders came over there to Paul, and he went over his service with them, and the length of time he had taken to declare to them the whole counsel of God.
S.McC. There is an interesting reference to the fact of giving attention to things. Paul says, "... by which, in reading it, ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery of the Christ" (@Ephesians 3:4). He called upon them to exercise there this particular feature of reading in view of understanding his intelligence in the mystery.
J.T. It would look as if the idea of devoting time is necessary. It is hard to get time for the things needed; time is precious. But heaven would say, 'There is time'. Nineteen hundred years have now been taken in. There is no such dispensation as this earlier. God would say to us, If necessary take the time because the thing has to be unfolded. It is
{256}
more important that it should be unfolded than that there should be large numbers. That is how the matter stands in the third chapter of Ephesians. It is a parenthesis; and the Spirit of God is here to open it up. The parenthesis really is an addition and it includes Paul's intelligence of the mystery; as if the Ephesians are to be reminded that it is worth their while to wait for Paul. Apollos is in Corinth and Paul has been up to Jerusalem, and now he is going back as if he were going to finish the matter of revelation. It is the finish of the matter in Ephesus. After that there was not much to disclose, no more disclosures. So Paul's intelligence indicates that the Lord had someone that knew this great matter; what is now unfolded to the apostles and prophets.
A.S.B. Is that why it says in @Acts 20:31, "remembering that for three years, night and day, I ceased not admonishing each one of you with tears"? It is to stir up our minds; the detail that enters into it all.
J.T. That is very good. We are very busy men and the war has turned the world upside down, but God is saying. There is time for this; time for the work of God; time to give attention to these things. Let the nations and all that go on; God would say, My hand is on that too. But let us remember this matter of the assembly is now in mind, and let there be time for that; God will help as to the time. I am sure it is right to have a wide outlook of the truth. God had a man such as Paul who knew. John was a reserved man too in one sense, but Paul had things committed to him and amongst these was the truth of the assembly.
J.McK. Paul's word to Timothy was to give himself wholly to these things.
J.T. Yes; and it is well to take time and look into these matters and see if they will not unfold to
{257}
us more by taking time; the Spirit of God will come in and flood us with light if we take the time.
J.R.H. It speaks of the treasure being hid. Is there a reference to ministry in that?
J.T. Oh, yes, there is. You see here in our chapter, after Peter's confession the Lord "enjoined on his disciples that they should say to no man that he was the Christ". That is, we are not casting our pearls before swine, because men would not understand, even if we did. The principle in this parable is to hide the truth. It is God's way to hide the truth. He gives it to selected ones and not to the multitude.
H.B. Is it somewhat on the principle of the badgers¬ skins and the goats¬ hair?
J.T. Quite so; it not only conceals, but it shuts out what would damage. It is like the badgers¬ skins.
C.A.M. I was just thinking in connection with what you said about taking time. The Lord evidently means us to take in much before His actual coming, inasmuch as we have the Bible reprinted in this remarkable form, and also a great move as to printed ministry. God intends us to read it. It should encourage us.
J.T. It took a long time to bring out this Bible. The early translation in 1611, called the King James version, made the Scriptures available in English, and then the so-called Revised Version followed, but the truth was tampered with. In the early days of the present revival they had meetings down in the south of France to bring out this Bible. It took a long time with able men to do it. What should we do without this Bible in our readings! The blessed God provided the time for spiritual men to translate again accurately, and the question now is, what use are we making of it. What wealth God has given to us in the Scriptures, and specially so in the accuracy
{258}
of the New Translation as we have it! So it is time for us to see what there is in the way of wealth for us to acquire. We are to be ready to go to heaven; and to go with intelligence as to what is there, what belongs to heaven and the assembly's place in it.
Ques. Philip went up and sat with the eunuch in the chariot as he read the Scriptures, as though the eunuch was a selected person.
J.T. Very good. He was a great man, prime minister of Ethiopia, I suppose. He was a busy man, but he was reading the Bible. He was an important man in the country, but was giving time to read the Bible, and Philip would tell him, 'I have time too'. The eunuch invited him to sit with him, and Philip evangelised to him Jesus. He had time to do that.
E.F. Would you help as to the thought of hiding the truth?
J.T. We are to go on with these meetings. I believe that is what God is saying. They are increasing constantly and the Lord is helping.
E.G.McA. We get this right seed in the beginning of our reading: "To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens" @Matthew 13:11, and then the Lord speaks in these parables. The meaning of these two we are having this morning is found or discovered in the writings of Paul; they are different phases of the setting forth of the assembly.
J.T. I think that is right. It awaited Paul, especially for the second one, the pearl; because it suggests the knowledge that Paul had: "My intelligence in the mystery" (@Ephesians 3:4). And the Lord would anticipate all that. He would have a man like that. What a man the Lord had in Paul! and what Paul had in Timotheus, and successive generations of men, teaching others after them. The Lord thought of all that aforetime, and so I think these two parables, especially the second one, allude to Paul's ministry.
{259}
G.MacPh. The assembly is a wonderful vessel in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
J.T. Just so; a very wonderful vessel.
J.McK. The assembly of God purchased by the blood of His own. That brings in what we have in these two parables.
J.T. Just so; the cost involved, the overheads involved. "The blood of his own" (@Acts 20:28)is a very touching word.
A.E.W. The seeking is in relation to pearls. Would the finding of the pearl suggest that God is concentrating on the assembly?
J.T. Yes; and the first one would be verse 44: "The kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure hid in the field, which a man having found has hid, and for the joy of it goes and sells all whatever he has, and buys that field". I would say that is the extended idea in the Lord's mind, the joy of opening up the truth of the gospel to the myriads of the nations, and it has come down to us now. We are told there is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents. Think of the amount of joy the Lord had in that!
A.B.P. Is the idea of the treasure carried forward in @Matthew 16? *"Thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly, and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it".
J.T. Quite so. Think of what all these years have yielded, beginning with Paul and Barnabas; it is not confined to them, but beginning in that service. What the Lord had in Paul and Barnabas in their missionary journeys and all that came out of them! What joy in heaven! What joy the Lord had! The gospel meetings and all these services, what they cost Him, and yet the joy of it! The word "which a man having found has hid", would mean that the man appraised it. He is not opening up the truth of what is in His mind; not letting that be broadcast in
{260}
the news or the radio or the histories, but the Lord hid it. It was not to be disclosed to the natural man. It is a question of the Spirit. "God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God", (@1 Corinthians 2:10). But then the unfoldings -- what joy the Lord has, and what joy the Father has in it. In that way we see what the gospel service implies. Take the eunuch and the history we have; how pleased heaven was with Philip, as if it were a treasure that had not been thought of. Philip was one of those men ordained to look after the poor saints, and that he should discover such a treasure in the opening of the truth and the securing of the man as well. What joy in that. "But when they came up out of the water the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no longer, for he went on his way rejoicing. And Philip was found at Azotus" (@Acts 8:39,40). So the gospel goes on. Philip had four daughters that prophesied. I only speak of that in a general way to show what there is in this verse; what God is doing in these centuries in the gospel field.
E.G.McA. What you remarked in regard to the missionary trip shows very beautifully in what field the treasure was found and the hidden character of it. The value of the pearl -- He did not buy another; it is just one.
J.T. It is more calculated; he is a merchant. We can understand what that means. When going to Europe recently they wanted to know what I could buy. I was not thinking of what I could buy for a few dollars, but what there was in England.
T.L.S. This is very precious as coming from Matthew, a man that was accustomed to the idea of money -- the treasure and the pearl.
J.T. The Lord likens persons who understand the truth to the householder bringing out treasures: "For this reason every scribe discipled to the kingdom of
{261}
the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old" @Matthew 13:52. The merchant here may be likened in that way. He is a merchant, a man who has to calculate. He is going to buy valuable things, involving much expenditure. He has to calculate, but he has in his mind what he wants. He finds it. It was greater, I suppose, than any idea that he had; not that I would speak of the Lord in that way, but as to the facts here: "Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant seeking beautiful pearls; and having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it". He was seeking but he found it. The word 'found' is notable; it is not brought to him by some vendor of these things. It is found by the seeker. That settles the matter in his mind. "He went and sold all whatever he had and bought it", which would refer back to divine counsel, I suppose. This is a matter of divine counsels; the greatest matter in the whole realm of testimony is this matter of the pearl, and I believe it refers to the counsels of God; what expenditure there was to have that thing. Matthew is intended to open it up to us, but Ephesians is the heavenly teaching that discloses it to us.
E.G.McA. "Having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it". Would that indicate what the assembly is to His affections? He sells all that he has and buys it. He never went to look for another one.
J.T. That is the idea. His ideal; the matter is settled by this find. Now it is a question of opening up the thing in detail. We must go on now to chapter 16. Before this, in chapters 14 and 15, we have the two feedings of the multitude and the two thoughts that come out pre-eminently; in the first feeding, the Lord lifting up His eyes to heaven, and in the second not lifting up His eyes to heaven; the
{262}
first alluding to what is in heaven and the second to what is by the Spirit here. Then follows Peter's confession: the Father had made a revelation and put it into Peter's heart, how to answer the Lord's own question. The Lord's question was: "But *ye* , who do ye say that I am? And Simon Peter answering said, *Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". This confession agrees with what has been said as to the treasure and the pearl: what the Father had in Peter and then the Son taking on Peter. "And *I* also, I say unto thee that *thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly", the Son taking him on as material for the building.
G.MacPh. Is that the personnel of the assembly, the kind of persons the assembly is composed of?
J.T. Just so; see what this is -- the Father Himself is in it. You can see the correspondence with the pearl and the treasure in what eventually happened in chapter 16. The Father Himself furnished the answer to the enquiry of the Son from the disciples. There was one whom the Father could use to make a statement. *"Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". The Father put that into Peter's soul, making him material. Therefore, the Lord goes on immediately: "And *I* also, I say unto thee that *thou* art Peter", alluding to the material the Father had produced to be used in this wonderful structure.
G.MacPh. The composition of the assembly is choice and select.
J.T. The Father's action is the first thing to think of; we must begin there. Even the two parables we have been speaking of must be excluded when we come to the very top, or the acme of our subject. This is what the Father is doing. That is the thing to get into our souls. The Lord says, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not
{263}
revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens". That is, you are going back to the Source. I should say this chapter is the formation, and the very beginning is what the Father is doing.
C.A.M. Would you say in that way the Father is stressed in the beginning of Acts? There is the dispensational idea connected with the Father; but really the material in Peter was here before Paul came on the scene at all.
J.T. Just so. This antedates Paul, of course. But it is a question of the Father, and so we have to begin here and see how the formation takes place. It comes under the Lord's hand, because the Father loves the Son and has given all things to be in His hand. We are coming to the economy. The Father Himself has brought this about of Himself; the Son took this ground. The Father's matter is entirely of Himself, and then all is given into the hands of the Son. It is a question of the economy; but the primary thought is revelation -- the Father's own action.
J.K. The Lord says, "I will build". Is that going back to what the Father is doing?
J.T. Showing the order of the economy now; everything is in the hands of the Son. Peter is taken up; so that the Father is beginning here and the Lord links on in that way. The Father brought it about. The Lord names it: *"Thou* art Peter". "And *I* also"; there is another One speaking into whose hands everything is given. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand" (@John 3:35). The Lord is taking on Peter and the building. It is a question of the Father now -- what is coming in from the Father.
A.B.P. This links on with the apostle's prayer in Ephesians. He bows his knees to the Father. "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father" (@Ephesians 3:14). And then we see what comes out of that.
{264}
J.T. Just so; and what is stated there, what the Father would do. The thing to do is to pray to the Father; Paul had that in mind. Then the Son comes into that, "in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God", (@Ephesians 3:18,19). That is how the matter works in Ephesians.
G.MacPh. Does the hymn suggest that? 'Father of glory! Thought beyond all thought!' (`247:1).
J.T. Yes; 'Thought beyond all thought'. You just feel we are on the very fringe of things, but still there is one who understand these thoughts - Paul knows. "Ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery", (@Ephesians 3:4). The Father is the Source of all. Then there is the workman -- the great Workman who does all His will is the Son; all is in His hands. He takes up the material; He claims it as His own. What will He do with it? He names it first of all. *"Thou* art Peter". What will be done eventually? What is Peter constituted? He is typical of the material the Father has furnished. And then, what of Peter? Because we have to think of him as 'first Peter'. Paul is not on the scene yet; it is Peter.
J.McK. The Lord says, "My Father who is in the heavens" has revealed this to Peter. Do we get the idea of where this administration is coming from -- even the Father?
J.T. The Father is the Source of all, and the Son is the One who does things. "I have found David ... who shall do all my will", (@Acts 13:22). Christ is the Doer of things. So He takes up the apostles, and He spends the whole night in prayer about them. What would He say to His Father about them in prayer? He says to Peter, "I have prayed for thee" (@Luke 22:32). All that refers to administration and we come into that.
{265}
S.McC. How do we come into this now, this revealing? This is special to Peter. We do not have this in an individual way now as set out in this chapter. How do we come into this?
J.T. Well, I think the answer to that is, to take note of Peter and how he came in. In Matthew it is Peter first; Matthew has that idea in mind, a leading man amongst the apostles. "First ... Peter", awaiting Paul. But it is not the assembly, Paul's assembly, that we are dealing with in chapter 16; it is Peter's assembly in measure; what there was there in the twelve -- the Lord taking the twelve to Him. That is the general idea; how the twelve are brought forward, and hence, when Peter is seen acting after the Spirit came down, he preaches, but he preaches with the eleven. He stood up with them. We have to keep our eyes on them and see how things are done.
J.A.P. "Grow up to salvation, if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is good. To whom coming, a living stone ... yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house", (@1 Peter 2:2 - 4). Do we come in there?
J.T. Those are Peter's own words. That is how Peter operates. He brings us in as living stones, a holy priesthood to offer spiritual sacrifices.
J.R.H. Would "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him" (@Ephesians 1:17) bring us in?
J.T. Well, quite so; I suppose we have to await Paul, because Paul is in mind, no doubt, in the pearl, but Peter operated at the beginning, and it is said that the twelve apostles of the Lamb are taken account of in the heavenly city in the foundations. Paul is not. He must be regarded in another light -- what is operating inside in the way of perfection.
A.B.P. Is there an unfolding process in the reaching of these impressions? I wondered if it would be seen in Paul in the words of the Lord Jesus to him
{266}
on the way to Damascus. It really contained the embryo, what was involved in the opening up of the truth. If oftentimes we searched into impressions we received, we would find a great deal hidden in them which would be opened up through meditation.
J.T. Paul says, God revealed His Son in me; not so Peter. He did not reveal something in Peter - it is *to* him. But Paul says, "But when God, who set me apart even from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me". (@Galatians 1:15). It would point to the inward side of things; and so Paul's prayer. It is the Father's Spirit working in the inner man.
E.G.McA. Why was the opening up of the truth of the Son of God held for Paul when the revelation of who Christ was was given to Peter? Why did he not carry that out?
J.T. That is a very interesting question. Peter never makes the Son of God the subject of his ministry, but Paul constantly does.
E.G.McA. He mentions it once in his epistle.
J.T. Only once, but Paul constantly.
A.S.B. Peter says, "According as our beloved brother Paul also has written to you", @2 Peter 3:15.
J.T. I am sure Peter would be very simple with those coming into the truth. Peter would say. If you want to understand that you had better go to Paul. The Lord has His specialists. That is an important thing. The Lord has His men, those He can use, and He has placed them and we may call them specialities. Peter is one, Paul is another, Paul especially so.
E.G.McA. Would there be anything in the position Peter had in Jerusalem in connection with the Jewish side that would prevent them taking up the large subject of the Son of God, whereas Paul was set free in regard of that matter?
{267}
J.T. I believe the Lord took all that into account, because Paul in speaking of himself goes up the stream much further than we might think from reading @Acts 9. God had laid hold of him from his birth, not simply from his conversion, and that is important. The Lord is now operating from His own point of view and this speciality He has in mind, because they come down the line now and we have to wait and see what may develop in any crisis. The brethren have already looked into the delay or extension of time contemplated in the second treatise of Luke, the forty days added and then further time added in the appearings to Paul. So we have special matters from the Lord all coming out as the time arrives for each, and there can be no alteration in it either. We may think or do what we may, but the Lord has His own mind and He stands by it.
E.G.McA. The Lord not only has His special thoughts but He has special men to open up the truth; it is not all given to one man to set forth.
J.T. Just so; and the Lord is saying that. Peter says. What about this man? The Lord says, Never mind about this man or that man; your business is to follow Me. The Lord implied that Peter had enough. There was much Peter had and he was to make all he could out of it.
{268}
FEATURES OF THE ASSEMBLY (4)
@Matthew 17:1 - 9, 24 - 27; @Matthew 18:15 - 20
J.T. I thought we should look at the passage in chapter 17, the mount of transfiguration, and then the reference to sonship at the end of that chapter, and then at chapter 18, having in mind an example of the assembly as functioning. The reference is to verse 17: "But if he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly; and if also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer". Then again, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on the earth shall be loosed in heaven". The allusion is to the assembly functioning or acting in administration, of which we have or should have much in our gatherings.
E.G.McA. Do you connect the transfiguration with the carrying out of this function in chapter 18 and the glory of the thing?
J.T. I thought the passage helps us as to the assembly in this light; the glory of it; and then the second passage read in chapter 17 is relative to sonship. That is an important element in the function of the assembly, that we are to act in the light of our being sons. These passages are just suggested, because it is thought that they are contributory to the main thought now; that is, in chapter 18, where the assembly is actually seen as serving or acting here on earth as representative of heaven.
E.G.McA. This morning we had the treasure hid in the field -- the treasure and the pearl -- we had the inside statement of what the assembly is to Christ, and the service rendered to secure it. Now, is it more the function of the assembly in connection with what we know internally and the glory that is to be seen in the functioning?
{269}
J.T. I think we shall see the great pleasure that the Lord has at a time like this. There is a certain likeness in Adam's position in @Genesis 2; what pleasure God had in him as functioning according to the wisdom he had. So that it is said, "And ... . Jehovah Elohim ... brought them to Man, to see what he would call them" @Genesis 2:19. The comparison that we are making is with what the Lord finds in the assembly in its service, in its functioning here; earlier allusion was made to the pearl, what pleasure He had in it, and the treasure too; whatever the treasure was, it affords joy to the Lord. The comparison that is being made is in verse 15 of @Genesis 2, "And Jehovah Elohim took Man, and put him into the garden of Eden, to till it and to guard it" @Genesis 2:15. And in verse 18 it says, "And Jehovah Elohim said, It is not good that Man should be alone; I will make him a help-mate, his like" @Genesis 2:18. And then, "And out of the ground Jehovah Elohim had formed every animal of the field and all fowl of the heavens, and brought them to Man, to see what he would call them" @Genesis 2:19. What God was to see in Adam's movements and words! as if God would find pleasure in what He could see and hear. "And whatever Man called each living soul, that was its name" @Genesis 2:19. So, it seems to me that this enters into our subject this afternoon, that is to say, the subject of the assembly, the assembly actually functioning for the Lord here, what there is in it for Him.
C.C.T. Then according to Scripture and the thought in @Matthew 18, the movements that take place in the assembly would be recognised in heaven.
J.T. The Lord would be, as it were, looking on to see what would happen, and so He speaks of a fact that would illustrate what He had in His mind. He says, "But if he will not listen to them". That is to say, we are now listening, as it were, to what this offender will do, a brother who offends. It is
{270}
said, "But if thy brother sin against thee, go, reprove him between thee and him alone. If he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother". Therefore, the assembly does not need to come into it. "But if he do not hear thee, take with thee one or two besides, that every matter may stand upon the word of two witnesses or of three. But if he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly". So that now we have before us an action of the assembly speaking to an offending brother. It is a trespassing brother -- what the assembly will do and how it is to determine what the brethren do; those who form the assembly; how they should be governed by it.
R.W.S. Would it be in line to inquire if there is not a great deal of disparity in assembly administration as to the standards of it here and the concrete working out of it amongst us?
J.T. That is a good inquiry. I think we should just perhaps go into that matter now, only it is thought that the earlier verses read, that is, in chapter 17, ought to be before us so that we may be able to rightly judge, be in a right spirit to gauge what the assembly's action may mean; and, therefore, the scene on the mount is surely intended to affect us as to dignity and glory. The very persons that are involved in chapter 18 are now seen above, and surely it is intended that they should be affected and when they come down know how to gauge aright what is said and done by the assembly. And then again in the end of chapter 17, this matter of sonship is not above; it is not seen above; it is seen in Capernaum, and it is a matter of taxes, of a certain tax that the Jews had to pay to the temple; and the Lord in taking this matter up waits until Peter came into the house before speaking of it, which is a characteristic idea in Matthew: that there is something in the house leading up to the assembly which gives liberty to the oracle; to whatever is in the
{271}
nature of an oracle or an answer, which might be a divine answer to an inquiry. So there are two thoughts; that is, the mount of transfiguration, the mount of glory which is above where the Lord is honoured; the scene in which He is distinguished and honoured; and now below, where there is no such scene. It is a question of paying taxes, and hence the Lord waits until Peter comes into the house before He answers; and He raises this question with him as to the matter of sonship.
A.S.B. You referred this morning to chapter 14 in relation to the feeding, that the Lord looked up into heaven in the first instance; in the second it is rather what is available by the Spirit on earth. So in chapter 16 in regard to revelation, the initial movement is from heaven and then the Lord joins in with that, and so here it is the heavenly side preceding the earthly side.
J.T. It is the heavenly side in the mount of transfiguration where Christ is honoured and glorified, and the earthly side in Capernaum where taxes are to be paid, and the question is raised as to who should pay them; whether the brethren are exempt in such cases or whether they may not or should not pay them rather than cause offence. The matter is trivial anyway, and it is a question of how the brethren may, in the dignity of the mount of transfiguration, be ready to adjust a small matter, the small claim that the government may put forth and meet it that way.
J.R.H. Is it your thought that these two witnesses in chapter 18 would promote a sense of what is due to the Lord in our assembly functioning, and also the sense of dignity and association with Christ in our movements?
J.T. So that our care meetings, for instance, should be clothed or surrounded in our minds with dignity, so that in matters coming up we act in
{272}
dignity; we act in the liberty of sonship, and hence preclude any narrowness or smallness or jealousy or the like; or any natural thoughts. We are, as it were, to overwhelm them with the greatness of our calling.
C.A.M. It is a wonderful prayer: "Let thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth" (@Matthew 6:10). It would really involve this wonderful knowledge of the glory and it would also involve the assembly.
J.T. Just so. Hence the importance of bringing in the mount of transfiguration. You wonder why it is brought in just here. The Lord notified the disciples that it should come to pass. He says, "Verily I say unto you, There are some of those standing here that shall not taste of death at all until they shall have seen the Son of man coming in his kingdom" (@Matthew 16:28). That is, the Lord notifies His disciples that the thing would happen. Surely it was intended to bear on what had been said and bear anticipatively on what was about to be said; that is, the question of the taxes.
E.G.McA. Is that why it says, "Hear him" instead of 'Look upon him'? It is not a question of the development of praise to Him but rather getting instruction from Him.
J.T. Just so; so that it is said, "While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them", that is beautiful, "and lo, a voice out of the cloud, saying. *This* is my beloved Son". This is to call attention to words. *"This* is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight: hear him". As you say, it is not 'see him' but "hear him".
G.MacPh. Would that suggest His voice being heard in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. We must expect to hear it.
C.C.T. Would you say as the outcome of hearing the voice we do see Him, because a little later on it says, "And lifting up their eyes, they saw no one
{273}
but Jesus alone"? Would that be the guidance in assembly affairs in administration?
J.T. That is what we would expect down below in the care meeting. The Lord would say, I will not leave you. I am with you always, but in this sense, not as on the mount of transfiguration, but down here where the thing is to be dealt with, whatever it be. "Jesus alone with themselves", is a great addition. There is no limit to what that may mean.
R.W.S. Then you connect the lunatic and the Lord coming down and the teaching of His being delivered into the hands of men, and the customs and the matter of taxes -- that all comes in here because of the glory on the mount.
J.T. Quite so. What men it makes out of us! Paul intensifies the thought in saying he was caught up as far as the third heaven and into paradise, and that he heard unspeakable things unlawful for man to utter. But when he came down here below there would be a danger of his being inflated by it; showing that while you are up there you are safe, but it is down here that the test comes; what we say in the care meetings.
Ques. What is suggested in the cloud overshadowing them?
J.T. That would be the Father's house, the divine abode, where the Father is. That would be the allusion. "Behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them, and lo, a voice out of the cloud". Whose voice was that? The Father's voice; so that you see the surroundings and the possibilities to fortify us against what is down in the valley. It is down in the valley that we are tested. And so we have these incidents. In verse 14 it says, "And when they came to the crowd, a man came to him, falling on his knees before him, and saying. Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic, and suffers sorely; for often he falls into the fire and often into the water. And I
{274}
brought him to thy disciples, and they were not able to heal him" @Matthew 17:14 - 16. So you see, we are exposed to criticism down in the valley, and how are we going to do? We are already fortified by the scene above, so the chapter here is to help us as to what to do in emergencies in the valley, and is augmented by the further thought in the end of the chapter where sonship comes into view. Sonship is not up there only. We are now children of God, but here it is sons. We are viewed as sons of God, and that is a relation that stands, but it is intended to help us when we have to deal with adverse things.
J.McK. Do you see that coming out by the ministry being calculated to help us relative to the administrative side? I was thinking of how Peter was given that distinction; the keys of the kingdom, and in @Acts 15 in regard to the circumcision of the nations, James comes in and supports him. As a result it says, "Then it seemed good to the apostles and to the elders, with the whole assembly, to send chosen men from among them with Paul and Barnabas to Antioch" @Acts 15:22. Then we see Paul, relative to what you brought out in Revelation in connection with Babylon, "God has judged your judgment upon her", @Revelation 18:20, bringing in the mind of God.
J.T. What you have been saying is of great importance relative to the care meeting, and things that tend to irritate and provoke. We are to be in dignity in all things relative to the assembly. Peter came into the house.
J.A.P. How do you account for the breakdown so quickly after Moses and the seventy elders of Israel were on the mount? There was breakdown in the valley. Moses had said, If any man has a matter let him bring it to Aaron and Hur, but there was breakdown.
J.T. It enters into what we are saying. How easily failure and breakdown may happen. The
{275}
man here in the verses read who had a lunatic son says to the Lord, "Have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic, and suffers sorely; for often he falls into the fire and often into the water. And I brought him to thy disciples, and they were not able to heal him" @Matthew 17:15,16. That is a challenge. Why are they not able? The Lord says, "O unbelieving and perverted generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with you?" @Matthew 17:17. Now, who are the persons being addressed? Who is the generation? The Lord is not making a difference between his disciples who have been upon the mount and the ordinary man or person around. He says, "O unbelieving and perverted generation" @Matthew 17:17. It might seem that the Lord was unreasonable, for there is no evidence, no great evidence that they had done anything out of the way. It is simply that they were unable to help the man, but it shows what testing there is in the valley; how something may come up to challenge us and irritate us and cause bad feeling.
C.C.T. Is that why He allows this, to give them instruction? We are given the instruction as we go on.
J.T. You see these three brothers that were up there, how they can think and speak of what privileges they have been brought to; but what effect has it had on them? Can they do any better in the Lord's work? Have they improved as disciples or apostles? I think the inference is there is no change, and the Lord has to say, "Bring him here to me" @Matthew 17:17. But He does say that.
C.A.M. That would imply there must be a new generation; and the new generation involves this matter of sonship.
J.T. The difference is not being made between the disciples and the crowd as hitherto.
S.McC. I suppose, this salutary word is for us today. We have had what corresponds with the
{276}
first part of chapter 17; the wonderful unfolding by the Lord in ministry of the greatness of things, and yet when it comes to administering we seem to break down so much. There is a word for that in this very section.
A.B.P. Is there not failure on the mount, too?
J.T. There is. Quite so. But that had been adjusted in Peter, but he does not seem to have gained anything here in the way the Lord speaks of them all; as if nothing had been gained by the wonderful display of glory to which they had been admitted.
J.K. Does faith enter into this? "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed" @Matthew 17:20, it says.
J.T. Of course it does. And here the Lord says, "O unbelieving and perverted generation" @Matthew 17:17. To whom is He alluding? It is a mixed number but clearly the disciples are there.
Ques. Would the Lord's rebuke of His disciples indicate they had dropped to the level of the crowd? Is not the transfiguration to check unbelief and give us a greater conception of the Lord's glory?
J.T. It made a great difference to them, and yet the word 'generation' is applied too, as if the Lord has to class the Christian with the average person, not being able to make any distinction.
C.C.T. There is movement on the part of the disciples afterwards. In verse 19 it says, "Then the disciples, coming to Jesus apart ..."@Matthew 17:19. Is there a spirit of inquiry?
J.T. Very good; they come into evidence. "Then the disciples, coming to Jesus apart, said to him, Why were not *we* able to cast him out?" @Matthew 17:19. They admit that they are not able; that they are wanting. So He says, "Because of your unbelief" @Matthew 17:20. They were all classified under he same head: "Because of your unbelief" @Matthew 17:20. How often it is that we are not any different
{277}
from those around in matters. The Lord has to classify us with the others.
G.MacPh. That is because the state of unbelief has not been judged in us.
J.T. "Because of your unbelief" @Matthew 17:20. Now the Lord is encouraging them as to what may come about if they are alert, and He says, "For verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain, Be transported hence there, and it shall transport itself" @Matthew 17:20. He does not say that to the crowd; it is to the disciples. He is distinguishing them now; before they had distinguished themselves in coming to Him. This is in the early part of the book. They came to the Lord on the mount in chapter 5. The Lord recognises that, and so here, "Ye shall say to this mountain, Be transported hence there, and it shall transport itself; and nothing shall be impossible to you" @Matthew 17:20. All this goes with Matthew, for the Lord says later, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them" (Chapter 18:20).
A.B.P. Is that why in verse 1 it says "Jesus takes with him Peter, and James, and John his brother, and brings them up into a high mountain apart"? The power of this lies behind what is said as to the transporting. The lunatic, the father said, often falls into the fire and into the water. The transporting is a matter of power in relation to movement.
J.T. So that you can understand how the Lord would classify all alike, when there is a case of this kind; the disciples are no different; they cannot help the man and they are put into the general number of perverted generation. But then they soon extricate themselves, which is important. We may say, Well, this cannot apply to us. We have already alluded to Dan in Bashan; he leaps out of it. He leaps out of a position that is unsuitable; he leaps
{278}
from Bashan. The disciples got out of the shame of the position by coming to Christ, and the Lord honoured them in doing it. He says to them, "Because of your unbelief; for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain, Be transported hence there, and it shall transport itself; and nothing shall be impossible to you" @Matthew 17:20. The Lord could not say those words to the crowd.
J.McK. Conditions seem to be indicated in the Lord's words, "But this kind does not go out but by prayer and fasting" @Matthew 17:21. Do you not feel there is a conscious weakness with us all in prayer and fasting? That is why there is a lack of power with us administratively.
J.T. Just so. And then the Lord recognises the distinction that belongs to them. They separate themselves and go to Him. We are now in this room where we can get something from the Lord. If we are mixing with the crowds in the world, what difference can there be? But there is a difference as we separate ourselves to be with the Lord, and He shows us how unbelief is operating in our hearts.
J.McK. When Peter was praying and fasting he went into an ecstasy and got a vision from God. If we take on these things we will receive light from God as to what is before Him.
C.C.T. Would you say that "nothing shall be impossible to you" @Matthew 17:20 is in connection with faith?
J.T. The whole position is brought up now inasmuch as the disciples save themselves by separating themselves and coming to the Lord. That is their salvation, and that is our salvation: not identifying ourselves with the generality of Christians around, but segregating ourselves and separating ourselves. It tells us how the matter can be accomplished; that is to say, it is a question of faith.
{279}
E.G.McA. Why is this difficult situation brought in first, before the last difficult ones are taken care of in connection with an offending brother? Is it in order to test their faith? I was thinking of @Acts 13 where John Mark, after he finds the opposition of Elymas, returns and leaves Paul; his faith was not up to it.
J.T. There seems to be the constant testing brought forward immediately to test out what effect the mount of transfiguration had upon them, and even there they fail in proposing the three tabernacles; but that was adjusted, and even now that adjustment did not help them down below. I think the Lord intended to solve the matter of power in the assembly. What can we do without power? "Thou hast a little power" (@Revelation 3:8).
A.B.P. Would you say judaism became the real test when Christianity was introduced? It really waited for Paul to remove the mountain: his appeal to the Galatians and his withstanding Peter and his visit to Jerusalem all seemed to link on with the removal of the mountain.
J.T. Quite so. It was a matter of faith. What a problem they had! Paul and Barnabas went up to Jerusalem from Antioch. What a problem they had! Allusion has already been made to the good general relations that are set out in @Acts 15, before the matter was put to the test and solved; most beautiful grace was put into evidence in Paul and Barnabas and those that worked with him, Titus being there. The very best in Jerusalem could hardly assail Paul's converts. The things that Peter says and the things that James says, put before us the great work of God that was going on among the gentiles. It was to buoy up the general spirit, and hence the great result reached in the letter that was sent out from the last general assembly. The general assembly was in @Acts 15, but it was successful.
{280}
E.G.McA. Is it not striking that the mount of transfiguration is brought in before this failure; and then faith is restored and then the Lord brings in the great thought of sonship before the question comes up of taking care of this offending brother?
J.T. This is the greatest test of all. What are we going to do with an offending brother? But there is the matter of taxes -- it was a Jewish tax we are told and it was not very much. The Lord is saying, It is not very much; but it is a question of sonship. It may be a very small matter that is involved literally, but a very great matter is involved in it, in the question of sonship. So that is what the Lord solves, and He waits until Peter comes into the house which, I think, is to be observed. Questions are asked about this, that and the other thing; how are they to be answered? One often feels and one refers to himself, one could do much better if he were allowed to go to the assembly to answer them. You could do much better. Even at table talk and after the meetings are over we have another meeting. We may solve something but we may not. It may be only a matter of talk, but the solution really lies in the assembly; the house leads up to the assembly.
H.B. We shall decide at the mouth of Jehovah. Is that the principle?
J.T. Just so.
S.McC. Do you mean you feel safer in the presence of the brethren and the Spirit and the light of the temple?
J.T. Yes. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?", @1 Corinthians 3:16. That is the background of answering questions. You may hope to answer a question aright under those circumstances.
T.L.S. It may take a long time; sometimes things take a long time. Peter is directed to go to the sea
{281}
here and take up the first fish, and take the money out of its mouth. It took quite a period of time to go into it.
J.T. Yes; and then the question is, what was Peter thinking all the time, because our minds have to come into this matter. And so Romans, which is a basic epistle, deals with the mind, the renewal of the mind, "that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God", @Romans 12:2. It is a question of the mind. What was Peter thinking when he started out to get the fish? The Lord says to him in verse 27, "But that we may not be an offence to them, go to the sea and cast a hook", (one hook) "and take the first fish that comes up, and when thou hast opened its mouth thou wilt find a stater; take that and give it to them for me and thee". The link is beautiful, because it brings the Lord down to us. It is not simply that He is on the mount of transfiguration and everything made of Him up there; but He is down here on the seaside; it is a question of fishing and He is with Peter. I was thinking we should keep that in our minds; He is with Peter. It is a question of sonship, and the Lord associates us with Himself in this small matter externally, but a big matter is involved in it, namely, sonship.
T.L.S. I want to ask whether this would help us as to the matter of a fund, Peter's answer about the Master paying tribute. He might have thought He could easily take the money out of the bank. All this has to come out.
J.T. Very good. A great deal now comes into mind as to what has been called of late the question of the collection, the beautiful phrase "the collection for the saints" (@1 Corinthians 16:1). Well, Paul saw to that, that it was taken care of by itself. It was taken care of in the houses of the saints, laid by at home where you live; that there should be no collection when I come,
{282}
he says; meaning that there is to be no external influence in the thing. It is to be a matter effected in your heart by love on the first day of the week. The Lord is saying, I think, that the mount where He had just been implies the Creator, and that everything is in His hand. We are told in 1 Kings what is in His hand; all put under the Son of man. Solomon named the things, but @Psalm 8 mentions how numerous the things are, so that the Lord settles the matter of the tax in this case, not by a collection from the saints. That is another matter. Paul made much of that. Two chapters are written about it and others besides, but this is a creative matter; we are in the presence of a creative matter. The Lord Jesus is the Creator and as such He tells Peter what to do. He deals with a fish which Peter would understand, but it is just one hook and the first fish that comes up, and there is a piece of money in its mouth. That is where the money comes in, in the fish. It is not the price of the fish, what he can sell it for. It is a question of what is in the fish; what the Creator has put there and how it can be used, that we may fall back on no less than on the Person who created all things, if it be a question of this small matter of tax.
A.B.P. Why is it one coin? Why are there not two didrachmas? Why one piece that covers for both?
J.T. I would say it is the unity of our position. The Lord is identified with the position.
A.B.P. That is more than association?
J.T. I think so. "For me and thee". But the Lord is the Creator. It is one matter and we are brought into it. He is behind us. It is a Matthew idea. "Behold, *I* am with you all the days" @Matthew 28:20. No less a Person than this, and whatever comes up He can solve it.
G.MacPh. God with us, among His sons.
{283}
J.T. Just so. Emmanuel is in Matthew; that is the idea of it. It runs through the idea of the assembly, the presence of God. "God is in you of a truth" (@1 Corinthians 14:25). If it be a question of money, the Lord can take care of that. It is a very small amount, just enough for the tax for two persons. The Lord can well take care of that.
G.MacPh. Our care meetings would take on a spiritual dignity as the outcome of this exercise.
E.G.McA. The word 'but' in verse 27 would indicate Peter had got into a wrong position. "From whom do they receive custom or tribute? from their own sons or from strangers? Peter says to him, From strangers. Jesus said to him, Then are the sons free. But that we may not be an offence to them". Would the Lord help him out in this difficulty?
J.T. The next point is the word 'sons'. How big that is, but how small the stater is.
S.McC. It is very interesting what you have pointed out about the hook because in every other reference, both in the synoptic gospels and John's gospel too, to Peter's fishing it is the net; a great general idea. But in this particular passage, and the only passage we have, it is the one hook.
J.T. The hook and line fishing is the best you can get. Do not they say in the north of Scotland that the hook and line fish is the best fish?
A.S.B. The Lord said in chapter 4, "Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men" @Matthew 4:19.
J.T. It is the making time. Chapter 16 is the making time really, as I said. Now it is a functioning time. We are leading up to it and Peter is learning how things can be met financially; even financial things can be met. They may be very small outwardly, but they may involve important principles. The principles are the things, and hence the important point is that the Lord says here,
{284}
"Then are the sons free". That is one of the most important sentences we can utter, the sons of God.
A.B.P. "There am I in the midst of them" . Does that link on with the stater?
J.T. Just so. See what that means when any problem arises, where there are two or three. The earlier passage is "two of you" in prayer.
C.A.M. Whatever the obligation may be in these problems, there is some kind of tax placed on you.
J.T. I think it is not without importance that we are in the tax time. It is the tax time in the history of the world. There never was such a tax time as the present. Think of the immensity of tax being paid by all the workers; not all the millionaires, but all the workers. Each has to pay his tax and surely the Lord is saying, Your salary will not be so big. Things may be reduced and your salary will not be so big, and yet you have to pay your tax and you may be pinched in paying it. The Lord would say. Count on Me; I will take care of that matter. We are not to be held up by inability to pay the tax.
C.C.T. It is an orderly instruction we have to follow to carry out what you are speaking about. Why is the lesson here to go to the sea? It does not say go fishing.
J.T. The Lord might have said of a certain brother, Go to him; he will pay for all you need. But the Lord would say, That is not what I want. It is to come this way. The Lord is to do it. He can take on these things. He is with us. "And behold, *I* am with you all the days" (@Matthew 28:20). He will take on these things for us and we may be very thankful that He can take on these things.
E.G.McA. On the way down to the sea and in the securing of the hook and the line and getting the fish, he was no doubt thinking of the instruction in the statement of the Lord's as to sonship. He
{285}
would move in the dignity of that when he paid the tax.
J.R.H. What bearing have the words of the Lord in verses 22 and 23 on this matter? "And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said to them. The Son of man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and the third day he shall be raised up. And they were greatly grieved" @Matthew 17:22,23.
J.T. How important they are! It is one of the features of the chapter, what the Lord had to think of personally; not paying the didrachmas, but that He is to die. "The Son of man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and the third day he shall be raised up. And they were greatly grieved" @Matthew 17:22,23. Well, what did the Lord say? That was His matter, peculiarly so. Peter's matter was this matter of the tax, but see the difference between the two: the death of the Lord Jesus and the paying of the tax. How the Lord goes into the matter of the tax as if He would say to us, You may have to go into these matters. Things may not be so good as they have been, but you must have recourse to Me in these matters. He has promised to be with us in Matthew. Everything will be solved by Him.
A.B.P. Is this intended to touch us, too, as to how real He has been to us in this wonderful unity?
J.T. Quite so. "And behold, *I* am with you all the days" (@Matthew 28:20). There is no ascension in Matthew. The Lord says, You will have all My time down here; I will look after your affairs down here Myself.
Ques. Do you look upon this matter of the tax as righteousness?
J.T. Well; it was met righteously. He makes it clear that neither He nor Peter were bound to pay the tax, but He says, "But that we may not be an offence to them". Keep clear of offending them. It is a small matter anyway, but think of the principles
{286}
that are involved in all this. The Creator Himself with us always.
C.B. We are to be exercised to meet the tax, yet not to lower the dignity of the assembly.
J.T. We are viewed as individuals here. It is a question of Peter and the Lord, and the Lord is saying, If the government wants a thing like that, it is a small matter anyway and the cattle on a thousand hills are His. We are to pay, and support the government. At one time He said, "Show me a denarius" (@Luke 20:24). He recognises that it belongs to the person who made the coin and whose superscription was there, so that we should not be an offence. The Lord has helped us on those lines in regard to the claims of the government.
G.MacPh. Does this show the way by which we may come into spiritual liberty by discharging our moral obligations?
J.T. Quite so.
E.G.McA. Are you using this as an illustration of the word, "Pay then what is Caesar's to Caesar, and what is God's to God", (@Matthew 22:21)? You pay it with the constant thought in mind that you do not belong to this country at all.
J.T. Quite so. It is a small matter, because we are bound to reckon relatively. Relative values are constantly in mind, and this is from the relative side a very small matter and the Lord would meet it on creative grounds; all that went through the paths of the sea were His. This one fish He knew, and He knew there was a piece of money in it, and that He could use that. It says, "Take that and give it to them for me and thee". It is beautiful to see the Lord of glory coming down to us, identifying Himself with the fisherman to pay the tax "for me and thee".
C.C.T. Is there any thought of an outward testimony in this?
{287}
J.T. That is what is implied: "But that we may not be an offence". Why should I be an offence to the government for the sake of five cents or ten cents or a dollar? Pay it and pass on.
E.F. So that Peter says, "Wherefore also let them who suffer according to the will of God commit their souls in well-doing to a faithful Creator", (@1 Peter 4:19).
J.T. Just so. What will He not do for us? It was a question of illuminating Peter. It was a line full of sonship. Why should we be held up by the payment of a small tax? The point is to get the idea of sonship into our souls.
A.B.P. Does the mount of transfiguration link on with @Hebrews 1 and what we are speaking of now with @Hebrews 2? I was thinking of the glory that it sheds on our position. The things that are the most menial -- the Son of God has had to do with them, and as we have to do with them He would bring us into the good of the light of sonship, which is to govern us.
E.G.McA. In the understanding individually of, "And behold, *I* am with you all the days" (@Matthew 28:20), I would be helped as I come with my brethren to take up matters. "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". If He is with us individually, He is with us collectively.
J.T. Just so. And then the outcome of this in the dispensation is seen in our taking up this trespass in verse 15. We were intending to reach this: the function of the assembly coming into it. The assembly is not in the fish matter; that is the Lord's action; but the assembly is in the matter in chapter 18, "But if he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly; and if also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer. Verily I say to you. Whatsoever
{288}
ye shall bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on the earth shall be loosed in heaven". So, clearly, this offending brother is put under restraint by the assembly; not that the assembly is brought into it as fully as might be implied, but it is brought into it. The persons brought into it, especially the one that is offended against, are to regard the offender as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer. It is most extraordinary, it seems to me, that this sort of penalty should be imposed almost at once. There is nothing more said. It is a question of the offending brother, how he acts, how he is affected by this action of the assembly, and how the matter is solved.
G.MacPh. Your earlier remark about the disciples being included in the unbelieving and perverted generation showed how serious was the position, and now this brother is to be regarded as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer.
J.T. It is a serious matter. There is much more to be said than is written here, what would lead up in assembly action to this, placing a brother in this position. How serious it is! How severe Matthew is! More so than any of the gospels.
C.C.T. It is not listening to the brother or brothers but listening to the assembly, so that it makes the assembly very important.
J.T. That is just the point to reach.
S.McC. Would verse 16 go as far as the care meeting? "But if he do not hear thee, take with thee one or two besides". Would it be brought to the care meeting subsequent to that?
J.T. I think so, leading up to an action of the assembly. So that what is often said in matters among us is, What has he done? But it is what he has not done. He has not listened to the assembly. It is a question of what the assembly is. If he does not listen to it, you might as well say if he does not
{289}
listen to God. "And if also he will not listen to the assembly". It is to bring out the importance of the assembly.
S.McC. Does the voice of the assembly proceed from the assembly as actually convened? It is not the voice of the care meeting.
J.T. Oh no. The care meeting has no authority at all except, you might say, moral, but no formal authority. The authority is vested in the assembly itself, not in the care meeting. The care meeting is always tentative.
C.C.T. You would not announce 'the brethren in care have decided so-and-so'?
J.T. It is always tentative. Remember, the authority is vested in the assembly.
R.W.S. The verse says, "And if also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to thee". It does not say 'let him be to the assembly' but 'to thee'.
J.T. I see what you mean. Much more could be said, but the Lord means there is enough to indicate the place the assembly has for us to take it in. How great the assembly is!
R.W.S. Some say as to shaking hands, that the assembly judged as to that, and then again it has come out in ministry that it is a matter of the priest, as to whether he will greet a person.
J.T. It is a question of leadership. When it comes to actual restoration as in @Leviticus 13 and 14 everything hinges on the priest. It is not said 'If there is one'. There is always supposed to be one. The priest would take the lead in the matter of this kind. If it be a question of leprosy, and of course that would enter into this, it is a question of what the priest does.
J.McK. The assembly is like the highest court. It is the final matter.
J.T. The Lord does not go so far as we might think He should go and tell us what should happen,
{290}
that a brother should be put away or withdrawn from. It is a question of settling the matter with the brother who is offended; how he behaves in the matter and how he is supposed to understand the authority of the assembly, and that affects him in regard to his relations with the offending brother.
C.A.M. The feelings of the assembly should be a guide to every right-minded Christian.
J.T. I do not understand how it is sometimes said that the shaking hands time has come as to a brother who has been withdrawn from That is a question of the priest, as to when he can offer his hand to a person.
C.A.M. I think the trouble has been caused by an independency of thought, persons exercising their own independent feelings. That is where the trouble has been. If the priestly element governs the situation I am sure it would come right.
J.T. Besides, the gospels are not really the last word from heaven in cases of discipline or in any case. The last words are apostolic words. It says they persevered in the apostles¬ doctrine. The last word is the apostles¬. The Lord is not entering into the matter fully. We have to go through things and see how they are perfected. The gospels do not perfect things. They are records of what the Lord Himself did. The Lord is concerned about what the assembly does, and to bring out how it functions, and we have to go to 1 Corinthians for this matter. We have to go to Paul for the completion. He gives the last word; he completes the word of God.
G.MacPh. Is there any possibility of this brother listening to the assembly?
J.T. Well, we are not told that here, it just says, "If also he will not listen". The Lord does not go the whole way in the matter. The same is true in regard of the position in chapter 19. Things are left, because the Lord in the gospels has in mind that
{291}
the Holy Spirit is coming, and things will be well when He comes. The Lord is not settling matters. He is going up to heaven and sending down the Spirit so that all assembly matters are settled by Him.
C.C.T. This is the outline and the Holy Spirit would guide us to fill in the outline.
J.T. Everything must await the Spirit.
E.G.McA. It is the importance of the assembly here, and the future handling of a matter like this is consequent on the Spirit of God being here. You find out in other parts of Scripture how to act.
J.T. It is the time of the apostles; that is where the last word is.
J.McK. Could you help us in regard to verse 18, the binding in relation to this?
J.T. The binding is collective.
J.McK. That is the assembly?
J.T. Yes, and everything must await the coming of the Spirit from heaven.
J.A.P. The Spirit is brought in by Peter when dealing with Ananias in @Acts 5.
J.T. Very good.
{292}
TEACHING
@Acts 19:1 - 7; @Acts 18:24 - 28
I have in mind to speak about teaching, and I selected these Scriptures because they give examples of it, of persons who needed teaching and accepted it and became taught in the Scriptures, in the truth of Christianity. I have selected chapter 19 to speak of persons who are evidently untaught. You will observe that the apostle, who was in the full height of his ministry at this time, had been up to Jerusalem and came back to Ephesus by the upper quarters, and finding these men in Ephesus he made inquiry as to whether they had received the Holy Spirit since they had believed. You will observe that no such question was asked of Apollos. The apostle asked the question of these twelve persons: had they received the Holy Spirit since they believed? Instead of saying as we often do, 'Yes' or 'No', and perhaps truthfully (it ought to be truthfully), the twelve men said, "We did not even hear if the Holy Spirit was come". Now I would say that is inexcusable ignorance. Most of us are ignorant, some more and some less. Indeed, all are more or less ignorant, but if anyone of those accustomed to attending meetings in this room in this city, should say that he did not know there was any Holy Spirit, I would say that brother would be inexcusably ignorant, and that he would be one who could not possibly, on these current lines, progress in the truth. It might even be an ignorance linked with the denial of the Spirit as a divine Person, for it is just possible that such ignorance may possess us. They were baptised, but it was a discarded sort of baptism. The writer of the Hebrews speaks about the doctrine of baptisms. We are more likely to talk about the doctrine than the thing, but the thing is more important. So they were baptised according to John the baptist. John was cut off in his ministry. He had wrought wonderfully.
{293}
The Lord tells us, "Among them that are born of women a greater prophet is no one than John the baptist", (@Luke 7:28). But he was cut off and his service was shortened. We have no record that it was to be continued. It was the baptism of John and obviously, according to what is here, it was defective yet it served its purpose. It was as right as it should be under him, but it was not Christian baptism.
Now I am speaking on teaching, if you will bear it in mind; that is the point. They were untaught as to Christian teaching and yet they had lived in a period of Christianity for a good many years. The doctrine of Christianity was taught in Africa, in Alexandria, and indeed all over that section, and therefore these men were inexcusably ignorant. Their teaching was defective and it was inexcusable that they were so ignorant. So, dear brethren, I am just saying these things not to insinuate that there is such a thing among us now, but we would do well to inquire into this matter as to whether we are taking on the advantage of all there is. Present advantages available to us in this city are wonderful. I am speaking, of course, of Ephesus and Alexandria, but my point is this city and the possibility of grave defectiveness in Christian teaching; not that it is not available, but that we are not availing ourselves of it, and proceeding on lines that should lead in the right direction, such as searching the Scriptures daily. There are many things we are enjoined to do in a daily sense. Certain Christians are said to have searched the Scriptures daily to see whether Paul's greatest teaching was right. They were not questioning it in the sense that it was wrong but to see whether it was so. This will lead me presently to say something about accuracy in teaching and understanding teaching.
These twelve men were admittedly defective in their spiritual education. They were not making the
{294}
most of what teaching there was, because Paul had been teaching for years. Apollos came from Alexandria, and needed teaching in Paul's ministry, so that coming to Ephesus he was instructed by Aquila and Priscilla. These men at Ephesus were moving in the same light as Apollos before he was instructed, but he was making headway and they were not. That is my point, whether we are making the most of what there is within the reach of our ears daily. These men were baptised to John's baptism, and they had not followed it up because John had said a great deal about the Holy Spirit. When they say they were baptised to John's baptism, the inference is that they accepted all John taught. His baptism implies that, as Christian baptism now implies all the teaching of Christianity. Well, they did not know there was a Holy Spirit at all. Yet if they were challenged as to it, they could have found out if they wanted to that John spoke a great deal about the Holy Spirit. He said in his ministry of the Lord Jesus, "He it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit"(@John 1:33). John said He would do it, not in John's time, but God told John that Jesus would do it. "He it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit. And I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God", (@John 1:33). These men did not know that. It was inexcusable.
The next thing I want to point out is that they are teachable now. They wasted no time in accepting what Paul said about the matter. "And Paul said, John indeed baptised with the baptism of repentance"; they should have known that, repentance is very important too. John taught that, so Paul says, "John indeed baptised with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe on him that was coming after him, that is, on Jesus". I want you to note now that Paul said very little. It would not have taken three minutes to say
{295}
what he said, and they accepted it at once. They were quick learners. They had been very dull before, but God acts quickly, and at times touches people so that they act quickly. Revivals are sudden, they are direct movements from God. God moves quickly, and, of course, sometimes slowly because He is patient with us. Here the matter was done quickly. The gospel of Mark is full of that sort of thing, things done at once and done well. Mark says the Lord Jesus did all things well and did them properly and quickly. "And Paul said, John indeed baptised with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe on him that was coming after him, that is, on Jesus". That is all Paul said. Then they acted. My point is that these remarks on this chapter should help us as to whether we are just getting on as fast as we should. Heaven is taking account of us and the manner of our learning, whether we are learning at all, or whether we are just learning and never coming to a knowledge of the truth; that should not be. Christians normally are coming in some sense to a knowledge of the truth. These twelve men came very quickly, however long they had been before. They are moving rapidly now, and God will perhaps touch us as to this.
So it says, "And when they heard that". It reminds you of Peter speaking at Pentecost, that God had exalted Jesus to His right hand and He had received the promise of the Spirit and shed it forth. When they heard that, they said, "What shall we do, brethren?". There is no time to waste; what shall we do about it? We are all challenged. How are we using our time? Are we getting on in the truth? Is the assembly growing here? The record is that when they heard this they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus. The Lord Jesus is brought in in a powerful way. "And Paul said, John indeed baptised
{296}
with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe on him that was coming after him, that is, on Jesus". They were baptised "to the name of the Lord Jesus". They were to understand that name, and now they received the Holy Spirit they would have the intelligence to use the expression "Lord Jesus". I wonder how many of us repeat that name. No one can say Lord Jesus except by the Holy Spirit. We want to come under that name. It is protection for us and that is the point here. "And Paul having laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied". That is to say, this is identification. They are worthy of it. Paul would not have done that immediately when he came to Ephesus. They were not impressionable at first, but now he lays his hands on them, one of the most precious things one can think of, because he is representative of God - divine hands mediatorially put on. He laid his hands on them, and it says the Holy Spirit came upon them. Think of all that lay behind it.
Think of what they were in the presence of now in the city of Ephesus. A man came to Ephesus and who knew him? Here he is and he puts his hands on these twelve men. I suppose he put them on one after another. We are not accustomed to these things, but it would be well if we were accustomed to them. It is the way of God in Christianity. There is the way of the Lord, and the "way of God", as in verse 26 of the previous chapter. The word 'way' there means how the Lord did things, how God did things, and now it is how Paul did things as he laid his hands on them. The Lord Jesus had done it many times in healing the sick. "And Paul having laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied". How characteristic all that is! Do the brethren not
{297}
see it is a revival within a short time? There is a complete change in those twelve men brought about by a few words, a dozen or so. And these men heretofore showed ignorance; they did not even know if the Holy Spirit had come, but Paul lays his hands on them and says something to them and they believed and were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus and the Holy Spirit came. Well, some might say, how do they know He came? We are not to be simply curious in regard to a divine Person. The Holy Spirit is a divine Person; He is just as divine as Jesus and as great too. He is here on earth now, and with us and Jesus is up there in heaven to represent us. We are wonderfully well off.
Now the Holy Spirit came on these twelve men. There is no suggestion that they did not know He came on them. Do we allude to the Spirit as merely a theory? He is a divine Person, and these twelve men received Him at the same time. "They spoke with tongues and prophesied". Now we might say it is a mere incident that there were twelve; there might have been fifteen or twenty, but there is no 'if' at all in the things of God. Things happen, and this thing happened; twelve persons were acted on at once, that is, the blessed Spirit of God came on them and the result was they prophesied. What the tongues were is not of great moment here, but the fact is just that they did speak with tongues, though it was in a more extensive way at Pentecost. I am not pretending we are to be speaking with tongues now, but nevertheless it is important to see that they spoke with tongues and the tongues came from the Spirit of God. You remember how that happened at first when divine breathing was heard; the sound filled the house. There was a sound of deep breathing, as it were, the very inwards of God moved in regard to this matter and there came forth tongues of fire and sat on each of them. The same
{298}
thing happened here. It shows how there was a repetition of Pentecost only in a lesser degree. God is saying, Now Ephesus is the matter in My mind. Cornelius was in God's mind earlier. It is a similar thing; God is repeating Himself. Is not that very interesting? God repeats Himself every time He converts a man. He loves to do it. It enters into the movements of this long dispensation. It is the continuous work of God, and so it is here that they speak with tongues and prophesy. We have had much about prophecy lately and God has been helping the brethren. I expect the brethren here have occasional touches as to prophecy. Is God not repeating Himself here? He is certainly, and in New York too. It is remarkable how it has come about in recent years. It is God coming in and He loves to do it; His own repetition, but nevertheless, there is that which is unique every time. Every time you get a ministry meeting in a real sense, it is unique, it has a touch of its own. This is somewhat different from Pentecost; still, they spoke with tongues and prophesied.
There were twelve men, which suggests administration and that includes the care of the assembly. The twelve men belong there. They would function elsewhere too, of course, but the word 'administration' is a very important one for us as to how we are to take part in the care meetings. Numerals are simply divine language, and if we are in a care meeting to talk about the Lord's interests and His people, thinking of them according to what they are on the breastplate of Christ, they are to be highly revered, loved, respected. Well, these are important matters. These matters mean that the care meeting takes on a new character. There is no time wasted. It is a time for twelve, twelve persons who receive the Holy Spirit at the same instant that God lays His hands on them, and they begin to speak with
{299}
tongues immediately and prophesy. These are very wonderful things, and the Lord is helping the brethren in every place to take on the question of administration because there is so much to be administered. The whole wealth of God is at our disposal and God is putting it into the hands of persons who love one another. That is where He has put it. He looks for representation among His people, and the Lord says, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", (@John 13:35). Men are to know it, that we "have love amongst yourselves". That means it is a mutual affair. It is like a quantity of a thing, like a commodity, but in good hands, in trained hands. They know how to use love, how to dispense love, how to distribute it around to one another. That is what I mean by using the word 'administration'. It means that these men were almost instantaneously transformed into qualified administrators, persons capable to be entrusted with divine things. God has them and they are His. They are representative of Him, and that is the secret of the great blessing seen at Ephesus. There is no such blessing reported at Antioch although Antioch follows on Jerusalem, but Ephesus seems to be the acme of success in Paul's service and it largely lies in the working out of what this numeral twelve means from a spiritual standpoint. It was Paul's work at this time. Now they are transformed into administrators, and one of the greatest possible things is love among themselves. You will see in that chapter that even the handkerchiefs taken from Paul effected cures. There had not been a movement like it before.
Another thing that comes in here is that God is saying, I will not be satisfied hereafter with careless learners. These twelve were so careless they did not know there was any Holy Spirit at all. It is a solemn thing really. We cannot afford to be ignorant as to
{300}
the existence of a divine Person. I believe God is saying now, I am not going to have a repetition of this in Ephesus, and hence we have the school of Tyrannus. God is saying, I do not want the brethren to come in carelessly and late. God would have what corresponds with the school of Tyrannus in result. It is imperative that I should learn. We should be all taught of God. Think of God being Himself in the position of a teacher among us. God is in earnest in what He is doing and the Spirit is in earnest in us. These twelve men were so ignorant they did not know there was any Spirit at all. They did not understand the Trinity, knew nothing about It. So Paul was in the school of Tyrannus for two years. "And this took place for two years, so that all that inhabited Asia heard the word of the Lord"(@Acts 19:10). Tyrannus is just a name to signify something, that there is authority in what is taught, but what is taught is the word of the Lord. That is the idea, the authority of Tyrannus is really in the Lord, hence the widened circulation of the teaching, the whole of Asia. "Reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus. And this took place for two years, so that all that inhabited Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks"(@Acts 19:9,10). It was just the province of Asia, not the continent as we know it, but the point is that the whole of it became affected by the word of the Lord Jesus. Christianity spread enormously in that province and it worked out in this way, from the things that I mentioned in detail -- the baptism of these men, the laying on of Paul's hands, the school of Tyrannus, the number of years there, and the province of Asia becoming christianised, thoroughly affected by the word of the Lord. That is no doubt the secret of why God uses the province of Asia to set out His mind in the book of Revelation. So, dear brethren, you see how things work in the
{301}
Scriptures and how God is working out this kind of thing in us so that we can be representative of Him.
Now turning to Apollos, I want to show you how he had progressed. There is nothing said about his being baptised or receiving the Spirit, but there is much said about his eloquence. "But a certain Jew, Apollos by name, an Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, who was mighty in the scriptures, arrived at Ephesus. He was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in his spirit, he spoke and taught exactly the things concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John. And *he* began to speak boldly in the synagogue. And Aquila and Priscilla, having heard him, took him to them and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly. And when he purposed to go into Achaia, the brethren wrote to the disciples engaging them to receive him, who, being come, contributed much to those who believed through grace. For he with great force convinced the Jews publicly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was the Christ". Now this is the description of an important servant of Christ. I am commenting on him because we may expect such a thing as this, in a smaller measure of course, of brothers and sisters progressing quickly. If we are not progressing quickly, it is time to see why we are not progressing. It is said of him initially that he was instructed in the way of the Lord. That is not the way of Episcopalianism or Romanism or any other 'ism', but it is the way things are done in Christianity, it is the way of the Lord. The word 'way' is at times used by itself, and alludes to the fellowship of Christianity. It is a word peculiar to the book of Acts. So it is all the more striking here that Apollos, although brought up under John's ministry, knew the way of the Lord. We have to measure our methods with the way of the Lord, not the way of Paul, but of the Lord. Then it is
{302}
called the way of God too. One might mention many things that are not just the way of the Lord and yet we think we are quite right in doing them. Coming in late, for instance, is not the way of the Lord. Luke tells us of the Lord and says that when the hour was come He sat down and the apostles with Him. Apollos "was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in his spirit, he spoke and taught exactly". That is another point, because we are so slipshod in the things we say at times in the Bible readings, and other meetings. God is particular. According to what we read in @1 Corinthians 14, one was there that fell down and worshipped God. He learned quickly. He was a simple person, and fell down and worshipped God and reported that God was among them of a truth. That is the thing that tells, that God is in a place. The man said, 'God is there', and that is what tells. He did not say that a certain man could speak well but that God was there. Apollos "was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in his spirit, he spoke and taught exactly the things concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John. And *he* began to speak boldly in the synagogue". You see, he is progressing, getting power, and his way is right. He is in the light of the Lord's way and the way of God; so "Aquila and Priscilla, having heard him, took him to them", as if they would take him to their house, for Christianity implies that, "and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly". God is the God of order. The idea of order must enter into the assembly. I have already remarked as to the way of the Lord. It is a remarkable thing how many things God is said to be God of. That refers to our attendance at the meetings, how we speak to one another, how we sit in the meeting. Are we respectful? We will never love the saints unless we respect them, so the God of order enters into all these things.
{303}
Now we pass on to a few further remarks. "They having heard him, took him to them and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly". This was a brother and his wife. They were not teaching him in the assembly, they took him to them, which is according to divine order. It would not do for a brother and his wife to teach in the assembly, but it would do for them to help to instruct in their own house. "And when he purposed to go into Achaia, the brethren wrote to the disciples engaging them to receive him, who, being come, contributed much to those who believed through grace". Now we have something being done by one man and it is a question of the ministry. Apollos was a great minister. Paul preached, Apollos watered; he was great enough to work with Paul. He was the product indirectly, just as the twelve men were directly, of the service of Paul, the twelve men to act administratively and Apollos to act as minister of the truth. We read that he was on the road, as we might say, to serve the saints. It is not simply now that he was a local man at Ephesus. He belonged to Alexandria and he is converted and in the truth and to some extent with Paul and in touch with Aquila and Priscilla and fully set out as a minister. He is a teacher and a successful one and that is what God is looking for -- successful results from the ministry of the truth and the way of God in our meetings. Hence, what it says of him is that he "contributed much to those who believed through grace". If we believe at all it is through grace. It is the effect of God in our souls. This brother was used in this way. "For he with great force convinced the Jews publicly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was the Christ". So that we now have a great minister working by himself, and twelve men administering together by themselves; they know what to do. One of the greatest difficulties as far as I know
{304}
is that we do not know what to do when an emergency arises. We are just up against a wall, but it should not be. The twelve men by the Spirit of God *know* what to do. The administration of God means that we know what to do in an emergency. The thing is settled; there is a word of wisdom. That is all I have to say.
{305}
PEACE - ON EARTH AND IN HEAVEN
@Luke 2:13,14; @Luke 10:17 - 24; @Luke 19:37 - 40
The idea of peace runs throughout these scriptures, first peace on earth and then peace in heaven. We may be sure that before we have peace on earth there must be peace in heaven, for already indeed this has come about, for the Lord Jesus has entered into heaven, being welcomed there, received up there in glory and relatively, at least where He is, there is peace; not that the matter is consummated, for it is not. A great war is yet in mind according to the book of Revelation, the war between Michael, the archangel, and the devil, who is to be cast out, and no place is to be found for him there. But as I said, that is a matter for us now to understand. We know it is only partial, and God in the magnitude of His grace and forbearance and long-suffering is content at times to have things partial, making them tolerable so as to carry out His designs, for He can do this even in the presence of the enemy.
Now @Luke 2 contemplates peace on earth. It was an auspicious time, outwardly at least. We are not told how many of the heavenly host appeared, but they came in to join an angel in a divine way, as you might say, to send out the glad tidings that others might join in. So this angel of the Lord spoke to the shepherds keeping their flocks by night. Heaven would value such sacrifice as the shepherds were carrying on -- it is like God. The light from heaven shone round about them, as if God would honour them in their unselfish service when others were carrying on in the cities and towns. They were keeping their flocks by night, unselfishly caring for others, which is something to be noted, because there is always need for such service, unselfish service which would show itself in local companies in the
{306}
care that is needed, and the shepherds are the divine provision for them. Shepherds and teachers - a combination that is always needed, the care of the shepherd with the ability and skill of the teacher. The prophets speak about the need of teachers and it is a notable fact that the Lord Jesus, according to Luke, began to do certain things and to teach. Therefore, if the flock is to be cared for, the idea of teaching should be added to the care the shepherds give. These services that we are now engaged in have taken on that character of doing anything that has to be done. The brethren know what amount of care is expended on these meetings. They cost something, not only actual purchasing power but what has to be done to provide for the brethren; the doing, we may say, in which unskilled labour can be conveniently used. Ofttimes the most needed service is unskilled. Skill is apt to make us proud that we can do things so well, but the point is to do the things that are not simply done for crediting ourselves with doing them. It is said of the Lord Jesus that He began both to do and to teach. He began; He had not finished yet, both to do and to teach. I stress the idea of teaching. Jehovah says through the prophet, "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge" (@Hosea 4:6). Hosea says, "and we shall know, -- we shall follow on to know Jehovah" (@Hosea 6:3). Let no one take any pleasure in ignorance. Sometimes we hear it spoken of as if it were a virtue. Ignorance is no virtue. No Christian should be ignorant. The whole divine system is engaged largely in the teaching of the saints, that we should know. Heaven is not going to be peopled with those who are ignorant. We are to be taught in view of our going up there.
The first scripture that I read, therefore, contemplates a beginning of something. The first chapter is a long one and contemplates a beginning. Luke is the writer of it and the writer of the second treatise.
{307}
the Acts: he says of the Lord that He began both to do and to teach. There was other doing, of course, before the Lord, and Luke himself is viewed by himself as a man who knew how to do things. He knew how to write; he knew how to form letters, not only into words but into sentences, all having method. So the Lord in the book of Revelation taught His servant John in the order in which he was to write the things that he saw, and the things that are, as he said, the present things, and then the things that are about to follow. That is the order in which John was to write the book of Revelation, a most orderly book as it was written, and a book regarding which there is a blessing mentioned. I am saying all that because of the necessity of learning of the brethren knowing, gathering up things in our opportunities to learn so as to know and to teach others also. For God has promised that all His people are to be taught by Him; they should all be taught of God. Why should anyone be ignorant? There is such a slur on ignorance that the Spirit of God says in @1 Corinthians 14:38, "If any be ignorant, let him be ignorant", a very solemn thing.
Now the second chapter of Luke contemplates an active situation, the shepherds keeping their flock by night. Heaven would look down on the scene delightfully; a flock cared for by those who knew how to exercise care over it, and heaven says, We will not leave them alone, we will visit them. Heaven visits, as we have already had today, the coming in and going out from heaven. Of course, angels are occupied with this all the time. It is said they are sent out. "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" (@Hebrews 1:14). Who can tell how many there are? They are not idlers or holiday makers, they are ministering spirits. Perhaps we hardly know what that means. We know what it means to be
{308}
ministered to by others, but we read of ministering spirits. They belong to heaven, heaven's workers, and one of them is here and the light shines about him. We have been just wearied and torn in our hearts for the last five and a half years with what is going on in this earth by men having no light at all, but darkness. The very light is darkness, whatever light they pretend to have is simply darkness and murder is behind it. This angel comes out, light is shining around the shepherds. What a difference! We have been seeking to engage each other with what we are attached to, that we are a part of the assembly; one of the greatest things we can think of is being part of the assembly. The angels, of course, are not part of it. They are at the gates of the heavenly city, but the city is itself heavenly and composed of men, not angels. God is saying, I have men, the right kind, the kind He intended to have. According to the prophet Jeremiah, the man spoken of in chapter 18 worked to do something, to accomplish something, and whatever it was he was seeking to make, it was marred. The whole earth is marred. When I look up to heaven there is nothing of that kind at all, not that there is not evil there, but as regards the physical heavens all is well. "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the expanse sheweth the work of his hands"(@Psalm 19:1). So that things are well in that sense, but as regards men, women, and alas, children too, how quickly they are learning wickedness. It is of the greatest importance for men and women today to look after youth. The devil is looking after them, filling the prisons with them. What dishonour to God that the youth should be so exposed at the present time as such examples of wickedness are portrayed before our eyes and their eyes.
The light was shining round about the shepherds. They were doing what was right. They were taking
{309}
care of their flocks by night. Heaven was delighted with it, pleased with it. They were doing it by night, and then there is the multitude of the heavenly host. There is a great deal in Scripture about God and His relations with His hosts. You remember the occasion of Elisha. A young man said, What shall we do? The forces of the enemy were there, but Elisha says, "Fear not, for they that are with us are more than they that are with them"(@2 Kings 6:16). The young man did not see them, but they were there. So Jehovah shows this young man what is there and sure enough the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire. "The chariots of God are twenty thousand, thousands upon thousands; the Lord is among them", (@Psalm 68:17). That is the position. It is light; God is there. There is not much we can say of that, but it for us to understand. But God is here and moves in and out even militarily, and as I have said, these angels came in. "Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host". They link on with the angel. The multitude of the heavenly host joined him, full of praise to Jehovah saying, "Glory to God in the highest". It is not a question of what men are doing down here, but what God is doing. It is where God is, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". That was going to be; that was prophetic. God comes in with something worthwhile, some indication of what is worthwhile. There was some intervention but only with one angel, but presently with a multitude of them and they are saying, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men".
Now I am seeking to enlist sympathy in this book because one confesses it has peculiar charm. Luke is the divine system, not the family; it is the divine system operating in grace, not in judgment. So one has peculiar pleasure in going over this ground,
{310}
because it is a line that runs through this book -- this matter of peace on earth and then peace in heaven, but the peace on earth is first. God would say, I am intervening with My spearhead and My army, evidently a great army. I am going to do something. Luke says the Lord was not failing to do things. The Lord Jesus went about to do and to teach, the doing first so that there was no shadow of doubt. Something could be done, but then there is the moral side which always raises the question of where men are. How much do we give way to the devil? God is saying, I am here, and I am actually doing things. He is here in a multitude full of praise to God, but what about the moral side? God is saying to us that something has to be done on a moral line; it is not merely a question of creation as it was at the beginning. There is a moral question in it and Luke starts with that, always ready for the great event of grace, the grace system ready to operate, ready to do things for men whatever is needed to be done. But this moral question, where men are, arose and stopped the proceeding. There is a halt, as it were; instead of saying peace on earth, the Lord Jesus is to die -- a solemn thing. We talk much about the Lord's death, but we sometimes lose sight of what it means to Him and to heaven. But that had to happen.
So chapter 10 contemplates actings by the Lord's servants, seventy of them, showing the bountifulness of the divine way. There were twelve earlier, but seventy added. God would say, 'I am going on', and something else had come into His mind. It was heaven, the operations that are there now and have been since the Lord Jesus went up. While He was down here the operations were down here, but as He went up He inaugurated a new thing, the Spirit came down while the Lord Jesus is staying up there, whom the heavens must receive The Lord Jesus is
{311}
up there, but not in any sense inactive. The operations have begun up there and He is in charge of them. You may say we know all these things, but it is well to be told about them. We ought to see what men are doing and what Satan is doing; but we are not to be ignorant of what men are doing under God's ordering among the nations. We pray for them. There are some whom God is using to maintain order and a sort of peace in a sovereign, provisional way, so that God can operate for a little while to save men by the gospel, to justify them, and glorify them. That is what is going on, not small things. The called are justified, glorified. These are not small things. These things are going on every day. It is an operational system, an operational time, and the devil knows it and is joining in it, making the most of it. Even unregenerate men are taken into God's service so that He can maintain a sort of order, so that He can send out His emissaries to preach Christ and gather material for the assembly.
@Luke 10 is to call attention to the fact that the Lord is not inactive. It is a heavenly matter now and they return and say to the Lord, "Even the demons are subject to us through thy name". The Lord, in fact, is saying great things will happen in that sense, and among them, "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven". That is a great matter. The seventy had not seen that, and the Lord is telling them that what they are glorying in so much is not so great as they think it is; not that it is not wonderful, but as I said, God can go on in His operational ways to achieve certain things in order to reach certain ends. He is content to do that, but we must not make too much of our part in it. We are apt to think we are doing something for the Lord and that we are the very centre of everything, but it is not so at all. In the parable in
{312}
chapter 17 He directs them to go and do something more, as if to say, You may think something of what you are doing, but you are not doing very much. When you have done all He says that we are to say, "We are unprofitable bondmen"(@Luke 17:10). It is well to be balanced, to have our measure. God is the God of measure. You may be sure that whatever my measure is God will know about it, and will not have me thinking I am anything more than that. "And the seventy returned with joy, saying. Lord, even the demons are subject to us through thy name. And he said to them, I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven". That is a sort of check and yet, on the other hand, is a wonderful thing; Satan falling from heaven is not nearly so great as when the saints go up to heaven. It is a much greater thing to go up than to fall. You may fall by gravity. The Lord says, "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven". It must be a rapid fall. The Lord said, I beheld it, but He does not go beyond that or stop to enlarge on the wonderful thing that He saw. The truth is, in His mind it was not so great as you may think. When the assembly goes up it will be a great thing. When the Lord Jesus went up, it was a very great thing. Here He says to them, "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven. Behold, I give you the power of treading upon serpents and scorpions and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall in anywise injure you. Yet in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens".
It would seem as if the Lord was belittling what was going on and we have to learn to take in those things. We need to humble ourselves by things we are doing. There are a good many things going on. There are a good many brothers who can take meetings, as we call it, but we have to watch as to what the value of these things may be, what the results
{313}
may be, and it may perhaps disappoint us at times. The Lord knows how to deal with those matters. So He says "notwithstanding" how good the meeting was or how many were saved. I suppose we may say they are saved; it is a misused word. The Lord too knows how to value that. But what He says here is, "Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven". Learn that, not that you have been an evangelist, or teacher, or preacher, but that you belong to heaven, you are among those who are to people heaven. There are only a few real men there yet, such as Elijah and Enoch and one or two others, so that the population of heaven is yet to go there. Angels are there, of course, but wisdom says, "My delights were with the sons of men" (@Proverbs 8:31), not only men but the sons of men as if they are peculiarly attractive. The Lord is saying, I am not despising what you are doing, but I want you to get the real thought in My mind now which is heaven. Heaven's time will come; the time of peopling heaven will come. There will be another time later on for peopling the earth, but heaven has a priority. Heaven did not have priority in chapter 2, but it has now. So the Lord says, "Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven".
I would seek to engage you, dear brethren, with your own greatness in this sense, not to occupy ourselves with ourselves, but this is the time for heaven and the time for us to enter into it. Hence the Lord is waiting up there, the heavens must receive Him, we are told. How honoured He is up there, received up in heaven, received up in glory! What a time heaven had when He went in there! What a time heaven will have and the assembly will have, because they are going to come into things in a big way, not
{314}
simply those of us who are alive and remain but all the saints going into heaven, caught up together, changed by the Lord's own power. It will be a big time, dear brethren; big times are ahead of us, and very near. It is the assembly time and God is not going to stop until it is finished. I may speak of certain things that will come, but He is not for a moment giving up the assembly, nor is Christ. "For the Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven"(@1 Thessalonians 4:16). It is going to be a big time and yet it will be private, very big happenings involving great sentiments and feelings, great enough to fill up heaven as the saints go up with the Lord. We do not go up by ourselves nor do we go up severally; we go up together. The great word in Ephesians, the great assembly epistle, is the word 'together': "Raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies"(@Ephesians 2:6). Well, there will be enough to occupy us and the Lord says, You are so great, so dignified; you will be made to sit down together in your own company. Paul, Peter, and John, and all the saints until now, all the sleeping saints, will be there and the changed saints will be there. What big times, eminent times, about to come! The Lord is preparing for all this. Heaven has received Him; He is there. It is heaven's business now to receive Him, but He is presently to come out and do things in a big way as to the accomplishment of the divine purposes in heaven and on earth, but heaven first.
I want to go on to chapter 19, which I hope will clarify what I have already said. It is a crucial time, a time in which the Lord was received, not up in heaven, but in Jerusalem. He had said in chapter 13, "Ye shall not see me until it come that ye say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord" (@Luke 13:35). We have to wait for that time but in the meantime
{315}
this happens. "And as he drew near, already at the descent of the mount of Olives, all the multitude of the disciples began, rejoicing, to praise God with a loud voice for all the works of power which they had seen, saying. Blessed the King that comes in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". There is no damper put on this as there was in chapter 10. This is a matter that relates to the great doings of Christ. We spoke of big times; this is a big time. It is not simply our going in there yet, but what the Lord Jesus had been doing here, and what He had been doing here had reference to heaven, not simply to earth. Satan had already been seen as cast down; the book of Revelation enlarges on it, when Satan shall be cast down in military power by Michael. The Lord had said this would happen in chapter 10, but now the "multitude of the disciples began, rejoicing, to praise God with a loud voice for all the works of power which they had seen, saying, Blessed the King that comes in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". Peace in heaven -- they are saying it now, the multitude of the disciples are saying it. It is not a question of angels here. The saints have learned to say things and that is the point in one's mind, that we might know how to speak of things, call them by their names, and join in when the time comes; and it does come, a time when we are together. We are taught for this, to be ready for it. The disciples had been taught for this, not angels now, but disciples, persons who have learned from Christ. That is the point of these meetings, that we should be taught and know how to call things by name, and if anything is to be done let us know how to do it that it may be worthy of heaven. What is done in the assembly should be worthy of heaven. The assembly is a reflection of heaven. We have been taught for this. It is a shame to us if we
{316}
are not learning, if we are not here as disciples, as persons who are learning to join in with praise and celebration. There are many opportunities for that. Heaven is always ready for a celebration. "Blessed the King that comes in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest. And some of the Pharisees from the crowd said to him. Teacher, rebuke thy disciples". Think of that! This is the devil. What we are doing in a little way the devil would stop. He would say. You are expending all this on the disciples and they do not know how to do anything. The devil would make them believe they do not know and they would do nothing. We have been taught to do things and do them well, to celebrate, and many other things. So the Lord says to the Pharisees among the multitude, "I say unto you, If these shall be silent, the stones will cry out". The Lord does not say the angels would do it. They have done it, but they do not need to do it now. The stones would do it; such is the education and power going on by the Lord that the stones would do it. The Lord is telling us what is in heaven and what power there is in regard of the assembly and its testimony and service in the coming age. He is saying in answer to these Pharisees, these religious men, "If these shall be silent, the stones will cry out".
The Lord would stir us up as to these matters. These are great times we are in. People are talking about what histories are going to be written. I doubt that God will recognise much of their histories. There is so much to be written, but it is not worth much because all is just about to go into oblivion. But this coming out of heaven is all glory; it is for God, and what He has up there. The Lord Jesus is received up there, occupied day and night up there. Heaven has received Him and the assembly is going up too. The Lord is waiting for that, as if to say. There is nothing more now. The priority
{317}
belongs to the assembly; the assembly is the first thought, has the first place in heaven. Priorities belong to it now. The Lord is saying, I am waiting for the time. The day is fixed; as the Lord says. No one knows the day but My Father, it is so wonderful. The Lord Jesus is God, and He is with the Father now, but nevertheless. He takes the lowly place in these operations. "But of that day or of that hour no one knows, neither the angels who are in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father"(@Mark 13:32). That day is in the Father's keeping. "Behold, I come quickly" (@Revelation 22:7). That is what these terms really mean -- that the Lord is waiting for the Father to unfold the moment. Things will happen then; there will be no mistake about it, and I do not want to be out of it for a second, but be ready for it, ready to join in with what is going to happen in heaven and what is happening now in heaven.
{318}
REST IN VIEW OF GOD'S SERVICE
@Genesis 8:20 - 22
There is peculiar freshness to be found in opening the holy page so early; that is, @Genesis 8, and particularly in this section, because whilst in the main God is saying things to a man or to men, we have here the initiative taken by Noah. He had acquired a great place with God, and God had opened the way for him early in His records, for Noah's name was to enter into all these things, between God and His great creature, that is Noah. His name was given to him by his father rightly. There is a good reason given for it, for it has meaning; it means repose -- rest. That one should be found in this early stage of the history in the Holy Book, that one should be found equal to giving rest to God, was a matter of great importance. God remembers these instances, for He tells us in later years that on the seventh day He was refreshed. He rested from His labours and was refreshed. It was remarkable that God should speak thus, but it is really not remarkable as we pursue the book and see it had reference to the Lord Jesus, who provided rest for God. We know that the birds that were sent out from the ark had certain meanings and the dove, pointing to the rest that God has in Christ, could not find a place for the sole of her foot, such was the situation on the earth, on God's earth; there was no rest. God had in mind, too, the thought of refreshment, and so He refers to it later in regard of the sabbath, that He rested on the seventh day and was refreshed. Think of that! He found refreshment Himself. Noah found rest for God and in saying this I have in mind that others should be stirred up, as to what each of us may yield to God, and as to whether there is with each one anything yielding to God something in the nature of restfulness or refreshment.
{319}
You will remember that in @Genesis 5:28,29 we are told, "And Lemech lived a hundred and eighty-two years, and begot a son. And he called his name Noah", which means, as we read in the note, repose. Lemech lived a hundred and eighty-two years and begot a son. "And he called his name Noah, saying, This one shall comfort us concerning our work" @Genesis 5:29. Not my work, but our work. He links himself with others. It was the time; the time had come for it. "This one shall comfort us concerning our work and concerning the toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah has cursed" @Genesis 5:29. So that the name was prophetic. The name given by his father to Noah was prophetic and God bore that in mind. He bears everything in mind that is the fruit of love, that is love towards Him. He never forgets anything that is the fruit of love towards Him. There are many that do not love God. I say many, although there are many that do love God, and one is encouraged to think that there are not many, indeed very few, in this room that do not love God. We read of persons who are lovers of themselves, rather than of God. That should challenge each one, but Lemech was not one of those. He belongs to the divine family, such as are spoken of throughout this book. Noah was one of them and Lemech was one of them and he gave his son a name which was prophetic. It means repose, not exactly for God, but "this one shall comfort us concerning our work and concerning the toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah has cursed" @Genesis 5:29. That is, he had one added to his family that was a great acquisition to him and his family because he would comfort *us*, he says. It was to affect the whole race, we might say, but it was going to narrow down to very few, because according to the New Testament there were only a few saved; that is eight persons. We have to come down to that. We have to come down to that --
{320}
small numbers. We have to come down to it, and we do well to be content in it, and yet not content, but to carry on in our prayers so that there may be greater things for God.
Well now, the prophetic word as to Noah was borne in mind by God; no doubt by others too who heard it, and the word in the New Translation would indicate that this offering of Noah called up into the mind of God the meaning of Noah's name. It is said: "And Noah built an altar to Jehovah; and took of every clean animal, and of all clean fowl, and offered up burnt-offerings on the altar. And Jehovah smelled the sweet odour". Notice the article in the passage. It is not simply a sweet odour, but *the* sweet odour here; it is as if God would say, 'The thing that his name means is not wanting'. *The* sweet odour is there. After six hundred years from the birth of Noah the sweet odour, the odour of rest, was there. And so one reminds oneself as to these matters, as what should characterise a Christian. If one loses this character and drops into the world's ways, in effect that which was indicated at the beginning is not there. That could never be said of Jesus. He was never other than Himself. "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", (@Matthew 3:17). God could always say that. But with others, alas, we have to say at times, it is not there; what used to be there is not there any more; or if it is there it is intermittent, and, of course, you are thankful for that; yet this odour is the primary idea of God for any one of us. If the world gets in, one loses one's character and that which is so precious to God. As regards Noah in @Genesis 8, it is there. *The* sweet savour is there; he had not lost it.
Well now, dear brethren, you will be thinking that what I have read has the character of suggestive ministry, but if it is not that, it is not much. There
{321}
may be some young one here who is turning to the world to some extent, so that God is not finding what He used to find in him. Demas, for instance, was a man who lost character; he lost colour in his worldliness. He loved this present world. Notice that it is this *present* world, not *that* one, but this one, the one all around us, urging itself upon us. Paul says, "For Demas has forsaken me, having loved the present age", (@2 Timothy 4:10).
Well now, our passage says that "Noah built an altar to Jehovah; and took of every clean animal, and of all clean fowl, and offered up burnt-offerings on the altar". Notice that word 'every'; it would mean that some of every kind of clean creatures were in the offering. He did not selfishly keep any. Perhaps there is selfishness in our givings to God; perhaps we keep what is considered choice in our minds, and give something else in its place, but that is not found with Noah. He gives of every clean beast and all clean fowl. Nothing selfish in his nature; I am speaking of his nature as of God. Believers now are made partakers of divine nature, Peter tells us, and as of that nature there is what is unselfish. God had wrought in men from the outset, even in Adam and Eve, and after sin had come in, so as to bring about what was for His pleasure. He had wrought in Noah, and had wrought early I would think; possibly from the time the name was given to him by his father. God honoured his father by pointing to him as a man of repose; *the* savour was there. Noah would, no doubt, count the creatures there after the flood. We may be sure, too, that God counted. He counts good and bad. "For we must all be manifested before the judgment-seat of the Christ, that each may receive the things done in the body, according to those he has done, whether it be good or evil", (@2 Corinthians 5:10). There would be the counting on this remarkable day as Noah came
{322}
out of the ark with his wife and his sons and their wives *with* him. We are told of this coming out at the end of @Genesis 8, before chapter 9 when God makes the covenant with him. That is particularly in view in the chapter. The counting was going on. God would look at all that was going on. We are reminded of God's pleasure in Christ; and God would call our attention to what pleases Him in a man like Noah. He found rest there. Later on God tells Abraham to take certain creatures and certain birds, and Abraham went and did it and brought them back to offer them to God. There is the counting in Abraham's case, and the counting in Noah's case of every clean beast and all clean fowl. There they are set out for God's pleasure. We have to do with a God like this; one who counts His people. He takes account of us as coming up on the first day of the week. We may think, it does not matter much if we give this or that, but it does matter, for God counts. So we are told that God will count by and by (@Psalm 87:5,6). Where was this man born? He was born where God had rest. And was this man born there? It is for each to challenge himself as to these countings of God.
Think of what there was on this peculiar day. These creatures come out with Noah and there they are, and Noah offers a burnt offering of every clean creature. Jehovah says, There is no mistake, *the* savour is there. That is the point in the thing, and one challenges oneself as to it. So "Noah built an altar to Jehovah; and took of every clean animal and of all clean fowl, and offered up burnt-offerings on the altar. And Jehovah smelled the sweet odour". He smelled it. It was for God, and it is as if God was saying, 'It all speaks of what pleases Me in Noah'. In chapter 9, following this, there is the covenant. God says, "And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you" @Genesis 9:9. God is saying, 'I have made no mistake,
{323}
Noah is the man'; he is true to his name. Hence the odour is there. There are the creatures, look at them. Noah brought them to offer to God, speaking to God's heart of His great creature, the man of the sweet odour, that which ministers a sweet odour to God. All this points to the Lord Jesus. It is He who yields to God *in this way* , and only He. We come in with Him. Sometimes we quote that verse of Scripture: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 3:17), and very often we put in the word 'all', but it is not there, because God is leaving room for us to come into this by the gift of the Spirit. Along with His beloved Son, the Father has made room for every one of us. He that has anointed us is God. There are other things, too, that He has done. He that has sealed us is God, and He that has anointed us is God, and He that has given us the Holy Spirit is God. We are brought in under the same Head. It is not 'all', it is, "in whom I have found my delight"(@Matthew 3:17). The omission of 'all' makes room for us. In the anointing of the Lord Jesus the Father has made room for us. How far and wide and blessed is the thought. We are brought into the anointing, the savour of Christ.
So here, every creature is counted in the offering, that is offered to God. Noah, what a creature he was; his name means repose. Well now, there are other thoughts in the passage. "And Jehovah said in his heart". This is the second point, the matter of God's heart. What He says in His heart. I have been clearing the ground for what I am about to say now. The ground clearly refers to God and His doings and consequently makes a way for God to say things, to intimate things that He is going to deal with later. He is saying things in His heart, not saying them out loud yet. Remarkable reference! How much God has said in His heart, and one is thinking of positive things, such as the mystery. The mystery was before
{324}
the world, and was kept in God's mind all the way down from Adam and Eve until the time of Paul, the time of the Spirit, who kept things without saying anything about them. "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing", (@Proverbs 25:2). That is remarkable! How long did He conceal the mystery, the mystery of the gospel, the mystery of the assembly? He concealed it from the very beginning of time, in His counsels. He kept certain things and said nothing about them. They were the very best things that He had. Such is our God! Because we all should remember that we are speaking of our God, not my God, and of course my God, too, but our God. The God we have. We share the blessed God, so to say, in common, dear brethren. The God we share and love and dwell with, that very One, has certain things in His heart, but the things He is speaking of here in Genesis are not just as great as the things He has in His heart *for us* .
I want to point out what surrounds this matter of what is in God's heart; it comes out after Noah had made his offerings. God is going along with us, and He is waiting at times for what we are doing. God does everything, you say. Well, He does not do everything; He expects us to do some things, and if we do not do them, then He must do what we leave out, but He is expecting us to do them. So here He did not tell Noah to build an altar, but Noah did it, and what he did God was pleased with, showing that there are things that we may do without God saying anything to us about them, but as done they please God. We must learn of the blessed God to be able to do things that please Him. How do we learn it? We learn it from others. We learn it from God and from Christ. The Holy Spirit operating in our hearts brings out things from our hearts. So here there is not a word about God telling him to build an altar, but as Noah did so, it gave room for
{325}
God, for the magnitude of His thoughts. What a man Noah was! What an understanding with God He had! What liberty with God!
God would speak to us about the matters relative to Noah and what he was. All showed what love was doing here. Noah picks out these clean creatures, and offers them to God, and God said in His heart, "I will no more henceforth curse the ground on account of Man". God knows His creature. He knows the work of Christ, and He knows the work of the Spirit. What the Holy Spirit does is not the work of redemption, but He accomplishes other things. Christ accomplished redemption. He is our Saviour, our Lord. The Spirit does certain things in us that please God, and He did certain things in Noah. At this particular time all these clean creatures were presented to God on the altar. God says, I am delighted with this matter. It opens up much. God waits for us to do things and that is the idea in the assembly at the present time in our dispensation. That is what God is looking for in us, and the Holy Spirit operates in us to this end. He works out with us the will of God, the things that God is pleased with, things like this. And so Noah can do this, and God is pleased with it, and now He says things in His heart because of it. What does He say in His heart? "I will no more henceforth curse the ground on account of Man, for the thought of Man's heart is evil from his youth; and I will no more smite every living thing, as I have done".
Now that is what God is saying in His heart. This was written many years later by Moses, not by Noah. I do not suppose Noah heard a sound from God about what He was going to do. It awaited the time for God to tell His creature what He was going to do. It was a negative thing; He knew what kind of heart man had -- unregenerate. I know that. God is not going to do anything like this again. He
{326}
said that in His heart, not aloud. Who can tell what God is saying at this very moment? What God is saying on account of the war? What He is saying on account of the happenings abroad? For God is not neglectful of these things. The worst things that ever happened are happening today. God knows it and feels it. He does feel it. Is not He saying something about it, saying something is going to happen? It is not a bad thing, but a good thing. The present dispensation is a time of good. God is not talking about bad things. Is not God going to have a wonderful crop from those who have suffered so much? What a lot of people are suffering! Europe is suffering. Germany is suffering. You say. They should. Do not say that too quickly, because there are saints in Germany, and they love God and God loves them, and God has them in His mind, has had them in mind during the last five or six years. He is saying something in His heart, and maybe it will come out in our prayers. He has a way of saying things. Here He is saying something in His heart, and it alludes to what is in Man's heart. "I will no more henceforth curse the ground on account of Man, for the thought of Man's heart is evil from his youth; and I will no more smite every living thing, as I have done". That is. He has changed His mind. Why should not God change His mind? "And Jehovah repented that he had made Man on the earth ... for I repent that I have made them" (@Genesis 6:6,7). God repented that He made Man on the earth. Why should He not do that? You say. Did God make a mistake? No, He made no mistake. Did God not change His mind? God is sovereign, and we want to be in line, and intercede with God to change His mind. @Isaiah 62:6,7 says, "Ye that put Jehovah in remembrance, keep not silence, and give him no rest". I am not speaking loosely, but am quoting Scripture. God says to you. Keep asking;
{327}
keep praying; do not give up; ask and it will be given to you.
So the one we read of in Luke that petitioned the unjust judge is a disturbing cause to him, and because of the disturbance she is, he will grant her request. So I would urge upon each one here if there is anything you want from God, ask God for it. In fact, it is said that God is ready to give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him. It is the greatest possible gift. He is ready to do that; there are some here who have not the Spirit. You are hardly a Christian at all if you have not the Holy Spirit. The Spirit is given to them that ask Him. "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?", (@Luke 11:13). How great that is! Does not every one of us, who are lovers of God, want to be like Jesus, to move on this earth like Jesus, to follow in the steps of Jesus, the very steps? The Holy Spirit makes us do it. It grieves Him when people have not the Holy Spirit. Almost before one can have part in this one must get the Holy Spirit, for you are hardly fit for heaven or for the assembly. You must have the Holy Spirit and you can have it, because, "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" (@Luke 11:13). Get on your knees about it. Ask with both your knees on the ground, and something will happen. God will answer. "For this reason", says Paul, "I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named, in order that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to
{328}
know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God", @Ephesians 3:14 - 19. I would urge any person here who has not got the Holy Spirit to ask God for It. I plead with you, and yet I am indignant with you for neglecting to see to these things. I would say. Do not be neglectful in getting the Holy Spirit.
Now to get to the point immediately before us. "Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". He is saying that He will not send a deluge again. He is not saying anything about the lake of fire. Terrible thought! God is not saying anything about that here. It is going to happen. Here He is saying, "Seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". That is what He is saying, and it is all negative. God is not going to have day and night eternally, or cold and winter eternally, but He is saying these things about the *provisional* time. It is a provisional matter, but He is not saying this out loud yet, but He tells Moses later on. Most of the important things that come out from God throughout the Old Testament come out much later; that is they are secret. God has His man to disclose them.
He is speaking of "all the days of the earth". It is going to terminate; the present earth and heavens shall pass away; but as to these days of the present earth and the years and months, God is saying at this particular juncture that these things are to continue "all the days of the earth". So we are to pay attention to this chapter, this passage, as to the matter of the present earth, the present heavens. We read of these things in 2 Peter. Peter deals considerably with this matter I am dealing with. As to what happens, and is going to happen to Israel in relation to the millennium, we have the whole truth
{329}
now, but God is going to have new heavens and new earth in which righteousness dwells. What a thought that is! And we shall be there. All believers will be there. As to the present earth and heavens, God is telling us here that it is a short-lived matter; now it is a question of days and years. "Henceforth, all the days of the earth, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". Let nobody try to alter the matter. Some men at times have tried to change days and years, but they cannot do it. God says they cannot do it. In the presence of such activities therefore, dear brethren, it is a time of suffering for the saints of God; this time of days and years. "Henceforth all the days of the earth" means that the time is very limited. The time mentioned is limited. It is not eternity. I hope the brethren are seeing the thing and understanding intelligently. God discloses what is in His heart for a provisional period after the deluge. Christianity had not come yet, but it came in its time. We are dealing with the thought of time, and so in the New Testament we are told that the time is short. If a man live sixty, seventy or eighty years, that is a very few days really. We may as well face these things. We are not going to live long. Look at the first commandment with promise: "Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be prolonged in the land that Jehovah thy God giveth thee", (@Exodus 20:12). That is for the young people, not old ones, we are not looking for days on the earth, but better days above; that is, above the earth. That is what we value, we who are real Christians.
We have here what God is saying of mankind, not publicly in Noah's time, but through Moses. You may say that you thought the millennium was a long period -- one thousand years. But it is not very long, you know, the life of one man; Methuselah
{330}
nearly used up all those years. God is telling us that there is not much to look for in time. God says, I am using time, the first day of the week, the Lord's day, and I want you to be in that, in the knowledge of that. I want to give you the mystery in those days, however short they may be. We have the days, all the days of the earth. There are times of cold and heat, and some do not come out to the meetings, some for the cold and some for the heat. Summer and winter, and the brethren do not come out, sometimes because of the heat, sometimes because of the cold, and yet God has made both cold and heat, summer and winter. Let us remember that God made them.
This is a day when the earth is feeling the suffering and sorrow and God is looking for something from His people that they may, like Noah, always be ready to yield to God. Every true lover is ready to yield to God; he does not keep back anything, not keeping back a clean beast because it is a big or fat beast. It is a time now of service to God and God is looking for service. "For *we* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh", (@Philippians 3:3). That is the time we are living in. I want you young people to think it over -- the days of the earth; not simply the generality of the thing for the actual days are very short. But while the earth remains there will be such time; there will be provision, day and night. The principle is that God is merciful. It is nothing like eternity, that which we are going into as through the redemptive work of the Lord Jesus. We are going into eternity, to our place with Christ. But in this provisional time of days of the earth, these things come into it; "seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease". And God is saying to us that He is looking for our love to be such that His
{331}
service may go on in all these years, days and months, especially the first day of the week, the day God claims for Himself.
May God bless the thoughts to us!
{332}
FORGIVENESS OF SINS
@Hebrews 10:14 - 17; @1 Kings 17:17 - 24
It will be observed that there is a calling of sins to mind with the woman of which I read in 1 Kings and in the first scripture I read it is said that God is not remembering sins. "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work", (@2 Timothy 3:16,17). They are not always clear in our minds, but as we enquire into the Scriptures, the Lord helping us, we find clarity, for there is complete agreement in all Scripture. All Scripture, as I have said, is given by inspiration of God, and it is profitable for teaching, conviction, correction and instruction in righteousness. So the wise course for persons not acquainted with these matters is to look into them. There are those that are ever learning, and yet never come to a knowledge of the truth. This is deplorable! For if we never come to a knowledge of the truth, we shall never be free, for the truth sets us free. So one would encourage hearers to recognise that every scripture is inspired of God and profitable, and not intended to baffle anybody or darken anybody, but to enlighten us. God has given us minds, and Christians, those who believe, are said to have the mind of Christ. I am not sure if we are all Christians here, but most are. Christians have the mind of Christ. We are able to think as Christ does. And, of course, Christ is God. These are cardinal truths that I am setting out. There are consequential things in us and one of these is a mind, as it is said. We have the mind of Christ; that is, Christians. And having such a mind, we may be encouraged to open our Bibles at any time and compare spiritual things with spiritual, scripture with scripture, and we shall find that all Scripture
{333}
agrees with Scripture. This scripture in @Hebrews 10 agrees with the scripture in @1 Kings 17.
@Hebrews 10 tells us that the Holy Spirit is witness to us. He is a witness of many things, but a witness to us that *our* sins and *our* iniquities are never remembered any more for ever. I hope that all here can join us in this great and blessed knowledge that belongs to Christians, that God does not remember our sins any more. It is not that He has not remembered them, but that He is not speaking of them any more. Again I say that I hope that all of you can join us in this matter, in this wonderful knowledge that we have forgiveness. God has so committed Himself to the idea of forgiveness that He is preaching it, not simply speaking about it, but preaching it: "That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem" (@Luke 24:47). God not only tells us about forgiveness, that some of the passages in the Bible set forth forgiveness, but He is preaching it. I am here tonight to do my little part in this -- the preaching of forgiveness, and I ask any here, whoever they are, who are not forgiven, to think over what I have said, and see if you cannot be one of us. Why should you not be? It is a public matter. God is not only telling us of forgiveness, writing it down in the Scriptures, but He is preaching it, having it preached: "that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations beginning at Jerusalem", (@Luke 24: 47). He did it at the beginning with twelve men who were commanded to go and preach among the nations and proclaim to them that their sins could be forgiven, that God is ready to forgive. The time for it has come. These men were in power, and at the beginning their preaching was accompanied by works of power from God, and thus these men preached remission of sins. Well now, that is the general fact that I have in mind at this time.
{334}
Now I proceed to speak of @1 Kings 17, in order to make clear that the woman there, who is a widow, we are told she was a widow of Zarephath, had been entertaining or providing for the prophet Elijah for some time. God had arranged that she should do this for His servant, that this woman should provide for him. Previously He had ordered the ravens to feed Elijah. He had ordered the brook to run down where Elijah was, so that he could drink of the brook. The ravens brought meat and bread and the water came down in the torrent. There was plenty of water for the time being, but it dried up. It lasted a considerable time, and when it dried up God arranged that this woman, called the widow of Zarephath, should provide for Elijah, His servant, and now she is doing it. He had been in the east near the Jordan, but the brook dried up so he had to go across the country to the place of the widow's residence. She was near the Mediterranean, and God had commanded this widow to provide for His servant, which the widow did. Elijah finds the widow near her house and she was the first person he met as he reached the place. She had an only son. It was a time of famine and they were suffering from the famine and so was Elijah.
Now these are things that I am seeking to bring before you, and again I ask if there are any here not forgiven; if so they should look into the matter as I proceed. At this particular time, there was this widow woman, who had herself no means of livelihood except a little meal in a barrel and a little oil in a cruse, coming out of the town to gather a few sticks to make a fire so that she could cook the little meal and the little oil, that she and her son might eat the little and die. That is the picture. You may say, I am not likely to be in those circumstances; but the question is, Are you not in those circumstances now? If you are still in your sins, unforgiven, you
{335}
are. This woman does not seem to be occupied with sins; she is occupied with the little meal and the little oil and occupied with the thought of her son, both in their sins, ready to die. A sorrowful picture! You say, I am not in that case. Certainly you are if your sins are not forgiven. You are in a worse case. She was not concerned about her sins at this time, but the conversation went on between the widow and Elijah, the conversation about the little she had, and Elijah says to her, Fear not. He had the mind of God. And so I would say to anyone not forgiven, Fear not, but fear God, for He is to be feared. "For also our God is a consuming fire", (@Hebrews 12:29). Our God -- that is the Christian's God. It is a question of God as such. He is a consuming fire, and we have to do with God. There is a good reason for unforgiven sinners to be afraid, good reason to fear.
Now Elijah said. Fear not. I am not going into further details except to say that the widow and her son and Elijah lived for a whole year on the little oil she had in the cruse and the little meal in the barrel. They lived for a whole year on that. Well, you say, that is something beyond my experience. It is not beyond the experience of persons that know God. Elijah knew God, and had confidence in saying to the widow, Fear not. So the year is spent; there was no food, there was no rain, but the meal in the barrel and the oil in the cruse did not fail. It does not say how big the barrel was, but the point is, that they came through with very small supplies, but they did not starve for a whole year. Our God is a God of miracles, a God of wonders, a Saviour God. Our God is a forgiving God; there is forgiveness with Him. He does not ration out forgiveness. Indeed it is not a commodity to be rationed, it is with God and like other things that are with God, there is plenty of it. God is reaching toward you that you may draw near to Him. He is ready to
{336}
receive you. If you have not got your sins forgiven, then I would say, God has forgiveness with Him that He might be feared. Pardon me for repeating my enquiry, as to whether there are persons here whose sins are not forgiven, because it is a serious matter. May you not go out of the door of this room unforgiven! It is a hazardous thing for you to do. Get your sins forgiven and go out of the door with forgiveness. There is forgiveness with God. That is what we are reading in this scripture.
The scripture shows that Elijah is kept alive, and the woman, and the boy; these three persons are kept alive for a year. God is a God of wonders. His name is Wonderful. Among the wonders of God is the fact that He can forgive sins and many sins. However many you may have, they can all be forgiven. The Lord Jesus has been the sin-bearer. Peter, speaking about believers, says of the Lord Jesus, "Who himself bore our sins in his body"(@1 Peter 2:24). Paul says, "For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified", (@Hebrews 10:14). Perfected for ever. Well, now, the widow, and the boy and Elijah lived for a whole year on the little meal and the little oil, but in course of time the son dies. I am endeavouring to bring before you, who are unforgiven persons in your own experience, how this widow illustrates you. She had not yet any trouble in her conscience about her sins, but when the boy dies she begins to be troubled about her sins. It is solemnly true that while God is a forgiving God, and has forgiveness with Him, and the Holy Spirit is witness that sins are forgiven and never remembered any more; yet a great many people are not forgiven, or are not consciously forgiven.
Now God is reaching out to you, that you might be afraid, afraid of your unforgiven state, and that you may have to do with God about it; that an element of fear may come into your heart when you
{337}
know you have to do with God. "For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God", (@Romans 14:11). The circumstances surrounding us are put in our way in grace so that we might stop and look around, and see if there is not something wrong in our histories. How it is we are not like others who have their sins forgiven all these years, and who have a witness to it, and no less a witness than the Holy Spirit? Why should anybody be so burdened with a load of sins on his back, on his shoulders, when we have the means right by us, and the witness of the Holy Spirit, that the Lord Jesus became the sin-bearer, has borne our sins in His body on the tree? At that time God forsook Him. Think of that! God forsook His beloved Son. The Lord Jesus Himself said to God: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"(@Matthew 27:46). What a question it was! Think of what it must have been to God to hear that, from One of whom it is said: "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand", (@John 3:35). And yet He has to say this to God, "Why hast thou forsaken me?"(@Matthew 27:46). Well, that belongs to the doctrine of what I am speaking of, not that I am going to preach doctrine, but doctrine has value. It is for us to know that there is such a thing as doctrine, what is called the apostles¬ doctrine. It is most important to understand that, if we are at all exercised about this matter of our sins and how the matter has been dealt with. There is no time for that now, but the Bible is for that, so that we look into the doctrine to get God's mind about the forgiveness of our sins. We are to be perfectly assured, and the doctrine assures us.
Well now, this boy dies. This is one of the many circumstances to arrest persons that are not forgiven. You are going about this world as an unforgiven person. You are no pleasure to God as moving
{338}
about in this town or in another town unforgiven, and yet there are millions of persons moving about unforgiven. The matter of sins has been settled fully to God's glory and satisfaction, and to the satisfaction of the conscience of every believer, and we want you, we believers, we want you to join us in this matter of forgiveness. We want you to become a forgiven person and we are telling you now that things may happen to you. A child may die, a wife may die, a husband may die. You say. Sorrowful thing, we must provide for the funeral. About this young person, it is a very terrible thing, he or she is dead, and the parents, the brothers and sisters, the neighbours, are careless about this matter of forgiveness. God is not careless, so He causes this widow to remember her sins. Many are like her, carrying their sins about and never settling them. God says, It does not suit Me to have you moving about on My earth with a load of sins. God says, I am not satisfied. Most of those in this hall have settled the matter of their sins, and God is pleased about it. It is a great thought, having the sense that God is pleased with you. He is pleased with all believers. Believers have their sins forgiven. Why are you not among them? God is saying to you, that sometime something will happen, but He wants you to be forgiven, if you are not forgiven yet. He is endeavouring to awaken you. "Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light", (@Ephesians 5:14). You who have not done that yet, God is endeavouring to awaken you. Like Jonah, who went to sleep and was aroused from his slumbers: "What meanest thou, sleeper?"(@Jonah 1:6). Your sins are not dealt with; you are still carrying them about; your sins are unforgiven.
God is persistently saying things to you, and He will continue. God has spoken to me and many more of us. God says things to us loudly so as to
{339}
awaken us to our danger as unforgiven sinners, because God is a God of light and He sees your sins and your danger. He is warning you that every knee must bow to Him and every one must confess to Him. At this time, if you confess to God, you will be saved. "Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else", (@Isaiah 45:22). There is forgiveness with God. He is preaching it. "Through this man [the Lord Jesus Christ] is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins", (@Acts 13:38). All believers are justified from all things; that is the gospel, not simply the doctrine but the fact of the gospel. "Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else"(@Isaiah 45:22). Why are you moving about this great city with the load of your sins upon you, when God speaks to you and proposes forgiveness? As I said, things happen in our lives so that we might look and see why we are moving about carrying our sins upon our backs, whereas God proposes to forget them; the work that enables God to do that, was done in the death of Christ, but in order that you might get the benefit of that fact you must get forgiveness. Well, you say, I need nothing to be saved. Well, that is where you make a mistake. There is something you must have to be saved, and this is faith. It is for you, if you want to be saved, and to enjoy what we are enjoying -- the forgiveness of our sins. You must have faith.
I want to show now how this widow of Zarephath lost her boy. It is a very real matter. The boy was dead. As soon as it happens she says to the prophet, "What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance?". Well now, I have been saying that the doctrine is: "Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more" (@Hebrews 8:12). That is a great relief. If your conscience is awakened, this word will bring relief.
{340}
Come, believe it now, and say I am a forgiven man. "All that believe are justified from all things" (@Acts 13:39). That is the gospel. Well, now, as to this woman; "And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so sore that there was no breath left in him. And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?". She thought Elijah had slain her son, whereas he had not. It was God that did it. God did it to help the woman that the woman might get to know her need of forgiveness. God did it. God has a right to do what He will, and a right to take life. I would say to all here, God can claim the life of your boy, your girl, your husband. God has a perfect right to do it if He wishes. God is saving people today, but He may bring death in in order to save one or another. This boy dies in order that the mother might be saved, but she blames the prophet. Generally when these things happen we blame someone else. "What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?". You can understand how Elijah would be distressed, how any servant of the Lord would be distressed. A poor widow who had entertained him for a year, and now her boy dies, and she blames him. It is a real plight. I want to show how God uses His servants to settle such matters. Elijah says to the poor widow: "Give me thy son. And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed. And he cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son?". You can understand the circumstances; Elijah felt them, but God is looking on. If there is anyone here unforgiven, God is looking on.
{341}
He is listening to what I am saying, and to what you are hearing. He would have you come to know that what has happened to cause you trouble, to cause you to suffer, is to awaken you.
And so it goes on: "And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again". Now listen, dear friends: "And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived. And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah said. See, thy son liveth". Is not light streaming into your soul as that passage is read? Does it fit your case, that boy, that girl, that husband has died and you are still living, as an unforgiven person, not pleasurable to God at all? God gave His Son for you, that you might be relieved, that your sins might be remembered no more, that your conscience might be free. As we said before, "All that believe are justified from all things" (@Acts 13:39). It is worth while to have this sorrow that one might be relieved from the burden of unforgiven sins. God is preaching forgiveness of sins to you now. He is forgiving sins. It is part of His work. The blessed God is labouring in this sphere of things. He is preaching it, to bring people to the knowledge of this fact that each should judge himself, for as he comes in contact with God there must be repentance. That is being preached too. The two things go together. Forgiveness is preached and repentance is preached. God says. You can repent too. I am opening the door wide so that you can repent. Tell Me all about your sins; what your life has been. Others do not know, but you know and I know. Why should you go about this earth with a load of sins on your back? God is saying, I am preaching to you to repent. Repentance and
{342}
remission of sins are preached among all nations. There must be this element of repentance and what goes with it is faith. I would call attention to what is said in the gospel of Luke about the woman who was a sinner; she was a bad person. She came into the house where the Lord Jesus had been invited by a man called Simon. This woman came in and she stood behind the Lord Jesus, weeping. It does not say any more about her than that, only that she had many sins. But the great fact is that the Lord says, "Her many sins are forgiven" (@Luke 7:47). That is the point -- her many sins -- the Lord said that. The Lord is ready to meet you, there is nothing in His heart for you but relief for you, to relieve you of those sins. He knows how many they are. We who believe can say. He bore our sins in His own body on the tree. He knows them well. This woman, who was a sinner, had many sins. The Lord Jesus, the blessed Holy Saviour, said to Simon: "Her many sins are forgiven"(@Luke 7:47). There is hardly anything I can say to you that would be a finer example of the Saviour that saves, than the incident of this woman who had many sins, but whose many sins were forgiven.
Well, I now come back to this widow of Zarephath. It says of Elijah, "He stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again". These matters are very important and it requires more than we think. We may think very lightly of the matter of the gospel and the matter of forgiveness. But much had to be done and much is being done. Elijah "stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again". Now Elijah is a type of Christ. He can take up the cause of this woman and this boy, and cry to God about the whole
{343}
matter and God hears him. He is a type of Jesus. "For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus",(@1 Timothy 2:5). Elijah is a type of this Man. If there is here a person who is not forgiven, the Lord is concerned about you. Elijah is concerned about this boy, because of the boy's mother. God is concerned about each one of you, because God has rights over you; God is concerned over you, because your parents know that their child needs to be saved. The Lord is concerned about you as Elijah is concerned about this woman and this boy, and is crying to God for them. "And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again. And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived".
Well now, that is a great matter. Oh, that that might happen before us in this hall, to that boy for whom we are crying to God, while the poor mother is mourning and sorrowing. Well, will that happen? God is a God of wonders. He has given His Son to die that we might live. He will forgive you; do you believe it? "And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah". Wonderful picture! The poor widow receiving her boy back again. "And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived. And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah said, See, thy son liveth".
We may apply that to any one that is not a Christian, that is unforgiven, that faith is coming into your soul, because the element of faith must be with you or nothing will happen. Without faith it is impossible to please God. So with this poor widow clearly faith was there. "And Elijah said, See, thy
{344}
son liveth". You are converted, God has caused the circumstances, so that you have come into blessing your sister, your brother, your husband, your neighbour, God has worked with them all. That is the idea, and God is going on with this work of forgiveness. Elijah has had the boy up in the upper chamber, it is called a loft, and he comes down now into the living room and the poor widow is there in her sorrow, but the boy has come down now alive. He is really alive, he can talk. Elijah says. There he is. I am not seeking to put anything into this which is not there, but I am speaking of God's thoughts that might come into your heart even now. The thing you are worrying about, your boy, God is going to turn your sorrow into blessing for you, as He did in the recovery of this boy.
Well, to come back to the passage. The boy is taken down and given to his mother. Well now, what happens? "And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is truth". That is the idea -- speaking the truth; that is what is needed. The idea of the gospel is to spread the truth. The truth is to be spread into human hearts, and the truth spreads into the soul of this woman. She is no longer worrying about her sins. That is why I read the passage in Hebrews, because the Holy Spirit is seen there as the power for any sinner that will draw near to God who will tell him, "Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more" (@Hebrews 8:12). How can you go along with sins on your conscience? In faith take advantage of what God has provided, when there is such a witness as the Holy Spirit here who will assure you that your sins and your iniquities are remembered no more.
That is all I have to say in seeking to bring out the truth of the passage in Hebrews. The great cardinal truth of the gospel that God is not remembering
{345}
sins and that the believer has the witness of the Holy Spirit that his sins and iniquities will not be remembered any more for ever. I want everyone here to leave this room with the knowledge in his soul that his sins and iniquities are remembered no more.
May God grant it.
{346}
CHRIST AMONG THE GENTILES
@Colossians 1:24 - 27; @Colossians 2:9,10; @Colossians 4:12,13
I have had a desire since coming here to speak a word as to Colossians. It is a peculiar epistle treating of Christ among the gentiles; "Christ in you" (as among the gentiles) "the hope of glory". It is somewhat like Joseph in Egypt, typical of Christ, separated from his brethren. So it is that Colossians is Christ seen among the gentiles; peculiarly, of course, bearing on ourselves and having in mind what is said in verse 27 of chapter 1, "To whom God would make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations, which is Christ in you the hope of glory". That is, Christ among the gentiles. As Paul once said, "Lo, we turn to the nations" (@Acts 13:46). The salvation of God is sent to the gentiles and they will receive it; a comforting word for us: they will receive it. We cannot just say that now, for much has elapsed since, but the gentiles have received the gospel, the salvation of God. The Colossians, for instance, had received it, but many have given it up since, the apostasy having set in, so that we cannot with much confidence say of any section of the gentile world now that they will receive the salvation of God, but the apostle could speak of the dispensation in that sense: they will receive it. This epistle shows what was in mind: that Christ should be among the gentiles, and that as among them, the ministry would be there, and the toil or labour of the apostle was to present every man perfect in Christ; a very great thought: to present every man perfect in Christ.
There is a challenge as to whether we belong in this late day to the gentile world that *has* received the salvation of God. There is an opportunity for some who may have neglected it even since yesterday,
{347}
that you should receive the salvation of God which is sent, which is among us. One would love to have this feeling, that one had some little result in endeavouring to present the glad tidings, because it is no less than that. What has been before us would make up our minds as to this great matter of the gentile world, and how they at the beginning were regarded by the great apostle that they would receive the salvation of God; they would receive it. One has no doubt that during these holidays a good many will be affected. We thank God for these holidays. We call them holidays, but really they become holy days to us. During these three days here in Chicago in the midst of this terrible city, one of the worst in the world, that there should be a company of holy people is a very great matter; a very great matter to heaven; and our thought now is that there should be an increase, that something should be accomplished in a turning of heart, with a view to the presenting of someone perfect in Christ, not simply perfect, but perfect in Christ. That is a qualifying word, which belongs, as we might say, to a higher presentation of the truth, that persons are not only secured, but in Christ.
Well now, what has been in my mind, too, is to connect what I have to say with the idea of completeness. It is found in these three passages that I have read: "the assembly; of which *I* became minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given me towards you to complete the word of God", or 'fill out'. I refer to this to begin with. It is a proper beginning, too, of the subject, that the word of God has been filled out. The word of God began, of course, to be spoken as early as @Genesis 1, and it was being spoken ever since, but not completed, not filled out -- very far from being filled out - in Old Testament times; and, of course, I need not say that the completion of the letter of the Scriptures
{348}
was very gradual, I mean, the Old Testament Scriptures. However much there was was to be regarded as Scripture, for "every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness" (@2 Timothy 3:16); so even in Old Testament times it was profitable. It is more so now, for not only is it added to, it is complete. That is Paul's assertion here, and it is of value to us because we are living in times of great looseness. Persons who would assume to know, such as teaching people -- college people, high school people and grammar school people are apt to say things very loosely -- are apt to say very untrue things about the Holy Scriptures, some of them going so far as to say that certain parts of the Scriptures are not inspired. Therefore the importance, dear brethren, of having our loins girded about with truth, meaning that our thoughts are not to flow loosely. When talking to people, it may be, in the workshop or in the store or in the school or in the train or in the bus, we are not to be speaking loosely of things so that we find ourselves speaking untruths, speaking lies. Very easily we may slip into it, and hence the great importance of having our loins girded about with truth, so that our thoughts do not flow loosely.
And so I believe Colossians is a tightening-up epistle; you will understand what I endeavour to say. It may be in regard of morals, domestic relations, and many other such things that need tightening up, girding. And so in regard to this matter of the word of God, let us put our seal to it in saying that it is complete. We set to our seal that God is true, but also that the word of God is complete. The Old Testament did not contain the completeness; it contained much, and the Spirit of God was not in a very great hurry -- I use that word 'hurry' rightly -- to begin writing the New Testament. There was no
{349}
New Testament to appeal to in the early chapters of the Acts, but nevertheless time was taken in heaven and on earth. Scribes began to work under God, to set out the mind of God in writing in what are called 'the holy writings'. The Spirit of God began to do that, but not in any great hurry. The principle was the *doing* first; what kind of work should develop in Christianity, and then to write down an account of it. We read of good works, too, that were ordained before that we should walk in them -- a most important matter. And then that they should be written down.
So we have the epistles, particularly those of Paul, and we see how he selected what to write and to whom to write. I say 'selected' because it is evident that they were selected; he decided to write to the Thessalonians, probably his first epistle. Well, he had great pleasure, it is quite evident, in writing that epistle. He styles it, "To the assembly of Thessalonians in God the Father"(@1 Thessalonians 1:1). What a lovely group they were, and what a lovely term used: "in God the Father". It is not "in Christ" now. I have already spoken of "in Christ" but here it is "in God the Father". Surely there was something peculiar, dear brethren, in that epistle. But then in time Paul selected to write to the Colossians, and I have read from the epistle to the Colossians. He had never seen the Colossians, he tells us, a remarkable thing too; the doctrine is so profound, dealing with the Person of Christ. Colosse was not very far away from the well-known church of Laodicea. We have not a record of the epistle to the Laodiceans, but there was one; in the one to Colosse we have four chapters. Paul had not known the Colossians, and, of course, we might say in speaking of ourselves, Paul has not known us and yet his epistles speak to us. They are our stock in trade, to speak reverently. They are final, authoritative words; words containing
{350}
completion, too, of subjects and particularly this one which speaks of the completion of the word of God. Paul had not known them, and it is a word, dear brethren, for us as to being ourselves in the place of the Colossians and seeing how an epistle from Paul would affect us even now. He had never seen them and, of course, he has not seen us, but it is well to compare and see how things worked out as to epistles and the effect of them.
So he says to them, "Rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ" (@Colossians 2:5). He had joy in the knowledge of the Colossians; they had order. What a word it is now. There is so much disorder. Even with the Corinthians there was disorder, but not among the Colossians; that is a very important matter to note; and, dear brethren, a very important matter to note as to ourselves that we are walking orderly, that we are not marked by disorder in our services, in our incomings and outgoings among the people of God. Heaven is looking on, because that is really what is implied in what Paul says: "Rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ"(@Colossians 2:5). That is what he could say of them; a very real pleasure to him. One often thinks of it as one is sitting down with the brethren at the Lord's supper, because the Lord's supper is the beginning of the service of God. Every Lord's day begins the service of God; and Paul, although not having been there, could discern, for he had a remarkable outlook. He said to the Corinthians, "Ye and my spirit being gathered together"(@1 Corinthians 5:4), for discipline and yet he was not there, showing what an advantage the early Christians had in Paul.
So he says to the Colossians, "Rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ" (@Colossians 2:5). What a pleasure it was to the apostle to be able to write thus; but undoubtedly he had more.
{351}
He wrote thus in order to say, perhaps, things that would not be so pleasant to the ear; and so we have such words as 'combating'. The dear servant "who is one of you", he says, named Epaphras; a beloved servant, Paul says; he singled him out, he was one of the Colossians, and one of the things he said about him was, "combating earnestly for you". And what was he combating for? That they might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. This word 'combating' implies that in that assembly the enemy had certain opportunities and advantages so that the apostle Paul had to clothe himself with armour. He speaks of combating for them in regard to the knowledge of the mystery. He was combating in his own soul that these dear people, whom he had never seen, should be set up in the knowledge of the mystery of God, in which were hid then and are hid now all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, but he had to combat; it is a remarkable word. Yet they were lovely Christians. One could see that outwardly anyway.
The apostle could say, "Rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ",(@Colossians 2:5) and yet they were in danger from the devil; he was allowed too close to them. That is what I am speaking about now. It is what I had in mind to speak about, that the devil should not be allowed to come into close quarters. It is too dangerous. They were allowing that and Paul had to combat for them, to agonise, as it were, in combat against the devil. It was a critical time for the Colossians, and it may be a critical time for some here. We have been hearing of the assembly, but then, has the devil any room to get in to oppose what has been brought forward? And so the need, dear brethren, of going home, as we shall, no doubt, tonight or tomorrow, God willing, and getting on our knees. It is a praying time now. Presently the ministry time for this season
{352}
will be over, but the praying time goes on. That is the word in Colossians, "praying always". One would say that is the urgent thing if we are to lay hold of and retain what has been ministered, pray; defeat the devil. It is a real conflict; it will be on immediately. It is on already, possibly, in some of our hearts here, other things crowding in: when we get home what we shall find there, and what possibilities are opening up to us, what prospects? All these things the devil finds room in and hence the minister has to be in conflict as Paul was and as Epaphras was about the Colossians. I do urge this, dear brethren, as to prayer. "Praying at all seasons, with all prayer and supplication", (@Ephesians 6:18). I refer to the urgency of it; the need for prayer especially after a season of blessing which God has given us, which the dear brethren in this city have opened up to us, the means of meeting together, and speaking together, having fellowship one with another in our houses and elsewhere. Is it worth while to kneel down and make it a practice to defeat the devil? Because it is a terrible time we are in, and especially after a season like this, that the devil should not have a place, and that there should need be such urgency of conflict that the saints should lay hold of the truth, the ministry. "In which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge"(@Colossians 2:3).
So, as I said, this matter of the word of God -- have you set to it the seal that God is true and that the Scriptures are true. God is true and the Scriptures are true? Set them both side by side. Then as to the use of them, we have spoken of the Bereans. They were not Colossians, but they were a good classification as compared with the Colossians, searching the Scriptures daily, as we are told, to see whether these things were so. They were noble; persons who would consult the Scriptures, the written page, the completed page of God. I do not mean to
{353}
say that what I am reading of here -- the completion of the word of God, is just all written. It is not only a question of writing; it is a question of the mind of God being revealed, but in words in some sense. The completion of the word -- it is the word of God; if from God, it is the word; even if it be not written. "Who hath made man's mouth?"(@Exodus 4:11), God. The most wonderful thing in God's whole creation is man's mouth, and it is through that mouth that the word of God comes. First from God Himself through some agency, but particularly, dear brethren, and reverently do I say it, through the mouth of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is called the Word of God. That is what He is called. It is one of His titles. His Name is called the Word of God, and that means He has spoken; the Lord has spoken what is in the mind of God, and it has been completed. What God intends to unfold to us is completed; nothing is to be added to it.
I do not say that nothing was added after this immediate time when this epistle was written. All John's writings were probably added, but the idea of 'complete' here is the working out of the thing, the fulness of the thing, the idea of the thing in its fulness. That is the idea, that Paul completed the word in that sense, and now it can be said to be absolutely so, and there are not even any additions verbally, I mean, in writing. All is now finished; and hence the certainty that we may have, dear brethren, as to all matters in the word of God; not simply the letter of Scripture, but the word of God. "For the word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", @Hebrews 4:12. It is the word of God; nothing is concealed from it. "And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are
{354}
naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do"(@Hebrews 4:13). So that the word of God is God Himself. But there is the idea of the completion of it, and the word 'completion' as I said, is that it is filled out; there is a sketch first, an indication of the thing first, which is then filled out, completed through the service of Paul, through the pen of Paul. So that he says of himself here, "Of which *I* became minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given me towards you to complete the word of God".
Well now, I am speaking thus so that the brethren will be on their guard as to Scripture, as to what we are going on with in our Bible readings and in our private readings, for we are enjoined to give attention to reading, and in our public readings such as we have had here, so that everything that is said imparts the idea of completion in what our blessed God has furnished us. His mind is disclosed to us. He loves to have us pursue the meditation of it, as it is said, "Then they that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another",(@Malachi 3:16). What were they speaking of? We are not told, but can you doubt it was a question of what was revealed in the Scripture? "Then they that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another; and Jehovah observed it, and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared Jehovah, and that thought upon his name. And they shall be unto me a peculiar treasure",(@Malachi 3:16,17). What a thought that is for us. We become the veritable property of God through this way of reading His word and attending to it, comparing spiritual with spiritual, and thus persons known to heaven and reflective of what is in heaven -- our names being written up there. And the Lord says, "I will write upon him my new name" (@Revelation 3:12), a most precious thought, all indicative of what the saints are as taking up the word; as the Lord says to Philadelphia, "Thou ... hast kept my word, and
{355}
hast not denied my name" (@Revelation 3:8), and hence the great advantage that the overcomer in Philadelphia is allowed.
Well now, I pass on to the second scripture which is in the second chapter. It is a question of the completeness of the saints; "ye are complete in him". Now, if you follow me, I have been speaking about the completeness of the word of God; now I am speaking about the completeness of the saints. How very seldom can we speak of each other, and say such-and-such a brother is complete. Well, who is complete? That is the question. The apostle here says, "Ye are complete in him". Let us analyse it for a moment. "See that there be no one who shall lead *you* away as a prey" (@Colossians 2:8). Remember, I have been speaking of the devil and the combat that came in because he came in, the combat of Paul and Epaphras, that the truth should stand with the Colossians. Now here he says, "See that there be no one who shall lead *you* away as a prey through philosophy and vain deceit, according to the teaching of men, according to the elements of the world, and not according to Christ. For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily"(@Colossians 2:8,9). We have the other scripture in chapter 1 where it is said that "in him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell"(@Colossians 1:19). What is said in chapter 2 is in addition to that. You can see how the idea of the fulness of God is brought to us. It was brought to the early Christians and is brought to us now. There is nothing at all short of deity in Christ. Paul says, The fulness now dwells in Christ bodily; within the compass of a blessed Man, within that compass the whole thought of God was really there. All the fulness dwells in Him bodily. That is, you could locate it, because it was in that Man, described to us in the Scriptures, the Man Christ Jesus. In that Person, and within the compass of His Person, all the fulness
{356}
of God dwells bodily. That is, as it were, towards us, towards our intelligence, towards our affections; all is there, focused there, intelligibly so in a Man; within that compass, but that compass itself being infinite. It is not merely a physical thought; it is an infinite thought, that all was there bodily. And then there is the added thought that I had in mind, "Ye are complete in him, who is the head of all principality and authority". Now I come back to that -- completeness in Christ. What He is as in Deity, as God toward us is one thing. That is all infinite; but Paul adds, "Ye are complete in him". I want you, dear brethren, to try and be patient with me and follow what I am endeavouring to say and understand it. Think of what it says: "Ye are complete in him". It is what I may call a subjective idea, not what He is as from God toward us; but what we are in Him toward God, in Christ, is another matter, and it is said that "ye are complete in him".
And so, as I said a minute ago, how little we hear of the thought that such-and-such a brother is complete; one who conveys the characteristics of a complete person, complete towards God. So it says, "And ye are complete in him, who is the head of all principality and authority", so that heaven looks down on us, and sees what we are as in Christ, taken up in Christ. What He is from God towards us is one thing, but what we are in Him towards God is another thing; and that we are complete towards God, that there is nothing missing. One may say there is a good deal missing in me, and of course, I would acquiesce in that and refer to myself too, but still I would insist on this idea of completeness, viewing ourselves as in Christ and involving the Spirit. It is only in the Spirit that we are in Christ, and involved in our having the Spirit is that we are complete in Christ Godward; and that enables us to have part in the service of God. There is nothing
{357}
lacking. God is looking down and thinking of the completion of matters, whether it be His word or whether it be the assembly, meaning ourselves; that we are set up in completeness. So that God looks at what is complete at any time in us as carrying on His service.
And then, finally, there are the exercises of Epaphras in the verse read in chapter 4:12: "Epaphras, who is one of you, the bondman of Christ Jesus, salutes you". We have had him before in chapter 1, and there can be no doubt that he gave Paul a clue as to what was needed at Colosse. Paul had not been there but Epaphras had been there and was there, and Paul could quote him. No doubt he was one that he had derived information from as regards the work of God at Colosse, and how important it is. We have had at these meetings our brethren who are placed here and there in localities, sown, as it were, in their places, so as to look after the interests of Christ. So here is a brother called Epaphras, a worthy man, beautifully spoken of in chapter 1, and so here, one who could be entrusted with the interests of Christ at Colosse. Paul had not been there, but he knew what was there from the information that Epaphras could give him, and, of course, from the intuition that he, as a great apostle, had by the Spirit. He speaks of such things as no other one does: "Rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ". So that Paul had a full account. He could, as it were, make a picture and visualise that the order was going on at Colosse when the service of God began on the first day in any week; he could picture what was there: "rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ" (@Colossians 2:5). But what sad thoughts they would realise, when the apostle thought of philosophy and vain deceit. Some young people in the meeting possibly were reading
{358}
the Greek classics and priding themselves in it. How often we hear of that, and hence the danger of our children being allowed to pursue these things. There is a certain pride in it, building themselves up in pride because they know so-and-so. So that it was a mixed situation at Colosse. There were the rejoicing and seeing the order outwardly of the service of God, but on the other hand there was the danger ever present of philosophy and vain deceit.
Another feature is referred to in chapter 2, the handwriting in ordinances, saying, "Let no one fraudulently deprive you of your prize, doing his own will in humility and worship of angels, entering into things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by the mind of his flesh, and not holding fast the head, from whom all the body, ministered to and united together by the joints and bands, increases with the increase of God" (@Colossians 2:18,19). So we have further, "Do not handle, do not taste, do not touch"(@Colossians 2:21). That is the legalist; an attempt was being made to introduce that legalism among the Galatians and so here. The apostle is working against it, combating against it, that the saints might be preserved from it. And so it is, dear brethren, any legality, any intenseness of religiousness according to man, according to the flesh, is to be avoided, for in the end it will damage if we admit of it. "Stand fast therefore, and be not held again in a yoke of bondage". (@Galatians 5:1).
And so, as I said before, Epaphras was the man sown and rooted locally in Colosse; he is said to be one of the Colossians. He was *sown* in Colosse, and what a man he was! Paul says, "Epaphras, who is one of you, the bondman of Christ Jesus, salutes you, always combating earnestly for you in prayers, to the end that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God". This was the great burden of Epaphras. He had spoken to Paul about it. I have not a doubt that he informed Paul of the tendencies
{359}
at Colosse; he prayed about it, and he combated about it in prayer. And what for? That they might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. It is not the completeness spoken of in chapter 2, we are complete in Him, but what comes about by prayer, by ministry, it may be; that the saints might be saved from all other than the will of God, that they should stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. It is a full thought, and that is why I felt encouraged to turn to Colossians, dear brethren, in view of these meetings and now in view of the close of them: that we might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. That is the word for the moment -- the will of God; and Epaphras was the man that Paul had in his mind peculiarly, because he was like a man sown in that town to guard the services of the Lord, and the interests of the Lord, and to carry on His work in prayer, in combat for the saints, that they might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.
May God grant it, dear brethren, to us, because God is aiming at much for us; He has much in mind. During these three days we have had a certain line of truth brought before us. The Spirit of God uses the brethren, helps us so that we have arrived at something that involves the will of God. We have arrived at something in regard to the ministry. That which was hid for ages is now made manifest and revealed to the holy apostles and prophets, I believe to Paul, who is said to be the minister of the assembly, and now rather to an Epaphras, if there are any -- and there are -- watchmen to keep an eye on the brethren in prayer, so that we may not slip away from the truth, but that it may become ours through our feeding on it, ruminating on it, living in it, making it food for ourselves, so that we may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.
{360}
*Pages 360 to 575 - "Notes of Readings in New York and Other Ministry, 1953" (Part only of Volume 193)*
THE GOSPEL (1)
@Luke 1:1 - 80
J.T. This chapter suggests what is evangelical.
J.T.Jr. Luke says that he writes with method as "accurately acquainted from the origin with all things".
J.T. That is good, and both these features should be in all ministry -- method and accuracy.
A.B.P. What do you understand by the word "method" as used by Luke?
J.T. It is important, in the things of God, that things be done with method. This chapter is evangelical, so you have: "Forasmuch as many have undertaken to draw up a relation concerning the matters fully believed among us". That is the truth of the gospel, and it was fully believed among the brethren.
J.T.Jr. And believed amongst us now?
J.T. Yes; we believe it now. If these meetings are not of this character we do not get much profit from them; that is to say, there is liberty between brethren so that we can speak about what is believed among us.
A.R. Luke speaks of "those who from the beginning were eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word".
J.T. Yes; they had delivered to others the truth as to "matters fully believed". That is a great matter.
J.T.Jr. So that before they had the written word these matters were fully believed amongst them.
J.T. Quite so; it was evidently understood amongst them; it was their conversation.
Rem. In Galatians it says, "The scripture ... announced beforehand the glad tidings to Abraham" (@Galatians 3:8), so that we are blessed with believing Abraham.
{361}
J.T. "Believing Abraham" -- that is one man who fully believed the truth. It is a great matter for us that we believe the gospel. The question is, Do we believe the gospel?
C.A.I. Paul spoke of coming to the Romans "in the fulness of the blessing of Christ", @Romans 15:29.
J.T. I suppose it is important to see that all this was thoroughly known amongst the brethren in the early days before the New Testament scriptures were written.
A.N.W. Luke was "accurately acquainted from the origin with all things". Is that an urgent need with us?
J.T. Quite so. It involves what has come down from heaven; if we have intelligence about these things, why should we not be accurate?
V.C.L. Paul says that the gospel is God's power to salvation to "every one that believes". It is not limited.
J.T. Quite. And then it says, "Those who from the beginning were eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word have delivered them to us". That is how matters were known at the beginning.
J.T.Jr. Is it important that we understand this title -- the Word? Would that be the way the disciples knew the Lord?
J.T. Yes; He would be known amongst them as the Word. Had we been there we might have heard someone say, 'I heard the Word speak today'. Well, what would He say? It would be something about the truth, the glad tidings.
J.T.Jr. So that this title "the Word" alludes to Christ.
J.T. Yes; quite so. There is only one Person who had that title.
J.H.E. John's gospel, which is the last book written, as we understand, supports that when it says, "In the beginning was the Word" @John 1:1.
{362}
J.T. Yes; "And the Word was with God, and the Word was God"(@John 1:1).
C.A.I. It is interesting that the things were there before they were written.
J.T. That is just what I was thinking. They were known to the brethren from the outset; the whole matter was known amongst the brethren.
A.B.P. Does the use of method bear witness to the skill of the evangelist?
J.T. Surely; Luke must have been a skilful man; he knew the forms of expression that would be needed for the conveyance of the glad tidings.
F.H.L. Paul speaks of "the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery", (@Romans 16:25).
J.T. He was the only one who got the mystery, I would say.
F.H.L. Luke wrote that Theophilus might "know the certainty" of those things in which he had been instructed. I suppose that with us things are established on the authority of the Scriptures.
J.T. Yes; the matter was fully told out to Theophilus by one who was fully capable of telling it.
F.W.K. Did John, when he wrote, "That which was from the beginning ..." (@1 John 1:1) have the fulness of the gospel in his mind?
J.T. Quite so, "that" is a demonstrative pronoun.
Ques. What does the idea of method involve?
J.T. That the gospel is accurately told out in an orderly way and that it stands to the present day.
A.R. It is all in relation to a Person -- the Word.
J.T. Yes; it is in relation to a Person who is called "the Word". The Word is a title. The disciples could relate these matters because John could say, "We have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life" (@1 John 1:1)
{363}
J.T.Jr. John's gospel runs along with what we are saying as to the Word. The "that which" of @1 John 1:1 would especially allude to the Lord's humanity and would link on with Luke.
E.A.L. "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us", (@John 1:14).
J.T. That is the Lord Jesus; He "became flesh, and dwelt among us". He is a divine Person but in manhood He dwelt among the disciples - wonderful fact.
E.A.L. It has been said that His in-coming here was the beginning of Christianity in a historical sense.
J.T. Quite so; "That which was from the beginning"(@1 John 1:1), and then here, "Those who from the beginning were eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word have delivered them to us". Notice that it is "delivered them to us". It was accurately stated.
J.T.Jr. The "eye-witnesses" spoken of in verse 2 would be the apostles. What is said in John's epistle as to "That which" and "Jesus Christ coming in flesh" (@1 John 4:2), would be the line that Luke opens up.
A.R. Does the record of the historical side of things as to the birth of the Lord Jesus bring out the reality of His humanity?
J.T. Yes; and there were "eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word", who delivered these matters to the disciples. It is more than what was simply said, they *delivered* it. It called for speaking in a peculiar way to bring out the truth of the glad tidings. There was nothing else like the glad tidings in the world at that time. It was delivered by certain ones who were eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word. This was the most wonderful thing there was in the world at that time.
A.N.W. Have we not learned that the method of his writing is in moral order rather than historical order?
{364}
J.T. Yes; the method is there. He knows how to set things out with skill.
J.T.Jr. That is why the reading of the whole chapter was suggested. It gives the method. It is eighty verses long but you really need to read it through to get the method.
J.T. Yes, and we must think of it tonight and tomorrow and maybe all the week to get the force of it.
E.A.L. You have told us that Luke was not only methodical and accurate, but he was a very feeling man.
J.T. Well, just so.
F.W.K. Is not the chapter full of selected vessels? We have spoken of the eye-witnesses and attendants who delivered these things to us, but the chapter is full of selected vessels.
J.T. They were used of God to supply what was needed to bring forward the truth of the glad tidings.
F.W.K. So that Zacharias, and Elizabeth, and Mary would be among the selected persons.
J.T. Quite so; and John's gospel supports the whole of Luke's gospel.
A.B.P. Does Luke's association with Paul result in his support of the Pauline ministry in his gospel? It would seem that each of these great early ministers supported the whole scope of the gospel.
J.T. I am sure that John and Luke were thoroughly with each other.
Rem. Luke had links with Paul all through the Acts. Even in the shipwreck, Luke was still with him. Later Paul writes, "Luke alone is with me" (@2 Timothy 4:11). And then Timothy must have been well grounded in the gospel through his association with Paul.
J.T. Luke was selected by God to do what he did -- to bring out the truth.
{365}
R.W.S. The word "origin", in verse 3, is important. Luke was "accurately acquainted from the origin with all things".
J.T. Things that had been "delivered" to the saints. That is another great word, as *conveying* the whole matter. He spoke, but his body would move to convey what he was saying.
R.W.S. You are stressing the word "delivered".
T.N.W. Beautiful feet are referred to in relation to the gospel.
A.R. The feet of the Lord are prominent in Luke.
J.T.Jr. Peter *stood up* with the eleven.
F.W.K. Is it not important to know the origin of things? Paul received his gospel from heaven; I have wondered if we may not fully understand the origin of the gospel.
J.T. And then what I say would be expressed with movement.
F.W.K. The gospel should be spoken feelingly; so Paul speaks of serving in his spirit in the glad tidings, as if the whole man were involved in it and moving with it.
J.T. We emphasize what we are saying with movement.
R.W.S. Would "opening up and laying down" be the idea?
J.T. Yes; and with movement of the body; Paul *persuaded* .
R.W.S. It says, "Then Paul stretching out his hand answered". (@Acts 26:1).
Rem. It says of Paul and Barnabas that they "so spake that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks believed", (@Acts 14:1).
J.T. Very good: the Lord "stood up to read". His standing would be to clarify the words.
A.E.W. Is the thought "that thou mightest know the certainty" of what is being said?
{366}
J.T. That is just it.
C.A.M. Luke's gospel commences with a priestly setting.
J.T. Yes.
A.B.P. Is there an expression of the grace of the dispensation in that Luke would write this entire gospel to establish one man?
J.T. It would convey that.
J.T.Jr. The gospel being written to one person would bring its truth home to each one of us. It was written to "most excellent Theophilus". Luke evidently had respect for him.
A.R. Should we be priests before we take on the preaching?
J.T. Quite so; it is within the range of all to be priests.
A.R. And should we come out from the presence of God to preach? Gabriel said that he stands before God.
J.T. Just so.
F.N.W. Would @Romans 12 show that the result of the gospel is that we present our bodies to God, in a priestly way?
J.T. Yes.
C.F.E. Would a subjective state be seen in Elizabeth and Mary? They seem to be in the good of the great things that were to come about in connection with the incoming of John and the Lord.
J.T. The passage reads, "There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judaea, a certain priest, by name Zacharias, of the course of Abia, and his wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name Elizabeth. And they were both just before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless. And they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they were both advanced in years". And then, later it says, "And an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing on the right of the altar
{367}
of incense". And then it says, "Thy supplication has been heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John".
J.T.Jr. Does that suggest that in Zacharias and Elizabeth we have two walking together in the truth?
J.T. That is it exactly.
J.T.Jr. They are both well spoken of as "walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless".
J.T. The Lord takes up both of them according to what He knows them to be. Zacharias and his wife were qualified for what God had called them to. Though Zacharias was unbelieving, he came to it in the end.
A.R. Gabriel, as coming from the presence of God could speak about John's evangelical service.
J.T. Quite; God has come down from heaven, in Christ, and He has come near us by the Spirit to make the gospel plain. What is said should be definite.
A.R. The preacher should be able to express something of God.
J.T.Jr. Would the allusion here to John the baptist be a help to the preachers? The service is to make ready for the Lord a prepared people.
J.T. Yes; John the baptist was taken up to prepare the way of the Lord.
J.T.Jr. The servants are to make ready a prepared people for the coming in of Christ. And the priestly side is emphasized here, reference being made to the course of Abia, one of the twenty-four courses established by David in @1 Chronicles 24.
J.T. "A certain priest, by name Zacharias, of the course of Abia, and his wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name Elizabeth". And they were both walking before the Lord blameless. And they had no child; well now, all that is very important and that these things had to be mentioned, and they
{368}
were fitted for the service that they were taken up for. What do you say?
C.A.M. You have said that the incoming of the Lord Jesus Christ here was guarded by a priestly setting, so that no unholy thoughts could intrude.
J.T. Quite so; you can see how important that was.
J.T.Jr. The method with which Luke wrote is seen in the reference to Zacharias and Elizabeth. The other evangelists do not give this. Method is seen in the giving of details in connection with the incoming of Christ.
Ques. What place does John the baptist have in relation to the gospel? Would it not seem that his ministry was for Israel?
J.T. John the baptist was augmentary.
J.T.Jr. He made way for Christ.
Rem. Zacharias fulfilling his priestly service before God in the order of his course would raise the question if we are in our course.
J.T. Yes; each one has an office and we should fill it out.
E.W.S. This section would indicate that we should be fully persuaded in our own souls before we attempt to evangelize.
E.A.L. Verse 13 is the opposite to that. Zacharias was making supplication for something he did not think would happen. He did not believe the angel, so he was dumb for a while.
A.N.W. In Mark's gospel we are told to believe *in* the glad tidings. We cannot preach effectively unless we believe in the glad tidings.
J.T. Very good; we have noticed that -- not only to believe the glad tidings but to believe *in* them.
J.T.Jr. The gospel alludes to a great sphere of things. We are to believe *in* them.
L.W. Paul says in @2 Corinthians 4:13, *"We* also believe, therefore also we speak".
{369}
J.T. That has been quoted frequently. It should be a principle with all of us that we should be sure of that of which we speak.
A.B.P. There is joy and rejoicing in this chapter. Is that what is expected as a result of the gospel?
J.T. I would say that.
J.T.Jr. That is what the angel brings in. Gabriel said, "I have been sent to speak to thee, and to bring these glad tidings to thee". So the preachers should bring in glad tidings, and be happy in their own souls.
A.B.P. I wondered, in that way, if we should grasp the thought that the gospel has in mind a rejoicing people.
J.T. What you say is true; it is a happy matter; we are to be happy in the service.
A.B.P. And a rejoicing people are to be the result.
Rem. The queen of Sheba noted, "Happy are thy men! happy are these thy servants", (@1 Kings 10:8).
E.A.L. "It was right to make merry and rejoice", the father says, in @Luke 15:32.
J.T.Jr. Does the angel give us a lead in this when he says of John, "He shall be to thee joy and rejoicing, and many shall rejoice at his birth"? Joy such as had not been before was about to be brought in.
J.T. I believe that this gospel should be understood in announcing the glad tidings.
J.T.Jr. So that the preachers need to be helped to be happy in their own souls, not bound up, but free in preaching.
C.A.M. Joy and gladness run throughout this gospel, commencing with heaven as seen in Gabriel in this chapter and in the heavenly host in chapter 2, and ending with the disciples praising and blessing God at the close of the gospel.
J.T. The whole matter is joyous.
A.N.W. And the glad tidings are in power.
{370}
F.W.K. In the Philippian epistle the apostle speaks of the glad tidings. It is a book in which we are exhorted to rejoice in the Lord. Paul himself was exulting in the glad tidings. He was restful in his circumstances for they were working out for the furtherance of the glad tidings, and he is full of rejoicing.
J.T. Quite so.
F.H.L. In chapter 2 the angel of the Lord announced "glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all the people" @Luke 2:10.
T.V.D. According to @Luke 24:52 the disciples "returned to Jerusalem with great joy". That is how this gospel closes.
J.C. Paul says, in @Romans 15:13, "Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing". The joy comes through believing, does it not?
J.T. Quite so.
J.T.Jr. The word 'evangelize' evidently comes from the same root as the word 'angel'. There must be something instructive in the angels bringing glad tidings in this book.
A.R. What is angelic is part of the system, is it not?
J.T.Jr. The angels brought glad tidings here, but they are not preachers. We merely get a suggestion here. The great thought of preaching was first set out in Christ Himself and then the apostles. "Having had its commencement in being spoken of by the Lord, has been confirmed to us by those who have heard", (@Hebrews 2:3).
J.T. Quite so; the preaching is not by angels; this angel introduces the matter, but the preaching was through the apostles.
{371}
THE GOSPEL (2)
@Luke 1:26 - 38; @Luke 2:1 - 20; @Luke 3:21,22
J.T.Jr. The facts as to the Lord's birth are before us in the first two passages read. The way the angel addresses Mary is impressive: "Hail, thou favoured one! the Lord is with thee: blessed art *thou* amongst women". But then, he says, "Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favour with God". It is a matter of selection by divine ordering; she had found favour. It is the selection of the one through whom the Lord was to come in.
J.T. God's selection of a vessel.
J.T.Jr. Yes; it is well to see that she is selected as a vessel through whom the Lord was to come in.
E.A.L. While she is referred to as a favoured one, that would be distinct from what is said of the Lord: "The holy thing ..."
J.T.Jr. Yes; the Lord derived nothing from her at all as to His Person.
J.T. And so, "The Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove upon him; and a voice came out of heaven. *Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". That is very beautiful and glorious.
J.T.Jr. So that the economy is alluded to in the verses that you have read.
J.H.H. God had His eye on the line through which Mary came, all the way down from the beginning. The gospel of God concerning His Son was in mind.
J.T.Jr. I would say that fully; it goes back to God Himself through Adam. The human race is in mind in Luke's gospel.
J.T. "And Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years old; being as was supposed son of Joseph ..." (@Luke 3:23) The line is traced back to God.
{372}
J.T.Jr. Yes; the race is in mind; the line goes back through Adam to God.
A.B.P. It has been suggested that the genealogy in Luke may be that of Mary rather than that of Joseph.
J.T.Jr. It is the line that runs through David and Nathan. The maternal side is in Luke.
A.N.W. And yet, the word is, "As was supposed son of Joseph", but pronounced from heaven as "my beloved Son".
J.T.Jr. Yes, in verses 21 and 22 we have the economy brought before us. The public testimony is about to begin.
A.R. In chapter 1 the Lord is called "Son of the Highest". The emphasis throughout is on the Son rather than on the woman, do you think?
J.T.Jr. The emphasis is on Christ; Mary is the selected vessel through whom He was to come in. She holds an important place, for she is called the favoured one; she had found favour with God, and as has been remarked, the selection relates to this line that goes all the way back through David to Adam and to God. So that the race is in mind.
E.A.L. Mary is seen in @Acts 1:14: "These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren".
J.T.Jr. She would be seen there as taking her place in a right way in the assembly.
M.G. Is there some point in the statement that "the holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God"?
J.T.Jr. Well, it may allude to what would come out in Him here in manhood, but still, the truth is there. In the next chapter the word is: "Today a Saviour has been born to you". The idea of a Saviour is there immediately. And that is what is stressed in the gospel, a Saviour and salvation.
{373}
F.N.W. Do we have the drawing near of God to man with salvation in view, all things being maintained according to what He is in Himself?
J.T.Jr. I think so. It is impressive to see that the three divine Persons are in this matter.
A.B.P. Does Mary, in chapter 1:38, represent the feature of subjection that is to be formed in the assembly? She says, "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord; be it to me according to thy word". Scripture speaks of the assembly being subjected to Christ.
J.T.Jr. And she is believing; Elizabeth says, "And blessed is she that hath believed" (@Luke 1:45). Elizabeth knew that.
J.MacK. Are we to be impressed by the feelings that mark the introduction of the gospel? The women shine in providing feelings that correspond with those of the Holy Spirit. It is as though the Holy Spirit is hovering feelingly, so to speak, over the whole position, and as soon as the vessels are available He fills them. Even though Zacharias had been unbelieving, yet as soon as he comes into the matter he is filled with the Holy Spirit; "And Zacharias his father was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied" (@Luke 1:67).
A.R. It says, in verse 35, "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and power of the Highest overshadow thee". The conception would be by the Holy Spirit, and the angel had knowledge of this, and that He should be called Son of God.
J.MacK. Yes; it would seem that the Holy Spirit had the custody of the whole matter.
Ques. What does the hill country suggest?
J.T. A holy outlook; a good and wholesome outlook would mark the hill country.
J.T.Jr. So the conversation of the sisters is on that line; they are marked by spiritual feelings. It is a question of being in sympathy with God in what He is doing.
{374}
A.B.P. This hill country is introduced in @Judges 1, is it not? When it was taken possession of, good brotherly feelings prevailed, for Judah and his brother Simeon went up together to possess it.
J.T.Jr. Therefore, the idea of the hill country would allude to what is above the ordinary conversations of persons and to a place where there are good spiritual feelings amongst the brethren.
A.N.W. Are we not at this moment in the realm where these things are the subject of conversation? It is entirely a contrast with what is filling the world.
A.R. Does this word 'Highest' bear on the idea of elevation in the hill country?
J.T.Jr. It is a name of God, of course.
J.T. "The Highest" is a distinctive name, a name of great respect!
J.T.Jr. So that we have the Highest, and the Holy Spirit, and then the "holy thing", which brings in the three divine Persons. It is important to see that divine Persons are making Themselves known, and that it is a question of our being in Their presence all the time.
C.A.M. The matter of elevation is a leading thought in Luke's gospel.
J.T.Jr. I would think so: it is moral elevation.
J.T. That word 'moral' is a very large idea; we should be careful in our use of it.
J.T.Jr. It is a question of what is right. These women were speaking together of these great matters, therefore their minds had elevated thoughts.
J.T. The matter that they were speaking about was of great import.
A.B.P. Would it be right to suppose that Luke acquired much of this information from Mary herself? And would it show the greatness of the person and of her contributions to the truth? Luke was not present at these occurrences.
{375}
J.T. That would be right; and female contribution to the truth is also right; it would give character and distinction to the whole position.
A.N.W. She was a holy vessel that contained matter which became invested in the assembly itself.
J.T. That is the point that would be in the mind of the Spirit of God.
W.T.P. It says that Mary kept these things in her mind, and pondered them in her heart.
A.R. You have told us that she knew things about the Lord that no one else knew.
J.T. I am sure she did; she kept these things in her heart; that is a good place to keep them.
A.B.P. In that sense, should it not be encouraging to the sisters, that they can have a real part in the development of right feelings in brothers who have part in announcing the gospel?
J.T.Jr. So that the woman who anointed the body of the Lord for His burial was to be spoken of wherever the gospel is preached.
E.J.F. Could a word be said as to the angelic service mentioned here as well as the service of the Holy Spirit? What has been said would help us as to the Spirit because we need to have right spiritual feelings as we take account of such holy matters as we have here.
J.T. We need right feelings in these matters.
J.T.Jr. It is not now the angels speaking but it is the Spirit of God who speaks; the Spirit of God teaches us.
E.J.F. Yes, but is there any suggestion that angelic power and care surrounds this great occasion in view of its holiness? Man has sought to mar it.
J.T.Jr. So it says, "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and power of the Highest overshadow thee". That would be protection. God is in the matter in the way of protection.
{376}
V.C.L. @Hebrews 1:14 says that the angels are sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation. Divine arrangement brought in the angels, too, because of the heirs of salvation.
A.N.W. It is also said as to the mystery of piety, "Seen of angels".
J.T.Jr. In chapter 2 "the holy thing" is to be seen. The angels are referred to in the first chapter in relation to John the baptist and the Lord Himself and then again in the second chapter in relation to the shepherds. This would show, I suppose, the great interest heaven had in all this great matter.
A.B.P. Did you have in mind to say something about the economy?
J.T.Jr. Yes; the three divine Persons are seen immediately in chapter 1 -- that is, the Highest would allude to God; then we have the Holy Spirit referred to, and finally, "the holy thing ... shall be called Son of God". So that the three divine Persons are immediately before us. Then again at the opening up of the public side in chapter 3:21 reference is made to Jesus; then you have the Holy Spirit; and then you have the "voice ... out of heaven" which would be the Father's voice. He is not mentioned by name, but from what is said it is evident that it is the Father.
A.B.P. Is it noteworthy that the activity of divine Persons here is in relation to one another? The Lord is praying, which would no doubt be to the Father; the Holy Spirit is descending in a bodily form as a dove upon Jesus; and then the Father is speaking to the Lord Jesus and saying, *"Thou* art my beloved Son". That seems to precede the public testimony.
J.T.Jr. Yes; I think it is an allusion to the activity of divine Persons in regard to the revelation of God, and then, too, in regard to meeting all that had come in through the fall. It was all met in Christ.
{377}
J.T. It is noticeable the place the Holy Spirit has in all this. It says of Simeon that "the Holy Spirit was upon him" (@Luke 2:25). God has brought in great victory seeing the place the Holy Spirit has in the Scriptures and His place objectively.
Ques. It is remarkable how many worshippers there are in the chapters before us. Mary, Elizabeth, Zacharias, and Simeon are responsive in the matter. Should the thought of the gospel produce worship in us, also?
J.T. Quite so.
F.W.K. Holy feelings find an outlet in these cases, so that the names of divine Persons are magnified. God gets precious fruit from these selected persons.
J.T.Jr. Mary uses the titles Lord, God my Saviour, and the Mighty One; the idea of Saviour was in her mind as well as the Mighty One. These titles indicate that God would be able to complete what He had undertaken.
J.MacK. So that God has His praise by way of the gospel.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; Luke emphasizes that. There is so much of glory to God in the gospel.
J.MacK. All the healing in the gospel is to afford testimony to God, and every vessel healed is to become available for testimony Godward.
C.A.M. Is that the basis of "the praises of Israel"?
J.MacK. I thought that is how the praises came about, because there is the ability to take an intelligent account of what God has wrought in souls.
A.R. In chapter 2:13 the celebration begins in heaven, but the gospel has in view "good pleasure in men".
J.T.Jr. How in keeping the heavenly host is with what was in God's mind. At the earth's founding "the sons of God shouted for joy"(@Job 38:7). Angels have a great place in God's matters. The Revelation confirms
{378}
that. But here and now men are brought into it by the Spirit.
F.W.K. Men are to be characterized by joy. In the temple the disciples are found praising and blessing God. It is a kind of crown to Luke's gospel.
J.T.Jr. Just so; there is need for right feelings in the preachers; they are not to be static in themselves; they are to be moving with what they are saying.
J.MacK. Praising God means that we can say something about what He has done; there is the work of God in our souls from understanding what God has wrought and we can speak about it intelligently.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; and sonship would give us to be intelligent and restful in what we say to God.
J.T. We read that "It came to pass, after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers and hearing them and asking them questions"(@Luke 2:46).
J.T.Jr. So it is important to hear first in the temple.
J.T. Very good.
A.R. We should have knowledge of the three divine Persons and be able to worship them as Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
J.T. We just wonder at divine Persons coming in at this juncture; it is a wonderful link in the chapter here.
J.MacK. In chapter 3:21,22, already alluded to, there is a certain completeness presented to us, is there not?
J.T.Jr. I think so; the testimony is about to begin and three divine Persons are presented in relation to the wonderful testimony that is about to come out.
J.MacK. Every marvellous divine provision for men is taken on in the economy.
{379}
A.B.P. According to what is before us there is intelligent joy in heaven amongst the angelic hosts; in the hill country there is intelligent joy amongst those who have been taken up; and amongst divine Persons Themselves there seems to be a sufficiency in Themselves in the Father's expression of delight. They, too, seem to be joying in the dispensation.
A.N.W. Can we distinguish between our soul feelings and our spirit feelings? Mary distinguishes between soul and spirit.
J.T.Jr. Man is composed of spirit, soul and body. We do not know how angels acquired their intelligence; that is something we could not say. But what came out in these women would indicate that they had been with God, and they learned what they had to say, from their links with God. I think that is the point in sonship; it means that we come into things intelligently.
A.R. So that we should not be behind in worshipping the three divine Persons.
J.T.Jr. What is set out here shows that the three Persons are before us. We are always in the presence of divine Persons.
A.R. It is quite in order to worship the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, do you not think?
J.T.Jr. Well, it is done here.
W.W.M. The Lord Jesus said in chapter 15, "There is joy before the angels of God for one repenting sinner" @Luke 15:10. If the sinner is to come into the joy of these things, he must start that way.
E.A.L. "The Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove upon him". The Lord embodied the work of the Spirit and unfolded the Spirit's operations. But when the Lord was glorified the Spirit was free to take up His abode in men.
J.T.Jr. All the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ. That is important to keep in mind.
{380}
E.A.L. In this gospel it says that certain were *filled* with the Holy Spirit, but the Lord was *full* of the Spirit.
J.T.Jr. The Spirit was given without measure; there is no measure; it could not be for He is a divine Person. No creature could take that place.
V.C.L. Was it a matter of the presence and committal of the Spirit to the Lord in manhood, whereas with us it is in view of formation in us by the Spirit?
J.T. The Lord had come into man's place; it is Man's distinction.
J.T.Jr. The mystery of it all is to be kept before us. We have in chapter 1:35, "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee". The birth of Jesus is in mind there. Then the Holy Spirit comes upon Jesus later; it is all mystery as to just what this means. Divine Persons are acting and the natural mind is shut out. It is divine Persons acting of Themselves.
F.N.W. "No one knows the Son but the Father"(@Matthew 11:27).
J.T.Jr. Yes; there is inscrutability.
Ques. In @1 Timothy 3:16, we have, "And confessedly the mystery of piety is great. God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit". What is meant by "justified in the Spirit"?
J.T.Jr. Everything that Jesus did was justified; all that came out in Christ was justified in the Spirit when He came. "God has been manifested in flesh" is what we have here in Luke.
A.B.P. What is meant by the sign in chapter 2:12? "And this is the sign to you: ye shall find a babe wrapped in swaddling-clothes, and lying in a manger".
J.T.Jr. The political matter comes before us in this chapter, how they came up to be registered in the census; that was all divinely ordered, no doubt. And then there was this sign of a Babe wrapped in swaddling-clothes and lying in a manger. It was not in the best place in the city, but in a manger.
{381}
J.T. A very humble place.
A.B.P. Our position today would fit?
J.T.Jr. Do you mean that we should be humble?
A.B.P. Well, there is a great political matter on today, but we believe that what God finds distinct pleasure in today is not in the most distinguished place in the city.
J.T.Jr. You mean that, without drawing too much attention to ourselves, this meeting is of importance to heaven today, but it is not mixed up in what is prominent.
A.B.P. Yes; and is not this sign an indication of what has characterized the dispensation, that throughout it the thing heaven delights in most is found in the most unlikely place?
J.MacK. So that the preponderously profound matter of God here in a Man and the lowliness of the environment go on together.
E.E.H. The sign that was given to Ahaz in @Isaiah 7 was that the virgin should bring forth a son and call his name Immanuel.
J.T.Jr. Yes, Immanuel means, "God with us"; that is seen in Matthew, I suppose. It is important that we realize that God is with us.
J.T. The Spirit of God is here.
J.H.P. Would the sign bear upon the restrictions of the present day such as we find ourselves in this afternoon? We are restricted as to numbers and the room in which we meet and so on. I thought that possibly the swaddling-clothes may suggest the limitation into which divine grace has seen fit to come. We would not look for anything great outwardly.
J.T.Jr. We would go along with what is in keeping with the gospel; it is a very great matter, of course, in view of what is coming out, but the external side, at the moment, is not for display. It is a question of what is to be displayed spiritually.
{382}
J.H.P. And coming into Christianity we would recognize that this characterizes the whole position, and will continue to do so right to the end, I suppose.
J.T.Jr. So we should keep humble and shun any exterior show.
E.J.F. Are the shepherds a sample company? It says, "And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God". Would our understanding of the gospel lead up to this?
J.T.Jr. I think so; it is a question of understanding, and that leads to sonship. It is a question of how things are understood. Sonship is in mind and we advance in it. Intelligence is acquired and we are thus able to apprehend things as the Spirit has scope in us.
E.M. Gabriel says, "I ... stand before God" (@Luke 1:19). The result of the gospel is that we are equipped to stand before God.
S.W. Have you anything to say about praying? It says in verse 21, "Jesus having been baptized and praying". Is that in view of the gospel being presented? In the next chapter Jesus enters into the synagogue and reads where it says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me"(@Luke 3:18).
J.T.Jr. Prayer is emphasized in Luke. There is more about it here than in any other gospel. It has in mind a Man here dependent upon God; the Lord came in that way, as dependent upon God.
A.R. The exclamation is, *"Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight".
J.T.Jr. God had found His delight in Him; it was a backward look at this point. We see Him sitting in the temple; it was to hear first. I think we need help in regard of the temple. The idea of the temple works out amongst us and we need to be ready to hear when we come into the temple.
{383}
F.W.K. "The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of the instructed that I should know how to succour by a word him that is weary. He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed", (@Isaiah 50:4). I suppose that speaking and setting forth of the glad tidings would be on the principle of prayer and dependence.
J.T.Jr. In that sense we have to be learners individually, in our homes and in every matter, so that when we come into the assembly it is a question of what is there in each person; what intelligence there is with each one.
C.F.E. Anna is a good example of one in the temple.
J.T.Jr. Yes; she was an old sister but she came into these wonderful things and she prophesied about them.
{384}
THE GOSPEL (3)
@Luke 4:14 - 22, @Luke 4:42 - 44; @Luke 5:1
J.T.Jr. It is suggested that we might see at this time the place the Spirit has in relation to the gospel. In chapter 3:22 it says that the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove upon the Lord; in chapter 4:1 it says, "Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit in the wilderness"; @Luke 4:1 then, in verse 14, we read, "And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit"; and finally, the Lord refers to the scripture which says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me". I thought we might get help in regard to the gospel, to see the place the Spirit has in it, as seen in the Lord's own service.
A.R. Does verse 14 suggest inward power, whereas verse 18 would be more the external evidence of the Spirit? -- "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me".
J.T.Jr. Jesus returned from the wilderness in the power of the Spirit; that would refer to what is inward, and I would connect it with the whole of His movements. Then it says that He taught in their synagogues. The Lord was a divine Person here in manhood and the Spirit is seen immediately in relation to His service. The first reference to His public service is connected with the Spirit.
A.R. Would "being glorified of all" suggest that He was recognized as a divine Person?
J.T.Jr. The effect of His ministry is seen on the people.
W.W.M. @Luke 4:1 says, "Jesus ... was led by the Spirit in the wilderness", showing the great place the Spirit has.
J.T.Jr. The Spirit is thus to be taken account of objectively; He is seen leading the Lord.
{385}
A.B.P. Would you say that in verses 14 and 15 the Lord is using the Spirit, speaking reverently?
J.T.Jr. It would be right to say that; it seems to mark all His movements. He returned in the power of the Spirit.
A.N.W. Would we consider the matter of the teaching in contra-distinction to the preaching? The anointing seems to be in view of the preaching, whereas it says, in verse 15, *"He* taught in their synagogues".
J.T.Jr. Yes, without saying what He taught. The teaching and the preaching go along together.
C.A.M. Do you think that Jesus returning in the power of the Holy Spirit would show that the enemy had gained no point of vantage during those times of testing?
J.T.Jr. I would think that. The fact that He returned "in the power of the Spirit" shows that there was no change in Him.
C.A.M. That would be perfect manhood.
V.C.L. Is this what Paul spoke of to the Corinthians when he referred to "demonstration of the Spirit and of power"? (@1 Corinthians 2:4) The whole matter would be marked by the Spirit's stamp of approval from start to finish.
J.T.Jr. The "demonstration of the Spirit and of power" would refer to the anointing. The Lord read from the scripture in Isaiah: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach". While the uniqueness of the Lord's Person and His Personality in Manhood must always be kept in mind, yet He was here as marked by doing things by the Spirit; all things were being done by a dependent Man.
A.Macd. Peter refers to Him: "Jesus who was of Nazareth: how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power; who went through all quarters doing good, and healing all that were under the
{386}
power of the devil, because God was with him", (@Acts 10:38).
J.T.Jr. Yes; that is a good connection as to the anointing and power. So if we have part in the preaching we should take account of how the Spirit would help us.
L.W. Peter says, in relation to the glad tidings, "To you they ministered those things, which have now been announced to you by those who have declared to you the glad tidings by the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven", (@1 Peter 1:12).
J.T.Jr. It is the Spirit coming in after the Lord's ascension. That, of course, is not alluded to in @Luke 4, but it is all connected because the preaching was to await the incoming of the Spirit; the disciples were to tarry in Jerusalem for the Spirit. So when Peter spoke on the day of Pentecost he alluded to the Spirit first. He spoke about the Spirit because it was the evidence of the Spirit's activity that caused the enquiry. And so Peter spoke about the Spirit before he went on to speak about Christ and the resurrection.
Ques. Would the Spirit enter into the matter when we preach?
J.T.Jr. I think we should give Him place and make full room for Him. It is a question how much room we make for the Spirit when we preach.
A.N.W. Allusion has been made to the word that the gospel was preached by the Spirit sent from heaven. Would that not involve making room for Him in our service?
J.T.Jr. It would; and perhaps we should be more cognizant of it as we seek to serve.
S.W. Would the preaching of the word in the power of the anointing dignify the preaching?
J.T.Jr. I think the enquiry is important because of the measure of activity there is, whether it be in preaching or in other ministry. We should take account
{387}
of the Spirit as the Lord did. Of course, we could not do it in the full sense in which He did, but we should do it in some sense. The anointing should come into the ministry.
F.N.W. Do we learn that from the fact that the Spirit has such a place with the Lord as He moves into His public service, having completed a life of thirty years delightful to the Father?
J.T.Jr. It is a question of the public testimony. It is in a Man, but it is in the power of the Spirit. The Lord could have done things of Himself, but I think He is seen as Man representing God, therefore it is a question of using the Spirit.
F.N.W. So that the life of Jesus in service helps us as to how we should serve.
J.T.Jr. Yes; that is, the objective side is presented first; He is led by the Spirit in the wilderness.
A.B.P. The epistle to the Hebrews seems to suggest that the preaching is to be all one piece: "having had its commencement in being spoken of by the Lord, has been confirmed to us by those who have heard", @Hebrews 2:3. And the part the Spirit has in it is also referred to there as "distributions of the Holy Spirit".
R.T. Is there something of significance in the 14th verse being introduced just after the temptations? It says, "And the devil, having completed every temptation ... Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit" @Luke 3:14. Nothing had occurred in the temptations to disturb the Spirit's relations in Him.
J.T.Jr. I would think that. As we have remarked, the contact with the devil had no effect on Him, whereas with us it may be different and an effect may be left on us from which we cannot free ourselves immediately.
J.H.H. Does it not suggest that the Lord was a perfectly dependent Man? He defeated Satan in the temptations as a dependent Man.
{388}
J.T.Jr. I think that is right; we noted at our last meeting that the Lord was praying at His baptism. That is the dependent Man. This is seen throughout Luke's gospel more so than in the other gospels. He is seen praying often in Luke. And it is the dependent Man in chapter 3:21 where the economy is in mind. We have the voice from heaven, which we know was the Father's voice; then there is the Son, and also the Spirit. The economy is in mind; so that we have the testimony opening up; the Son and the Spirit are now seen in relation to the position in testimony here.
D.P. Did the rulers of the synagogue have some sense of the authority in the Lord Jesus that would set aside the legal system and bring in a new feature?
J.T.Jr. Well, He could not be hid. It is stated previously that He was glorified of all; He could not be hid. When He stood up in the synagogue every eye was upon Him. They all took account, in some way, of the Person that was there. Never had there been a time like it before. There had been, in a typical sense, when the ark was brought to Jerusalem, but now it is the true Ark, the Person Himself comes into the synagogue -- the place where God should be acknowledged. What a sight for heaven when Jesus was in the synagogue in relation to the people!
Ques. Does that which was inaugurated here in relation to the preaching set a pattern for us in that the gospel is expressed in the Person? The words of grace came out of His mouth and the power was in the Spirit. By extension that should be carried down to the present day.
J.T.Jr. The pattern or model is a good thing to have in mind. We learn from the Lord how to preach. The expressions are noteworthy: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach", and then "sent me to preach", and "to
{389}
preach the acceptable year of the Lord" @Luke 3:18,19. Then, later in the chapter, it is to preach the kingdom of God, meaning that He was making a point of preaching. How right it is, therefore, for us to see how the Lord moved in relation to the preaching.
A.R. There is skill in the way He uses Scripture. He finishes His reading at "the acceptable year of the Lord". He did not read on to "the day of vengeance".
J.T.Jr. Yes; grace has been alluded to; it was not judgment.
Ques. Is there also something for us to learn in the place the Lord gives the Scriptures, both in the temptations and in His own preaching?
J.T.Jr. I think so; it is helpful to know how to meet the enemy by the use of the Scriptures, and we seek to do that; but then the Scriptures come into the testimony: "Today this scripture is fulfilled in your ears".
L.W. So that the Lord sets out the pattern in the way He proceeds; He comes in the power of the Spirit; He reads; and then He speaks.
J.T.Jr. And a present bearing of the Scriptures is given by the Lord in His preaching. That, too, should come home to us -- "Today ..."
A.B.P. Each answer to Satan met the temptation perfectly. Skill in the selection of Scripture is seen.
A.N.W. Philip took up the same scripture the eunuch was reading and made it a word to the man himself.
J.T.Jr. So that the importance of the Scriptures in what we say is to be noted. We use the Scriptures in our preaching, but the point would be, how are we led to the scriptures that we use in the preaching.
S.C.M. In @Acts 8:29 it says, "The Spirit said to Philip ..." showing how prominently the Spirit was with him in his preaching.
{390}
J.T.Jr. Yes; Philip was able to speak from the same scripture. He knew the Scriptures. It is important that we should know the Scriptures if we engage in the service.
V.C.L. Is there a danger that the customary rule of preaching three Lord's days may hinder the Spirit?
J.T.Jr. Well, if a brother is not able to preach three times you would not expect him to go on, but the point of the three times, as practised in these parts, is taken from @Acts 17:2: "And according to Paul's custom he went in among them, and on three sabbaths reasoned with them from the scriptures". Preaching successively three Lord's days seems to have been approved of the Lord as a right thing. It gives opportunity in the preaching to open up what the Lord may give.
V.C.L. I was thinking that the freedom of the Spirit in the one who is preaching should be emphasized, so that he should not simply fill out a service in a formal way.
J.T.Jr. The preacher is not just filling out an hour; there should be something definite which the Lord has laid upon him which will open up as he speaks. The Spirit's place in the preaching, and in all ministry, should be in our thoughts, for He will give the lead as to what is to be said and will help us in speaking.
F.N.W. Do you think that if the Scriptures have their bearing on us through the week we will be more likely to get the word for the moment?
J.T.Jr. I think so; as we read the Scriptures privately the Lord gives something. I think that ministry comes through prayer and reading of the Scriptures; the Lord gives us something that way.
F.N.W. While the Lord's manhood was unique, yet He accepted the application of the Scriptures to Himself as seen in this chapter.
{391}
J.T.Jr. He is referred to in Luke in that way: "Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature" (@Luke 2:52). Real manhood is in mind. The Lord is the pattern for the testimony that came out at Pentecost through the apostles. The men whom the Lord raised up were like Himself in the sense that they preached in the power of the Spirit. And we should have that before us in our service.
J.H.H. The Lord found the scripture that was suitable. That also would be a principle in the preaching.
J.T.Jr. Yes; "Today this scripture is fulfilled in your ears". It was the right scripture for the moment.
A.T.D. The right scripture for the moment would confirm the Spirit's work in the hearts of those who hear.
J.T.Jr. We are to take account of the conditions that exist. The Spirit of God works in the preacher and in the hearers, too. What the Lord read was enough.
A.R. So that those who are responsible for the gospel being carried on in a locality should be preachers, should they not?
J.T.Jr. They should be. The question is whether we really know how to preach. Do we bring the Spirit into our thoughts in regard to the preaching? We should be concise; the Lord read but two verses.
A.N.W. And He broke off in the middle of a sentence.
J.T.Jr. What He read was enough.
S.C.M. Should we not be conscious of being sent? The passage reads, "He has sent me to preach" . And the Spirit was sent from heaven.
J.T.Jr. Being sent to preach is a needed requirement. The Lord is looking for those whom He can send. Isaiah said, "Here am I; send me", @Isaiah 6:8.
{392}
S.W. In preaching we may be pursuing a subject with the help of the Spirit, but while doing so the Spirit may give us a specific, but different, word.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; and something concise. We should not be too lengthy. The Lord was very brief in what He said in the synagogue. If the Lord gives something while one is preaching it is well to follow it through, particularly if it is felt that the Lord is helping. We may take up too many scriptures.
J.H.H. @Romans 10:15 says, "And how shall they preach unless they have been sent". And then the apostle brings in a scripture to support what he is saying, "According as it is written. How beautiful the feet of them that announce glad tidings" @Romans 10:15.
J.T.Jr. Those that preach should know that they have been sent.
A.B.P. As the Lord speaks and the state of unbelief shows itself in those in the synagogue He brings in additional texts referring to what happened in the days of Elias and Elisha to bear upon their state.
J.T.Jr. There is always the principle of bringing in other scriptures to confirm or bear upon a matter.
A.B.P. The more frequently scriptures are introduced to support the word, the more power there is in it.
A.P. Is it necessary to read many scriptures at the preaching? Some read a number of passages.
J.T.Jr. We get help as we proceed, I think. We learn from the Lord what to do. Younger brethren may feel the need of more scriptures to fill out what is in their minds, but the Lord helps as we proceed.
G.V.D. May we draw from this scripture that public reading of the Scriptures is proper preceding the preaching of the gospel? Jesus stood up to read. It was the word of God.
J.T.Jr. The Lord standing up would suggest the dignity that marks the public testimony. When He
{393}
had finished reading He sat down. We do not do that when we preach, but here it is the Lord setting out the great matter of the gospel and He is the subject of it; so that He sits down and all eyes are upon Him.
Ques. We may be too casual because of the simplicity of the gospel. Do not the Scriptures show that teaching enters into the service of the glad tidings?
J.T.Jr. Yes; and the Spirit of God is here to lead, and if we drew upon Him more we would realise that what is being preached is right.
L.W. Is it right to pray for a sense of the anointing?
J.T.Jr. I think so; one would have liberty to ask for that. As we feel the need of the Spirit's support we should be free to ask for Him to come in, and we may be sure that He will do so in some way.
A.R. The psalmist says, "I shall be anointed with fresh oil", @Psalm 92:10. That would be a fresh sense of the anointing.
W.W.M. Would the Lord, by stopping the reading where He did, indicate that He was not going to preach judgment?
J.T.Jr. Quite so.
A.R. In considering the gospel in these readings, are we to be bathed in the grace of the dispensation? It says that the people wondered at the words of grace that were coming out of the Lord's mouth.
J.T.Jr. Yes; and that we might be helped in the preaching, for I feel that we need help in it. The Lord would help us to speak in power if we are dependent. Perhaps we are not feeling sufficiently the urgency of the commission. The Lord is looking for those that He can commission.
A.N.W. The preaching should be a definite message and pronouncement. There should be no uncertainty.
{394}
O.H. Must a brother start to preach in his own locality?
J.T.Jr. I see nothing in that. There should be evidence that he can preach. One said about David that he was "skilled in speech", (@1 Samuel 16:18). Someone will say. That brother can preach. We want to know the brothers that can preach. It is a question of being sent.
C.A.M. Paul says, in @Romans 1:9, "God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the glad tidings of his Son". Would serving in our spirits enable us to make a good start in the preaching?
J.T.Jr. Quite so.
A.N.W. Philip was not officially appointed as an evangelist, but he went and preached and thereby proved that he was one.
J.T.Jr. Yes; and later he was called the evangelist.
L.W. @Luke 5:1 says, "The crowd pressed on him to hear the word of God". Is there liberty to go beyond the thought of salvation in the preaching of the word of God?
J.T.Jr. The word of God is all-inclusive, of course. If it is time for the basic gospel the word of God will cover that. It is also a question of what the Lord sees that the saints need at any time.
A.R. The gospel brings in the glory: "the radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ", (@2 Corinthians 4:4).
J.T.Jr. Yes; and it takes us into God's rest, "Let us therefore use diligence to enter into that rest, that no one may fall after the same example of not hearkening to the word", (@Hebrews 4:11).
V.C.L. Would the Holy Spirit be, more free to bring persons into our meeting rooms if this expanded view of the gospel were more before us?
J.T.Jr. That may be so, but we are in hard territory here. Persons come in occasionally, of course,
{395}
but the territory is hard. But we must go on in spite of that.
W.W.M. The class of persons to whom the word is sent is mentioned here; "the poor" and the "captives" and the "blind" and the "crushed". The preaching is to let them know God's attitude toward them.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; so that you take account of the conditions which exist and you are enabled, by the Spirit, to preach what is needed.
Rem. The Lord preached in Nazareth, "where he was brought up". He would know the state there.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; and they should have known Him. The preaching is not judgment; it is grace. It is a question of being ready to meet the conditions. If there is opposition it is to be met with grace.
V.C.L. In @Acts 14:9 it says that a certain man "heard Paul speaking, who, fixing his eyes on him, and seeing that he had faith to be healed ...". Is it possible that the preacher may have a sense that God is working in someone in the room? Should we look for that?
J.T.Jr. We should be able to take account, in some sense, of what is going on in persons. The lame man must have made some expression, or have been intently occupied with Paul so that Paul could discern his state.
W.W.M. It also says, in that chapter, that they "so spake that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks believed" (@Acts 14:1).
J.T.Jr. That is a great credit to the preaching. There are some brothers like that who so speak that they get converts; and we should look for conversions.
E.A.L. It says, in @Luke 4:15 that *"he* taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all". Is it normal that if the preaching is right all will be affected?
{396}
J.T.Jr. Well, that must be guarded, for there was no defect in the preaching in the synagogue at Nazareth, and unbelief seems to have marked the hearers. But normally, if Christ is being presented in power, it will affect persons. There is a good deal in the reference to the man that had faith to be healed. He had faith. The preaching is on the principle of faith, to faith, according to @Romans 1. A great deal depends on the brethren, too, if they are helping the preacher by listening to what he is saying and supporting it.
Ques. Does not prayer before the preaching help, too?
J.T.Jr. I am sure that it does; so that household prayer for the gospel, as we have it, brings the families into the exercise and helps the preacher. He feels the sense of support as he stands up.
A.B.P. Do the conditions referred to in the Scripture which the Lord read, suggest that the persons are the subjects of the operation of the Spirit in new birth? Is it supposed that they have a desire for healing and for blessing?
J.T.Jr. Do you mean that these conditions allude to the work of the Spirit?
A.B.P. No; rather that the awareness of the condition would be the work of the Spirit, so that they might say, like the blind man, "Lord, that I may see" (@Luke 18:41).
J.T.Jr. Quite so.
E.A.L. In @Luke 7:22 the Lord says to John's disciples, "Go, bring back word to John of what ye have seen and heard: that blind see, lame walk, lepers are cleansed, deaf hear, dead are raised, poor are evangelized".
J.T.Jr. The whole matter is set out there, both the effects of the work of the Lord in miracles and in the preaching. And so it says, in @Mark 16:20, "The Lord working with them, and confirming the
{397}
word by the signs following upon it". The signs follow the preaching.
Ques. @Romans 1:4 speaks of the Lord Jesus being "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness". How does the thought of holiness apply to us?
J.T.Jr. I think that alludes to the way Jesus did things. The Spirit of holiness was there, and that would fit into this gospel because it brings in "the holy thing". We can hardly enter rightly into the service without holiness.
S.C.M. Should we not also feel the need for the service? what need there is in the audience? In verse 43 He says, "I must needs announce the glad tidings". And in @John 4:4, it says, "He must needs pass through Samaria". It is as though the need that was there required it.
J.T.Jr. There is so much that we need to learn as to the preaching! As we follow the Lord's movements here we see how He brings in the Scriptures, and then it says, "the eyes of all ... were fixed upon him". That is the *attractiveness* of the preacher. But also, there was *power*, and *authority* . Then it says that "they wondered at the words of grace". Well, that is the outstanding matter; words of grace were coming out of His mouth. That, of course, is unique, but it is a pattern, nevertheless. Grace is the predominant feature; we need to acquire ability to speak words of grace.
F.N.W. Are we to take account of the words? The brother who preaches may not be an able speaker, but if the words he uses are right and there is evidence of the Spirit's help, we should be sympathetic.
J.T.Jr. Words would follow one after another; our words should be selected words.
Ques. Is there something for us to learn from verses 42 and 43? The Lord was not governed by
{398}
the request of the crowds in His service, but by the sense that He was sent and had other places in view.
J.T.Jr. Yes. He was not governed by the crowds. The commission should govern us -- what the Lord would indicate. There is the scripture: "Pass over ... and help us" (@Acts 16:9), but the vision was to Paul. It was what the Lord was indicating to him.
Rem. The Lord sets a great example for us. We may become discouraged because results are small; yet as He went from city to city there came a time when He had to upbraid them because of unbelief. So we should continue.
J.T.Jr. The thing is to have a sense in our souls that the Lord is helping us despite the apparent lack of results, and to be "a sweet odour of Christ to God", @2 Corinthians 2:15.
A.N.W. In that connection, it says, in verse 30, "But *he*, passing through the midst of them, went his way" @Luke 4:30. He went on His way still, right to the end.
E.E.H. Will you say a word about the sovereignty of God as seen in this passage? It says, "There were many widows in Israel in the days of Elias, ... and to none of them was Elias sent but to Sarepta of Sidonia, to a woman that was a widow. And there were many lepers in Israel ... and none of them was cleansed but Naaman the Syrian", @Luke 4:25 - 27. Must we not learn that in the preaching, with all the stress we may put on the word, the results depend upon the sovereignty of God?
J.T.Jr. Christ is the great Subject of the gospel and it is a matter of what He becomes to persons. Here the Lord refers to the sovereignty of God. The Jews were in mind in the Lord's preaching but they did not want Him. They refused to accept who He was, as witnessed to in the scripture He read: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me". They said, "Is this not the son of Joseph?". It is then that He speaks of God's sovereignty. They really
{399}
did not want Him, and as has been remarked, they would have killed Him.
C.A.M. Does not this show how Luke's gospel supports Paul's ministry? On account of Christ's rejection by the most privileged, the gospel takes on a wider scope; that is, the nations are in mind.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; Paul says, "Lo, we turn to the nations", (@Acts 13:46).
Rem. The Lord said, "Of a truth I say to you, There were many widows", and so on. The gospel combines grace and truth, does it not? And the Lord is said to be "full of grace and truth" (@John 1:14). It was the truth here that brought out the enmity of those who did not believe.
J.T.Jr. There are many lepers and many widows today, but who is it that wants Christ? Those who want Him will get Him; He will find a place in their hearts.
L.W. There must be faith in those who hear, but what about faith in the preachers?
J.T.Jr. Paul says of the glad tidings, "Righteousness of God is revealed therein, on the principle of faith, to faith", (@Romans 1:17). If the preacher has not faith, then he should not try to preach. We have to start right and have faith -- and that brings God in.
L.W. So that it is "the word of faith, which we preach", (@Romans 10:8).
E.A.L. The Spirit would help the preacher to see something he had never seen before in the scripture from which he speaks.
J.T.Jr. The great thing is to make way for divine Persons in view of the testimony.
A.R. So that the gospel involves a system - the kingdom of God.
J.T.Jr. The Lord refers to that in verse 43: "I must needs announce the glad tidings of the kingdom
{400}
of God to the other cities also". He had been doing it.
A.R. Should persons who are converted be brought into the sphere of the kingdom of God immediately?
J.T.Jr. It is a great system of things where the power of God is and where we have the sense of divine support, and a convert should rightly feel the power there is in the kingdom of God.
W.W.M. Should right feelings mark us in service? We see and feel the need and we want to be a help to others.
J.T.Jr. Yes; the kingdom of God meets that need. It is seen here in Christ; that is Luke's side -- the kingdom of God. God comes in to meet whatever need is here. There is power in the kingdom to meet every felt need.
A.B.P. Is the power of the Spirit seen in the kingdom of God in a peculiar way?
J.T.Jr. I am sure it is; it is a question of what is here in the Spirit.
A.N.W. In chapter 5:1 the word of God is brought in. Is that a more comprehensive thought than the glad tidings? "The crowd pressed on him to hear the word of God".
J.T.Jr. Yes; it is involved in the preaching. The word of God embraces much. We have come to see that; it includes all these things about which we have been speaking. It is the word of *God* . We have the whole of Scripture from which to draw.
G.V.D. Though the Lord was not governed by the crowd in chapter 4:43, as has been said, yet He was constrained by the crowd in chapter 5:1 when it was a question of the word of God.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; there is something in that: "The crowd pressed on him to hear the word of God". If we are in the attitude of pressing to hear the word of God the Lord will bring in something.
{401}
S.W. Would preaching in the power of the Spirit be authoritative?
J.T.Jr. There would be evidence of authority with the word. I think that gift involves that. If you have gift you have authority, and it will be respected. Gift involves that something has been received from Christ -- from an ascended Christ.
F.N.W. "If anyone speak -- as oracles of God", (@1 Peter 4:11).
A.B.P. What is the force of the expression, "The acceptable year of the Lord"?
J.T.Jr. I think that it refers to the time of these glad tidings. It is a time in which man can be set free from all that he labours under.
C.A.M. Would it be like the year of release in @Deuteronomy 15?
J.T.Jr. Yes; it is the time of release; everyone may be released through the gospel. It is the acceptable year of the Lord.
A.B.P. Would it refer, specifically, to the time of the Lord's testimony, but now carried through in the present dispensation?
J.T.Jr. I would think that; it goes on as long as the Spirit is here; it is the acceptable year of the Lord.
Ques. Does Paul's word to Timothy link on with this? "Faithful is the word, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners", @1 Timothy 1:15.
J.T.Jr. Yes. Paul confirms the thought in that scripture.
W.W.M. The day of the vengeance of our God will not come in until the acceptable year is over.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; there is the present matter of God's government, of course, but that is not the same as the day of vengeance. This is the time of the preaching, the time of sonship, the acceptable year of the Lord.
{402}
L.W. What is the difference between preaching and teaching? The Lord speaks of announcing the glad tidings, but it also says that He sat down and taught the crowds.
J.T.Jr. There is much that we have to learn, and the Lord is teaching us all the time. We need to be taught the gospel, for instance. We need not only to be delivered by it, but to be taught. Romans is largely the teaching of the gospel. It says that they "obeyed from the heart the form of teaching", (@Romans 6:17).
V.C.L. There is no thought in relation to the preaching that each brother is to be given his turn to preach, is there? It is to be carried on on the principle of gift, is it not?
J.T.Jr. We should detect if a brother has received something; some evidence of a commission; of having something, as it was said of David. I think there will be some evidence if a brother has something from the Lord. "A man's gift maketh room for him", (@Proverbs 18:16).
C.A.M. The crowning thought of release is probably seen in @Leviticus 25:9, "Then shalt thou cause the loud sound of the trumpet to go forth in the seventh month". That was a great proclamation of release connected with the year of jubilee.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; so here, I suppose, the release of which you speak was carried on to Pentecost. They did not accept it in @Luke 4, and they later put Jesus to death, but the whole matter was carried on to Pentecost, when forgiveness was extended on the basis of repentance. It was not vengeance, but forgiveness that was offered.
Ques. Should there be a warning in the gospel for those who refuse? Paul tells us that "there is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety, and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness", (@Romans 1:18).
{403}
J.T.Jr. It is right to bring that in. It is not part of the gospel, exactly, but it is right to refer to it, like the preaching of Jonah at Nineveh, "Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown" (@Jonah 3:4). His preaching was very effective.
{404}
THE GOSPEL (4)
@Luke 7:36 - 50
J.T.Jr. It has been said that this section of Luke's gospel suggests the mercy-seat.
J.T. Quite so; very good.
L.W. In what way does it refer to the mercy-seat?
J.T.Jr. Because of the position of Christ in it and the forgiveness of sins. It says in @Romans 3:25, that Christ is "set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood". What the Lord did and said to this woman anticipated His death and the shedding of His blood.
C.A.M. Forgiveness was available to Simon as well as to the woman.
A.R. In @Romans 3:23 the whole world is guilty before God, "for all have sinned", it says. This woman knew that she was a sinner.
J.T. Quite so; "All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God", @Romans 3:23.
C.A.M. The mercy-seat is now in the view of all.
J.T.Jr. Yes; Christ is *set forth* a mercy-seat, so that all may come to it.
J.T. Thank God that it is available even now! "As they had nothing to pay, he forgave both of them their debt".
J.T.Jr. We should have a sense, as together now, that we have availed ourselves of the mercy-seat.
J.T. It is a question of having the full thought of it; having "nothing to pay, he forgave both of them their debt". The forgiveness of sins is in view.
S.C.M. Is not faith necessary? Those at table began to say, "Who is this who forgives also sins?". Faith is required. The Lord says, "Thy faith has saved thee".
J.T.Jr. Yes, that is another link with @Romans 3:25; we are justified on the principle of faith; as it says, "through faith in his blood".
{405}
A.R. In @Leviticus 16 the mercy-seat is the centre of a whole system, the centre of everything.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; the Lord is in that position now.
C.A.M. All that took place in the Lord's holy life was in view of His death, when the mercy-seat could be "set forth" for all.
J.T. Quite so; all is now finished; it is the finished work of Christ.
J.T.Jr. This chapter is in view of that; He could say, "Her many sins are forgiven", and again, "Thy sins are forgiven".
J.T. Her many sins were all taken account of; none were overlooked. Redemption is a great matter.
Rem. It is interesting that, as a sinner, the woman should know where the Lord was.
J.T.Jr. The woman came to where He was, as we have come together this afternoon; it is a question of what is here. The full thought of the mercy-seat is to be understood amongst us.
J.T. Thank God for the full idea of redemption and for those who are in the good of it.
Rem. Before we can rightly appreciate the mercy-seat we need to be thoroughly convicted of our sins.
E.E.H. Is the accessibility of the Lord Jesus seen in that this woman of the city was able to come so near to Him in the house of the Pharisee?
J.T.Jr. Yes; Simon did not recognize the position; he "spoke with himself" about the Lord in a wrong way. How prone we are to speak within ourselves in a wrong way about matters. But the Lord is the One who can administer forgiveness; He becomes the centre of the whole matter; so the woman comes to Him, as it says, "Behold, a woman in the city, who was a sinner, and knew that he was sitting at meat in the house of the Pharisee, having taken an alabaster box of myrrh, and standing at his feet
{406}
behind him weeping ... .". Something was going on in her; she came to Him where He was.
A.Macd. The Lord makes mention of the time: "But *she* from the time I came in has not ceased kissing my feet". She was occupied with the Lord and His movements.
E.A.L. The Lord says, "Thy faith has saved thee; go in peace". Would it be right to say that her debt is forgiven, according to the Lord's parable, but grace gives her credit for having faith?
J.T.Jr. And that is God's gift. Much is made of what goes on in the woman; the Lord makes everything of that: "she loved much" and "thy faith has saved thee".
E.S. She took her true place -- at His feet.
J.T.Jr. What she *did* is mentioned by the Spirit in the narrative, but the Lord tells Simon what she did and what he did not do. There is, therefore, something for us to think about in connection with what is going on in our own souls.
J.T. I wonder how many of us here today have fully and absolutely a sense in our souls of the forgiveness of sins, because it is an immense thing.
A.R. Did she have some apprehension of the death of Christ? She brought the box of myrrh.
J.T.Jr. Well, it was precious; it was something of value.
A.P. Would it refer to what we have in our souls as we repent?
J.T.Jr. I would think so. The way the Lord spoke about her shows that faith was there.
J.T. The idea is that grace is there; Luke stresses grace: "but as they had nothing to pay, he forgave both of them their debt".
A.N.W. The woman's love was the result of forgiveness; the forgiveness was not because she loved; she loved because she was forgiven much.
{407}
J.T. The Lord forgave her on the ground of redemption, which was yet to be effected.
J.E. The woman anointed and kissed His feet. What would that suggest?
J.T.Jr. It would probably allude to all. His service, all the way to the cross.
J.T. Just so; when we think of redemption it is a matter of how far He has gone; it involved the cross.
J.H.E. "Without faith it is impossible to please him", (@Hebrews 11:6).
J.T. Faith is a great matter: "Ye are saved by grace, through faith; and this not of yourselves; it is God's gift", (@Ephesians 2:8).
C.A.M. In @Luke 24:40 the Lord "showed them his hands and his feet". Following His pathway in this gospel, the Lord showed them His feet in resurrection.
J.T. We have often thought of that and of His feet carrying Him all the way. She appreciated the way He had come. So, as has been remarked, faith is God's gift; God had wrought in this woman's soul; she had nothing to pay, but she had faith.
B.W. Would you say a word about the unforgivable sin of @Matthew 12?
J.T.Jr. Speaking against the Holy Spirit is the unforgivable sin. There is no forgiveness for that, as the Lord says, "neither in this age nor in the coming one", @Matthew 12:31,32.
A.R. Mr. Darby has said that the notion of a clergyman is the dispensational sin against the Holy Spirit.
J.T. That is a remarkable statement!
J.T.Jr. Clericalism shuts out the Holy Spirit, and there is no forgiveness for that.
J.T. That is right.
A.N.W. It shows how great and real a Person the Holy Spirit is.
{408}
T.E.H. What kind of a sin is contemplated in @1 John 5:16? It reads, "If any one see his brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life, for those that do not sin unto death. There is a sin to death: I do not say of that that he should make a request". What kind of a sin is a sin to death?
J.T.Jr. It would mean something which had been done that God could not pass over and it went on to death.
A.N.W. The sin against the Holy Spirit could not be forgiven, governmentally, in time or eternally.
J.T. It is a question of what God orders and if God orders it, it stands.
D.P. Could we say that this woman had judged the clerical system in the person of the Pharisee and came under the authority of the Lord?
J.T. Very good; the Pharisaical system is a real thing and we must have a judgment of it.
Rem. It is remarkable that the Lord should choose to go into a Pharisee's house, a difficult place for this sinful woman to come into.
T.N.W. Would you think that when we come together for the preaching of the word, the brethren provide an atmosphere that is in accord with the mercy-seat?
J.T.Jr. Yes; and so in all our meetings we should be conscious that God is there by His Spirit. The cherubim of glory overshadowed the mercy-seat (@Hebrews 9:5). God was represented there in the cherubim. And so here: "God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself", @2 Corinthians 5:19. God was there in Christ in the Pharisee's house. Now it is, "in whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit", (@Ephesians 2:22). The Lord is available to all. God has set Him forth a mercy-seat.
V.C.L. And some sense of this must have come vividly into the soul of the woman, because there
{409}
seems to be no thought on her part that she would not be accepted; she has the liberty of one who has confidence of acceptance.
J.T.Jr. No doubt the woman would suggest how we come into the feelings that are proper to the assembly as to the Lord Jesus.
J.H.E. You mentioned that "God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself"(@2 Corinthians 5:19). And Paul could say, "We are ambassadors ... for Christ" (@2 Corinthians 5:20). The position is the same today, is it not?
J.T. Quite the same.
Ques. In that same passage in 2 Corinthians it says, "Putting in us the word of that reconciliation" @2 Corinthians 5:19. Does the preacher, in that way, reflect the glory of the mercy of God in his preaching?
J.T.Jr. The preacher should be in the good of the mercy-seat himself. So that the feelings of this woman should be known by the preachers; they know their own part as sinners and are kept humble by it. Paul is an example in this. He said, "Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom *I* am the first", (@1 Timothy 1:15).
D.P. Would the ministration of this woman to the Lord qualify her for the assembly?
J.T.Jr. I think so, she would be a suited person to come into the assembly.
W.W.M. The mercy-seat is really a Person; it is, "whom God has set forth" (@Romans 3:25). That puts everything on Christ. The mercy-seat was made of pure gold (@Exodus 25:17). Everything is divinely ordered, disclosing the heart of God: "There is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared", (@Psalm 130:4).
F.H.L. In @Hebrews 9:12 it says, "By his own blood, has entered ... having found an eternal redemption".
J.T. Yes; His own blood, "through faith in his blood"(@Romans 3:25). It is His own personal matter.
{410}
V.C.L. The Pharisee missed the mark. He says to himself, "This person if he were a prophet ..." and then he says to the Lord, "Teacher". It was the Redeemer who was administering forgiveness.
J.T. He did not even know that He was a prophet; he did not know that much.
R.F.D. The Lord seems to exercise the right of the creditor in this scripture; elsewhere sin is regarded as against God.
J.T.Jr. It was against God here; the Lord spoke in a parable; all sin is against God. She was a woman in the city, and a sinner; but she took the alabaster box of myrrh; she *did* that, showing she had faith; and she came behind Him weeping. She wept because God was working in her. She had faith, and faith will bring out these things.
J.T. Faith was active in her.
J.T.Jr. I thought we may be helped to see that faith operates in our souls as to our sins, so that we come to understand the awfulness of that from which grace relieves us.
Rem. So that we are justified through faith. Is that not a great principle in the gospel? Simon missed it. He would condemn the woman, but she was justified by the Lord.
L.W. Is that why the Lord can tell her, "Go in peace"? Is justification seen in what he said to her?
J.T.Jr. She was told to go *in* peace; it is the way in which she goes now. @Romans 3:17 says, "The way of peace they have not known". It is not the way she came in, but she is now in "the way of peace".
J.T. Very good; it is the gospel.
A.T.D. The One who spoke peace to her was the One who made peace by the blood of His cross.
J.T. Quite so; the Lord appraised the whole situation when He spoke the parable, but then He
{411}
enlarged on what had gone on in the woman's soul, and what had *not* gone on in Simon.
A.N.W. The Lord knew that repentance was underneath, so that He could draw attention to what she did as the evidence of her faith.
S.W. Her broken and contrite heart was not despised (@Psalm 51:17).
J.T.Jr. It is a very interesting matter as what she did was taken account of. It seems to be a full idea with her. She washed His feet with her tears -- the expression of the deep feelings she had -- and then she dried the tears with the hairs of her head.
V.C.L. She showed the marks of the Spirit's work, typically, in that she anointed Him. The Lord had said, earlier, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings" (@Luke 4:18). Typically, she had the Spirit and was trustworthy.
Ques. Had she any intelligence that Jesus was to suffer in that she anointed his feet with the myrrh?
J.T.Jr. The alabaster box of myrrh has some significance; we are impressed with that. The Old Testament references to myrrh seem to suggest the idea of suffering love. She evidently appreciated the grace that brought Jesus into the suffering position.
J.LeP. Was not this woman the exemplification of verse 35: "Wisdom has been justified of all her children" @Luke 7:35?
J.T.Jr. Yes; she was one of wisdom's children.
T.E.H. God had provided her with long hair in His creational rights, and she evidently honoured that. In that way her glory was used to serve Him.
J.T.Jr. Yes; her tears were well spent; they were used to wash the Lord's feet and her hair was used in a most exalted way, that is, in wiping His feet.
Rem. In @Ephesians 4:32 it says that we are to "be to one another kind, compassionate, forgiving one another, so as God also in Christ has forgiven
{412}
you". Mr. Darby's footnote links that with showing grace as @Luke 7:42.
J.T.Jr. So that we begin to act like God after we have been convicted of our own sins and have realized the extent of grace that has been shown to us.
V.C.L. Grace and forgiveness are being emphasized at the present time. Is not this an evidence of the anointing? The Holy Spirit has been given greater place in relation to administrative matters.
J.T. The Spirit of God has been sent down from heaven and is here in the assembly.
A.R. It says that "he forgave both of them their debt". Forgiveness was available to the Pharisee as well as to the woman.
J.T.Jr. The allusion to the Spirit is helpful; the Spirit has come down from heaven and we have Him; the anointing comes into view.
Rem. The coming of the Spirit was an act of grace, and the Spirit's falling upon those to whom Peter preached in @Acts 10 was so again.
A.R. Grace was in full sway at Pentecost when three thousand were converted.
J.T.Jr. There was the administration of forgiveness, and the gift of the Holy Spirit: "Be baptised ... for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit" (@Acts 2:38).
L.W. @Romans 3 and 5 are very closely linked in that way?
J.T.Jr. Yes; not only do we receive the forgiveness of sins but also the gift of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. It is marvellous; the Spirit has come down from heaven, sent down from heaven.
J.T.Jr. This is a very full section of Scripture which is greatly used in the gospel preachings, and rightly so.
S.C.M. The Lord says to Simon: "Thou gavest me not a kiss, but *she* from the time I came in has
{413}
not ceased kissing my feet". That is a remarkable testimony to what the woman did.
J.T.Jr. It is a question of how much we do when the Lord has come in. "From the time I came in", He says. So that we can regard the Lord as being amongst us here today; but then, what are we doing in relation to Him?
J.T. What a sight it is to see so many brethren together!
J.T.Jr. It is a great sight to see so many that have been forgiven.
S.C.M. As having been forgiven and having impressions in our souls, we are able to speak to each other in this happy way.
J.T.Jr. And so it is that the Lord refers to love here: "She loved much"; love has a great place in the gospel.
J.T. It is actually what has been done through the gift of the Spirit.
J.T.Jr. The pouring out of the Spirit involves the greatest thing we can think of in the way of what we have received.
J.T. The whole question is what has been done, including the gift of the Spirit, the coming of the Holy Spirit from heaven.
A.N.W. Are you referring to the Lord's work, His death, the smitten Rock?
J.T. Quite so; what actually has been done; what has happened at any time that is involved in the gift of the Spirit.
D.Macd. The Lord said to the disciples, "It is profitable for you that I go away; for if I do not go away, the Comforter will not come to you; but if I go I will send him to you", (@John 16:7).
J.T.Jr. The Lord is no longer here personally, but the Holy Spirit is here, and that involves all that is connected with the mercy-seat.
{414}
Rem. Paul wrote, in @1 Corinthians 2:3,4, "I was with you in weakness and in fear and in much trembling; and my word and my preaching, not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your faith might not stand in men's wisdom, but in God's power". It is evident that he was under the Spirit's power as he served at Corinth.
J.T.Jr. The "demonstration" would suggest that there was something in evidence which was manifestly of the Spirit and was in power.
A.R. The Spirit being here involves a great system below. The tabernacle in the wilderness represented a great system on earth.
J.T.Jr. And now it is that we are "built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit"(@Ephesians 2:22), as has been remarked.
A.R. So that, in testimony, the mercy-seat is set forth here today.
J.T.Jr. I think so; we should feel the greatness of the position in which we are. This woman, in coming so close to the Lord, had some sense of what these things represent. And the Lord allowed her to come so close to Him! He took up the matter of her forgiveness, which was the point in His parable and was available to both these persons.
J.T. "As they had nothing to pay, he forgave both of them their debt".
J.T.Jr. From this standpoint no one has anything to pay, but as receiving the Spirit we get the ability to pay.
G.V.D. Would you say something further as to our ability to pay as having the Spirit?
J.T.Jr. I was thinking of the type in @2 Kings 4:7, of the oil in the vessels. Elisha told the woman to pay her debt and to live on the rest. That is an allusion to a person using the Spirit and thus being able to meet every obligation. But the point here
{415}
is that there was a time when we had nothing to pay.
A.N.W. "... That the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit", @Romans 8:4.
J.T.Jr. It is a question of how we are set up with the means of doing so. According to @Romans 8, a having the Spirit you are able to meet everything by the Spirit.
C.A.M. So that it has been said of the believer and his blessings, that he gets the first one for nothing, as seen in this chapter, but that he is able to pay every debt afterwards.
J.T.Jr. So that this brings out an important foundational phase of the truth -- that when it is a question of the debt we owe on account of our sins against God, we have nothing to pay.
V.C.L. Would you say something as to the one whose many sins are forgiven, loving much, and he to whom little is forgiven, loving little? Paul speaks of himself as the chief of sinners. Was it a progressive matter in his soul, so that as the work of God expanded he had a deeper understanding of his own condition?
J.T.Jr. I would think that; we have been speaking about the preaching; it is a question of how the truth is presented. The Lord says, "He to whom little is forgiven loves little". But the woman was conscious of having been forgiven much and she loved much.
Ques. How are we to view the bondman in @Matthew 18 who was forgiven the huge debt but went and throttled one of his fellow-bondmen who owed him a small amount? He was delivered to the tormentors, and the Lord says, "Thus also my heavenly Father shall do to you if ye forgive not from your hearts every one his brother"(@Matthew 18:35).
{416}
J.T.Jr. That shows the other side; that man was not really a subject of the mercy of God. He did *not* love much.
W.W.M. Having nothing to pay means that we had nothing that could meet the obligation of our sins. The mercy-seat is Christ Himself: "whom God has set forth" (@Romans 3:25). He has met the obligation for us and as we believe we understand that righteousness has been met, and as Elihu said to Job: God "will render unto man his righteousness", (@Job 33:26). That is provided at the mercy-seat. "Jehovah hath laid upon him the iniquity of us all", (@Isaiah 53:6). And then it says, "Their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more", (@Hebrews 10:17). So that, "having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God", (@Romans 5:1). We are free in the presence of God, but we should always remember that Christ took our place.
C.F.E. When the Lord Jesus, on the cross, said, "It is finished" (@John 19:30), He had all this in mind.
V.C.L. Although there is this principle that he to whom little is forgiven loves little, in @Romans 3 *everybody* is shut out before the mercy-seat is presented; "for there is no difference; for all have sinned"(@Romans 3:22,23); so that it is not a question of little or much, but the greatness of the mercy-seat.
A.Macd. Is it not significant that although the Lord Jesus was addressing Simon, He turns to the woman and says to her, "Thy sins are forgiven"? She received a special word from the Lord at that time.
{417}
THE GOSPEL (5)
@Luke 8:1 - 21
J.T.Jr. I thought the reference to the word of God would be an interesting inquiry in relation to the gospel. The Lord says, in verse 11, "The seed is the word of God".
A.B.P. In @Matthew 13:38 the *persons* are sown -- "These are the sons of the kingdom". Here, the seed that is sown is the word of God.
J.T. That is very plain; "The seed is the word of God".
A.N.W. Peter says, "Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the living and abiding word of God", @1 Peter 1:23.
J.T.Jr. Here it is what is sown in the person; the ground refers to persons.
J.T. The word is a living idea.
C.A.M. Would the potential be in the word? That is where the value lies that would produce something.
J.T.Jr. Yes; the word does not change; the seed is the same in each place, whether it be the rocky soil or otherwise; it is the same word.
J.MacK. Is your thought that every kind of material in the heart of man is tested by the word, and that whilst the seed is the word, it depends upon the environment into which it comes as to its fruitfulness?
J.T.Jr. I think that is what comes out here.
J.MacK. And is it not important to see that the word tests every kind of ground? Does it not bring man, as such, into responsibility -- not only the persons who receive it?
J.T.Jr. Quite so. It would seem that formation is in mind. The Lord finishes with the thought of
{418}
His mother and His brethren being those who hear the word of God and do it. So that an order of things is established in persons in a collective sense.
A.E.W. Is this like what is mentioned in @Acts 19:20, "Thus with might the word of the Lord increased and prevailed"?
J.T.Jr. That is an interesting reference because the allusion to the word there is that it increased, meaning that it was taking form in persons.
A.R. What is the difference between this chapter and the reference in chapter 1 to those who were attendants on the Word?
J.T.Jr. Well, the reference in chapter 1 is to the Person of Christ, as is also seen in @John 1:1. He is also called "The Word of God" in @Revelation 19:13. All that is sown must be from Him, and it is evidently connected with what is spoken; it is the word.
J.MacK. And presented in testimony?
J.T. Yes; the word is a living idea; it is the living and abiding word of *God* .
A.N.W. Peter confirms what has been said as to the vocal character of the word: "But this is the word which in the glad tidings is preached to you", @1 Peter 1:25. It is in the preaching.
C.F.E. In @Psalm 119 we have several references to the word. In verse 105 it says, "Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path" @Psalm 119:115. The word there is for guidance in our pathway.
J.T.Jr. Reference to @Psalm 119 is very fitting because so much is said in it about the word, the precepts, the law, the testimony, the statutes, the commandments and all that line of things.
L.W. In verse 8 of our chapter it says, "He that has ears to hear, let him hear". @Psalm 119:130 says, "The entrance of thy words giveth light, giving understanding unto the simple".
{419}
J.T.Jr. Yes, @Psalm 119 is very helpful in that an important end is reached in it. Did not Mr. Raven say that @Psalm 119 finishes the Psalms as a point reached?
J.T. Quite so.
J.T.Jr. It is a point reached in the believer for the word of God is established in him.
R.W.S. Is that what is reached here in the thought of a hundredfold, the thought of fruit being brought to perfection, and hearing the word of God and doing it? Is that what you have in mind as to formation reaching its desired end?
J.T.Jr. Yes, the word has formation in view.
J.MacK. Would this formation take place as the word is received, the formation being the work of the Spirit? And would it not follow the intelligent line in the soul as the word becomes understood?
J.T.Jr. I would think that, and being born again by it, as alluded to in Peter's writings, must have that in mind. It is a question of the intelligence.
A.R. In @Hebrews 4:12 it says, "The word of God is living and operative". God really comes into the matter through the word: "And there is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes".
J.T.Jr. The word of God is linked immediately with God Himself in that scripture.
J.MacK. In @Acts 10:44 it says, "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word". Does it not show that the Holy Spirit very quickly links on with what is spoken as there is faith and readiness to receive it?
J.T.Jr. I think that is very important. We should have in mind that the word, as spoken, is one thing; it is from God. But then it says, "Who were hearing the word". That refers to what was going on in them; they were hearing.
{420}
A.R. The word in @Acts 10:44 is the *logos* . Christ was that, was He not? He was the full expression of the mind of God.
J.T.Jr. God's thoughts have been expressed in Christ; but they are also expressed in the word of God; it is of God and from God.
A.B.P. In @Acts 10:44 there is reference to "the word" and "these words". Would the plural idea be the breaking down of the scope of the truth included in the thought of the word?
J.T.Jr. Yes, I would say that; it is the detailed way in which the mind of God is conveyed.
L.W. The angel, in @Acts 5:20, released the apostles from the prison and said to them, "Go ye and stand and speak ... all the words of this life".
J.T.Jr. The "words of this life" would be about the life of Jesus.
S.C.M. Peter says, "The word of the Lord abides for eternity", @1 Peter 1:25. Does the formation go through?
J.T.Jr. That refers to the word itself: "The word of the Lord abides for eternity". It is a quotation from @Isaiah 40:8, where it is contrasted to the brevity of the life of all flesh.
S.C.M. That lends force to the rest of the verse, "But this is the word which in the glad tidings is preached to you" @1 Peter 1:25.
J.T.Jr. The gospel should take that form; therefore, it is a question of how we preach -- if what we say is the word of God.
R.W.S. In certain nations the word of God has prospered and there has been formation; in others there is not much for God apparent. The Gauls were marked by fickleness and the Cretans by lying. Does that affect the results, and is sovereignty behind it?
J.T.Jr. I suppose that what we have in this chapter would cover that. Various kinds of ground
{421}
are alluded to in the parable. Therefore, if we apply it nationally, we might well ask what kind of soil there is in this and other countries.
D.P. In @1 Corinthians 1:18 the apostle calls attention to "the word of the cross". Is that different from the word of God?
J.T.Jr. It would be the opening up of the truth of what the cross involved.
A.B.P. The word of God is a wider thought than that, is it not?
J.T.Jr. Yes, I think the word of God would embrace every phase of the truth.
J.MacK. Is it not important to see that the sower does not select the ground? He allows every kind of ground to come under the searching character of the word. Should that be a stimulation to us to use the word freely that it might accomplish something in the good ground, but in any case, to accomplish that whereunto it is sent?
J.T. Do you mean in its searching character?
J.MacK. Yes; the word in @Isaiah 55:11 is that: "It shall not return unto me void, but it shall do that which I please, and it shall accomplish that for which I send it".
A.N.W. It has been remarked that the word of God covers every phase of what is spoken. The Lord, in quoting from Deuteronomy to Satan, in @Matthew 4:4, said, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word which goes out through God's mouth".
J.T.Jr. Quite so; the *logos* is not only what has been said, but what can be said; it is what God *can* say.
F.N.W. Is the good ground entirely the work of the Holy Spirit in new birth?
J.T.Jr. Well, we can look at it in that way, I suppose, but we have presented to us here the various kinds of ground that exist. It is more from
{422}
the side of responsibility; that is, whether it is good ground, or rocky, or thorny ground. We might ask what kind of ground there is here tonight.
J.T. Just so -- in you, and in me, and in every one of us.
A.B.P. In @Isaiah 55, where it speaks of God's word not returning to Him void, the preparation of the ground is referred to: "As the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud".
W.W.M. Would the ground be presented in the word "towards all, and upon all those who believe", @Romans 3:22? Would those who believe be the good ground?
J.T. "All those who believe"; it is a question of faith, and what they believe; that is the good ground.
V.C.L. Is this an illustration of the truth that "where sin abounded grace has overabounded" (@Romans 5:20)?
J.T. Quite so; God has seen the extent to which sin has gone and has acted accordingly.
A.R. Verse 15 would confirm that the ground is in the persons: "But that in the good ground, these are they who in an honest and good heart, having heard the word keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience". The good ground, therefore, would be the honest and good heart.
J.T.Jr. So the question may be asked, How do we get an honest and good heart?
A.R. Will you tell us, please?
J.T.Jr. Well, I think we must first discern what the flesh is in us; that all our hearts are the same; "there is no difference; for all have sinned" (@Romans 3:22,23).
J.MacK. Whilst, clearly, there is the matter of sovereignty in the word and the quickening power of the Spirit, yet does not this parable throw into relief the element of responsibility with all of us?
{423}
The moral environment into which the word comes determines its fruitfulness, although, from the divine side, the seed is always good.
A.N.W. The Lord, in summing up in verse 18, says, "Take heed therefore how ye hear". The crux of the matter seems to be in how we hear - whether tonight or at any time.
Ques. Is the searching character of the word seen in @Acts 2:37? Being pricked in heart they said, "What shall we do, brethren?". They were convicted.
J.T.Jr. That is right; that is, perhaps, the beginning of honesty; it must have a beginning, and conviction is necessary.
A.R. Repentance would take place if souls were convicted.
J.T.Jr. I think there is a process; the Lord is speaking about the different kinds of ground here; and after all, our hearts are all the same, basically; any difference that comes in from our lost condition must be the result of God's work in us.
J.T. Our circumstances have much to do with it.
D.Macd. It says of Mary that she "kept all these things in her heart", (@Luke 2:52).
J.T.Jr. She had positive things before her. But seven demons had gone out from Mary of Magdala, which refers to the power of evil. Before we can have an honest and good heart, things that are there which are not right must go.
C.A.M. Is it not worth noting that our ears are referred to? It is an important matter: "He that has ears to hear ...". That brings in our responsibility. When Stephen rendered his testimony those who were addressed *stopped* their ears.
J.T.Jr. The side of our responsibility should be stressed. We are responsible as to the word which we have heard.
Ques. Joseph's brethren alleged that they were honest men. Is the process to which you have
{424}
referred seen in the way Joseph had to take to bring out that they were not honest?
J.T.Jr. That is right; they had to come to that in self-judgment.
Ques. What can be said about the devil being able to take away the word after it is once sown?
J.T.Jr. I think that we can each work the thing out in ourselves. We all know how, at times, the word has been taken away from us.
J.MacK. Is it somewhat like the blinding of the minds of them that believe not? People are not blinded save as they are unbelieving; it is the advantage that Satan acquires through unbelief in persons.
J.T.Jr. And I suppose, also, the working of the will enters into it.
F.H.L. In @Hebrews 6:5 reference is made to some who "have tasted the good word of God" and have fallen away.
R.W.S. Abraham did not let the devil have access in @Genesis 15; he scared the birds away. It was a question of the word of God in that chapter.
J.T.Jr. That is good; we must be on the watch for the enemy coming and taking things away from us.
Ques. Do we need to call upon the Spirit in this connection? It is said of the Thessalonians that they "accepted the word in much tribulation with joy of the Holy Spirit" (@1 Thessalonians 1:6). I wondered if the service of the Spirit is essential if we, as believers, are to keep the word in our hearts.
J.T. Quite so; and there is joy in it, too.
A.N.W. According to verse 14, we must watch lest the "cares and riches and pleasures of life" choke the word.
J.T.Jr. Those are things which come up. In the first case of the word springing up, it says, "It was dried up because it had not moisture". There was
{425}
something lacking, subjectively. That is often the case, that we lack a subjective work; there is no moisture.
C.F.E. Is the subjective side seen in the women who ministered to the Lord of their substance? They had acquired substance so that they were able to minister to Him.
J.T.Jr. That section indicates what was in the Lord's mind. "He went through the country city by city, and village by village, preaching and announcing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God; and the twelve were with him, and certain women". The Lord had this order of things in mind. There is the administrative thought in the twelve, but the feminine side was there, too. So that you have something reached in the gospel in that way -- administration and subjective affection are there; there are conditions where the word of God has taken form.
A.B.P. Does that connect with @Romans 10: where it speaks of believing *in the heart*?
J.T.Jr. Quite so, and obeying *from the heart* the form of teaching. The *form* of teaching would be the responsibility of the preacher.
S.C.M. That passage also says, "The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach; that if thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved" (@Romans 10:8,9).
J.T. "My mother and my brethren are those who hear the word of God and do it" (verse 21).
J.T.Jr. That would confirm what our brother has been saying: "The word is near thee, in thy mouth". If confession is made with the mouth and there is a believing heart, we have the good ground. These are subjective things; it is like hearing and doing.
J.T. One of the most important things that has come before us of late is the part the Father and the
{426}
Son and the Holy Spirit have in these things, and how divine Persons act and react on each other.
A.B.P. Would the moisture referred to here be a preparatory work of the Spirit?
J.T.Jr. I think it alludes to the Spirit, because all subjective work is by the Spirit; the moisture would allude, in some way, to the Spirit.
R.W.S. When Paul came to Ephesus and found certain disciples who had not heard that the Spirit had come, it could be said that they did not have moisture until the Holy Spirit came upon them.
J.T.Jr. They were not really established until they had received the Spirit. Paul saw to it that they did receive the Spirit, so that they would not be dried up.
A.R. And then there is the word in @John 3:8: "The wind blows where it will, and thou hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it comes and where it goes: thus is every one that is born of the Spirit".
J.T.Jr. That is John's presentation of the truth; that is the sovereign action of God by the Spirit.
A.R. Does it connect with the thought of the tempestuous blowing of @Acts 2:2, which took place in the upper room?
J.T.Jr. Well, I think that what has been remarked about the Father, the Son and the Spirit should be kept in mind. The verse you allude to is the work of the Spirit. All that the Spirit is doing is in relation to the other divine Persons.
J.T. We are to consider the relations between the Father, and the Son and the Holy Spirit. Though all are equal in Deity, yet the Son and the Spirit have taken lowly places in serving.
J.T.Jr. So that the most important side of the truth bears upon the Father, the Son and the Spirit acting and reacting in relation to Themselves; and the Spirit is referred to in @John 3 in view of new birth
{427}
A.R. Does the Spirit's service accompany the word of God as it is preached?
J.T.Jr. Well, it is the word of *God*, and it is a question of what is involved in that.
Ques. Does the word of God involve the three divine Persons: the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Just so; the Father, the Son and the Spirit; the three Persons.
E.E.H. The Lord says, in @John 6:44, "No one can come to me except the Father who has sent me draw him". Is that an instance of divine Persons reacting on one another?
J.T. Just so; that is just the point; the thought of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, three Persons, and yet They are the same; we can regard Them as equal and yet They are not equal in relation to the working out of divine thoughts. We have to make allowance for the Father being greatest of all, and the Son next, and the Spirit next.
F.H.L. Peter referred to that on the day of Pentecost when he said of the Lord Jesus: "Having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear", (@Acts 2:33).
J.T. Quite so.
V.C.L. And is the matter brought within our range in what the Lord said, "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him", (@John 14:23)?
A.N.W. And the Lord also said, "My Father ... is greater than all". We have to understand that.
E.E.H. The Lord said of the blind man in @John 9 that the works of God were to be manifested in him. At the same time *He* opened the blind man's eyes. It was the works of God.
{428}
Rem. The three divine Persons are seen operating in relation to the word in @Titus 3:4 - 8: "But when the kindness and love to man of our Saviour God appeared, not on the principle of works which have been done in righteousness which *we* had done, but according to his own mercy he saved us through the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit, which he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Saviour; that having been justified by *his* grace, we should become heirs according to the hope of eternal life. The word is faithful, and I desire that thou insist strenuously on these things".
A.B.P. Is there a link between John's teaching and this chapter in the *moisture*? It says, in @John 3:5, "Except any one be born of water and of Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God".
J.T. The water, in a certain sense, is on a level with the Spirit. Elsewhere we have, "They that bear witness are three: the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and the three agree in one", (@1 John 5:7,8).
A.R. Would being engaged with the Father direct us towards God?
J.T. It would.
J.T.Jr. What you have been stressing is what has come out in revelation -- the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, to be regarded in that order.
A.E.W. Should we, in our preachings, be more concerned to make room for divine Persons? We are apt to be more concerned as to what we shall say than that room should be made for the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit to have Their part in it.
W.W.M. Verse 14 refers to things that hindered the fruit: "cares and riches and pleasures of life". We may have escaped the latter two, but be burdened with anxious cares which hinder the fruit from coming to perfection. We are to live by faith and trust God and not be burdened with anxious cares.
{429}
J.MacK. Does the reference to hearing the word and keeping it refer to moral qualities in persons?
J.T. Quite so; therefore you have to count on these qualities coming to light through the preaching.
J.MacK. Stability would be seen in a person making room for the word and keeping it, so that with patience fruit is brought forth.
C.A.M. Is it not encouraging to realise that the potentialities are in the word; growth is not a matter of effort?
J.T. The potentialities are with the word; therefore it is a question of the conditions in which we are found. As together here as brethren we affect one another for good. But we are not all the same, and therefore we have to be patient, and move on together in these things.
Ques. We have spoken about the word of God in relation to the glad tidings, but we can say that we have had it as together tonight, also.
V.C.L. What has been said about environment lays stress upon the fact that the word of God has added power as spoken where the saints are present. The preaching being in the environment of those who have the word of God in their hearts sets the matter on.
A.R. There is a difference in the three gospels as to what is produced. In this gospel it is, "having sprung up bore a hundredfold".
J.T. Luke would give the full result of grace.
A.N.W. I think you have said that the evangelist is optimistic.
J.MacK. Does verse 16 contemplate that the person who keeps the word and brings forth fruit can be used testimonially?
J.T. Very good; he can be relied upon.
R.W.S. And is the local assembly in mind in this section?
{430}
J.T.Jr. I thought so; the good ground is the environment where the word of God is appreciated, and that is extended in verse 16, "that they who enter in may see the light".
A.R. We might say that the local meeting is referred to in verse 21 in those who hear the word of God and do it.
S.W. Would you open up the thought of hearing the word and *keeping* it in verse 15, and hearing the word and *doing* it in verse 21.
J.T.Jr. We become related to Christ as we hear the word of God and do it. Keeping the word is linked with the thought of patient continuance.
F.H.L. The Lord looked around in a circuit in @Mark 3:34, suggesting the circle of fellowship, would you say?
J.T. Yes; the Lord looking around in a circuit would speak of the fellowship; they were all there, ready to act for one another.
J.MacK. In @Philippians 1:14 the apostle Paul says that the boldness of the brethren to speak the word of God hung upon its being manifest that his bonds were in Christ. That would suggest that the testimonial side, and the speaking of the word of God, flowed out from the evident witness in a person.
R.M. Does the reference to Isaac reaping a hundredfold teach us that the most effective man in testimony is the heavenly man? It says, in @Genesis 26:12: "And Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year a hundredfold; and Jehovah blessed him".
G.V.D. There must be many believers in Christendom who hear the word of God but do not follow it to its logical conclusion. If thy did they would be in the assembly in a practical way. Hearing the word of God and doing it would bring one into that position, would it not?
{431}
A.N.W. Obedience to the word brings out those who are practically in the assembly.
A.B.P. Before this chapter is concluded a man, a woman and a child are secured -- suggestive of the personnel of the assembly.
J.T.Jr. That is the result that the Lord had in mind; His real relatives come to light in those who hear the word of God and do it. The preaching has been before us in these meetings, and it is a question of what the preachers are saying, and how long they take to say it, and are the saints really hearing the word?
V.C.L. It is said of Paul, "who, fixing his eyes on him, and seeing that he had faith to be healed" (@Acts 14:9). He saw that as he was speaking the word, did he not?
J.T.Jr. Do you mean that we should look at our audience to see what is going on in them?
V.C.L. We feel encouraged at seeing those who have the word of God in their hearts.
J.T.Jr. So that it is good to look at the brethren to see that faith is active.
R.W.S. Did you refer to the length of time we take to speak? Do you think that we should be more brief?
J.T.Jr. Well, I mean that the word of God should be in evidence; something in which God is helping us. We may have things arranged in our minds in view of speaking, but what has God in mind? The word of God will come in as way is made for it.
W.W.M. Paul's instruction to Timothy was to "proclaim the word", (@2 Timothy 4:2).
J.T. Yes, without saying what word, showing that the word had acquired great place with him.
D.Macd. Philip evidently preached with much liberty to the eunuch, showing that something can be given us at a moment's notice.
{432}
J.T. In the service it is a question, chiefly, of the Spirit. *He* supplies what is needed. It is what *He* will bring in through the speaker, what *He* has in mind. So we need to give Him scope in ourselves.
A.B.P. Philip "preached the Christ" to the Samaritans. Then, later, he announced to them "the glad tidings concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ" (@Acts 8:12). All this is included in the idea of the word of God, for it says that "Samaria had received the word of God" (@Acts 8:14).
J.T.Jr. Yes; therefore we see the great variety in the word that is available to the preacher; and it is the living and abiding word of God.
S.C.M. It says of Samson that "he found a fresh jawbone of an ass" (@Judges 15:15). Is that suggestive?
J.T.Jr. Quite so; it was fresh, but he threw it away after it had served its purpose; @Judges 15:17.
Rem. The apostle speaks of the gospel, in @2 Corinthians 3:8, as "the ministry of the Spirit".
A.N.W. And Peter says that certain have declared to you "the glad tidings by the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven", (@1 Peter 1:12).
A.R. What is meant by the fact that Samson threw the jawbone away?
J.T.Jr. Well, he would not use it again. The Lord might have you use a word again, but it would be in a fresh way. Samson *found* a fresh jawbone. The thing was fresh; it is suggestive of the living character of the word of God.
E.A.L. It would not be a sermon from the bottom of the barrel, as they say.
F.H.L. In the parable there are four classes or kinds of ground. This would suggest the universal thought, so that the word of God covers every condition that might be presented to the preacher.
{433}
THE GOSPEL (6)
@Luke 10:25 - 42
J.T.Jr. The question of eternal life is raised in this passage. We have had considerable ministry on this subject.
A.B.P. Can eternal life be inherited?
J.T.Jr. It is what we come into; it is a gift; the Lord says, "I give them life eternal", (@John 10:28).
C.A.M. It is connected with the inheritance, of course, but was this man right in asking if there was something he could do to get it?
J.T.Jr. Being a gift, it would not be so much what we can do; we are enjoined to "lay hold" of it (@1 Timothy 6:12).
J.T. It is a question of love and it belongs to the *saints* as such.
J.T.Jr. The Lord says, "I give them life eternal"(@John 10:28). The man's question brings up the subject of the neighbour.
J.T. It is the nearest of the brethren; they cannot be far away if we are to be in the enjoyment of life.
J.T.Jr. So that the enjoyment of eternal life involves persons.
J.T. Yes; distinguished persons.
A.B.P. Does the inn suggest the sphere of life?
J.T. Yes; the inn suggests the sphere of it; that is good.
A.R. Do the scriptures quoted by the lawyer bear on eternal life? "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thine understanding; and thy neighbour as thyself".
J.T.Jr. We could not have eternal life until the Lord came.
J.T. Quite so.
{434}
Rem. Jude says, "Keep yourselves in the love of God, awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life" @Jude 21.
J.T.Jr. There it is regarded as something to be reached.
J.T. Yes; it is an objective idea there.
S.C.M. Paul says, in @Romans 6:23: "For the wages of sin is death; but the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord".
J.T. While it is all very simple, it requires that we lay hold of it, as remarked, for it belongs to the saints and all here should understand it.
A.N.W. Is it not important to emphasize that it is objective, it is something outside of myself?
J.T.Jr. It is objective in Romans, but it is not objective when we reach Christ.
C.A.M. Is it objective until the moral question is settled?
J.T. Quite so; the moral question needs to be settled. 'Moral' is a good word if we understand what is meant by it.
Ques. What is the difference between enjoying eternal life and having it as an objective?
J.T.Jr. Romans treats of it objectively. We do not *reach* eternal life there -- it is "unto eternal life". We need the circle and conditions of life to enjoy it.
A.N.W. In the 133rd Psalm, where brethren dwell together in unity, it says, "There hath Jehovah commanded the blessing, life for evermore" @Psalm 133:3. That is subjective among united brethren.
J.T.Jr. Yes; you must get out of the world to get into eternal life.
C.F.E. To love the Lord thy God with all the heart, and with all the soul, and all our strength, would suggest that it lays hold of our whole being?
J.T.Jr. The lawyer quoted that, but he did not have eternal life.
{435}
E.McK. Would you help us on the thought of laying hold of it?
J.T.Jr. It is something to be laid hold of; it is there for us.
A.B.P. Does the reference in Ephesians to "the Holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance to the redemption of the acquired possession" @Ephesians 1:13,14, suggest the present foretaste and enjoyment of eternal life?
J.T.Jr. Yes, that is the way it is presented in Ephesians, but in Romans it is presented as something to be reached.
J.T. Eternal life is enjoyed amongst the brethren; it is the collective idea.
W.W.M. Romans presents eternal life objectively while in Ephesians it is the subjective idea in the Spirit. In Romans, as F.E.R. has said, we have the *faith* of it; many have the faith of it but do not have the thing itself.
J.T.Jr. F.E.R. opened up the truth of eternal life.
J.T. Yes; he greatly helped, and we should be thankful for his ministry.
E.E.H. Will you make it more clear what is in mind about the collective idea in relation to eternal life?
J.T. It involves the brethren; they are all lovable; there are none like them on the earth.
A-w.R. Is that why the apostle John says, *"We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren" @1 John 3:14?
J.T. That settles the whole matter; it is experienced collectively.
A.R. We must have the sphere of life to enjoy eternal life?
J.T.Jr. Yes; amongst the brethren. Romans does not give you the assembly formally, but it leads on to the assembly, which is the sphere of eternal life.
{436}
A.B.P. How is it worked out in our chapter?
J.T.Jr. This question was raised by "a certain lawyer" who was tempting the Lord.
J.T. He was not of much account, spiritually.
S.C.M. The Lord quoted from what was written in the law when He was tempted of the devil; He met him with what is written.
J.T. Very good.
N.C. Was eternal life displayed in @Acts 4 when the believers were together and no one said that anything he had was his own but they had all things in common? Would that be a sphere of love, manifesting the fact of eternal life?
J.T. Just so.
W.W.M. That would be fulfilment of @Psalm 133:3 -- "There hath Jehovah commanded the blessing, life for evermore". It was there.
J.T.Jr. It is a question of what the brethren know and understand about it now, and I think one feature of eternal life is that the pressure of death is removed from the believer.
A.N.W. It is not everlasting existence.
A.R. Is it important to see that it belongs to the land and the land suggests a sphere which is beyond death?
J.T. We know very little about the land.
J.T.Jr. We should see that it is necessary to get out of the world; that is the first thing; and the truth, as set out in Romans, would take us out of the world.
A.R. Does it take us out of the wilderness, too?
J.T.Jr. Eternal life has a relation to the wilderness, in one sense, for it relates to us now; it has come into a scene of death.
A.R. In that way should a meeting such as we have today be outside the world altogether?
J.T.Jr. Well, quite so; although not of the world, yet we are in it, physically.
{437}
E.A.L. Would @John 3:36 help in that connection? It says, "He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life".
J.T. That is a very good verse; it is related to administration in the hands of Christ.
S.W. Would you say a word as to being maintained in the sphere of eternal life? Is it by feeding on Christ as set forth in @John 6:54, "He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal"?
J.T. Eating and drinking is in mind in @John 6; real manhood is in mind.
J.T.Jr. What our brother is quoting as to @John 6 is individual. We have to make a distinction between what is individual and what is collective.
J.T. Quite so.
J.E. In @John 17 the Lord connects the knowledge of God and the knowledge of Jesus Christ with life eternal.
J.T.Jr. That is collective but what our brother has just been saying as to @John 6 is individual. He that eats the flesh of the Son of Man and drinks His blood has life in himself. But then the Lord says more than that in @John 17:3: "This is the eternal life, that they should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". That is a further thought.
D.Macd. We have been speaking of an out-of-the-world condition of things. Before speaking of life eternal in @John 17 the Lord says, "I have overcome the world", @John 16:33.
J.T.Jr. Yes; in @John 6 you get the kind of food that gets a person out of the world; he that eats the flesh of the Son of man and drinks His blood feeds on the death of Christ.
Ques. Is the collective sphere necessary for the enjoyment of eternal life, or can it be enjoyed individually?
{438}
J.T.Jr. In the fullest sense it would be amongst the brethren.
A.R. Do we touch eternal life after the Lord's supper?
J.T.Jr. I think we have it before we partake of the Lord's supper. There must be the giving up of the world and coming amongst the brethren; it is there that we enjoy it.
J.T. That is the idea; amongst the brethren.
A.P. What relation has fellowship to the truth of eternal life?
J.T. As separated from the world and as having come among the Lord's people, you love the brethren, you are at home with them and have fellowship with them. It is in such a state of things that you have eternal life, for the Lord is there.
Ques. How would you present eternal life in preaching the gospel?
J.T. I would present it as being in Christ, and where He is, His people are; therefore, it is amongst them in Him. It involves loving the brethren. There is nothing simpler than that, so far as I know. God gave Mr. Raven great light in what he taught, and we should keep his ministry in mind.
A.N.W. "The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord"(@Romans 6:23). This verse is constantly and effectively used in the gospel.
J.T. The wages of sin is given for a reason; it is something earned; but eternal life is given because of believing in Christ; it is God's gift.
E.E.H. Then you have the individual, "whosoever", in @John 3:16; would you say a little as to the individual side.
J.T. @John 3:16 shows how the individual comes into it.
{439}
Ques. That is the point on which I wanted help; do we speak of the truth as it applies individually first and then collectively?
J.T. Quite so.
J.T.Jr. First of all, it is in Christ; you locate it, so to speak. That is where it is. I think that it is important; it is a question of where eternal life is, it is in Christ.
J.T. And it is in the saints, too.
J.T.Jr. Yes; it involves a sphere of things that is spiritual.
G.H. Is the collective side the greater thought?
J.T.Jr. The collective is greater, and where Christ is you have the saints.
A.N.W. @Romans 6:23 emphasizes just what you are saying: "... but the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord".
J.T. In @Romans 5:21 it is *through* Him; He is the instrumentality of it, and then it is *in* Him in chapter 6:23. As we get hold of these points we get help, because we must reach Christ to enjoy it.
E.E.H. Do we need to understand what is meant by the expression, "have life eternal", in @John 3:16? Are we to connect it with ourselves? It is in Christ but we have it in Him?
V.C.L. John speaks much of eternal life because he knew what it was to be in the Lord's bosom. Will we not have greater power in speaking of eternal life if we know nearness to the Lord, personally?
J.T.Jr. I think so; so that it relates to a sphere of things where Christ is and where the saints are; it is a spiritual sphere.
Rem. The scripture says, and it has been said in ministry, that Christ is it. "He is the true God and eternal life"(@1 John 5:20).
J.T.Jr. You cannot reverse that; eternal life is not a person; it is an order of things that has come
{440}
about through Christ becoming man, therefore. He is it.
A.R. John's epistle would confirm what you are saying. It speaks of *that* which was from the beginning.
J.T.Jr. "That" refers to what came out in the Lord's life here as man.
Rem. The Lord said, "He that believes on the Son has life eternal", @John 3:36.
J.T.Jr. Yes; he that believes has it, but the point is *where* he has it; he has it in Christ, and where Christ is, life is; and where Christ is the saints are, therefore eternal life is enjoyed in the assembly now.
D.P. Would the carrying out of the law lead to eternal life? The Lord said to the man in our chapter, "This do and thou shalt live" (verse 28).
J.T. Eternal life means more than carrying out the law.
J.T.Jr. The requirement of the law is fulfilled in those who walk according to the Spirit, and not according to the flesh; this man was not doing that because he was tempting the Lord.
S.C.M. We have a reference in @Colossians 3:3: "Your life is hid with the Christ in God".
J.T. That is it, your life is hid with Christ in God; that is where it is, it is hid in God. We cannot speak of it in a public way, it is hid, it is private, so to speak.
Ques. Would @1 John 5:11 help? It says, "And this is the witness, that God has given to us eternal life; and this life is in his Son".
J.T. It is in the Son; that is where it is.
W.W.M. That should be greatly enforced on all our minds, and also the end of verse 20 in that chapter: "We are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life" @1 John 5:20. That shows that eternal life is in Christ.
{441}
J.T.Jr. The difficulty with many may be that they want to stay in the world and also to have eternal life. Conversion does not necessarily mean that a person is in the thing; we may have it before us, but may not be in the enjoyment of it.
Ques. Does it not say in @John 12:25 that "he that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life eternal"?
J.T. Quite so, and when you come into the assembly you have it.
V.C.L. Unless we have really died to the world we will never know and enjoy eternal life.
J.T.Jr. That is right, to die to the world and then to the flesh; the order of man after the flesh was ended in the death of Christ, as well as the world system.
A.B.P. The half-dead state of this man seems to provide the means for grace to operate to bring in life. There is need for life.
J.T.Jr. The man had left Jerusalem; he descended from Jerusalem; he was on his way to Jericho.
Rem. In @John 6:27 it says, "Work not for the food which perishes, but for the food which abides unto life eternal, which the Son of man shall give to you". Eternal life is connected with food there.
J.T.Jr. Yes; and it is a gift. That chapter shows that eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the Son of man gives life. It involves another order of things; the end of the condition of flesh and blood is in mind; it relates to a dead Christ. We need to come to the end of the fleshly condition if we are to come into eternal life. So in a general way what marks the saints is that they are delivered from the world and have come into the assembly.
A.B.P. The blood and the flesh are separate.
J.T.Jr. Yes, showing that death is in mind.
G.H. Our sitting here this afternoon with love being in evidence shows that we are in the enjoyment
{442}
of eternal life. It is not only on Lord's day morning but as we sit together in love on all occasions.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; when you get the brethren together, there is opportunity for the enjoyment of eternal life. The Lord said that where two or three are gathered together to His name there He is in the midst. The enjoyment of eternal life involves the Lord's presence amongst the saints.
A.R. The man in our chapter required to be taken out of the position in which he was found.
J.T.Jr. First of all, we have to go to where the man is.
V.C.L. You spoke of one feature of eternal life being when free from the fear of death; are we not relieved from every form of bondage when we come into the enjoyment of eternal life?
J.T. Yes, every feature of bondage, whatever it is.
A.R. The man is put into the hands of an inn- keeper; the Samaritan is prepared to spend money for his care, too.
J.T.Jr. Before you come to that, however, he is put on the beast; the Lord's own power is available; it is His *own* beast; He supplies His own power to bring persons to the inn.
J.T. The point before us today is the place where the love of the brethren is and this would correspond with the inn.
J.T.Jr. So that if a brother falls amongst thieves you want to get to him, and heal the damage he has received from the thieves.
A.N.W. Just prior to the reference to binding up of his wounds, it says, "But a certain Samaritan journeying came to him, and seeing him, was moved with compassion, and came up to him". Not only did he come to him but he came *up* to him and applied the healing to his wounds.
J.T.Jr. Quite; we must consider the damage done to persons; the damage to this man was done by
{443}
the robbers. The priest and the Levite could easily let the matter go; they did not take it up; they passed by. We need to be moved with compassion and come to the person where he is and try and get him out of the position, pouring in oil and wine.
J.T. Then the need to get him amongst the brethren.
J.T.Jr. The oil and the wine would be amongst the brethren; the brethren have it.
S.W. Would the preaching of the gospel be very extensive, and should we be accurate in speaking? John's first epistle speaks of letting "that which ye have heard from the beginning abide in you, ... *ye* also shall abide in the Son and in the Father. And this is the promise which *he* has promised us, life eternal", @1 John 2:24.
S.C.M. Our chapter speaks of pouring in the oil and wine. There was no scarcity of oil and wine. I suppose we should draw upon the divine bounty through the Spirit.
A.R. Both the oil and wine suggest the Spirit, do they not?
J.T.Jr. Yes. The thing is to get the man to the inn. The binding up precedes that; he had fallen into the hands of robbers, and they had left him half-dead. The unions will rob a man of his rights as to conscience and take away his livelihood. If a brother becomes ensnared in a union, he is deprived of his privileges. The thing for us to do is to try, with the Lord's help, to get him out of such a position. He it not dead; he is *half-dead* .
J.H.E. Paul exhorts, "Ye who are spiritual restore such a one", @Galatians 6:1.
J.T.Jr. That is the line we should be on.
D.Macd. Some of our young are on this downward pathway. When half-dead, this man had no will of his own. Must we wait for the breaking of the will before we can pour in the oil and the wine?
{444}
J.T.Jr. That may be so; here, the robbers were the ones that did the damage; he fell into their hands. When a brother is damaged, we have to inquire what happened to him. What caused him to be in a half-dead state?
D.P. Does the local meeting administer the aid to such a damaged person?
J.T.Jr. Quite so, but it is for each one of us to take the matter on. It is the *neighbour* . We do not wait, we do something to bring about recovery. We do not wait for others to visit him, we see him ourselves.
A.N.W. The word to the lawyer was, "Go, and do *thou* likewise".
J.E. Is there a suggestion that we are to have something that will relieve the condition? The Samaritan *had* the oil and the wine; he had what met the condition.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; and what we get in the Samaritan is that He was moved with compassion; divine feelings were operating in the Samaritan. He was moved with compassion. That should characterize the preachers.
A.B.P. In the expression of those compassions he would not compromise the elements of the kingdom. The binding up and the pouring in of oil and wine seem to suggest the elements of righteousness and peace and joy.
J.T.Jr. And the kingdom would be a sphere of protection. I suppose that what you pour in would be of a comforting nature; you want to be set for building up.
C.A.M. Did the Samaritan do the work of a priest and a Levite? He sympathized and healed, and then carried him to the inn.
J.T.Jr. Yes, he had everything with him. So that the preachers should have what is needed. The Lord will be with them when they have the oil and the
{445}
wine. It would suggest the compassions. And then, he has the beast. The preacher has everything at his disposal.
V.C.L. The willingness of the victim to be helped is not prominent here but the compassionate attitude that should be with all the saints as set out in the Samaritan.
J.H.E. In @2 Corinthians 5:19 Paul says, "God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself ... and putting in us the word of that reconciliation. We are ambassadors therefore for Christ". This would be the oil and the wine.
J.T.Jr. That is a good scripture to bring in here: "God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself".
J.T. The 'word' is a question of what one can say.
J.T.Jr. Yes; and he was moved with compassion; that is, the preacher is to be moved, and he should move the compassions of the saints also.
G.H. In Luke's gospel we see, in an outstanding way, the expression of compassionate feelings.
J.T.Jr. That is right; the word is that he "was moved with compassion". The preacher should thus convey that divine feelings enter into the preaching and that he has something with him and in him to cause healing and movement.
A.N.W. It was on the way of his journey; he came right to where the half-dead man was.
J.T. That is it; he had purpose in his journeying.
A.R. It is easy to lose persons, but the point is to *save* them.
J.T.Jr. We need to get down to where they are and pour in the oil and the wine.
A.R. We want to save people, and not be required to withdraw from them.
{446}
J.T.Jr. We may have to withdraw from persons, but the point is to save them if that is righteously possible.
F.N.W. Does it show the fulness of the glad tidings? It is not just the administration of first aid on the spot, but the inn is in mind to which to bring the person.
J.T.Jr. Yes, that is important, and then there is the beast. The Lord supplies the power to bring the person to the inn.
J.T. The word "beast" is apt to divert our thoughts, but the idea is to suggest, in type, the faithfulness and support that is available.
J.T.Jr. It alludes, therefore, to the Lord's own power; it was His *own* beast. The Lord would bring us to the inn Himself, but He would have us to do likewise.
E.E.H. Everything is done for the man; he does nothing himself.
J.T.Jr. He allows it to be done; he does not resist it. If a man's will is active you cannot do anything for him.
A.R. It has been stressed for the last fifty years that the assembly is the sphere of salvation.
J.H.E. In chapter 15 of this gospel, the shepherd lays the sheep upon his *own* shoulders. The Lord is capable of doing that.
Ques. Is the responsibility placed on the innkeeper suggestive of the care and support which is in the assembly?
J.T.Jr. That is our responsibility; it is put on us to care for one another. So we have shepherding and the care meeting. The idea of the care meeting is that we care for the Lord's interests and for one another.
Rem. It says, in verse 35, "Take care of him, and whatsoever thou shalt expend more, *I* will render to thee on my coming back". The Lord will
{447}
reward us at His coming for any service, even to the giving of a cup of cold water in His name.
J.T.Jr. We may think that we are overspending; doing too much; but the Lord has given the means.
A-w.R. We are being helped more and more to get away from what is legal and into what pertains to love's sphere.
J.T.Jr. Very good; we want to get into love's sphere.
F.N.W. It is a comfort that the love is not running out at the end of the dispensation; whatever is spent, there is to be plenty in reserve.
J.T.Jr. The Spirit being here, we have the means to meet every need.
A.B.P. The word "compassions" is used in @Romans 12:1 "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God". Would that refer back to the opening up of the gospel, the compassions of God, which should create right feelings in us?
J.T.Jr. I think that is the point; so that the preachers should convey that.
D.P. Would the priest and the Levite know of the inn?
J.T.Jr. They *should* know about it; but we cannot excuse them, for they did nothing. We are to make most of the person that does something; he shows what he is by what he does; he is a neighbour.
D.Macd. Can we look at the innkeeper as figurative of the Spirit?
J.T.Jr. I think so; everything here below is under the charge of the Spirit.
Rem. The Lord Jesus would be very sympathetic in this matter, for "All we like sheep have gone astray", and "He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities ... and with his stripes we are healed", @Isaiah 53:5.
J.T.Jr. Quite; so the Samaritan brings the man to the inn and leaves him in the care of the innkeeper.
{448}
It is a sphere of things; the saints form it, I think, and that is what you come to -- the sphere where the saints are.
W.T.P. Does the Lord trust us to care for things that are His?
J.T.Jr. That is the way to look at it; everything is under the Spirit and the Spirit is in the assembly. The man was left with the innkeeper.
A.N.W. Mr. Raven has remarked to the effect that there are many who have not the faith for the position of reproach and must be carried.
J.T.Jr. In @Acts 20, Paul descended from the upper room and embraced Eutychus. It has been suggested that he represents the idea of a priest as enfolding Eutychus in his arms.
J.T. He was one who had love for the saints, and love resuscitates life.
{449}
THE GOSPEL (7)
@Luke 14:15 - 24
J.T.Jr. This scripture speaks of the kingdom of God, the Supper and the house. I thought perhaps we might consider these important features of the gospel.
J.T. "Blessed is he who shall eat bread in the kingdom of God".
J.T.Jr. I suppose there is an allusion in that to the place the kingdom of God will have publicly. The one who said that had the actual eating of bread in mind.
A.Macd. In @Acts 28:30 it says that Paul "remained two whole years in his own hired lodging, ... preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ". He had the kingdom in mind.
J.T.Jr. Paul speaks quite a little about the kingdom. I suppose the idea of eating bread in the kingdom would suppose that there would be peaceful conditions.
S.W. Would you say that as subjugated by the kingdom we would be at ease at the Supper?
J.T.Jr. I would say that; the kingdom of God has in view that there might be peaceful conditions, and it would make way for the Lord's supper.
S.C.M. It is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.
J.T.Jr. That is the way it is spoken of in @Romans 14:17; it is not yet in manifestation; but it is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.
L.W. Had the conditions of the kingdom been established in the preparation of the Supper?
J.T.Jr. I think this chapter looks forward to the establishment of everything; no doubt it was fulfilled in @Acts 2, when the Spirit came and the word was preached.
{450}
J.T. The Spirit being come, everything was ready; everything is done if the Spirit is here.
J.T.Jr. Everything is done. That is what it says here: "Come, for already all things are ready". That would allude to the time when the Spirit was come.
A.B.P. Was the person who spoke of eating bread anticipating the display of the kingdom rather than having an understanding of the character of the present moment?
J.T.Jr. Perhaps he was not fully in line with what was present, but I suppose his remark was right; it will be a blessed matter to eat in the kingdom.
A.N.W. There seems to be a reflection of the very thing that we are engaged with in this section in what the Lord had said. It says, "And one of those that were lying at table with them, hearing these things ... .". The Lord had said, "When thou makest a feast, call poor, crippled, lame, blind" @Luke 14:13. This is the very kind of persons that is called into God's house. The blessedness of that may have been seen in some measure.
J.T.Jr. Yes; the man was hearing these things.
Ques. In @1 Chronicles 12:39 it says, "And there they were with David three days, eating and drinking". Does that fit into the thought of eating bread in the kingdom?
J.T.Jr. Yes; David had provided peaceful conditions; so I suppose the coming in of Christ would provide conditions whereby we can be at rest.
J.T. "He spoke a parable to those that were invited" (verse 7).
J.T.Jr. The Lord carries the thought of those who were invited through to the parable of the great supper. Finally He says, "Not one of those men who were invited shall taste of my supper". They had been invited but had refused the invitation.
A.R. There are two sides to the matter. They got the invitation and were called when all things
{451}
were ready, but then, it is a question of *coming*, is it not?
J.T.Jr. I suppose those that were invited originally were Jews, and they did not come.
J.T. That is the idea, exactly, it was the Jews.
Ques. Who are the invited ones now, by application to the present day?
J.T.Jr. I think the gospel is towards all. "But now without law righteousness of God is manifested ... by faith of Jesus Christ towards all, and upon all those who believe" (@Romans 3:21,22), so that the preaching has been extended to all, through Paul and others.
A.N.W. Are we in the compelling time? Are these the times when, as it says in verse 23, we "go out into the ways and fences and compel to come in"? We all have been compelled to come in from dire need, have we not?
J.T.Jr. There are many references to the gospel; many varied features come into it, whether it be as an invitation or compelling.
C.J.L. In @Matthew 22:3 it says that the king "sent his bondmen". It is plural there, but in this chapter it is singular. Would the "bondman" be a type of the Spirit?
J.T.Jr. Well, I do not know that we can make too much out of that; it would probably suggest the preacher, I suppose. He is the bondman; one who is ready to do anything. The apostles alluded to themselves as bondmen.
J.T. And then it says, in verse 25, "And great crowds went with him; and, turning round, he said to them. If any man come to me, and shall not hate his own father and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, yea, and his own life too, he cannot be my disciple", @Luke 14:25,26. That is a very strong word: He *cannot* be My disciple.
{452}
J.T.Jr. That is the test, is it not? The test in verse 25 is applied to those who come to the feast, we might say. There are those who would not come to the supper but there were those who came. It is a *great* supper; there never was a supper like it. It is the gospel supper.
J.T. Just so; the gospel supper.
L.W. At what part of the dispensation would you place the gospel supper?
J.T. Well, I think it is included in the Lord's own service and in the presence of the Spirit. The presence of the Holy Spirit is the point.
J.T.Jr. All that the Lord did would be linked on with it.
A.R. What do you mean by the gospel supper?
J.T.Jr. That God was inviting men to this great feast, for the gospel *is* a feast; it is that which satisfies men and makes them joyful. A supper has that intent; it not only strengthens you but makes you joyful. It is a *great* supper.
E.W.S. In @Romans 10:15 it speaks of those that announce "glad tidings of good things". Would that be descriptive of the feast?
J.T.Jr. Yes; the gospel supper has in mind good things.
J.T. It is a gospel scene.
C.F.E. Does verse 25 have a present and direct bearing in our dispensation?
J.T.Jr. I think that is the test to those who come; we are reached through the gospel, but then we are tested as to how fully we are in the matter.
J.T. "Turning round, he said to them. If any man come to me, and shall not hate his own father and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, yea, and his own life too, he cannot be my disciple", @Luke 14:25,26.
A.R. If we are going to eat, it is a question of coming into the house, is it not?
{453}
J.T.Jr. Yes; it says, "Compel to come in, that my house may be filled". God has in mind that His house may be filled. And so in @Acts 2:2 it says that the violent impetuous blowing "filled all the house where they were sitting".
A.R. You mean that the house of God is here?
J.T.Jr. Yes; when the Spirit came at Pentecost the thought of the house was there.
A.N.W. The house is very prominent in the next chapter; the sheep is brought to the house; the lost piece is found in the house; the prodigal son is in the house. I suppose, in principle, the thought of the house is carried right through, is it not?
J.T.Jr. We had ministry on the house of God in relation to the gospel many years ago.
J.T. What are you alluding to?
J.T.Jr. Notes of your ministry of 1905, entitled, *The House of God and the Gospel* (J.T. New Series, Volume 1, page 112).
J.T. Quite so; I remember that.
J.T.Jr. It links on with @Acts 2; the house is mentioned there and the preaching followed.
J.T. You would expect God to bring about the gospel in that way.
Ques. Do you have the house before the gospel is preached?
J.T. Quite so.
J.T.Jr. You must have the house before the gospel is preached; so that the Lord waited for the house to be formed before the preaching began at Pentecost. The disciples were told to tarry in Jerusalem and to await the promise of the Father.
C.J.L. It is said of Noah that he builded and preached; the building and the preaching went on concurrently.
J.T.Jr. Yes; the house is a similar idea to the ark; the ark was a place of salvation and so is the assembly.
{454}
E.A.L. In @Matthew 13 the Lord dismissed the crowd and went into the house, and there the disciples asked Him to expound to them the parable of the darnel of the field. It is only in the house position that He discloses to them the detail of the truth.
J.T.Jr. Yes; in the house He opens up the mysteries. That is another side of the truth, but it connects with the house position.
A.R. Should every preacher have the assembly in his mind in his preaching?
J.T. I think so; and then the thought of the Supper should be in his mind also.
A.B.P. Is it permissible to link the thought of the Lord's supper with this parable?
J.T.Jr. I think so; would you say that?
J.T. You would expect the Lord to bring that thought in, in view of what has come out in relation to the Supper in these latter days.
J.T.Jr. In @Acts 2:42 it says that the disciples "persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers".
A.R. Luke uses the expression, "the master of the house" here, in verse 21. He also uses the expression in chapter 22:11: "Ye shall say to the master of the house ..." @Luke 22:11. What would "the master of the house" suggest?
J.T.Jr. It suggests authority; immediately the Spirit came in at Pentecost there was authority here in the house.
F.N.W. Does the house involve a sphere of love for the family?
J.T.Jr. Well, it includes all that, I think; in @Acts 2 you get so much that enters into the position; it is not a small position that we come into but a great one.
J.T. There is a wonderful thought in all that.
{455}
A.N.W. In @Acts 2:2 it says, "Filled all the house where they were sitting".
A.R. Would the master of the house refer to the Spirit?
J.T. It is more the idea of authority.
J.T.Jr. Authority there, in the house.
G.P. Would the house of Chloe give the apostle Paul authority to write the epistle to the Corinthians?
J.T.Jr. He got information from the house of Chloe, but he had the authority before. He got information from the house of Chloe. It was the source of information; it was where he got some of the facts of the case.
A.B.P. "A called apostle of Jesus Christ, by God's will" (@1 Corinthians 1:1), would be the authority behind Paul's word.
J.T.Jr. The authority was set up immediately upon the incoming of the Spirit; then it came out in the apostles. It has been here ever since. The authority is here now; it is in the Spirit.
Rem. The idea is that God's house is being filled with subject persons.
J.T.Jr. That is what it should be. In Corinth, of course, there were some who were not subject; but still, the thought is that the house of God contains people who are subject.
A.R. Our gospel preaching should not be limited to the matter of persons going to heaven when they die, but of coming into the assembly now.
J.T.Jr. That is the point of this parable, but certain would *not* come; they made excuses.
Ques. Does the enjoyment of the Supper and the blessings of the Lord's Day lend tone to the preaching in the evening?
J.T.Jr. I think they do; the Lord's supper is the centre of things, in that way.
{456}
J.T. Quite so; the Lord's supper gives occasion for God to get His portion and to express His thoughts for men.
J.T.Jr. This chapter is inclusive of Paul's ministry, because it awaited Paul to open up the truth as to the Supper.
S.W. In @Luke 10, when the Samaritan brought the man to the inn, which would be a similar thought to the house, there is no suggestion that he had a desire to leave. It is a sad matter when persons desire to leave the assembly after having "tasted the good word of God" (@Hebrews 6:5).
J.T.Jr. With such the test of verse 25 has not been faced. They have not valued the position properly. The test is whether we can leave everything and take up the cross.
A.B.P. The trouble here seems to be that persons are not coming *into* fellowship.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; they are not responding to the call, those called are not coming.
F.N.W. Mephibosheth would represent one who was affected by the grace of God and, in principle, enjoyed the Supper. So that when he was ill treated he did not leave the position. In principle, he hated his own life: "... such a dead dog as I am" (@2 Samuel 9:8).
A.R. Are there three kinds of invitations to persons here? In verse 17 they are told to come; in verse 21 they are brought, and in verse 23 they are compelled.
J.T.Jr. God "desires that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth" (@1 Timothy 2:4). And then, it says, "God . . . now enjoins men that they shall all everywhere repent" (@Acts 17:30). The gospel is not optional.
J.T. Yes; it says, "All things are ready".
J.T.Jr. Compelling a person involves that you have the ability or authority to do so. To bring would evidently allude to the fact that the "poor
{457}
and crippled and lame and blind" need to be brought.
R.T.M. Would the anger of the master of the house be like the word in @2 Corinthians 5:11, "Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men"? Does the solemnity of having to do with God as well as the display of His grace come into the gospel?
J.T.Jr. Quite so; it is right to allude to the anger of the master of the house because he rightly was angry. A great matter was on hand and invited persons were treating it lightly and slighting it.
J.T. "And all began, without exception, to excuse themselves. The first said to him, I have bought land, and I must go out and see it".
J.T.Jr. How easily we find an excuse!
L.W. Would the being "pricked in heart" of the three thousand souls added at Peter's preaching be the power that compels persons to come in?
J.T.Jr. That would be it, I suppose. There was conviction. The majority of the Jews refused to come. There was animosity with the Jews right through the Acts. They would not bow and they would not come.
E.A.L. Would "Come now, let us reason together, saith Jehovah" (@Isaiah 1:18), be an invitation, and would the anger be seen with Paul in @Acts 18:6? After his reasoning with the Jews in the synagogue in Corinth they opposed and spoke injuriously, and he shook his clothes, and said to them, "Your blood be upon your own head; ... from henceforth I will go to the nations".
J.T.Jr. That fits in with what we have been saying. The invitation was to them but they would not come.
F.N.W. The excuses belittled the invitation.
J.T.Jr. Yes; the invitation related to a great matter. Christ had died; that is the way to look at
{458}
it. Christ has died and has risen, and has gone into heaven, and the Spirit has come, so that all things are ready, and God is inviting all men to this wonderful supper.
D.P. Would Paul's appeal before Agrippa be compelling?
J.T.Jr. Well, he said, "In a little thou persuadest me to become a Christian" (@Acts 26:28). Paul did his best to compel him.
Ques. Does "the new covenant in my blood" (@Luke 22:20), as spoken of by the Lord at the Supper, prepare the way for the gospel?
J.T.Jr. The whole matter is there: "Already all things are ready".
A.B.P. What is the underlying teaching in these excuses?
J.T.Jr. They refer to the various phases of life; some phase of life is liable to detain persons and they use it as an excuse.
E.A.L. They may be right things in themselves, but as cutting across the will of God, they prevent persons from obeying Him.
G.A.L. Would the streets and the lanes of the city suggest judaism and the ways and fences the gentile area?
J.T.Jr. Yes; and the ways and the fences may refer to practices and restrictions which hinder persons, but they are to be compelled to come in. It would include the preaching in the open air.
D.P. Is it easier to get along in the kingdom position than to move on to the house? There were certain in David's regime who seemingly got along well in the kingdom position, but they did not fit into Solomon's system in relation to the house.
J.T.Jr. Well, we are not to stop short, so the Lord in testing His followers tells us that His disciples must make a clean break with everything, taking up their cross.
{459}
A.B.P. Does Paul name the five yoke of oxen in @2 Corinthians 6, where we are called upon to not be diversely yoked with unbelievers? He speaks of five unequal yokes in that passage.
J.T.Jr. Very good; the great principle brought in there is separation, not only from unions, but from everything else that is not compatible with Christianity, with the presence of the Spirit, and with the light we have received.
A.B.P. So that the second excuse relates to associations that are damaging and which prevent us from taking on the fellowship.
J.T.Jr. Quite so; there is the suggestion of that in the yoke.
E.A.L. Would hesitation to move forward be contrary to the truth?
J.T.Jr. Well, we do not want to be too severe; it is a question of going on with what is right; answering to the test. The Lord, turning round, said to them, "If any man come to me, and shall not hate his own father and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, yea, and his own life too, he cannot be my disciple" (@Luke 14:26). He touches the whole matter of whether we are prepared to take up the cross and follow Him.
{460}
PAUL'S LETTERS TO TIMOTHY (1)
@1 Timothy 1:1 - 20
The following were considered at this reading:-
1. Recovery of present truth corresponds with Ephesians.
2. True character of this dispensation.
3. Our correspondence morally with this.
4. Efforts of the enemy to nullify the whole position.
5. Repentance.
6. Recovery.
7. Activity of the priests.
In his opening remarks J.T. said he hoped we might see that *each one* of us should be in the testimony in an active way. This epistle being written to one brother (sisters, of course, are in mind too) confirms this. The word to Timothy in regard to his position in the testimony is a pattern for us -- how we are to act, and to be committed in the way of a charge. Paul left Timothy at Ephesus for a certain purpose. Ephesus would call to mind the present time, the position that has been recovered to us in the truth, for everything God has in mind in Ephesus has, in a certain sense, been brought out amongst us; that is, the heavenly position has been reached and enjoyed, involving *the purpose and service of God* .
It was observed that Timothy was a young, timid, and, possibly, weak man: we are not to shrink from our responsibilities in the testimony by feelings of inadequacy. In the first epistle he is to keep the entrusted deposit, himself, so to say. In the second epistle he is to keep it by the Holy Spirit. We noted @Acts 19, where Paul laboured at Ephesus, and @Acts 20, where he called the elders from Ephesus to Miletus,
{461}
and were impressed with the determined effort of the enemy to rob the saints of the truth and joy of their heavenly calling.
The character of our dispensation was brought out, verse 1, "God our Saviour ... Christ Jesus our hope", and the sound teaching in verse 11 is "according to the glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God". We are to be in correspondence morally with these glad tidings. We rested on Paul's allusion to mercy being shown him in verse 16, and "the grace of our Lord surpassingly over-abounded with faith and love".
Verses 3 to 10 show clearly the attempt of the enemy to set aside the truth. If this line were allowed to go unchecked it would nullify the whole position. Mention was made of conscription for warfare in the book of Numbers -- how each one is summoned to the armed forces. The great features of the dispensation are brought out in the first verse to stabilize us as to what God has brought in, and then the "grace, mercy, peace", which God has maintained amongst us, and will until the end. We must keep to the instruction, or else we shall be influenced by other things coming in. It is not a question now of the apostles -- it is in the assembly that the truth is preserved by the Spirit.
The matter of *mercy and grace* was emphasized, not only in this reading but in the subsequent ones. How are we going to do things in the assembly? Verse 7 was quoted, "desiring to be law-teachers, not understanding either what they say or concerning what they so strenuously affirm". The activity of God's throne in mercy is asserted as things come up amongst us. It was observed that at the end of chapter 5 of Romans grace reigns through righteousness to eternal life; that grace personified is, so to say, on the throne, and, corresponding with this, righteousness is our leader.
{462}
The local assembly as a city of refuge was mentioned, and how Paul came into it and was protected. It says all were afraid of him, "But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles", (@Acts 9:27).
The difference between the old covenant and the glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God was introduced as showing the great superiority of Christianity over everything else. Achan was put to death under the old covenant; this would not be so today.
We were reminded of how certain legal and judaising principles might spread over a whole province, so that Paul says in @Galatians 1:6, "I wonder that ye thus quickly change, from him that called you in Christ's grace, to a different gospel, which is not another one", and in @Galatians 2:5: "To whom we yielded in subjection not even for an hour, that the truth of the glad tidings might remain with you".
The matter of repentance was touched on, and @Luke 17:3,4 was read. It was pointed out that someone might say when the brother came the second time saying, 'I repent', that this indicated he was not right the first time; but we have to heed his words, for "by thy words thou shalt be justified and by thy words thou shalt be condemned" (@Matthew 12:37), and we are to forgive "until seventy times seven", @Matthew 18:21. We cannot read a man's heart, his motives are known to God. @Leviticus 13 and 14 was considered - the looking of the priest -- he goes by what he sees, not by what he does not see. The priest does not wait until the man becomes right -- "and the priest shall go out of the camp", @Leviticus 14:3. It might be said of someone under assembly discipline, 'We are waiting until he comes back to the meeting', but in @Luke 10 the Samaritan came to him, and in @Luke 15 the shepherd went after that which was lost until he found it.
It was observed at the close of this meeting in matters of discipline a person should be given every
{463}
benefit. Elihu says even to Job, "I desire to justify thee" @Job 33:32, showing that the Lord would make the best He can of any case. We want to have a forgiving spirit amongst us.
{464}
PAUL'S LETTERS TO TIMOTHY (2)
@1 Timothy 1:17 - 20; @1 Timothy 2: 1 - 15
We considered at this reading:-
1. Paul's emphasis on the truth of the gospel in this epistle, exposing at the same time what would nullify it.
2. Paul's sense of mercy preceding the doxology.
3. The doxology itself, and ministry as to the service of God.
4. The charge, involving warfare.
5. The two's of Matthew and the two's of 1 and 2 Timothy.
6. The need of good leadership in our localities.
We noticed this morning the place Timothy had in regard to Ephesus, suggesting the high level of the truth that has been recovered to us, also that the gospel is called the "glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God" @1 Timothy 1:11. Chapter 2 brings out further thoughts as to the gospel, "God is one, and the mediator of God and men one". Much more as to this came in the next reading, for at this time we really only finished chapter 1.
We were affected by Paul's sense of mercy preceding the doxology. He says in verse 13, "Mercy was shewn me because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief" @1 Timothy 1:13, and verse 16, "But for this reason mercy was shewn me, that in me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole long-suffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal" @1 Timothy 1:16. Then he breaks out in this remarkable doxology. Our brother said these remarks of Paul bring out the great thought of God in regard to everything. It is what we have come to, what Genesis begins with -- God: and in the end, God and men. We have been helped lately as to the knowledge of God, of *God Himself*, and then in chapter 2, *God and men* finally. Timothy is
{465}
to be instructed in all this. We are learning in these days to rightly speak of God and *to* God, the Deity itself. This whole wonderful matter has been opened up to us in view of the end.
The "King of the ages" involves rule in kingship. Royalty must come from God, it does not belong to man. God's being invisible would suggest what He is essentially. This was linked with "God is a spirit" in @John 4:24 and would involve the three Persons of the Deity. As having God before us, as having turned to Him, we would be kept from idolatry. It is important to view things contextually, especially the way the Spirit of God uses the names of divine Persons. The Father represents Deity in revelation but this does not exclude the idea of Deity from the Son or the Spirit, nor can it be excluded. Inquiry was made if the Father is not supreme in the Deity. This was said to be derogatory to Christ and the Spirit, for in abstract Deity the Persons are co-equal. In revelation the Father is supreme; "To us there is one God, the Father", @1 Corinthians 8:6. The question was asked if the "only God" in verse 17 alluded to the Deity or the Father. It was said that it might be the three Persons or the Father; and we were reminded of what was said in Indianapolis three years ago that in speaking to one of the divine Persons there is light in our minds as to all Three. It was indicated that in reading contextually "My God and your God", @John 20:17, the Person there is the Father; that it is the Lord as man speaking of the Father as God, but not to the exclusion of the Son and the Spirit. We do not see the Father, we do not see God at all: what we see is Christ.
Coming to Paul's charge in verse 18 we spoke of the prophecies preceding, involving what we receive from others, as the word is, "What hast thou which thou hast not received?" @1 Corinthians 4:7. This brought up the recovery under J.N.D. coming on down to
{466}
our own day. All this makes us responsible in the ministry. Warfare is not optional.
In connection with the 'charge' it was said that each brother and sister has two positions to maintain, (1) to protect the local assembly; (2) to be subject to the assembly in every way.
Hymenaeus and Alexander came before us at the close of the meeting; two men acting wilfully in regard of the assembly is a dangerous thing; it is partisanship and is like the evil two's of Matthew as over against the "two of you" (@Matthew 18), our brother adding, We can always look for an overcomer in the local assembly.
The need of good leadership locally was stressed. It may be some would not detect Hymenaeus and Alexander.
The matter of shipwreck as to faith brought up the subject of innovations in localities, and we were reminded of the new cart which David used to bring up the ark, and how careful we must be to avoid Philistine ideas in assembly matters.
{467}
PAUL'S LETTERS TO TIMOTHY (3)
@1 Timothy 2:1 - 15; @1 Timothy 3:1 - 16
We considered the following:-
1. Need for greater scope in our prayers as covering universal matters.
2. Warnings of hardness in our relations with our brethren.
3. Interference in local assemblies.
4. Clearing the Lord's name.
5. The greatness of the thought of mediatorship; verse 5.
J.T. opened the meeting by saying that what should occupy us at this time is that God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, in chapter 2, and then in chapter 3 the assembly, finishing with the great thought of the mystery.
Chapter 2 begins with what is priestly; "first of all" indicating there is something to be first, that is we are thinking of men in regard to the general position, feeling for them, for it is "supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men"; the full priestly thought is in mind. With that, of course, is the great thought of sonship alongside the priesthood. It does not come up here but it is well to think about it because priesthood and sonship go together. Priesthood is the great preservative amongst us in regard to everything. In Deuteronomy the priests have the last word about everything. All this helps us in view of the present time, because priesthood is not local in that sense -- it is universal. We have to think about the position as priests, and see everything according to that point of view, so that the saints are responsible in regard to everything that happens in the assembly, whether it be local or universal. We are to see that everything
{468}
is in accord with the law of God. The priest's mouth is to be enquired at. If you wish to know the law the priests define it, and so today, it is the *commandment of the Lord* . The priests would define, enlarge and bring out the truth as to the commandment.
@Galatians 6:1 brings in the thought of "ye who are spiritual". They can always be consulted because the spiritual think on these lines -- not natural carnal persons, but minds that are always running in the channel of considering for God. In view of the present time when there is so much stress universally, we should take on this thought of greater scope in our meetings for prayer, having in mind quietness and tranquillity amongst the saints.
(Note. - In reading these impressions it might help to have in mind that we were viewing this epistle in connection with the highest, that is the full unfolding of Christianity in its heavenly character. Touches of this came into all our meetings - the impressions of the glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God, chapter 1, the greatness of the Mediator standing in relation to God and men, chapter 2, the greatness of the assembly, being mentioned twice, and finally the word as to the Lord Jesus being received up in glory, were all before us. Our brother said that is just ahead of us -- to be received up in glory in view of fixed eternal conditions, and hence the great need for everything being right now in our localities. <p>There was a sense of urgency in all the readings that each one of us is responsible to judge elements which would nullify by hardness or legality the greatness of what we are now enjoying, for the Ephesian position was not held by apostolic authority but in the moral power of a man of God full of sympathy for the testimony but not flinching or swerving in relation to the truth.)
{469}
Emphasis was placed on the expression, "My words" (@Matthew 7:24), and "My words" (@Luke 9:26), especially in relation to forgiveness; also the need of giving full weight to what the Lord said to His disciples in @Luke 17:3,4.
The matter of the priests and elders saying the same thing was introduced and we observed in @Deuteronomy 21:5, "And the priests the sons of Levi shall come near"; it was stressed that there should be no divergence in the speaking of the local elders and the universal priests. If there is a divergence it is a question of how the truth has been apprehended, but if there is patience and a waiting on God He will reveal His truth.
The seriousness of one local company interfering with another local company came up at this point, and we were impressed with the Lord's jealousy of His rights in each locality, noting the Lord's separate word to each of the seven assemblies in @Revelation 2 and 3, and also, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them", (@Matthew 18:20). Flowing out of this we were helped to see that in @1 Corinthians 5 it is not a question of repentance, but of the offender "being such" and "him that has so wrought this". It was a matter of public wickedness. Here a helpful suggestion was made that, while many matters such as "some fault" (@Galatians 6:1) can be 'mended' privately, others involve the one, two, three of @Matthew 18, while certain cases in which *the Lord's name* has been dishonoured must come under *assembly discipline* . In @1 Corinthians 5, nothing is said about repentance but "Remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves" @1 Corinthians 5:13.
In the second epistle grace is shown, and forgiveness "lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with excessive grief" (@2 Corinthians 2:7), and then the
{470}
*assembly itself is* to repent, "but that ye have been grieved to repentance", @2 Corinthians 7:9.
Much was said about @1 Corinthians 5 and the universal report. Paul, though absent, judged as present. Indeed in each reading of the five we touched in some way upon the Corinthian epistles, our brother insisting that we must go to Paul and to Corinth for assembly order and assembly discipline and that the understanding of the first and second epistles to Corinth is imperative in view of all that pertains to the local assembly.
It was clearly indicated that most cases coming up amongst us fall into the first two classes and that if we were more spiritual and priestly, persons would be restored. The seriousness of withdrawing from a person rested upon us as we were reminded of J.T.¬s own word, 'Putting a man out of fellowship is like putting a man to death'.
(Note - There was sympathetic support from all present and, what cannot be adequately expressed, a feeling that the time had come for a deepened regard for each of our brethren in line with @Ephesians 4:32, more kindness, more grace, more forgiveness, more love: and, when this is brought about, the rapture).
We rested for some time on @1 Corinthians 5 as feeling the need of greater wisdom in handling matters which come up amongst us. Reference was made to the early ministry of J.T. as to what is capital sin. All this was balanced by the expression that we are never given a 'yardstick' but the priest maintains the law, and the Holy Spirit is amongst us.
The greatness of the mediator was stressed. The Mediator of God can be no less than God and the Mediator of man must be a man, so that the Lord's humanity is in view. All this should add to the service of God when we realize that we have such a Person as our Mediator.
{471}
PAUL'S LETTERS TO TIMOTHY (4)
@1 Timothy 3:1 - 16
We considered the following:-
1. Public side involving divine order of man and woman.
2. Why are some young men silent at meetings for prayer and in assembly service?
3. Dress of women.
4. High standard set out in chapter 3, is because the assembly is in mind.
5. Is an unmarried brother with no household disqualified from overseership?
6. The 'know-how' of verses 5 and 15.
7. The assembly does not teach, nor does one assembly teach another.
We have the "assembly of God" and the "assembly of the living God", chapter 3:5,15, and we saw Timothy's relation to the assembly, first in regard to the care of it, and then in regard to his conduct in it. We referred to the last paragraph of chapter 2, which is very instructive about the whole matter, because it is a question of men and women; that is, "Men pray in every place" and "In like manner also that the women in decent deportment and dress adorn themselves with modesty and discretion" @1 Timothy 2:8,9. Then woman is not to exercise authority over man -- an allusion to the fact that *the assembly is not to exercise authority other than what the Lord has committed to her* .
Violation of the order of man and woman would be reflected in the assembly. This is not to say that the woman is not personally the same as the man, but it bears on the public order as set out in @1 Corinthians 11, which runs down from God to Christ, then to man, then to woman. As to the assembly exercising
{472}
authority other than what the Lord has committed to her. Eve was brought in not only as one who was deceived, but one who went beyond divine order. Full-blown evidence of usurpation was seen in Jezebel. This brought out what the assembly does and what the assembly does not do. We saw that the assembly does not teach or preach, or teach another assembly, but is taught. The word of Paul in @Colossians 4:16, "And when the letter has been read among you, cause that it be read also in the assembly of Laodiceans and that *ye* also read that from Laodicea", indicates how a whole area or district may need the same ministry.
The allusion to men praying brought up the service of young men, whether they are filling out their part sufficiently. We were reminded that Timothy, though a young man, was a man of God and was given a charge. This should normally exercise each of our young men as being right on moral lines to enquire of himself if he has received a charge. It will be seen that a practical line came before us here, in relation not only to young men but to the dress of women -- that it is to be seemly, not extreme or conspicuous.
We spent some time on chapter 3, our brother calling attention to the high standard which becomes this section because, as he said, *the assembly of God* is in mind, and Paul never fails to impress us with the greatness of this vessel. We rested on the word 'irreproachable', searching ourselves whether this could be said of any one of us -- not one thing against him. Running down the list, while not minimising this faithful word of Paul, we were reminded that we are in 2 Timothy conditions, and if this scripture were insisted on to the letter, almost all of us would be disqualified from overseership. Enosh, whose name means, 'Man, as weak, mortal' was mentioned, but the scripture continues, "Then people began to call on the name of Jehovah", @Genesis 4:26.
{473}
Verse 5 was considered -- how one who aspires to oversight conducts his own house. Is a brother disqualified if a member of his family has been withdrawn from or is not in fellowship? It was said that if the head of the house asserts his authority and maintains right principles in the home he is not disqualified -- he takes issue about things. Eli was mentioned as one who was disqualified, "because his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not", @1 Samuel 3:13.
Further enquiry was made as to an unmarried brother with no household. It was observed that Paul was unmarried, with no household, and we were reminded that in 2 Timothy days Paul says to Timothy, "Do the work of an evangelist", @2 Timothy 4:5. The need for skill in doing things in the assembly was mentioned, that while 'elder' would literally allude to one who is older yet the Lord would help any one of us to arrive at eldership rapidly by having the basic quality of love. We observed that David lowered the age of the Levites from thirty to twenty (@1 Chronicles 23:27). This would suggest ten years of learning before they entered upon their full levitical service. There is no thought of only one elder being in a city -- it is plural, and the 'know-how' mentioned twice in this chapter has its application especially in days of difficulty, and when there is trouble in the local setting.
We were warned that fleshly leadership may come into a local assembly and shut out what is of Christ and of the Spirit. There must be room for the Spirit to speak in each assembly -- the Lord is very jealous over every local position, "there am I", @Matthew 18:20. "The pillar and base of the truth" works out locally.
{474}
PAUL'S LETTERS TO TIMOTHY (5)
@1 Timothy 3:16; @1 Timothy 5:17 - 21; @2 Timothy 1:11
The following came before us:-
1. Impressive presentation of the mystery of piety.
2. Service of elders.
3. Need of maintaining right conditions on the home front.
4. What is a witness?
5. Convicting before all.
6. Are 'assembly restrictions' legal?
7. 'Appointing' from care meeting -- is it right?
We spent much time with great profit on the mystery (verse 16), the order of man -- God, manifest in flesh, or as the note says it probably should read, 'He who has been manifested in flesh', how the Lord Jesus was here amongst men, how God was seen for the first time by angels, bringing up the early part of Luke's gospel and the need of having holy thoughts as to the incarnation. 'He who has' was no less than Christ, no less than God, and we rested on many beautiful sections of @2 John 1:7, "Jesus Christ coming in flesh", is that order of manhood. This chapter was said to reach a wonderful conclusion, for chapter 4 goes on to speak of the Spirit speaking expressly, and we were profoundly affected as we went over verse 16, reading it several times, "And confessedly the mystery of piety is great. God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory". Justification in Spirit was said to be seen by the way the Lord did things, and as the Spirit is here everything as to Christ is justified now. Mephibosheth was introduced as one who was never entirely cleared by David, for David was not right about him,
{475}
but the Spirit approves every word and act of Jesus. He went out unjustified, but the Father raised Him by His glory; and then in the Acts the Spirit witnesses fully in the way of approval. The assembly was said to be the place where Christ is understood so that we understand at least in part the mystery of the incarnation. The final allusion in this verse to the Lord Jesus being received up in glory suggests that just as He was received up in glory, so His counterpart, the assembly, is about to be received up in glory, and we are to be ready for the glorious finish.
The services of the elders came up as we moved on to chapter 5:17, our brother remarking that we must allow these words their full weight, "Let the elders who take the lead among the saints well be esteemed worthy of double honour, specially those labouring in word and teaching". In a sense things rest in a locality with the elders; they are probably gifted too. This cuts at the root of democracy in the assembly. An elder takes the lead amongst the saints because he is with God, and it was observed that in connection with elders¬ service allusion to muzzling an ox comes in -- we must not destroy or limit the thought of elders, and yet the balance is that the elders do not replace the care meeting, nor the care meeting the assembly, for the care meeting is not executive, whereas the assembly is. We went over @Acts 15 briefly, the chapter which helped us a few years ago in Toronto in relation to sisters attending. It was asked if elders could not talk things over together privately. Our brother said, elders, or anyone, could speak things over, but we have to guard against a special class or special committees. James was mentioned as signally honouring the elders who are called by the sick person, and who pray over him anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord.
Allusion to two or three witnesses, verse 19, raised the question as to what a witness is -- it is a person
{476}
*who sees* or *hears* a thing; he does not give his opinion or his judgment, but goes by facts. Allusion to "Those that sin convict before all" might or might not have withdrawal in mind. Paul rebuking Peter was cited, and we observed the note: 'to bring home a fault demonstratively to a man's conscience;'to put to shame,''conquer,''rebuke,'but with conviction'. The elders of an assembly cannot act independently of the assembly; they may confer but they are not entitled to make decisions. It was urged too that if we come together in view of discipline we should not have preconceived thoughts, or have any action fixed in our minds, for who knows what the Spirit of God may say?
Inquiry was made as to whether assembly restrictions are right. It was said if they are right, only the assembly can restrict, but it is a question if the word of Solomon to Abiathar and to Shimei would have its application today. There is no first, second or third class fellowship. We are either in fellowship or we are out of fellowship.
Question was then raised of being 'appointed from the care meeting'. It was said there is no thought of this; that if there is something to be done one or more come forward and offer to do it. This avoids officialism and the Lord helps us as we proceed.
We were encouraged to see the line of faith introduced in the first chapter of the second epistle, raising enquiry as to the line we come through; that God is operating on the line of faith. Here it is the feminine side exclusively, but Timothy needs stimulation to re-kindle the gift which was in him. We spoke somewhat of the spirit of cowardice, it being said that naturally we are all cowards; and if we are, we do not get this from God, "For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice", @2 Timothy 1:7. Elijah fled from Jezebel but we noted the divine solicitude for him in his journey to Horeb. We can count on God's
{477}
faithfulness to help us through. It was pointed out that following the word 'cowardice' comes 'power' and 'love'. We might have reversed this, placing love first, but we need *power* and then *love*, and then *wise discretion* .
{478}
GENUINENESS
@Romans 2:28,29; @Revelation 3:9; @Esther 3:13 - 15; @Esther 8:3 - 6; @Esther 9:12 - 16
It is in mind to speak about genuineness. At no time was it more needed than now. I have selected these verses from both Testaments because they speak about the Jews as representing genuineness and how it is worked out in the detecting of evil, and in dealing with it. Evil is on the increase, and it is taking on proportions publicly and nationally which are affecting the Lord's people who are genuine. The public course of things is bearing in that direction. The enemy simply cannot bear that there should be those, almost hidden, yet genuine in regard of what is of God; that is, out-and-outers, as we may say. The enemy has watched this for years, and it has become increasingly abhorrent to him. He has moved internationally and nationally to circumvent it, and to this end would dull our consciences so that we are less sensitive and more compromising as to evil. Genuineness and faithfulness as to good and evil will involve suffering. There are the lines, as I see them, dear brethren, on which the enemy is moving.
I refer to the book of Esther to show how pronounced was the enmity against the Jew; it took form in the most virulent way in one man. That is the trend today -- centralization, leading up to one man -- and in time the man who will answer the purpose will appear. So that my word is to call upon the brethren for genuineness as to what we profess, so that we may not lose what we have. I take the verse in Romans to begin with, where the Spirit of God calls attention to those *called* Jews and shows that they were marked by certain outward things. In the book of Revelation they are spoken
{479}
of as the synagogue of Satan; that is, they have a distinctive religious or synagogue character, not a temple character, but a synagogue character. The synagogue corresponds with what we call a meeting. A meeting is one of the most generally used words in our vocabulary as Christians, and there are those who take on that thought, but the position they take up belongs to Satan -- the synagogue of Satan. One idea relating to the synagogue is that it is a local matter; the temple was the general thought. So that evidently the enemy has taken account of our Gatherings -- he does not like them. He does not like the meeting rooms, nor does he like the stress laid on local matters -- local responsibility, local privilege. He does not like what is current, and the Lord says, "Behold, I make them of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie; behold, I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that *I* have loved thee". That is one of the most remarkable undertakings of the Lord and it applies at the present moment; it is a prophetic forecast of the present time. The Lord intends that others should know that He loves the saints, and He loves them in this local way.
Now these verses in Romans are very apropos as to what a Jew is, and what he is not. The outward thing is not it -- "He is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither that circumcision which is outward in flesh; but he is a Jew who is so inwardly ... whose praise is not of men, but of God". These verses fit very peculiarly into what I have to say and I press them now. They fit in the teaching of Romans, as if the Spirit of God would lay down in that fundamental book what underlies the lovableness the Lord hints at in Revelation -- "That they may know that *I* have loved thee". Professing systems which have now degenerated into a synagogue
{480}
of Satan are to be compelled to come and worship before the feet of the saints, that "they may know", says the Lord, "that *I* have loved thee". Now that is a promise we are to take to our hearts and to use in our prayers. The Lord has particular pleasure in the saints presenting to Him His promises and asking for a fulfilment. But then how is this lovableness effected? It is a question, dear brethren, of being genuine in what we profess. It is to the inwardness of the position that the last verse of @Romans 2 refers -- "He is a Jew who is so inwardly; and circumcision, of the heart, in spirit, not in letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God". So that, in making these promises, the Lord approaches believers in this epistle with the thought that there is to be an inwardness, a reality, in believers and that their hearts are to be affected by the circumcision, that it is to be in spirit. I do not speak of the Holy Spirit, but of our own spirits. The word is very much used, and rightly so, but to make the spirit of a meeting of any moral value there must be this kind of circumcision, as the apostle says, "of the heart, in spirit". We are to understand how circumcision is to be in spirit, and that will affect the spirit of any company -- any number of brethren in so -- called 'meetings'. It is a question of the kind of spirit, not simply that we are together happily, but the *kind* of spirit; that is, circumcision in heart and in spirit. And then there is no thought of praise from men. I know well enough -- no doubt all do -- how we hanker after that. "Whose praise is not of men, but of God" -- you leave all in regard to recompense and praise with God. Now that is what the Lord has in mind. He says that there are certain who deal in externals and in externals only, and in that way have come under Satan's power in a synagogue character. That is what He has in mind -- "I will cause that they shall come" -- however many or
{481}
externally great they may seem -- "and shall do homage before thy feet". It is such persons that are inwardly affected by the circumcision of Christ as indwelt by the Spirit, whose praise is of God and not of men. The Lord looks on that; He loves that, and He says, "I will cause that they ... shall know that *I* have loved thee". It is persons who are real Jews.
Well now, the book of Esther, as we have often said, shows the character of the enmity against the Jew; that is, the real people of God. And I want to work out from this book how the evil that is determined is to be met. Satan is working on a wide scale, much wider than we may realize, and all is converging on the Jews, however many there are. It is not a question of numbers, but of quality - all is converging on the Jew. Let us not be mistaken as to this, dear brethren. The thing is coming nearer and nearer to us, and it is a question whether we are going to face the issue with God and accept the consequences. Our profession of rich ministry and good meetings will all disappear unless there is a facing of the issue at the moment, acceptance of the consequences.
The enmity in this book was headed up in the kingdom of the Medes and Persians. You will observe how things were moved one way and another like a weather-vane. The supreme power was affected, either for good or evil, in relation to the Jews. Let us understand the magnitude of the position of the Jews -- I mean real Christians -- at this time. The book of Esther shows how the balance goes in favour of the good through the influence of real believers. We cannot stress too much the importance of real genuine Christians who are prepared to face the issue and accept the consequences at the present time. The first passage I read in Esther shows how fixed the evil was. The matter was settled; the king
{482}
had veered to the side of evil and committed himself to Haman. A covenant was made, a weapon formed against the people of God. And the city of Shushan "was in consternation". They were perplexed.
It is well to have an eye on current events. You will see that as soon as the supreme power is moved and veers towards evil, that peace is taken away, there is disturbance. The truth is being given up, not only by individuals, but by nations at the present time -- but "the city was in consternation". The king and Haman were in agreement, and they sat down to drink -- that was the position -- to intoxicate themselves, but "the city was in consternation". It is well to have our eyes open to what is current, to what can be seen.
Now, having called attention to that, dear brethren, I want to show how the situation was dealt with and to seek to carry our feelings along with the Jews. It is a question of those who are *real* Jews; those who are so *inwardly*, those who are circumcised in heart and spirit, "whose praise is not of men, but of God". Keep your eye on such. It is not now a time for saying, Prophecy says so-and-so; and, so-and-so is the antichrist. We say these things glibly, and yet may not have much thought as to what is really meant by the word 'antichrist'. We know that antichrist comes -- there is not a more solemn thought conceivable than that -- but then the Spirit of God says, "Even now there are many antichrists" (@1 John 2:18). So that we should understand and meet the matter in so far as we may. And chapter 4 of this book opens up the way to meet the matter. There is one man who is characteristically the *Jew* . One of the most interesting men in the whole testimony of God is spoken of here. If you can get one man representing the idea, then you have something to look at. God always gives a lead; there has never been a time when God did not give a lead to His
{483}
people -- but to see it is another matter. Esther was not just ready to see it, and in truth she had not prepared herself. There are many like her; she had not as yet declared her identification with these persecuted people. As far as Haman and Ahasuerus were concerned, the matter was fixed, but the Spirit of God had said, "No weapon that is prepared against thee shall prosper", (@Isaiah 54:17). We are to reckon on that, dear brethren. There are weapons being formed that I fear we are not aware of, and the enemy has the advantage. What is current, in that way, is a great advantage to him. But Mordecai was the leader; he represents what I am speaking of -- genuineness -- and he represents a man who is prepared to suffer, not only for himself but for others. Chapter 4 calls us into that; calls us *all* into it.
There is no outward pretension of religiousness with Mordecai, nor, in fact, with the Jews, generally. But I am not speaking of externals. I am speaking of genuineness with brethren; the thing is there and every spiritual person will put a name on it. So there is Mordecai; he goes out to the very midst of the city. His office was there, in the king's gate. He had a distinctive place and he filled it well. But now he goes into the city clothed with sackcloth. "When Mordecai perceived all that was done, Mordecai rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and a bitter cry" (@Esther 4:1). What a testimony that was! What ridicule, what reproach would be attached to it! That is the point, dear brethren. That is what we evade. One observes, also, a slothfulness to discern evil in the local meetings. Unless we discern the thing while it is yet small, it will become so big that we are surprised at it, and it will make room for the devil. So that if we are to have any power, publicly, we must look to the local conditions. Each must look after himself, of course,
{484}
and see if he is thinking of the praise of men or the praise of God, and what his ambitions are. I have a little gift, perhaps -- what are my ambitions? What have I in view? All this enters into what I am speaking of -- that, unless I am a real Jew, exercised by the inward side of the truth, I shall come under the power of the devil. But a real Jew will discern the evil and will face it. One may say that the brethren are slothful about it; what can I do? But what did Mordecai do? He went and clothed himself with sackcloth and uttered that very bitter cry, which he did not conceal, in the very midst of the city of Shushan, and came as far as the king's gate. And then Mordecai said to Esther, "Imagine not in thy heart that thou shalt escape" @Esther 4:13. Nor will *you* . So that each has to take it to heart. A good lead is effective; Esther is brought thoroughly into it. And then there is another thing we can reckon on, dear brethren; that is, that God always sets something in the midst of the enemy's camp that will disrupt it -- we can count on that. This matter comes to the ears of the queen of the Medes and Persians; she is an ambush in the enemy's stronghold. Not that she had intended that, but God did; she is in the enemy's camp, and she is going to disrupt it. Thank God for that! We can reckon on God coming in in this way. But we must not leave it all to God -- Mordecai did not. It is most baneful the way brethren let things drag along; they say, God will come in. Yes, but God says, "I will be an enemy to thine enemies" (@Exodus 23:22). Then let me make the thing my enemy. God says, 'If you have an enemy I will be the enemy of your enemy; I am in the conflict'. That was exactly the position of Mordecai and he brought Esther into it, and she came into it nobly. There is only one end to that - triumph for the truth and defeat of the wicked one. The arch enemy here was Haman, and Esther puts a name
{485}
on him -- "The adversary and enemy", she said, "is this wicked Haman" @Esther 6:6. He is the enemy of God's people and God says, "I will be an enemy to thine enemies" (@Exodus 23:22). -- and He was. Now everything moves in the direction of victory for the Jews. But, dear brethren, let me press it upon you that it is through each one taking his place in the matter and making the evil *his* enemy and dealing with it in so far as he may as his enemy. God gives us a lead, let us follow Him in it. Let us not make excuses and say it is a local matter, a governmental matter, and what not. Evil is evil and has to be faced as evil by the Jews, by genuine Christians and, as faced, God will be with us.
You will observe that I am speaking of just one line of thought -- how evil is met by the Jews; that is, by real Christians. First of all, it is by openly identifying ourselves with God's people, as Mordecai did; going into the city with an exceeding bitter cry and being clothed with sackcloth. He was not ashamed to come to the king's gate in such clothes. Mordecai thus gives the lead. Let us each begin with ourselves and with our local meeting. I am not beside the mark in saying that in some cases evil is allowed to drag along and is not faced. In every such case Satan has an advantage. So that the thought is to go into the city, or wherever the evil is, wherever the weapon formed against the saints is, and express yourself. This cry of Mordecai, a bitter one, came from the depths of his soul, and all the Jews rallied to it. And Esther nobly comes forward; she is an example of saints coming forward to meet the situation.
In chapter 8, after Haman's destruction, there is the finishing up of things. That is so important in these matters; not only that the evil may be dealt with in the main, in the locality, but the acts that have marked it remain, and these must be followed
{486}
up with a priestly, determined hand. So it says, "And Esther spake yet again before the king, and fell down at his feet and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his device that he had devised against the Jews. And the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther". She is concerned as to the effect of the evil. It is not a question only of the main leader in it, but of the effect of it and the spread of it. She is concerned about that now, and the golden sceptre is held out. How auspicious that is, it means that the supreme power represented in Ahasuerus is now in favour of God's people. The golden sceptre is held out -- it is a matter of our prayer meetings. It says, "So Esther arose and stood before the king, and said, If it please the king, and if I have found favour in his sight and the thing seem right before the king, and I be pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters devised by Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews which are in all the king's provinces". Now think of these letters! How many wicked things are sent out; how much literature. The writer may die, but the writing remains and the influence of his teaching, or principles, or morals remains and all that has to be dealt with. And how diligent was this warrior queen, Esther, in securing the favour of the supreme power. It was Ahasuerus, of course, but it is *God*, although His name is not mentioned in the book. So Esther is in favour, and she says, "How can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people? or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?" What a wonderful speech for a sister, or a brother -- "my people", "my kindred". She is the queen of the Medes an Persians, but see what she is morally! Mordecai led her into this. She hesitated, but she was brought into it. Thank God for people like this! When they
{487}
are in the fray they are truly in it as good soldiers of Jesus Christ. We pursue matters in our prayer meetings, the whole matter must be dealt with in its roots and full effects. Letters were sent through the post, for the matter had to be attended to in all the provinces. Thus Esther identifies herself nobly with the despised people of God, like Moses, her great prototype, who identified himself with the Hebrews. That was the despised name then; now it is the Jews, and Esther says they are "my people", "my kindred".
In following this matter through to completion in the ninth chapter, the king is seen as taking it on. But *God* takes the matter on; God acts of Himself. God is always active in these matters. I am speaking now of the supreme power, whether it be Ahasuerus or others -- it is what God is doing. So the king says, "The Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace, and the ten sons of Haman" -- the Jews have done that. The king, the supreme power, is noticing now what is being done. We might say, Haman is gone, that is enough. But it is not enough; evil has to be pursued to its full extent and dealt with. "Remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves", says the apostle (@1 Corinthians 5:13). How can you bear wickedness among yourselves in one form or another -- 'Remove it', he says. Esther knew what had been done, so when the king asked of her, "What have they done in the rest of the king's provinces?" - it was for her to say. Her answer is not given, but no doubt she knew; she had an ear for what concerned the brethren. It distresses one to find that brethren are often so local, they do not develop assembly ears. It speaks in the Acts of tidings having come to the ears of the assembly at Jerusalem. But the king puts it on Esther -- "What have they done in the rest of the king's provinces?". What do you know? What do I know about what is being done
{488}
in the provinces? What is being done on the Continent? What is happening? What are the brethren doing? The king then asks, "What is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee; or what is thy request further? and it shall be done". There is not a word about prayer to God in the book -- I quite admit that -- but there was *prayer*, Esther was praying. She said, "If it please the king, let it be granted to the Jews that are in Shushan to do tomorrow also according unto this day's decree, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows". You say, They are dead! That is true; it says so earlier in the chapter; but they were not hanged yet. You say. You are too severe, too exacting. Is Esther too exacting here? Let us deal with the thing in the presence of God. The word of God says, "Cursed is every one hanged upon a tree", @Galatians 3:13. The Lord Jesus hung on a tree: why should I allow evil? Let us deal with it according to God. "And the king commanded it so to be done: and the decree was given at Shushan; and they hanged Haman's ten sons". We never hear of them again; we never hear of their roots coming up again, they are dealt with for ever; dealt with drastically. *That* evil is dealt with; other evil may come up, but let us deal with the present and deal with it as God dealt with evil in the cross of Jesus.
What I had to remark further, dear brethren, is that the people, as you will observe, are brought into this. It says, "The Jews that were in Shushan gathered themselves together on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and slew three hundred men at Shushan". The thirteenth day had done its work, that was the main day for destruction; but let us go further and deal with the thing thoroughly. It says, "But on the prey they laid not their hand". And then it says, "But the other Jews that were in the king's provinces gathered themselves together,
{489}
and stood for their lives, and had rest from their enemies, and slew of their foes seventy and five thousand, but they laid not their hands on the prey". That is, it is a great matter now, spread abroad, the evil is dealt with universally. God *has* allowed widespread matters of this kind -- not lately, thank God -- but what He is doing is dealing with evil in localities, and He is calling on us to do it or we shall have a more widespread matter to our sorrow and our loss. All the people are brought into it here and what comes out is that selfishness is foreign to them. Three times over it says they did not lay their hands on the prey; they made no claim to anything that would add to themselves; it is God's matter. We know that Jews, naturally, will lay their hands on the prey. The teaching, therefore, is that these are not mere outward Jews: they are Jews circumcised in heart and in spirit, not in letter, whose praise is not of men but of God. Men will praise us if we do well for ourselves and take the prey, but they do not do it here, thank God! This beautiful trait mentioned by the Spirit of God shows that they were real, and that is the point I would stress in closing -- that we might put on these beautiful traits and be marked by unselfishness. We want to have part in what God is doing. In what He may permit us to do we are not taking credit to ourselves; the excellency of the power is to be of God, and the results are to be *for* God.
{490}
ENLARGEMENT
@2 Corinthians 6:11 - 13; @Genesis 9:27; @Numbers 23:9,10; @1 Chronicles 4:9,10
One has in view spiritual enlargement. My remarks are intended for Christians, for enlargement is not for others. The more enlargement they get, the greater they become and this breeds strife and discontent, and exclusion of God and His things. So that this word is for those who believe. They are of interest to heaven. They become of interest to heaven when they receive forgiveness and grow in righteousness. Heaven is constantly concerned about them; day and night, it is constantly making provision for them. It is said of the Lord that He is "always living to intercede for them (@Hebrews 7:25)", as though He does nothing else. They are always on His heart, in the breastplate. The type of the high priest shows that He never appears before God without us. Even when we fail, as with Peter, He prays for us: "I have besought for thee that thy faith fail not (@Luke 22:32)". The Holy Spirit of God is also here now and He is interested in the saints. As Christ is Advocate above, so the Holy Spirit takes care of us here. Often grieved, yet He unceasingly looks after us. He is our Solicitor -- the Paraclete. He remains with us, as the Lord said, "another Comforter". He bears witness with our spirit, and is constantly reminding us that we are the children of God.
Angels are attending the saints, also: "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" (@Hebrews 1:14). No census has been taken of the angels, but they are *all* ministering. It is not that they *can* minister, but that they *do* . They are sent out for service on account of the saints.
And then, the Lord Jesus has given gifts to men. *"He* has given some apostles, and some prophets,
{491}
and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints (@Ephesians 4:11,12)". Anything we may have in the way of gift is for the saints, however naughty they may be. It is "until we all arrive ... at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ"(@Ephesians 4:13). All those are active for us that we might be enlarged, spiritually; not in our businesses, for that is of little consequence. It is not that God does not prosper us, for He may. "Beloved, I desire that in all things thou shouldest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospers" (@3 John 2). But when we make money, we begin to love money; it becomes a snare to us, for the love of money is the root of every evil.
Then, again, the saints are liable to become sectarian and partisan, which is a grief to heaven. Paul wrote his first letter to Corinth because of grief due to this. But in his second epistle he says, "Our mouth is opened to you ... our heart is expanded ... let *your* heart also expand itself". They had been convicted of their naughty ways. They had a peculiar place in the affections of the apostle: "Written in our hearts, known and read of all men", @2 Corinthians 3:2. He spoke well of them; his heart was enlarged. He spoke to them as his children for he was a father to them. They could have ten thousand instructors but only one father, for Paul had begotten them through the glad tidings. But he goes on to mention five things -- five groups of things set over against each other -- things that would hinder spiritual enlargement. "What participation is there between righteousness and lawlessness? or what fellowship of light with darkness? and what consent of Christ with Beliar, or what part for a believer along with an unbeliever? and what agreement of God's temple with idols?" (@2 Corinthians 6:14 - 16). The unequal yoke, whatever it may be, is against enlargement. You may get on in business with an unequal yoke, but there will be no spiritual
{492}
enlargement. Paul says, *"Ye* are the living God's temple" (@2 Corinthians 6:16). Think of being that, dear brethren; his first letter had brought this light to them. "Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit?" (@1 Corinthians 6:19). But now he says, *"Ye* are the living God's temple". God dwelt amongst them, walked amongst them! So he says, "Come out from the midst of them, and be separated" (@2 Corinthians 6:17). He brings forward what is positive to urge them to give up evil things that nothing may hinder them from being enlarged.
In @Genesis 9 we have a test case of the kind of persons that are enlarged, as seen in the case of Noah, and the blessing of his three sons. This passage is very interesting, for Japheth means 'enlargement'. Shem's name means 'renown', and Ham means 'black'. Ham acted in an unholy way. Some think that he was cursed, but he was not, directly. The curse was a much broader thing. The word is, "Cursed be Canaan". The curse of the father came upon his progeny. It was executed long afterward by Joshua. What a terrible thing to be occupied with the nakedness of the brethren! How God hates it when we delight in the exposure of His people! The leaders in Corinth were envious of Paul. They spoke badly of that beloved servant of God. They said that his speech was contemptible. They said that his bodily presence was weak. Their conduct was like that of Ham. They wanted Paul's place. But Shem and Japheth looked in another direction; they covered the nakedness of their father. That is the man God loves! He loves the man who covers his brethren. Never hide what is wrong, of course, but do not speak ill of your neighbour. That is love's way. And so God delights to enlarge Japheth. We are nearly all Japhethites in the west. God has enlarged him in Europe, America and elsewhere. But we are speaking of spiritual enlargement, and Japheth illustrates the kind of man that God delights to enlarge.
{493}
Jabez is said to have been brought forth in pain. He cost his mother much. He was a product of suffering. And so is every Christian. Not only do we owe everything to the sufferings of Christ, but we have caused our brethren suffering. Would we all admit that? Well, we have. The mother of Jabez is like the local meeting. Think of how much our younger brethren have cost us. But we value them, and seek their spiritual enlargement. Jabez is like a gem set in this long list of genealogies. He "called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou wouldest richly bless me, and enlarge my border ... !" He was spiritual. He may have called on God as Creator, but he was a spiritual man. What a prayer! You can enlarge that prayer, almost indefinitely. Every Christian should be able to say, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (@Ephesians 1:3). But that is what Jabez said, in principle. He desired to be *richly* blessed. Who can enumerate the "every spiritual blessing"? Jabez turned to God; he was a young man who had cost his mother much, but she is going to reap accordingly, for God brought about what he had requested. And God will grant our requests if they are on the line of spiritual enlargement.
Well now, enlargement is helped by separation. Some may say that if we separate we will be small -- just a handful. Many turn to the multitudes, but we must not "follow the multitude for evil" (@Exodus 23:2). Balaam's prophecies are full of encouragement to turn aside from evil associations. The Spirit of God used Balaam, though unconverted, to say wonderful things about God's people in separation. "It is a people that shall dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations". They are not to vie with the world. The authorities may require information from us, and if so, we are Christians -- believers. That is
{494}
what we are in the mind of heaven. They may call us a sect, but we *are* Christians. Let us ever keep to the spiritual thought! The neutral kind of persons may say that if we are on the line of separation we will be small. Scripture says, "Who hath despised the day of small things?" (@Zechariah 4:10). The Lord does not. "Who can count the dust of Jacob ... ?". These are they who are dwelling alone; there is enlargement, spiritually. It means separation from the world, but there will be sufficient; there will be enough in numbers; and it is the sure way to spiritual enlargement. God has in mind that Christ is to be the firstborn among *many* brethren.
May the Lord bless the word to us.
{495}
LOVE AND LOVABLENESS
@1 Thessalonians 1:4; @1 Samuel 16:11 - 13; @Daniel 9:20 - 24
It is in my mind at this time, dear brethren, to speak about love; that is, divine love, and lovableness. God is working to prepare us for our eternal portion. Love will be that; the great prevailing feature of that scene will be love divinely expressed and intelligently reciprocated by its objects. So that we are to become conversant with the realm of love. As converted to God, we have been taken out of the realm of hatred in this world that we may be lovable and love one another.
I have thought well to begin with this verse in the first letter to the Thessalonians and to base what I have to say on it. These believers at Thessalonica are addressed as beloved of God, as elected; they became lovable, and hence beloved. For the apostle to say that they were beloved of God would mean that they were so characteristically, not momentarily, or in given circumstances, but characteristically. Jude, the brother of James, uses a similar expression in addressing the saints of God, as called ones, as "beloved in God the Father"; so that the idea is made general, for Jude's epistle is general. The epistle to the Thessalonians is local, but the thought of being beloved is made general by Jude, so that we are entitled, through grace, and in a humble way, to accept that place. It is now a question of our responsibility to answer to what this beautiful expression, "beloved", implies. It is used, perhaps more than elsewhere in Scripture, in the book of the Song of Songs, the great love song of Solomon; but its use there is not
{496}
exactly what is in mind now. There it is a question mainly, of our regard for Christ. The loved one is challenged to give an account of why she so regards her beloved. But I am not speaking of lovableness as set out in that book, or in servants speaking of one another, as Peter could speak of Paul, but of lovableness under God's eye, because it is a matter of *what* God loves, what He addresses as beloved. And how great a victory it is for God that in the world today there is that which He can regard as lovely. Surely it is attractive. How can any Christian fail to see the attractiveness of being beloved of God? It says in @Psalm 14:2, "Jehovah looked down from the heavens upon the children of men to see if there were any that did understand, that did seek God". I am speaking of what is lovely under God's eye, and hence lovable, and so beloved.
Now I go on to 1 Samuel, to speak of David, not to bring him out as a type of Christ, exactly, but as a type of any of us as coming under the eye of God in loveliness. At first, perhaps, others may not know it; perhaps we do not know it ourselves, but then it becomes an open matter, God honouring us by some way that He has planned, so that His mind about us is unmistakable. But before touching David, I must say something about the Lord Jesus in this respect. I have referred to how the saints regard Him, and I think what should be noted particularly are the reasons for His lovableness that are given by the lover of Christ, typified in the Song of Songs -- how intelligently her thoughts of His personal glories are expressed. But then there is the Lord Himself, as under God's eye in all His lovableness, as seen in the gospels. So that before speaking of what is lovable, it would hardly be right not first to speak of Jesus; not only as we see Him, but as God saw Him in manhood here. What history has been made in heaven! Perhaps some of us have not thought that
{497}
history is made in heaven. It is being made every day! Heaven is most active, spiritually. It is not unbecoming to direct our minds to heaven. We are, indeed, enjoined to set our minds on things above; and one of the things above that attracts me very much is that history is made in heaven. What history proceeded as the incarnation took place! What intentness there must have been with all the great beings there! Think of the Father's own intentness! Heaven was intensely interested in what took place when Jesus was born; when, as it says, He was "seen of angels". What history marked that day! Much that had been mystery now became clear. The multitude of the heavenly host praises -- what interest they had in it as the tidings of great joy were presented to the shepherds! The angel of the Lord acquainted them with what had happened, but a *multitude* celebrated it. We have thus an inkling of what goes on up there; that heavenly beings are affected by what transpires in God's ways down here. And then, later, the Lord Jesus says to His parents, "Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" (@Luke 2:49). How delightful that would be to heaven! Yet heaven was silent, as far as Scripture goes; the time had not come for an open announcement. But when He became thirty years old, and was baptised, and was praying, the heaven was opened, as if to suggest the possibility of looking in, that we should get an insight, and "a voice came out of heaven, *Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight" (@Luke 3:22). Stephen said he saw the heavens opened; *he* saw in. It has been said that the epistle to the Hebrews is the epistle of the opened heavens. That is a good word, to be kept in mind in reading that epistle, for we are addressed there as holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling. We are partakers of other things too, for we are partakers of the Holy Spirit. Our place is in
{498}
heaven, and surely it is right to think of looking in there. One who had tasted something of it said:
<blockquote>'And see! the Spirit's power <br>Has ope'd the heav'nly door, <br>Has brought us to that favoured hour ...' (`74:5)</blockquote>
It is within our reach, dear brethren. But as I was saying, the heavens were opened upon Jesus and the Holy Spirit descended; not as of old when the Spirit came upon certain persons for special service, but now, in the form of a dove, a divine Person comes down from heaven. It is not yet Pentecost, but the Spirit descended in bodily form as a dove and abode upon the Lord Jesus. And then the voice is heard: *"Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight"(@Luke 3:22). That delight had been experienced all those years; heaven had noticed it. You may be sure there were good times in heaven. Heaven is a created sphere; God has come into it, but it is our sphere, though not in the same fulness and unlimited character as it belongs to divine Persons. I suppose that the third heaven is the limit to which creatures can go, but the very idea of third gives a sense of the fulness of the realm in which we have part. But what days were in those thirty years for heaven We may be sure, basing our thoughts on other passages, that angels observe all this, for there is joy in the presence of the angels over one repenting sinner. How much more, then, in relation to the delight the Father found in Jesus here below! So that each day was marked by untold joy there.
Having said these things about the Lord Jesus that we might have the full thought before us, I proceed now to the passage in 1 Samuel, so that we all, young and old, might see how we come into this great thought. For in truth, David's name, as many of us know, means 'Beloved'. If the translator had said, 'The Spirit of Jehovah came upon the beloved from that day forward', the meaning would have
{499}
been perfectly evident and right. Of no one else is it said in quite the same way, although it has been said many times that the Spirit came upon men. It was usually to meet some emergency; but the pronouncement as to David, and, of course, more so as to Jesus was not simply to meet an emergency, but to stress the delightfulness of the person. If Jesus had gone to heaven at that moment instead of remaining here and carrying out the will of God the voice out of heaven would have had no less force, for it was a matter of what He *was* . And it was understood by Him, for He was conscious of it. He could speak of the relations between the Father and the Son from the very outset. These are only rightly known in heaven, for only the substance of them has been brought to us by the Spirit, for these relations go on in holy interchange of thought and feeling, not recorded for us, save touches in the Psalms and elsewhere, and expressions by the Lord Himself. But how heaven delighted in it all!
But I wish to speak of David now as a type of many of us to show how we come into this great matter. God had set His mind on David, and He was very particular that Samuel should not miss the mark, so that He says, in principle, I will be there with you and I will tell you who he is. David was not present, at first, as you know; he was tending the sheep. Any brother or sister may say that he is of little account. Our young people sometimes become depressed and discouraged because of not being sufficiently noticed. But it does not always do to notice the young too much, for they may not be equal to very much notice however much they may like it. David had not been regarded; it was almost as if he did not exist; he was left out in the field. He could readily have said. Nobody cares about me. I do not suppose that he *did* say that, because he had relations with God in his soul, and he knew that God
{500}
cared for him. And that is the great point. What greater can come into a young person's soul than the knowledge that God cares for him? Whatever others may think, God knows you, not only according to what you are actually, but according to what you are potentially. *He* knows that; nobody else does. And He loves us accordingly, and cares for us accordingly. David was neglected most shamefully, even by his father. Samuel was nonplussed. He asked Jesse, Are these *all* your sons? Jesse had to admit that there was another. And some here may have been neglected, but the brethren will come to it; God will see to that. Samuel needed adjustment; he had not been looking for a man like David. So you need not be surprised if the leading brethren do not notice you much -- though this may not be to their credit. Samuel was at fault. It is sorrowful to have to say that, but it seemed as if the influence of Saul had remained with him; he was still thinking of the height of his stature and such features. But one of the finest things about a spiritual man and especially one whom God is using, is that he can be adjusted readily. And that was the case with Samuel. He says to Jesse, We will not sit down till he comes. Think of Samuel, great man that he was, and those invited, standing and waiting until David came in! One has known of such things; young men who have been forced into the notice of those more prominent: God knows how to do that! They could not have had much of an occasion at Jesse's house until David came in. And we cannot get very far in our meetings until Christ comes in. David had been looking after the sheep in the field. But now he comes in, and heaven was all aglow, speaking reverently. The word is, "Arise, anoint him; for this is he". And then we have what the man was, it is not what he was going to be, although the anointing implies that, but what is recorded by the
{501}
Spirit is what he was. This is the point. "He was ruddy" -- the allusion is to life. The ministry of life has had a great place amongst us, thank God, and still has a place. It is something that every young one should pay attention to; what is really life, what gives ruddiness. There are many spiritual anaemics amongst us; that is, persons in whom there is a lack of life. The life is in the blood. Spiritually, it is a question of love; that is what promotes ruddiness. The Lord is spoken of in this way, typically, in @Song of Songs 5:10: "My beloved is white and ruddy" -- that is supreme beauty -- "white and ruddy". Here David is seen as ruddy; he had developed in life, in the fields, unnoticed. Everyone can do that. You do not need to be noticed; in fact, the lack of being noticed among the brethren is being used of God to turn our minds to what is really life. David is thus seen as "ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance". He was full of life! Why had not Jesse seen it before? or the others? But there it was! *God* saw it, and He saw to it that David was brought in under circumstances that would make much of what *He* had seen in David. Why could it not be seen before? I suppose Samuel had never seen such a man as this; and they were all brought to it. God saw to it that they should not sit down till he came in. So that it is not what I *want* to be, but what I *am* that makes me lovable in the sense in which I am speaking. And then it says, "And the Spirit of Jehovah came upon David from that day forward". He is the only one, as far as I know, who is spoken of in that way. The Spirit came upon others, but here is a man upon whom the Spirit of Jehovah came "from that day forward", as if He never left him. Indeed, he says to Jehovah later, in his penitential psalm, "Take not the spirit of thy holiness from me" @Psalm 51:11. It would seem that He was never taken from him. That is the thing; the Spirit
{502}
was there from that day forward -- the Holy Spirit having taken possession -- and thus what was there was anointed. And so, the time will come when the younger men must fill the ranks. Samuel went back to Ramah; the ground was now to be held by David, a man after God's own heart. That is a thing that was never said of Samuel, or of anyone else. David was to occupy the ground in testimony.
I proceed now to say a little about Daniel. It is not now a man developing ruddiness caring for the sheep; it is an experienced man, a man who had ruled empires, a man in prominent public influence. And it is said of him that he was in prayer. That is another feature of lovableness. How heaven regards a man who prays properly. It is said that Daniel understood by books. He read the Bible, of course, but he also read books, and he understood by the books that God had in mind seventy years as the duration of the captivity. And he knew the law of Moses; he read the books of Moses, according to his prayer. Well now, dear brethren, if we are to take part rightly in prayer, in the prayer meeting or in private, we must watch these points. As we kneel down, or stand up -- for both are right and scriptural -- heaven takes account of the beginning of our prayer. Gabriel calls attention to "the beginning of thy supplication". That is a point to notice. How do we *begin* our prayers? I am taking advantage of this opportunity to say a little about prayer, because it enters into this important subject so pointedly, and it is so essential to the position today, as always. You can understand that when the disciples saw the Lord praying, they would ask Him, "Teach us to pray". So that it is not only a matter of what I say, but how I begin, and how I proceed, and how I finish. Solomon prayed the longest recorded prayer in Scripture, but he finished. Sometimes we may wonder when a brother is going to finish. And, very
{503}
often, the longer we pray the poorer our prayer is, we reduce its quality as we proceed. Solomon's prayer was long, but it was wonderfully sustained, both in matter and breadth of thought; but it says that he finished. Let us notice that; it was when he "had ended praying" that "the fire came down from the heavens and consumed the burnt-offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of Jehovah filled the house", (@2 Chronicles 7:1). What a time that was for heaven! God said, in principle, I am pleased with that prayer. His glory filled the house; it was entirely delightful to Him and, because of it, the priests could not serve. That is mentioned twice over in 2 Chronicles. What a scene it was! How intent heaven was in listening to every word of Solomon's prayer! Think of all the years that were taken account of in that mediatorial prayer! It was a wonderful time for heaven, and God signalized it by showing what He thought of it, by filling the house with His glory.
Well now, Daniel is on that line; his prayer in the early part of the chapter is beautifully worded; I would urge every one here to read it. Gabriel told him that "at the beginning of thy supplications the word went forth". Now what did Daniel have in mind when he prayed? He had something definite in mind, which he had learnt from books -- hence the importance of reading, and getting the mind of God. Evidently he wanted to know what the mind of God was as to His people and His holy city; and God sent Gabriel to tell him, and in doing it he says, "Thou art one greatly beloved". Now that is what I wanted to come to. Daniel was beloved always, I believe, even when he ruled under Nebuchadnezzar and Darius. One of the earliest things said about Daniel is that he "continued unto the first year of king Cyrus" (@Daniel 1:21): God saw to that; he must have been an old man, but God was pleased with him from the
{504}
outset, and he continued till the reign of Cyrus. So that Gabriel says, "Thou art one greatly beloved". What fame he had in heaven, dear brethren! Think of fame in heaven, a name in heaven, our names written there; they are valued in heaven! But to make it clearer what heaven thinks of prayer, God says of the eunuchs and the sons of the alien who keep His sabbaths, "Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer", (@Isaiah 56:7). So that the meetings for prayer become intensely interesting and blessed. Young people are apt to stay away from them, and the toil on Monday often keeps wives away, and others too. But God would make them attractive; He would give us to see from this instance what He thinks of prayer and of those who pray; those who are intelligent in what they are saying, who read books, books that God supplies for us. Daniel is thus told that he is beloved. The word went forth as soon as he began to pray. He did not have to work himself up to a suited state; he began aright, and proceeded aright, and he was still praying when Gabriel came. And then we get reference made to the seventy weeks of the captivity determined, and a most interesting and concise history of Jehovah's people right down to the end of the ages. So that we can get impressions at the meeting for prayer. God shows His pleasure in the prayers of His people, as, one after another, they unfold their exercises and burdens in a spiritual way. How blessed God is! And He makes us joyful in His house of prayer!
{505}
ESPOUSAL TO ONE MAN
@2 Corinthians 11:2,3; @Romans 8:10; @John 4:26 - 30; @1 Peter 3:3,4
These scriptures occupy us with one Man. The first passage directs our attention to the ministry, the apostle Paul representing that thought supremely in the New Testament, as Moses does in the Old Testament. The Lord had spoken to Paul in Corinth in a vision, telling him that He had much people in that city. The apostle would ever afterwards think of the city in that light, as all those who love Christ now, in going around from city to city, think of each city in relation to those who are of Christ in it. So that if Corinth were mentioned to the apostle at any time in his travels after he had been there, he would recall what Christ had there. Indeed, referring to the place the Lord's people had in his heart, he said, *"Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men", (@2 Corinthians 3:2). They were written there indelibly; they were his letter; they had an indelible place in his heart. Wherever he had the opportunity he would speak about them; they were "known and read of all men". It is as if his very attitude in referring to them would impart his thoughts and his affections towards them.
The Lord had told him that He had much people at Corinth, but He did not tell him the number, We have not much in the way of numbers, save in the earliest days of the twelve; but as the Lord had said "much people" there were no doubt a good many. But the apostle would think of them as to what they could be made for Christ, for as yet the material was all potential. We might say that the pearl was there in the sense in which it is spoken of in the parable; it had to be sought and found. And the great servant would have in mind how much he
{506}
could effect in the persons he found, for his work would not be completed unless the subjects of it were brought somewhat into accord with the pearl of great price. The apostle had that kind of an outlook, and, being a skilled workman, would work away with the great model in his heart and mind as one after another of these Corinthians would respond to the truth of the gospel. Although, as he says, he preached Christ crucified: "I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified" (@1 Corinthians 2:2), yet he preached the Son of God too, for he also says, "The Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus)", @2 Corinthians 1:19. Whether they preached in different halls on the same night, or preached one after another in the same hall on the same night, we cannot say, but there was certainly a three-fold testimony to Jesus as the Son of God, and this testimony would have in mind to attract persons to Him. So that the apostle undoubtedly alludes to that kind of ministry when he says, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ", @2 Corinthians 11:2 That was what he aimed at, and what he effected. Whether each saint at Corinth reached the full thought of what he had in mind has to be left; but, in general, he had succeeded in espousing them. They were really interested in Christ in such a way as to commit themselves to Him in a marital sense. That is how Paul looked at them, and how he had them in mind as he penned these verses.
Well now, I have in mind to occupy you with the Lord in the same way, so that there may be with us something in the nature of espousal. Espousal is not exactly marriage. The word "husband" in the Authorized Version in verse 2 is properly "man"; it may be used in the sense of husband, but the sense, properly, is *man* . The Corinthians had been brought
{507}
into the covenant in that way, not in a light trivial way, but in a chaste way -- "a chaste virgin" is the idea. So there was something in Corinth that aroused the hostility of the devil, as there is in this town now. The devil hates the saints, particularly because of their relation with Christ, for he hates Christ. He would attack the property of Christ, as the Lord said, "Why dost thou persecute me?" (@Acts 9:4). It was the saints viewed as Christ who were being persecuted. So that knowing what Corinth was, as he did, the apostle would know the kind of wiles to which the enemy would resort to corrupt them; that is, what Corinth was had to be overcome. Wherever we are, in whatever city, town or village, the world is there in some way, and that is the test for us as in the place. Overcoming implies that we overcome *there* . The Corinthian saints had to overcome Corinth, whether it were its architecture, its profligacy, its wealth, or its learning, or whatever it was. One might be affected by one thing, and another by another, but whatever the city is has to be overcome if we are "to be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead", (@Romans 7:4). I believe that word "up" would mean moral elevation as well as the literal rising out of the grave. There is moral elevation in the suggestion "raised up from among the dead".
But the serpent would not fail to use what is available to corrupt our thoughts from "simplicity as to the Christ", whether it be an old man who is converted, or a middle-aged man or woman, or a young man or a young woman, or even a boy or a girl. For God works in men and women from almost the outset of their being on earth, and, indeed until they leave it. But Satan would select that peculiar form of corruption that would be most likely to damage one, for the idea of "a chaste virgin to Christ", you understand, applies to *all* the saints.
{508}
It is a collective thought here, as if the assembly at Corinth was set up intelligently in that way. The Lord's supper, of course, might be introduced to show how the espousal worked out. The Lord would have His part in every occasion; that is, "the time of love", (@Ezekiel 16:8). It is to Corinth that we have most of the instruction as to the Lord's supper. And every occasion should be a love occasion, dear brethren. It is a very important thing, as we sit down together at the Lord's supper, to leave ample room for the exercise of this kind of love, the love of Christ, and of His saints as espoused to Him. Ample room should be left for it, because He is entitled to us; we are His; He has secured us at infinite cost, and there should be room made for the constraining love of Christ and the responsive love of the saints. The Lord looks for it as we come together in assembly. He would impress us with the cost at which He has secured us, and what cost there has been to God, too, for the Lord is the Mediator of a new covenant, as well as being our Husband, as it were. He is the Person for whose pleasure we are to be, as it says, "to be to another". It is a question of *who* He is, in that sense, and *what* He is, as the Mediator of a new covenant. So it is an important matter, dear brethren, to keep in mind that the Lord should have His time, and that we should be to Him, "who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God", (@Romans 7:4).
You can understand how the devil would be aroused from the beginning of Paul's service at Corinth, the Lord having told Paul about His people in that place. You can understand how the devil would be set to prevent the Lord from obtaining what He had there, from really securing it. Whether it would be by corruption from without, or whether by disorder within, or by rivalry, the devil set to work, and with great success, alas!, to damage what
{509}
had been so secured by the service of the great minister and those who had worked with him to present the Corinthian saints as a chaste virgin to Christ. The apostle alludes to the kind of subtlety with which Satan began, because his earliest movements in God's creation have not been lost sight of. We are told: "The serpent was more crafty than any animal of the field which Jehovah Elohim had made". (@Genesis 3:1). Of course, we know now, that however he spoke to Eve through the serpent, he is nothing less than a great spirit, but set against Christ. So the apostle alludes to that, and says, "... as the serpent deceived Eve by his craft"; the serpent was more crafty than all the other animals, and the apostle knew that he would not fail to have recourse to his old methods. He does not, as far as one can see, cast aside any of his old methods. I suppose he used his best ability when he attacked Eve. God had performed a great Work, having brought order out of chaos, and everything was very good, and God blessed it. But then, here is Eve; she was not called Eve when she was created; she was called Ishshah; that is, her name was derived from her origin; she was the counterpart of Ish -- she was Ishshah. That was not a question of life, exactly, but Eve implies life out of death, in a moral sense, sin having come in; whereas Ishshah means that she was taken out of man, and that before sin came in. She was the greatest expression of the handiwork of God, next to Adam; in fact, she was the shining out, the effulgence of Adam; she came out of Adam.
The craft lay in the devil's scheme to bring in something in relation to her that would bear on her husband; something to divide, to break up that wonderful combination, or, as I might say, that organism; for the woman is out of man, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh -- a remarkable thing! It is a mystery; the apostle treats of it in that way
{510}
in Ephesians, and we may be sure, dear brethren, that what is divinely mysterious is what the enemy would spoil if he can. And, of course, we are to understand mystery; we are to get outside the range of the natural man. So the devil would spoil the mystery; there was nothing of the kind in relation to other creatures. The serpent, in a certain sense, stood over against all the other creatures, for he was superior in craft to all other animals. Man was superior in the wisdom and intelligence that God gave him, and in his links with God. So that you can understand that Satan was jealous of that, and would spoil it, and he did. So he spoke to the woman. The apostle was thinking of all that as to what might happen at Corinth, and indeed, what *had* happened at Corinth, and what is happening now. We are all in danger of the craft, the subtlety, of this being, and how he would spoil what is particularly for Christ in a collective sense; for that is the mystery, and to secure that the apostle Paul was called out and peculiarly fitted to minister it. He combated for the Colossians that they might be "united together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God", (@Colossians 2:2). Satan was against that, but Paul was for it. He was toiling for it, and combating for it, that Satan should not succeed. He had succeeded to a considerable degree undoubtedly, here at Corinth, but the apostle spoke of it as though he had not; he says, "I fear lest by any means, as the serpent deceived Eve by his craft, so your thoughts should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ".
Now the question may arise as to what this simplicity is, and I think a further reference to Satan's craft, and his attack on Eve will bring it out. Simplicity in her case, as the serpent spoke to her, would have saved the situation. He was a hideous
{511}
creature; there was nothing attractive about him; he did not appeal to her affections, I am sure; there was nothing of that. It was a question of intelligence. His head was to be bruised, which would suggest the spoiling of intelligence used against God. So that it was not a question of attractiveness; there was nothing in him to attract anyone's affections. It was a deeper thing; his attack was an appeal to the intelligence. So the Lord's supper is introduced in that way -- there is the question of the Lord's rights over us, and of the mystery. The apostle says, "I speak as to intelligent persons: do *ye* judge what I say", (@1 Corinthians 10:15). The enemy was seeking to spoil that through their misconduct, possibly even in the assembly meeting at Corinth. What a disgrace! And how jubilant the enemy would be to occasion that disgrace as spoiling that which is most precious to Christ! How Satan would think of the Lord's words to Paul, "I have much people in this city" (@Acts 18:10). And he would say, I am *spoiling* that!
So the serpent asks, "Is it even so that God has said ... ?" (@Genesis 3:1). He raises the question of the restriction put on Adam and Eve in regard to the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. It is a question of the *knowledge* of good and evil; that is the point he was making. Knowledge is a very attractive thing; learning is a very attractive thing; and it causes pride. I do not know of anything that promotes pride more than education; not that it is not needed, in a sense, but it is a subtle thing, and the enemy is using it to cause pride in our hearts. Eve listened to him. Now if she had been simple -- and if *we* are simple in the same sense -- a deaf ear would be turned to that sort of attack. She would have said. Why should I listen to that creature? There is nothing about him to attract me. *Why* listen to him? He was raising the question of knowledge; for he had in mind to shut God out of Eve's thoughts, as her descendants,
{512}
later "did not think good to have God in their knowledge", (@Romans 1:28). Had she been simple, Eve would have said, I will call my husband, but there was not a word about that. Now, dear brethren, something of this kind may arise with us, we will say; something appealing to our intelligence, as in the suggestion: "Ye will be as God", (@Genesis 3:5). It suggests that intelligence makes us great. That is the key to the inflation of this present world: "Ye will be as God". But if the woman had been marked by simplicity as to her position in the recognition of her husband, she might have said to the serpent: There is my husband; he existed before me, and surely I ought to ask him about this matter. But, no! And this is the point to see, dear brethren: it is the tendency to take things on and to listen to things that are said, leaving the Lord out of the whole matter. Is there anything I can afford to go on with, and leave Him out? I do not think so. Simplicity as to Christ would say, All wisdom is there in Him; why not consult Him? Adam was the woman's head. Paul says, "Adam was not deceived; but the woman, having been deceived, was in transgression", (@1 Timothy 2:14). The woman was deceived; it was because she was not simple, in that sense. Why did she not refer to Adam? Why not bring him in? When the angel came and told the wife of Manoah a certain thing, she immediately told her husband; and Manoah prayed that the angel should come again, and the next time he came, she brought her husband. That is the idea; she was not corrupted from "simplicity as to the Christ". But Eve was.
So, dear brethren, this is the safeguard. If we are to avoid corruption from simplicity as to the Christ, let us not listen to anything or take anything on without consulting Him. Let us see what He thinks about it. The Corinthians were moving without Him; they thought they knew better, indeed! How
{513}
often things come up which remind us of that! People think they know better than the Lord, but they do not. Simplicity as to the Christ means that I recognize Him as Head; it is simply a question of "holding fast the head". (@Colossians 2:19). It is a question of seeing that all wisdom is in Christ, positively; indeed, He is called "God's wisdom", (@1 Corinthians 1:24). Let us see to it that we take on nothing without Him, and we will shut out the serpent. He is foiled as we adhere to the simplicity of our position. It is a covenant, I might say; it is a question of consistency, but also of simplicity as to the Christ, and thus o defeating the wicked one who would spoil us for the purpose for which the Lord has taken us on.
Now I want to show, briefly, how this works out from Romans where we get the fundamental principles of our whole position: "If Christ be in you", says the apostle, "the body is dead on account of sin". One can understand a saint at Rome who had been a votary of the emperor being struck by that verse, for the Roman emperors were idolized and deified, and would become attractive to the citizens of Rome, as great men are today. Next to national feeling and the like, one hardly knows of anything more attractive and besetting to people's minds than a hero; you may hardly realize that some person of this kind is carrying you away. Well, the apostle is writing to the saints at Rome, and he says, "If Christ be in you ... .". He had said much before which led up to this verse. And now he is developing the truth about the Spirit; indeed, this chapter is mainly about the Spirit. You will find that the Spirit is mentioned here perhaps more than in any other chapter in the Bible; and it is because of the instruction needed as to the Spirit. And the apostle brings in this expression, which is not a characteristically Roman truth; it is rather a Colossian truth: "If Christ be in you ... .". It is a hypothetical
{514}
statement -- and if that be true, "the body is dead on account of sin". That is a remarkable thing! It means that the serpent cannot get at you through your body, the body being viewed as the vehicle of sin here: "the body is dead on account of sin"; or, we might say, on account of the working out of sin. Well, surely there is more to be said as to the Christian than that; so the verse goes on, "but the Spirit life on account of righteousness" . Now one can understand how this scripture and our passage in @2 Corinthians 11 run together. How effectively the serpent would be shut out if the body were dead. And so, as I was saying, the woman should have said to the serpent: Adam is near, and I will consult him in this matter. But, no! she saw "that the tree was good for food, and that it was a pleasure for the eyes, and the tree was to be desired to give intelligence" (@Genesis 3:6). That was as far as she could see; but how can one see aright while under the influence of the serpent? Things will look very different under *that* influence. The district of Sodom was like the garden of the Lord to the eyes of Lot, but not to the eyes of Abraham. How differently things look when you are under the influence of the serpent! Had the woman gone to her husband, she might have changed her mind; she might have said, This is a peculiar influence under which I have been; it would shut out my husband; it wants me to think without him. Had she gone to Adam she might have been saved, but she did not. She partook of the fruit of the tree, and gave to him, and he partook of it. She came under the influence of the serpent and, evidently, Adam came under hers. It is the terribleness of bad influence, and none could be worse than that of the serpent.
Now, if the body is dead, that is the end of the serpent's power over the body; he works through the flesh, through its lusts, and pride, and all that;
{515}
but the secret is: "If Christ be in you ...". Had Adam been in Eve, in that sense; had he been "the hidden man of the heart", she would have consulted him; but, no, she went on by herself. She brought him under the nefarious influence of the serpent, and there he was; and there we are! "By one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death; and thus death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned", (@Romans 5:12). There it is! But Romans is the recovery epistle, and so we read, "If Christ be in you" -- that is the test. Has Christ come into you in such a way as to fill your mind and your affections? Then the body is dead; that is, in relation to sin. Whether this be a potential matter, whether you have come to it in your mind, or whether it is actually worked out in you, makes no difference from the point of view from which I am speaking. That is the legitimate result of Christ being in us; therefore how important to see that it is *Christ*, and not simply doctrine! Christianity is Christ in that sense, brought to us in the gospel, and getting a place in our hearts, so that He is in us. "The body is dead": that is, it has ceased to respond to the influences of the devil; the flesh is not allowed to act lest there should be sin. The Spirit takes the place of that; the believer is "not in flesh but in Spirit" (@Romans 8:9). The body is viewed here as representing the lusts, as having been the vehicle of the flesh; we have to understand it in its context. In chapter 12 the same body is presented as a living sacrifice but here it is viewed as dead. It can only be a living sacrifice in the sense of the Spirit being in it, and the flesh negated; so the Spirit is life on account of righteousness. What a change this would effect in a Roman citizen who might have been full of love for the emperor, and for the empire! Now he is full of Christ, the body is dead on account of sin, and the Spirit in him is life in view of righteousness. So that he moves about
{516}
the city of Rome as a vessel of righteousness. What a triumph, dear brethren! Surely it was not written for their sake only, but for the saints at any time, and for ours, so that we might be moving about as vessels of righteousness, the Spirit being life in view of righteousness. How it recalls Christ: "If ye know that he is righteous, know that every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him", (@1 John 2:29).
I want to show now from @John 4 how Christ came into the woman spoken of there. She had had five husbands! That is her history, and the one she then had was not her husband. You can see how far away she was from the idea of being espoused to one man, a chaste virgin to Christ. Could anyone be further away? And yet she is only a picture of any or all of us. How far away we are naturally from the divine idea! And yet the gospel proposes to bring us to it in spite of the terrible obstacles. This woman comes to this. She had come out to the well with her water-pot, intending to fill it and carry it back to the city, but she left it and went back to the city without it. Why did she leave her water-pot? She was teachable, spiritually; she had taken in spiritual thoughts. Dear brethren, we shall never reach the idea of spiritual ministry unless we begin to take in spiritual thoughts. The chapter is full of spiritual thoughts. The Lord set out to impart to that woman spiritual thoughts, to give her spiritual ability. He presented spiritual things to her, and did not hesitate to bring before her the greatest spiritual thoughts, going so far as to say to her, "God is a spirit". That is the foundation of what He was talking about; He wanted to lead her on spiritual lines. If she is to have to do with God she must be spiritual. In truth it is a question of teaching, and the root of the teaching is in chapter 3 where the new birth is spoken of by the Lord: "That which is born of the Spirit is spirit" (verse 6). It is not *a* spirit,
{517}
but *spirit*; it is the character of the thing. It is not that another spirit is imparted to the person, but "that which is born ... is spirit". It is that character of things, and it is fundamental in that sense; so that the Lord's words to the woman, that "God is a spirit", would be in keeping with that.
And now, we may say that the woman shows that she had not been listening for naught, and that is important in these matters. If we are not taking in spiritual things, we are not profiting by them. She was now beginning to be spiritual in her thoughts; a great change had come about in her. She left her water-pot -- that is the token that this woman had been listening spiritually -- and went away into the city. She had become the water-pot herself; that is the lesson. She was carrying water to the city such as she had never taken there before, nor could have carried before. She was the vessel herself. And when she went to the city, she went to the men! I want to bring out, from that, that her body was "dead on account of sin". Christ was in her! She says, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?". It is a matter of intelligence; she is not yet speaking of Christ's attractiveness or His loveliness as we get in the Song of Songs; it is a question of how He appealed to her intelligence. What I am speaking of is most important. If persons can be secured spiritually, through their intelligence, they can know how to triumph over any attempt of the serpent to divert them from Christ; they have an answer for him. Indeed, they do not need to answer him; they turn away from him, as discerning the voice of their Saviour and Shepherd. It says, "The woman ... went away into the city, and says to the men ...". That is not for nothing; it is mentioned with the greatest care by the Spirit of God; she says, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?".
{518}
It becomes a matter for the men to decide; and it is a matter for *your* intelligence; your conscience, of course, as having been touched by a Man who can tell you all things you have ever done! Where can you get the like? As said the man in @John 9:33 "If this man were not of God he could do nothing". It is spiritual logic, I may say. She says, "Come, see a man", but she does not end there -- "who told me all things I had ever done". The men are not influencing her now -- her body is dead. They would have influenced her earlier, but not now. Christ is influencing her; Christ is in her! She is full of a Man who can tell her all things she had ever done. Surely, she would say. He is the Christ, but it is for you to see for yourselves. And they went off to see the Lord Jesus.
Finally, Peter uses a remarkable phrase: "the hidden man of the heart". He is speaking of marital life, but he is also speaking of adornment in the wives. The adornment of women is a matter of great importance to the commercial world; if it did not have that to reckon on there would be great loss. Peter is speaking about adornment, and he tells the wives the things that are not to be their adornment: "Whose adorning let it not be that outward one of tressing of the hair, and wearing gold, or putting on apparel". He says, "Let it not be that", and then he uses this phrase: "but the hidden man of the heart". What did the apostle have in his mind in speaking of "the hidden man of the heart"? He is not speaking of a person, but expressing a characteristic thought. As I apprehend it, it is a man in the sense of *the new* man, not a person, but a characteristic thought. And do I understand what is hidden in that way? What is the hidden man of my heart? It surely is a conception, dear brethren, but not so much the idea of a person, although it must work back to Christ. It must direct the mind to the Lord
{519}
Jesus. He is the hidden Man, undoubtedly, but it is to be manifested. You cannot see this "hidden man" in the adornment of the world. He is in the hearts of Christians. True Christians normally have something in reserve, something secret, and they are thinking of that all the time. Whatever they put on, they are thinking of that.
Now, to show that it is a question of character or of a quality, the apostle goes on to say, "For thus also the holy women who have hoped in God heretofore adorned themselves, being subject to their own husbands; as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord" (@1 Peter 3:5,6). That is the idea. It is well when we get a concrete example of what is in mind. This adornment refers to what is hidden, "the hidden man of the heart". The idea should have begun with Eve, and should have come right down. Thank God, it found some expression in Sarah, a holy woman. She adorned herself in this way; she was one of those of whom the apostle tells us that they were in subjection. If we speak of this in a wider sense, what is it but the assembly as having a conception of a Man hidden in her heart? And all that is external must flow from that! And the fundamental thought in that is subjection. "The assembly is subjected to the Christ", (@Ephesians 5:24). It is not simply 'subject', but God has placed everything in subjection to Christ. It is not a question of our taking a position, but of our being placed in that position. The assembly is placed in subjection to Christ, and any move away from that position is lawlessness; because it is the place of the assembly; it is the place of wives in relation to their husbands; and any disregard of that is lawlessness. The apostle Peter can call upon one of old; he can bring her forward as a concrete case, a woman who had that kind of adornment in them hidden man of the heart. She was marked by calling her husband lord.
{520}
Well, dear brethren, I do not know if I have made as plain as I would wish, what this "hidden man" is, but I think the key lies in this word 'hidden'. It is a question of determination inwardly as to quality. "The hidden man" is an expression covering both man and woman, as in "Let us make man in our image ..." (@Genesis 1:26). That word 'man' covered both man and woman. It is a question of laying hold of qualities as seen in Christ, and of their coming out in us. That is the idea of adornment, and it works out in subjection, and we have this case brought forward of a holy, godly woman who illustrates it in her subjection, calling her husband lord.
That is what I had to suggest to you, and I commit it all to the Lord that through it He might have a greater place in our hearts, that His qualities may come out in adornment in us here below as loving Him.
{521}
THE NAME
@Matthew 28:16 - 20; @James 2:6,7; @3 John 5 - 8
What I have to say, dear brethren, has reference to the name which we, as Christians, have been baptised to and which is called upon us. I have the public position of Christians in mind. Matthew has it in mind, particularly; James speaks of "the excellent name which has been called upon you"; John says that for "the name" certain have "gone forth, taking nothing of those of the nations"; so that these apostles, in writing thus, have the public position in mind. John has what I may call the private position particularly in mind in his gospel; he builds inward, as it is said of David, in taking Zion, that he "built round about from the Millo and inward", (@2 Samuel 5:9). John's gospel has that in mind, particularly, and Paul also has it in mind; being the architect, as I may say, of the public assembly, he has the inward in mind more than any. He speaks of the Father, "that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man" (@Ephesians 3:16), with a view to our eternal relations. John, also, ministers on the same line, directing us through the words of Christ into heavenly and eternal relations.
But in his epistles, particularly in the second and third, John speaks of the assembly in its public aspect. He speaks, for instance, of Diotrephes casting persons out of it, and he speaks of the love of the brother to whom he wrote having been declared to the assembly. The assembly is to be informed of matters of special interest, in the sense that every right feeling is in it; indeed, I might say, what is of heaven is here below in that sense, for the feelings and sympathies of heaven are in it. There is respect and reverence for God, and for Christ, and respect for dignitaries; these things mark heaven. We read
{522}
of the assembly having ears; it is ready for every information as to the work of God and as to the people of God. It is the home of all such information - the best use can be made of it there. Matthew speaks of the assembly as militant -- an important side to its position, for the gates of hades are not to prevail against it. So that the things of God are safe there. And he speaks of it as a court of appeal, which is another matter of great importance, for there is that here which is capable of rendering right judgment. And then James speaks of the assembly in relation to sickness amongst the people of God. Paul is concerned about the financial affairs of the saints, telling us that those who carry the bounty of the assemblies to meet need are messengers of assemblies, Christ's glory. There is a peculiar glory attaching to that.
So that what I am speaking of is the assembly of God, or the assembly as such, for it had acquired that place, the word denoting a very great matter. Matthew brings it in to supersede military protection for the saints, for they that take the sword perish by it. The assembly is a refuge from any such feeling. He also shows that it supersedes the court of the land for the Christian. And James, if you will allow me, shows that the hospital is superseded by the assembly. He speaks of it in relation to the bodily illnesses of the saints, of which there is always much. But in the passage I read he avoids using the word 'assembly' for he is speaking of rich people blaspheming the excellent name. He uses the word 'synagogue' showing the character of the epistle. While it deals with what is really of God, in the Christian sense, it also includes the great Jewish community, addressed in grace by the Spirit of God in this way, so that even the synagogue was observed. But he does not finish the epistle without speaking of the assembly. There is no suggestion of rich blasphemers
{523}
in the assembly; it would cease to be the assembly were it allowed there. So he speaks of the synagogue, for that is the word, the synagogue where the rich and the poor came together.
Well now, as I said, I am seeking to occupy you with the public side of our position. If you follow what I have been saying, you will see that there is that which is really intended to supersede, for believers, all mere human institutions. I am not here to say a word against such institutions, whether it be military, official or authoritative. They are there provisionally, but spiritually they are superseded by the assembly. Would that everyone here would take that in, but the young ones especially.
But we are living in a dual sort of way; living in relation to what is spiritual and of God, and at the same time living in relation to what is public in a literal sense, subject to governments, subject to every human institution for the Lord's sake, honouring the king and all dignitaries, praying for them too, making supplication for them, giving thanks for them. So that the Christian is never an overturner of governments, he is a patient sufferer in regard to any ill-treatment. Inwardly he is in another world; that is the position; he is in an out-of-the-world state of things. That may be an expression that the young ones may not fully understand, but if you will be patient and think it over and see that there is another world opened up, and that the assembly is a part of it, there will be great gain. The assembly is to be a great luminary in that world presently. She is coming out of heaven from God. In the meantime it has a public place, but not as a rival of governments, for those who form it know that patience is our present normal right attitude -- we are in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ.
At the same time we do not forget the public aspect of the assembly, that it is here as the vessel
{524}
of grace in the enforcement of the kingdom of God in whatever way it may be required by believers. And, of course, if believers are benefiting by it, others notice that and it is a testimony to them. The kingdom of God is a very real thing, beloved brethren. It is against evil, but not against human institutions that are, in the providence of God, beneficial in restraining evil. How can we be against what restrains evil in any sense? A policeman on his beat is of interest to a real Christian so far as he is a minister of God for the restraint of evil. That is what he is, and from the policeman up to the king the same thing applies so long as we can view them in that light. So that, dear brethren, we are not rivals of what God is supporting providentially. We are thankful for that, and yet there is another world, another kingdom, another place of authority in the assembly, and all these features of which I am speaking, whether it be courts of appeal, hospitals and the like, are provided for in the new system, the new world, for those who belong to it. There is perfect government in it; there is perfect provision made for every ill for those who belong to it.
Matthew has all this in mind when he records what we do not have elsewhere, that the countenance of the angel at the tomb of Jesus was like lightning. In this chapter the angel is a public personage; in the other gospels his service is private. But here he is a great heavenly official with his countenance like lightning, and he is sitting upon the stone that had been on the mouth of the tomb in which the Lord of glory lay. He says, "He is not here". He is a public personage. The keepers were as dead men on account of him; that is, the keepers were those who represented the murderers of Christ. He is against them; he is against the seal that is on the tomb, because it is against Christ. Had it been another tomb, it would have been different. But it
{525}
is the tomb of Jesus, and that must not be sealed; not that it made any difference, in one way, whether it was sealed or not. Jesus came out before the stone was rolled away. The stone was rolled away, but Jesus did not do it. The angel did it, and sat upon it; it is a public matter. And now he says to the women, "Go quickly and say to his disciples that ... he goes before you into Galilee ... . Behold, I have told you" (@Matthew 28:7). It is authority. And the Lord Himself met them as they went, for they went by the angel's word and He respected their obedience. He saluted them and said, "Hail!" And then He sends a message to His brethren, "Go, bring word to my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there they shall see me" (@Matthew 28:10). Authority and dignity are in mind. They went; they were obedient to His word.
You will understand that what I am saying now is to bring our hearts into subjection, for entrance into this realm depends upon subjection. Self-will is incongruous to it and has no part in it. So elsewhere, Peter tells us that the Holy Spirit is given by God to those who obey Him. It is by the power of the Spirit that we enter into this realm on the principle of obedience. The eleven obeyed and went to Galilee, and the Lord met them there. It was a matter of appointment. It is well to bear in mind the need for keeping appointments. In this public position yea and nay will not do. Paul was very particular to disclaim any lack as to this in himself. He says, "Now God is faithful, that our word to you is not yea and nay" (@2 Corinthians 1:18). And that is to be observed; we are to see to it that we can be relied upon. The eleven went to Galilee and when they saw the Lord they worshipped Him and He came and spoke to them. It is what might be called the public side of worship, for there is such a thing as that. *"We* are the circumcision", says the apostle, "who worship by the Spirit of God" (@Philippians 3:3). It is the public side of worship,
{526}
the public service of God. It is not governed by the Westminster Confession or any confession or creed. It is by the Spirit of God -- we "worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh"(@Philippians 3:3).
But then, some of the disciples doubted. I need not say that no one here wishes to be a doubter. It spoils the public position when we doubt. "Why didst thou doubt?" said the Lord to the greatest of the twelve on one occasion. Doubting will not do. It is a question of the maintenance of the public position for God. But the Lord went on with what He had in mind. He might have stopped to correct or adjust them, but no, He went on. The position was so great and the service was too important to delay. He says, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth". There is nothing to fear. Perhaps the best way to meet a doubter is to go on and let him see the power; perhaps he is much more affected by the evidence of power than by argument. The Lord proceeded, talking about power: "All power", He said. The disciples would feel the absurdity of doubting in the presence of such dignity and authority. "Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations". It is a public matter; not all the men of the world, but the nations. It has never been done, but still, it is in the Lord's mind to bring about this great matter. In the time to come we shall see the basis on which the nations come into blessing -- not all of them, not the nations we are conversant with now, exactly, for God must make His own selection. Sovereignty must enter into that as it does in the selection of individuals. The prophets indicate the nations that shall be blessed, but it is on the basis of divine selection.
How beautifully the Lord brings to our attention that when He sits upon the throne of His glory, when all the nations shall be gathered before Him,
{527}
He will say to those on His right hand, "Come, blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you" (@Matthew 25:34). What a word to them! And to those on His left He will say, "Go from me, cursed, into eternal fire"(@Matthew 25:41). The nations that shall be saved shall walk in the light of the heavenly city. They will not be independent, they will bring their glory to it. The great metropolis of the universe will be respected then; they will bring their glory, publicly, to the heavenly city. And so the Lord goes on to say, in chapter 28, "Make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you. And behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age". So that the saints at the outset were fortified in this great position. Faith lays hold of the mind of God expressed in these words. What a thought! What a conception! "Make disciples of all the nations"! Was the power not there? It was, all power in heaven and upon earth was there.
Well now, I am thinking of the name. It says, "... baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". It is *one* name, and I wish all the young brothers and sisters here to realize that you are baptised to the glorious thought of that name! It is not an empty thing, all the power of God is behind that name, and you have been baptised to it. It is a great objective thought for faith to lay hold of as one is baptised. That is the position, it has not altered one bit. The power has been greatly weakened outwardly, but the fact stands and can be proved. It is a great public matter -- the name. It is not to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, but to the *name*, all power being here in connection with the name!
{528}
So, as I said, James contemplates that it will be blasphemed. That is a solemn matter, dear brethren; for there is a solemn side to the position. A corresponding passage is found in @Leviticus 24:11, where certain men strove and one of them blasphemed the Name. It does not say what name. What name could it be, dear brethren, but the covenant name by which God was in relationship with His people? All that entered into the name of God, the name of Jehovah and the other different titles which designate the Deity, entered into the word 'Name'. One blasphemed the Name and he was stoned.
Now James alludes to the same thing and he reminds his readers of the danger of favouring the rich. He says, "Do not *they* drag you before the tribunals? And do not *they* blaspheme the excellent name which has been called upon you?" Christians ought not to disregard this. Being in business we are exposed to blasphemy of the name. How we need to have our ears under control and not to permit the awfulness of it for a moment, but rather reprove the insolence expressed in the use of the name in a blasphemous way. It has to do with all this, dear brethren. The Lord would help us to hold ourselves free. It is an excellent name. If we are to speak of it, we are to say. Lord Jesus. It is not the mere use of these two words; it is to be in the power of the Holy Spirit, as the apostle Paul says: "No one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit" (@1 Corinthians 12:3). He is speaking of the assembly and the gifts that are in it, in that chapter, but it is well to be reminded that he brings in the Holy Spirit in regard of the use of the name Lord Jesus. And it is a public matter; what power there is, whether in the school-yard or the office, if I say. Lord Jesus, confessing with the mouth, not only in my ways, but with my mouth, Jesus as Lord. James supports Matthew on this point, and so does Peter. The
{529}
apostles support each other. They were perfectly agreed in their testimony, the Lord prayed for that. Peter says, "For neither is there another name under heaven which is given among men by which we must be saved", (@Acts 4:12). There is power in it, dear brethren. Let us try it in the sense in which I am speaking of it, for we need to be kept from the evil that comes to our ears and our eyes, and in the expression of the name there is power, even though there is reproach too. As identified with the name I am certainly under reproach, but the victory in Christianity is on the line of suffering. I am bold to say that there is not a liberty or privilege that belongs to us publicly that is not recovered on the line of a suffering people, and the suffering attached to the name called upon us. It is the excellent name that is called upon us that is blasphemed.
Well now, John says that there are some who have gone forth in the name to serve the Lord: "... for the name have they gone forth", @3 John 7. He writes to the beloved Gaius as a hospitable brother He says, "Thou doest faithfully in whatever thou mayest have wrought towards the brethren ... in setting forward whom on their journey worthily of God, thou wilt do well; for for the name have they gone forth". How it sets aside all human names and organizations in the service of the Lord. It is *the* name and no other. John is writing about certain who had gone forth for *the* name, and the brother to whom he wrote was hospitable to them. They had gone forth taking nothing of those of the nations. They were wholly on the principle of the new order of things; the new world that has been brought in. They were dependent on God, not on the nations; and here is a brother who was looking after them and setting them on their way. So that John says, in effect, You are doing well, and your name is being mentioned honourably in the assembly
{530}
because of it. It is for the name they have gone forth, taking nothing of the nations; we, therefore, ought to receive such that we may be fellow-workers with the truth. Hospitality is one of the greatest things that can be displayed amongst the people of God. It is love; John calls it that here; he says that certain "have witnessed of thy love before the assembly". It is because of the name. What a dignity is given to hospitality, or any service that can be rendered to those who have gone forth for the name, taking nothing of the nations.
Now I must mention that the Lord had said to His disciples that He would beg the Father and He would give them another Comforter, which means Paraclete. That is a term that signifies that the Spirit is here in a personal sense as Christ was here, to take charge of things for us and for God. It is a marvellous thing that there is a divine Person here to look after things for God and for us. The next mention the Lord makes of Him in that chapter is the Spirit of truth. He will not tolerate any untruth, dishonesty or deceitfulness where He has sway. He will maintain the truth for God. But then the Lord says, "These things I have said to you, abiding with you; but the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, *he* shall teach you all things" (@John 14:25,26). He says, "whom the Father will send in my name". It has a bearing on Philadelphia; it is a question of the name now -- of the name of Christ -- over against other names. The Spirit is here in that relation and He will not tolerate any other names in rivalry to Christ. How wonderful it is that the Spirit has taken such a lowly place! He would bring all things that Christ has said to their remembrance; and what may have become beclouded or distorted in the history of the assembly, will be brought to us by the Holy Spirit, so that we have it, and the name is maintained here in living power.
{531}
Would that the brethren would take this in, because the Spirit being here in Christ's name has a great bearing on our meetings. The Spirit is looking after things, bringing things to our remembrance and teaching us all things so that we are here intelligently. If you find an assembly of saints like that, what is the wisdom of the world as compared with it! It is nothing; it is eclipsed. The Spirit of God, the Comforter, a divine Person, is bringing everything to us, as I might say, teaching us as to all things so that we are here in Christ's name in living power. The Lord said to Philadelphia, "Thou hast a little power, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name", (@Revelation 3:8). It is only on these lines that it can be said of any of us that the name is preserved, not only in literality, but in power, in the power of the Holy Spirit.
May God bless His word.
{532}
SPIRITUAL FEELING
@Revelation 1:4 - 10; @Revelation 5:1 - 5; @Revelation 10:8 - 11
I have in mind to speak about spiritual feeling, and particularly to show how it works out in those who serve in giving a lead to others. I believe the principle is found throughout Scripture, which gives us the whole history of God's testimony. Indeed, in the very first verses of the Bible we find it in relation to God Himself. It is said that the Spirit of God hovered, or brooded, over the face of the waters. The writer of the passages read is John, who in his gospel furnishes us with much as to feeling, particularly as seen in the Lord Himself. Luke similarly presents much on this subject, as also does Paul, showing it in relation to the Lord Jesus and in himself, Timotheus and others. In the Revelation John is not serving as an apostle, but as a bondman. He is the same John, but a spiritual man is always amenable to influence from the Lord, both externally and internally, so that he can take on the service of a bondman, indeed of a prophet, in this book, and keep within the bounds of that kind of service. To illustrate it, he says, "I became in the Spirit". That is, he shows the capability of change, and so he takes on the attitude of a bondman. He describes himself as Christ's bondman John.
Having addressed himself to the assemblies he proceeds to draw the saints into the great thoughts of Deity; not indeed in absoluteness, which is beyond us, but as come into revelation. From the standpoint of this book, he says, "Grace to you and peace from him who is, and who was, and who is to come; and from the seven Spirits which are before his throne". Notice how the seven Spirits are brought before us in the benediction. Seven is a symbolical number referring to the totality and variety of the operations of the Spirit as seen in this book, but invoked in
{533}
blessing. All this is in the mind of the minister, for we should never lose sight of the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. He then says, "... and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth. To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father". Thus we have the Trinity presented in the benediction. We see how deeply affecting this is to the minister, the prophet. That is the feature I would keep in view, as the prophet goes on: "Behold, he comes with the clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they which have pierced him, and all the tribes of the land shall wail because of him. Yea. Amen". That is feeling; the prophet is marked by feeling.
He then speaks in the language of the prophets of the Old Testament: "I am the Alpha and the Omega, saith the Lord God, he who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty". I apprehend he is bringing in Isaiah, who is the most feeling of all the prophets. There is no book in the Old Testament that inspires more feeling than the prophesy of Isaiah. What the writer says here is confirmed in Isaiah. John tells us that the Lord God, that is, Jehovah, says this. So that, at the outset, we see that ministry begins with God, the minister being profoundly affected by God as known. All this is brought to bear on the actual ministry, for God is presented in the book that is before us.
The prophet then speaks about himself, and his relations with the saints, and gives us this thought of the assembly, for the assembly, under the symbol of seven assemblies, is brought into all this. Let us understand, dear brethren, that the book of Revelation is an assembly matter, showing things to us in an intelligent and feeling way, and God is dominating the soul of the minister. Can we doubt that the Lord
{534}
is helping us at the present time, as we enter upon the fringe of the great events portrayed in this book? Can we doubt that the Lord is helping us in regard to Deity, as coming into our range, having us in mind and affecting us so that we can say, with feeling, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father"? I verily believe the Lord is helping us as to this, so that in our service we should have feelings as those who know God, and thus be enabled to give a lead to those whom we serve. One is not leading unless he is what he presents, for the lead is in the person, not exactly in the things he says. The things in themselves have no heart, but the heart, the feelings, the intelligence, the personality is in the speaker, and it is in the personality that you get the spiritual lead. As John proceeds he shows that in his relations with us, he is one of ourselves, and if *he* is so amenable to heaven, so amenable to change for a specific purpose, why not any of us? The need of service is great and the word is, "Whom shall I send?" (@Isaiah 6:8). It is a man of feelings that is sent. Isaiah says, "Send me", for he was expressing himself with feeling.
And so John says, "I John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus, was in the island called Patmos, for the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus". Then he says, "I became in the Spirit". The thought is that he was something now that he had not been immediately before. I do not say that he had never been in the Spirit before, for we know he had, but I am speaking of the power and capability of change. Why should I not be amenable to the influence of heaven in this respect? Why should I not be amenable to the influences, impulses and gracious suggestions and feelings of the Spirit of God within me? "The Spirit joins also its help to our weakness", (@Romans 8:26) and
{535}
moreover, "bears witness with our spirit, that we are children of God" (@Romans 8:16). He operates within me; why then should I not be available to Him and amenable to change according to what is required? Severity may be needed, or gentleness, or tearful entreaty. Why not be always ready for the work of God? John says, "I became in the Spirit". It was needed. The words are repeated in chapter 4. He is called up to heaven and he says, "Immediately I became in the Spirit" @Revelation 4:2. These are points of importance in connection with what I am speaking of, dear brethren, for there should be with us the readiness to change. John presents himself as one of us: "Your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation ...". His identification is made very clear because he announces himself -- "I John". He does not do that in his gospel. Here he gives us a lead, a most essential feature at the present time. I believe the great need in every gathering, small or great, is for a spiritual lead, someone to move forward in things. We wait for one another, of course, but if you have a spiritual lead, and it is from the Lord it is for you to move on and others will follow. It is not an arbitrary matter; it is what a person is.
I go now to chapter 5 to speak of the exigencies of the service. The scene is constantly changing in this book, and this involves constant change in the position of the minister as well as in his attitude and feelings. It is a poor thing if one goes on day after day in his service as if there were no God, no Spirit, no heaven; as if there were no power of being "transformed ... from glory to glory" (@2 Corinthians 3:18). There is the suggestion of progress in that sense; it is from glory to glory, which we might say covers every position and all our movements here. From the divine side it is changing glory, that is, glory is presented in different aspects. If the servant is pursuing the movements of glory he will receive and
{536}
retain feelings that are suitable so that he does not mar his service; he is not out of accord with it, but is in keeping with it, and exemplifies it. Emergencies may arise or we come to an impasse. These things happen in our service and in the meetings and it is important to have right feelings in every circumstance. In looking at any matter we are to look at it with right feelings.
The scripture says that John "saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to break its seals? And no one was able in the heaven, or upon the earth, or underneath the earth, to open the book, or to regard it". Many would be utterly indifferent to this, but John wept much; he was in straits about it. Circumstances arise with us in which there seems to be no way out, but the point is, are we feeling the thing? You may be sure, dear brethren, that right feelings are the beginning of the solution of any matter. As soon as I feel them with God I begin to get relief. Prayer is connected with it, of course. Isaiah tells us how Hezekiah, in his history, turned his face to the wall, deliberately, suggesting that he had come to the end of himself. There appeared to be no outlet, but that was the beginning of the solution; there *was* an outlet. The way out begins to appear when there is acceptance of the circumstances, and right feeling about them. Christ is the solution of every difficulty. There never was a difficulty brought to Him which was not met and solved, but it is the acceptance, with right feelings, of the inability to solve the matter for ourselves that leads to the solution.
John said, "I wept much". I am speaking particularly, dear brethren, of feeling in relation to service. Why should I pass on on the other side, in any gathering like the priest and the Levite of whom the Lord speaks in @Luke 10? Why should I? Where are my feelings and affections in the matter? It is
{537}
not, indeed, that I should interfere, but certainly I should feel, and that leads to the solution of the matter. Right feeling leads to prayer, and prayer brings God in. Christ is the wisdom of God, and the wisdom of God in Christ is the solution for everything. "There is not a wise person among you", (@1 Corinthians 6:5) says the apostle, implying that there was not one to take on the matter in question; whereas we are told that Christ "has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption" (@1 Corinthians 1:30). We may ask reverently, Why not use Him? Prayer brings Him in. I do not say John's weeping brought Him in, but He was brought into John's soul, and that leads to the solution of the matter.
The opening of the seals requires the wisdom of God. The idea of seals ought not to be foreign to us; they should not be strange. There is really nothing sealed to us now. The "mystery" involves, as we are told in @Colossians 2:3, "all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge". Why should we be at a loss about anything? We can read this book with a measure of understanding, and John represents us, in that sense, as we feel things.
And it is time that we should begin to feel the great things of the Apocalypse. Do not let us put them too far away, for they are at our doors; we are in the very presence of them. One of the most serious things at the present time is that the great evil portrayed in this book is edging its way in, and influencing even the people of God. Do we feel that? I am speaking now of feeling, and immediately we feel we inquire as to what can cope with this - with trade unionism, for example, and all its accompanying evils, and many other things that are current in the world at the present time. These things have to be met, dear brethren, if God is to continue with us; and they must be dealt with in His way. His way is plain enough; the way out is the way of suffering.
{538}
Hence we see the Lamb standing as slain, as John says, "And I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing, as slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God which are sent into all the earth" @Revelation 5:6. I am impressed at this moment, dear brethren, with the slain Lamb as the solution, following on the weeping. Prayer will follow on if we have the feelings; and the next thing is suffering. It is suffering in outward weakness, for the "Lamb" throughout this book is a diminutive word. He is also said to be "the lion of the tribe of Judah", which directs us back to Genesis, for this book goes back to the root of things. But John saw "a Lamb standing, as slain". There is no aggressiveness in the thought; it is the attitude of a Sufferer here; but that suffering One who was crucified in weakness lives by the power of God, and so He is presented here as having seven horns, the perfection of power. And He has seven eyes, the perfection of perception. The seven eyes are said to be the "seven Spirits of God which are sent into all the earth" @Revelation 5:6. That is, power of influence in the most immediate way is seen in the seven Spirits of God sent into all the earth. What power can stand against this?
We see, then, that there is no question of arms, or of our taking part in the affairs of this world; it is a matter of suffering. And what accompanies suffering? The power of God! The horns are symbols of power; the seven Spirits of God are active dynamic power in the possession of those who suffer on this line. The way is perfectly plain. There is no compromise with evil of anti christian principles, but rather a repudiation of them, though making everything of the powers that be, as ordained of God, in our prayers and in our subjection. You will understand that I am speaking of what is dealt with in
{539}
this book; that is, the organized power of evil against Christ. There never was a time when organization was more evident than the present time. It is all in view of the summing up of evil in this world when the Spirit of God is taken away. The Spirit of God is here in the assembly and He will continue His activities here until the close of the dispensation -- God dwelling here in Spirit. The organization of evil is about to head up, and so God calls upon us to accept the situation with right feelings and face it on the line of the accompanying sufferings. Thus we shall have power in that the seven Spirits of God are sent out into *all the earth* . It is a universal matter. In the address to Sardis the Lord is presented as having in His hand the seven stars. He does not say they are sent out to all the earth. But this allusion is to His power in relation to political matters that are now coming, indeed, they have already come. Do not let us forget that they have come, in principle, and it is for us to give a lead to our brethren who will follow us. Surely we are not to be behind in this, and the lead, as I said before, is in having right feelings about things.
Finally, in chapter 10, the servant is affected by the eating of the little opened book. This little opened book is obviously in contrast to the sealed book. An open book does not need any power to open it for it *is* open. The sealed book alludes to what was still mysterious and could only be met by the Lamb -- the One who died and rose again. It is a matter of His rights in redemption, for in redemption He has secured universal rights; and He opens one seal after another, seven of them, showing the mind of God and how His ways are carried into effect here below. That is what the sealed book alludes to. The little book is not sealed; it is little, for it relates to known prophetic history. It is not what we call the history of Europe; it is prophetic
{540}
history. There is the sense in which we do not need to go outside the Bible for anything, for the Bible gives us history, but this is *known* history. The Lord is seen as a mighty Angel. "And he set his right foot on the sea, and the left upon the earth, and cried with a loud voice as a lion roars. And when he cried, the seven thunders uttered their own voices" @Revelation 10:2,3. Christ is speaking, for none other has a right to take charge of the earth. The earth is His but it is on the ground of redemption that He acts. He roars as a lion -- not now the Lamb - and seven thunders utter their voices; heaven is announcing, in power, that something is about to take place. The Lord has this little opened book in His hand, as though He would say, I am coming in in relation to what you know. He comes in as a Lion, in power, in relation to what was *not* known, but now *is* known, for in the tenth chapter "he has made known the glad tidings to his own bondmen the prophets" @Revelation 10:7.
Since the revival of over one hundred years ago prophecy has been a leading matter with the saints of God, particularly at the beginning, not as a mere mental study, but in spiritual inquiry. It was to open up the spiritual map, and it did so, and we rightly speak of it thus ever since. We have come into that wealth, and we look at the map. But very often it is looked at in a mere mental way as we think of the history of the great men of the past, whereas it is spiritual matter. The prophetic ministry that came in and which is still extant in writing and carried down by spiritual men refers to what is in this little opened book. It is open; it is known. Let no one say he does not know it, for the Lord would say to him, Why not? It is to be known, it is at your door. The Spirit of God would make it intelligible to you. The Lord says that He is coming in now in relation to this matter. Satan knows this and he too is coming in in relation to it. So it
{541}
becomes a question of the history of the testimony in the western world. God desires us to be intelligent in the history of the testimony. The Lord says, I am coming in in regard to it. How do we stand in regard to understanding of the prophetic books? What are they to us? The angel told John to take that little book out of the hand of Christ and eat it, and he did so.
Well now, the Lord would have us eat and appropriate the book, and as we do so we shall feel the things that are going to happen in this world, and what they mean for the saints of God. What is Europe coming to, beloved brethren? Is that which is coming nothing to you, or to me, in connection with the testimony? We should not be talking lightly about prophetic matters, but appropriating what they mean. John took the little book, and the Lord said that he would feel something when he ate it. But He is always sympathetic with His own. He knows how it is going to affect us. It is already affecting our brethren elsewhere, if not here. What do we feel about it? The Lord says. It will be sweet as honey in your mouth, but as you appropriate it, it will be bitter. The Lord mentions this, for He is sympathetic with us and He warns us beforehand that we are bound to feel things. Immediately we appropriate them, we find that these things are real. Ask the Lord what they mean, for as soon as we appropriate them we realize that these things are not merely subjects of table talk, they are real matters that are occurring now in principle and will shortly take place actually. How am I thinking and feeling about them? The angel told John it would be bitter in his belly and sweet in his mouth. And so Jeremiah says, "Thy words were found, and I did eat them", @Jeremiah 15:16. They caused joy to him, but afterwards there was bitterness. What will happen to the people of God when all these
{542}
things occur? Some of the saints will have to go through them. Thank God for the Lord's word to Philadelphia: "*I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial". That is a matter of feeling. Surely, dear brethren, we ought not to be without feeling as to the bearing of all these things. So we are told that John "took the little book out of the hand of the angel, and ate it up"; and he says, "And it was in my mouth, as honey, sweet; and when I had eaten it my belly was made bitter". The change from verse 9 to verse 10 should be noted. In the latter the sweetness in the mouth comes first and the bitterness follows. That is what we do not like, but the Lord warned him that it would be so.
In closing, I desire to impress upon you that this experience qualifies the servant for further service. If I am dealing with the things of God lightly or for entertainment, or if I am interested only in a mental or superficial way, I shall not be employed by the Lord, for I am not qualified. He will have servants who feel for His people. A servant should feel what affects them for ill or for good, and so it was said to John, "Thou must prophesy again as to peoples and nations and tongues and many kings". What a wide range there is to be ministered to; and may I not suggest, dear brethren, that this is the way to increase our fields of labour? The Lord would encourage us to be feeling about things, and to appropriate the ministry of the word feelingly. The figure used is that it is to be eaten and assimilated in the digestive organs. You will remember that the jaw bones were the portion of the priest. There is the power of mastication and assimilation which enables the servant to qualify for further service. There is to be no thought of laying down our service. It must be carried on, and become enlarged.
May God bless the word.
{543}
WOOD -- TYPICAL OF CHRIST'S MANHOOD
@Exodus 15:23 - 26; @Nehemiah 10:34,35; @Nehemiah 13:30,31
I have in mind to say something about wood - to speak of Christ, of course, but as presented in the figure of wood. Christ is in mind especially in the first scripture. The word 'tree' in the Authorized Version is more properly rendered 'wood' and inasmuch as it had to be *shown*, we must come to the antitype to understand that while, literally, wood is visible, this passage, in truth, refers to Christ as Man.
The typical scriptures are full of truth for our contemplation of Christ as Man, yielding much which the New Testament does not afford in detail, for the Old has the New in mind. But the Old has the same authority as the New. The Lord said of Moses¬ writings: "If ye had believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me". And then He adds, "But if ye do not believe his writings, how shall ye believe my words?" (@John 5:46,47). So that Moses¬ writings are, by the Lord's own words, of the same authority as *His* words. When the rich man, in hades, entreated Abraham to send Lazarus to his brothers as a testimony, Abraham said, "They have Moses and the prophets: let them hear them", (@Luke 16:29). And then, further, he said, "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, not even if one rise from among the dead will they be persuaded"(@Luke 16:31). Nothing can be more confirmatory as to -- the status of the Old Testament scriptures than those words. Abraham had died before Moses wrote the five books, yet the Lord put these words in his mouth. If there is any one here who does not believe the Scriptures, there is an opportunity for him now. Paul said to Agrippa, "King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest", (@Acts 26:27).
{544}
No doubt Agrippa had read and believed as many do. That is, many people are not modernists or sceptics. In a certain way they accept the Scriptures. But when Paul tested Agrippa in this way, he answered, "In a little thou persuadest me to become a Christian"(@Acts 26:28). But almost, as we have often said, is not enough. Faith in the inspired word is in mind. The Scriptures testify of Christ. They testify in a great variety of ways and with a great variety of glories, not the least of which is the type that is now before us in the wood that Jehovah showed Moses.
We are told that when the people came to Marah they could not drink the waters for they were bitter; therefore the name of it was called Marah. The people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink? And Moses "cried to Jehovah; and Jehovah shewed him wood", (@Exodus 15:25). He *showed* it to him! It is, in type, the kind of humanity that was in Christ. The natural eye did not see it. The natural man said, "Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon?" (@Mark 6:3). Marvellous things were being done; great miracles and works of power; such ways and works had not hitherto been seen or heard of, and yet people had no other thought than that He was an ordinary man! So that the Lord, as His ministry proceeded, challenged His disciples, asking them as to what men were saying about Him: "Who do men say that I the Son of man am?"(@Matthew 16:13) It was not simply what men thought, for many think much that they do not say. The question was. What are men *saying*? And the disciples immediately answered, for they were not ignorant of what men were saying. Nor should we be, if we are being faithful to the Lord. We, too, if we speak about Him to men, will bring out what their thoughts are about Christ. And so the disciples answer: "Some, John the baptist; and others, Elias; and others again,
{545}
Jeremias or one of the prophets" (@Matthew 16:14). None said that He was a divine Person! None knew that great and glorious Person who walked at the sea of Galilee, among the fisher people there; that One who dwelt in Capernaum -- lived there as one might do here in Boddam, in a house, to be seen every day, as it were. Hundreds of years before, a prophet anticipated this and said: "The people sitting in darkness has seen a great light, and to those sitting in the country and shadow of death, to them has light sprung up", (@Matthew 4:16). But they could not name it! Such is the dullness and dimness and blindness of the natural eye! They could not name what was before them! And the Lord, in order to bring out where the disciples were in regard to this, asks, "But ye, who do ye say that I am?". Peter answers, *"Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God" (@Matthew 16:15,16). But then, the Lord says, "Flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens"(@Matthew 16:17). The "wood" must be shown, and the Father shows it to Peter, as it were.
Well, let us consider a man like Simeon -- an elderly person. He took the Babe up in his arms before. He began to walk and to speak. He took Him up in his arms and blessed God. He worshipped as he took the Babe in his arms! What made the difference between him and the ordinary person? He was the subject of God's work; an exercised man; he had to do with God, and God had to do with *him*, too, for He had told him that he would not die until he had seen the Lord's Christ. He believed this, and carried it in his heart as he waited. And so he saw the Lord's Christ in that Babe, and he said, "Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go, according to thy word, in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation ... a light for revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel", (@Luke 2:29). He knew who was there, and he said what
{546}
he knew about Him. It had been communicated to him by the Holy Spirit. It had been "shewn" to him! And he worshipped God, and spoke about Jesus, having received Him in his arms in the temple.
Well now, the average man or woman did not know Him, as I have said. Although there was much there to be seen in what Jesus did and said, yet they did not know. But then, Peter and John and James might speak together about the Lord, and what would they say? Would they not say that there was something wonderful about Him -- something different from every other man with whom they had contact? At one time the disciples who were with Him when He crossed the lake in a storm and spoke to the sea and it was calm, said about Him, "What sort of man is this?" (@Matthew 8:27). They were thinking aright. They were judging from what they had seen. He *was* different from the ordinary man; He could command the sea! Great miracles had been performed by Elijah and others, but what sort of man is this, that the wind and the waves obey Him? Such men believed; they were disciples; they began to say something about Jesus. It is a great thing when young people begin to say something that shows that their Christianity is not simply what they have heard from their parents or at the meeting, but that they have begun to see and to speak for themselves. So these men said, "What sort of man is this?". Later, on another occasion, He not only quelled the storm and the waves, but He walked on the waves. They did not say, then, -- "What sort of man is this?" (@Matthew 8:27). They said, "Truly thou art God's son", (@Matthew 14:34). That was a definite apprehension that they had acquired from what they had seen. They were making progress. They were coming to know who that blessed Man was.
Well, all that I have said, dear brethren, will indicate to you what is in mind. The wood was
{547}
shown to Moses; attention was called to it. And so here. It is what came out in Jesus, personally, and what was called attention to. At His baptism the heavens were opened and a voice from heaven said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 3:17). Every person within the range of that voice would hear that. It was a voice calling attention to that Man; and *what* a Man, as I have already said. The disciples said, later, "What sort of man?". But here it is the relation in which He stood to God. I wonder if there is any one here who has not the light of that in his soul. It is said, "He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him", (@John 3:36). A most solemn word! Any one refusing Him would expect to suffer; the wrath of God abides on such, alluding particularly to the Jews at that time.
You will see from what has been said, dear brethren, how the idea of 'showing' comes into the New Testament where we get the antitype of the wood -- God calling attention to Jesus. Jehovah showed Moses the wood, as if it could not be seen otherwise; the antitype explains the position. The natural eye could not take in what was there; it had to be shown, and it *was* shown. God called attention to Jesus from heaven, and the works testified to Him, too, if they could see it. They were "the works which no other one has done", (@John 15:24). The Lord had to say, "Unless ye shall believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins" (@John 8:24). But they ignored it; they could not see it; to them it was "this fellow" -- they said, "Away with him". But to Moses the wood was shown. I wonder if this light has come into your soul; the light from God of the knowledge of Jesus as another order of Man, different from all other men, a unique Person, no other like Him; He stands alone. But now the Spirit of God is calling
{548}
attention to Him so that this light should be in our souls as life; that we should get the right thought of Man. It is a Man who was entirely amenable to the will of Another; He came as the sent One; and this is to be reflected in all believers, if they are to be in correspondence with the wood, for it was *cast* into the waters. It was amenable to the will of another. If I am to be in accord with this wood, I am to be amenable to the will of God. I must give up my own will. If I do not, although I am in fellowship, I am not different from what I was. If my will is working, I retain the old character and I am not fit, practically, for the fellowship or for the structure. Paul said, "As a wise architect, I have laid the foundation" (@1 Corinthians 3:10). The dimensions were right -- length and breadth -- all perfect dimensions! But then, what is the quality? What is the foundation? It is Jesus Christ -- He is the great foundation! And that is what I am speaking of, though in a different type. In the wilderness it was not a stone that was shown, but wood. This wood is equally a type of Christ as the stone. The structure is to be of the Peter character, and Matthew had this in mind. The foundation is Peter's confession. It arose from the conversation to which I have already alluded. It is a fixed foundation, as I understand it. It is a fixed matter. The fixed foundation is the eternal, immovable thought. But the wood aspect is what the believer comes into -- first: what the epistle to the Romans presents, who Christ is; it is "by faith of Jesus Christ" (@Romans 3:22). We begin with that; we apprehend that kind of Man. The whole epistle is to dislodge the other order of man from our minds and to renew them so that we may prove "what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God" (@Romans 12:2). That is in the wilderness. In @Exodus 15, Moses brought the people from the Red Sea into the wilderness of Shur. Naturally, we do not like the wilderness. If we are
{549}
honest we will be inclined to say, 'We are in this position; we cannot go back; the Red Sea is behind us; we must face the matter now'. But it is a bitter experience, and I am to begin to look for this wood -- this kind of Man. He has to be *shown*! The people had believed on Christ, in type, as seen in Moses, but the new order of Man committed to the will of God had not yet come before their souls. We may question why we must drink this bitter water; why is there not good spring water? But the people were there -- Moses had brought them there - and what were they to do -- quarrel with God and with Moses? That is what they did, exactly. When the people could not drink the water, they murmured against Moses, they murmured against the authority of God in Christ! You may say, 'I have never done that'. But are you sure? Have you not murmured against your parents, at times? Have you not murmured against the brethren and spoken against them at times? That is what the people were doing here. Jehovah did not rebuke them, because it was the beginning of things with them. God is exceedingly gracious with young believers. So He showed Moses this wood. It is the humanity of Christ; that kind of Man; different from all of us; amenable to Another; not exercising His will. When He was about to be cast into the depths, He could say, "Not as I will, but as thou wilt" (@Matthew 26:39). He could not but shrink from the cross. He could say, "My Father, if this cannot pass from me unless I drink it, thy will be done"(@Matthew 26:42).
You may say that you do not want to do your own will, but we must go further than that. We must say, Not my will, but *Thy* will. That brings me to the will of Another. Not doing my own will is a negative matter; I may do *nothing*! . But the will of God means that I move on. The will of God requires movement, and that may mean sorrow and
{550}
distress; it may mean bereavement and all kinds of pressure, but it is the will of *God* . We are to "prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God" (@Romans 12:2). That is the point, dear brethren, and we would all like to have part in that kind of humanity. Many *do* come into it. It is what shone in Jesus as Man here below before He died and is now taken into heavenly glory. And we have liberty in this eternal condition that He has taken on; the other has been laid down. There is no difference, morally, for in the new condition He is subject to the will of God as in the old. He has laid down the flesh and blood condition, never to take it again. He took life again -- He took humanity again, but in another condition, a spiritual condition, a kind of humanity in which He went through closed doors. Material things cannot control that condition.
Well, it says that Jehovah showed Moses wood, and Moses cast it into the waters. It was Jesus, entirely amenable to the will of God. And the waters were made sweet! How were they made sweet? It is the humanity of Jesus in the acceptance of the will of God "even unto death". And it is ours to take on that kind of thing -- to be submissive to the will of God. Jesus, in drinking the waters of death justified God: "Thou art holy". And we have to drink them before partaking of that kind of humanity. You will notice that in verse 23 Marah is mentioned three times. The waters of Marah were bitter. Jesus *tasted* death! He tasted it in all that it meant, as we shall never taste it; yet we are to drink the waters if we are to have part in this. So that you see the casting in, and you accept that - that is the will of God. Jesus was entirely amenable to that will, and my lesson at this time, lies in that, for everything changes when that is accepted. The change is in *me*; that I can face death. I can face bereavement or sorrow: I can face it and bow to it.
{551}
But it is also a question of having part in His death, having part in His suffering, tasting death. It changes me for I begin to become like Him.
And then Jehovah says, in principle, Now that you have come to this point, I will talk about statutes. This is now the order of the day; not our wills, but His will. And so, He institutes laws and ordinances and statutes, and He says that the acceptance of these will mean that none of the diseases of Egypt shall come upon us. But we are to be entirely amenable; His will is to control us, and if so, we will be immune from the diseases of Egypt. These are not physical ills; it is a question of what is spiritual.
We have lingered considerably on what was shown to Moses, and what he did, and the effect of it, but you can see, beloved brethren, how Christianity, seen here in type, has now come into being. And how real it is! How practical it is! After this they came to another kind of water, the seventy palm trees and the twelve wells of water. This is Christianity in truth. And the point is that the saints come into the value of Christ's humanity as He was here, and become available for the tabernacle. Hence we see the great place given, from chapter 25 to the end of the book, for the use of acacia, or shittim, wood. God is seeking to enlarge us so that we will be prepared to build a tabernacle for Him. Heaven will do it with a completely subdued people; a people that can be brought together as one; a people who say, 'Not my will but Thine'. We can have no part with God unless by the acceptance of His will: "the good and acceptable and perfect will of God" (@Romans 12:2). There will then be a representation of God's own assembly in the locality in which we are placed, so that it can be said, in principle at least, "So also is the Christ". What a blessed matter when it is no longer our wills but the will of God; and
{552}
the will of the brethren, too, for we are to submit ourselves to one another.
Now I want to say a word about the wood offering. It is a unique kind of expression which is only found in Nehemiah; that is, in remnant times. Romans teaches us something about the wood offering. It is not wood for construction, because, at that time, the temple had been restored and the service of God resumed. It is kindling -- firewood. It is a very great necessity, for the fire of the burnt-offering had to be kept burning all night, and it is very remarkable that Nehemiah makes such a point of it. He tells us, in chapter 10, that the brethren had committed themselves to supply the provisions for the service of God: "We made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God" (@Nehemiah 10:32). The great point with any such agreement is that it is to be in accord with the mind of God, and not merely a human thought. And this was a mutual arrangement which came entirely within the scope of the mind of God. Such arrangements provide for the outflow of love. And amongst the things to be provided was the wood-offering; that is, that there should be wood in the house of God. It was wood for the fire -- kindling wood. I recognise that in the types, the fire denotes judgment. But this is not the fire that is outside the camp. That is not in mind here; it is related to what goes up to God. There can be no fire without this wood. We may have hymns and words in our meetings without real stimulation, nothing kindled, as it were. This wood brings in some touch that would kindle the feelings, some touch that causes the fragrance to ascend to God. I am not overlooking the divine thought of fire; it involves suffering. I believe we get it first in @Genesis 22, in a very pathetic way. Isaac called his father's attention to the wood. The wood was there,
{553}
but where was the lamb for the burnt-offering? How affecting! Isaac was about to be offered up. Abraham had no other thought in his mind; it was complete self- sacrifice. The ram, caught in the thicket, became the offering. The wood was used. And now Nehemiah calls attention to it, saying that they had made an agreement among themselves to provide the wood. And what is it, but that when we come together there is some power to bring out the affections of the saints so that there is fragrance for God? That is in mind -- what ascends to God in holy fragrance. We cannot do without the wood-offering. Nehemiah says, "We made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves ...". Every one is to charge himself to have the wood. It tells what kind of man I am. Let us not be without it. It is mentioned twice in Nehemiah; almost the last words in the book refer to this wood-offering. And it is referred to earlier, when Nehemiah had severely reproved the brethren because many had married strange wives. Mixed marriages destroy the wood-offering. They are contrary to the kind of humanity that is suitable for the service of God. Nehemiah spoke plainly about it. It means in type, that there will be no wood-offering if young people are seeking wives or husbands who are unconverted or who are not walking in the will of God. We are to consider for the fire on the altar. What a fire! What a holy scene of righteousness! This wood-offering for the fire is the kind of manhood seen in Jesus; the foundation and support for the offerings. No other man, no other kind of manhood, could be in the offerings. But in Nehemiah there is this offering of firewood; it is what stimulates and kindles, so that there is fragrance for the nostrils of God in our service.
I commend these thoughts to you.
{554}
INCREASE AND THE PROMOTION OF WHAT IS GOOD
@Genesis 5:1,2
My thought is not to follow on what our brother has been speaking of, nor do I think much of consecutive or suggestive thoughts, in that sense, in a meeting like this; but rather that we should have something direct.
What has come to me now is based on these verses about Adam's generations. It is a thought that is full of suggestion. The idea begins in the first chapter of the Bible and runs right through. But what is in my mind, mainly, is to call attention to the peculiar situation that arose immediately in the facts recorded in the Bible, as Moses was directed to write. Peculiar circumstances arose almost immediately as to man, but why is it that these circumstances *did* arise? What was the divine mind in them? Why should it be, for instance, that man's creation should be so recent; that is, so comparatively recent? And why should there be male and female? All these thoughts are in my mind and what I have to say about them will be brief, but presented in the form of suggestion as to these meetings. They are peculiar meetings and, I believe, very opportune. Our brethren have been well advised, under God, to invite their brethren from elsewhere to meet together in this way, and what has been before us has been opportune in meeting existing need, as I fully believe.
Well then, as I have said, why should this situation at the beginning of the Bible be -- why should there be creatures, male and female, called the lower creation, and why should they be made before Adam, and why should they be made subject to Adam? And then, why should there be creatures made much earlier than man, not marked by male
{555}
and female? For the angels are not marked by male and female. And so with these things in mind I have read these two verses which call attention to Adam's *generations* . The passage goes on to say, "In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him. Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created". We are told about this incident -- a great incident -- in the first chapter of Genesis: "And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the heavens, and over the cattle, and over the whole earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. And God created Man in his image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them" (@Genesis 1:26). Now you will note that this is repeated, in part, in the passage we have read, only our passage distinctly gives us the creation of man and woman, whereas chapter refers to the creation of Man, mentioning the woman only by inference: "Let them have dominion", and again, "male and female created he them". Man was to rule as male and female over the lower creation.
And now I am enquiring in my mind for our good, I trust, why all this was, and why it was that angels were not created male and female. No such thing is mentioned. God waited and created man in His own image, which it does not say of the angels. *Man* was created in God's image, after His likeness, and He created them male and female. So that we have to inquire as to the bearing of all this as we are here in this city -- in this hall. We have been here, happily together, male and female; and it seems to be a happy arrangement. It creates peculiar exercises and leads to peculiar thoughts and decisions. No doubt some good has come out of it, but the point would be, immediately, to make it more so; to
{556}
make the results more in keeping with the divine design, that good should be in it. Evil began immediately -- in @Genesis 3 -- but then, redemption has come in in the meantime, and the question now is if we can promote God's primary thought as to man in creating him male and female, and how this can be brought about. And that was why I have ventured to speak; just to put this in our minds, dear brethren, that we may make the most of the situation -- making a way for good in it -- that nothing harmful may grow out of these meetings, but rather good. God had in mind to create man in His image, and He made them male and female, having in mind also that there should be the development and expansion of good.
And so, one may inquire what is the hope of increase in these circumstances. The great need is for good -- the promotion of *good* . It is said that God blessed them, and if He blessed them He did so to promote good in them. And so we have young people here -- young brothers and sisters -- and the question now is, Why are they here? What is the motive that has governed us in coming to these meetings? Is there any good coming out of the occasion from each of us? We shall soon be separating, but in the meantime we shall have the first day of the week and we are hopeful that there will be something for God. If there is not something for God coming out of these meetings, dear brethren, we cannot look for much otherwise; we cannot hope for any increase; we cannot hope to reach God's design in the creation of man as male and female. But there is good hope that there will be good results from these meetings -- results for God -- better conditions; better understanding of the divine service, and that brothers and sisters will have a greater part in it. We have part in it together, as has often been said, and there is a readiness to be
{557}
subject to the principles that govern us as together, so that the sisters are to learn in silence. I am not going to say much to the sisters; my desire is simply to bring out this -- one question as to why certain conditions existed at the beginning of the Bible, and whether we understand why it was left to man to be responsible to promote the good. And then we are to look for the promotion of good amongst us -- increase in numbers of brothers and sisters in the fellowship, and increase in meetings, too, with better conditions and better quality in the meetings. It was this thought that led me, and I believe rightly, to bring up this point of why things were ordered so at the beginning, and whether we are promoting what was in the divine mind and design in ordering them thus.
And so, we might ask, What is going to come out of these meetings in Chicago? I regard them of very great importance. We have spoken of the spiritual history of Chicago in the past, and of the present history and circumstances, and now the burning question is, How are conditions to be met and are they going to be improved, so that there will be better conditions, increased betterment? That is what is in mind. And so I ventured to put these things on the brethren in this brief way, but, I trust, in a way that will affect our hearts, so that there will be the promotion of good.
{558}
REMEMBERING OUR LEADERS
@1 Corinthians 11:1; @Hebrews 13:7,8,17
This is the time for learning. There is much to be learned, and a great need for learning. There is also some ability to teach. It is also important that there should be examples from whom we may learn. The apostle Paul was an example as a leader. He enjoins us that we are to be followers of him, as he also was of Christ. And then, in @Hebrews 13, we have the suggestion that leaders are to be remembered; that is to say, those who were here before us are to be remembered: "Remember your leaders". No doubt it has reference to those who have gone to be with the Lord, or if they are still living, their past service is in mind. Then, in verse 17 it says, "Obey your leaders, and be submissive; for *they* watch over your souls as those that shall give account; that they may do this with joy, and not groaning, for this would be unprofitable for you". The word, therefore, at this time is for the younger ones. Often, those who minister the word say that it is a word for the young, but in these scriptures the younger ones are particularly in mind, that they may learn. We can thank God for the many young men in this country who have ability to minister the truth. In this *city* I may say, there are a good many who are capable of serving in this way. It is of God that their spirits are to be in the service as well as their words and that the Holy Spirit may be availed of so that their ministry will influence others. We are to be influenced by what is said and the manner of those who say it.
So that the first passage I have read has in mind that the saints are to be imitators of Paul. Of course Paul has gone; centuries have elapsed since then, but his example is referred to here. The Spirit of
{559}
God carries it down, letting us know what Paul was so that we may learn by example and by objective thought. And so it says, "Be my imitators, even as I also am of Christ". So that our learning is to begin with divine Persons, not simply with any one of us, not even the greatest of us, such as Paul. The learning must begin from Christ: "as I also am of Christ". But then we have this unique example in Paul, for the example is carried down through Paul from the Lord Jesus Himself. Paul learned from Christ.
Well now, as I said, it is the learning time, and that applies to every one of us here today. Presently the time will come when very bad things will be set out as doctrine, but we are to be prepared to overcome. The point is to be overcomers. Whatever may come, let us be overcomers! So that we are to learn from Paul, but through him we learn from Christ. That is what is in mind in this scripture.
Then, in @Hebrews 13, we have the idea of leadership in those who have been before us. We might refer to the apostles, of course, for they have been. Paul has been, but the point is to *remember* our leaders. Paul was a great leader, and there have been many leaders since then. One might speak of the great servant of whom we often speak -- Mr. Darby. We have learned much from him; not that any of us have seen him, but we have learned through having heard of him, and many accurate things have been said of him and of his ministry. So that the fact of an example is there for us. We may say that it is still here today as is also the example of Paul, for he enjoins that we should learn from his example. But the first thing in this passage is that we are to remember our leaders who have spoken to us the word of God. It says, "spoken to you". It is not simply that it was spoken, but spoken to *you* . So that each of us is to be a learner. And not only
{560}
so, but we are to consider "the issue of their conversation". It is the issue of it, what issues out of it, what culminates from it. The leaders that have been before us have set us examples as to this; it is the kind of men they were; not only what they said, but what kind of men they *were* . I would like to have seen Mr. Darby, but I have learned much of his manner and ways and things that he said. One can thus speak of him in that way as one of the leaders who have spoken to us the word of God.
Further, it says, "Imitate their faith". Now that is something specially interesting -- to imitate faith. We may learn how to exercise faith as we see it in others. We may ask, What is faith? Or, What is *your* faith? but we are to learn what faith is and to imitate it as we see it in exercise. So that we are to "imitate their faith". And then, further, it says, "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come". We are directed to ancient things, in that sense, but things that have come within our range. And that is what is in mind, especially for the younger ones, that they may learn what to say, learn what deportment they are to have, what kind of spirit they are to display and learn how to set out the truth. They are to learn from others. We should not at all be ashamed to learn from our elder brethren. If they can set out the truth in a distinctive way, let us learn from them how to do it. We are to be teachers of one another and learners from one another. But then, we have not only the actual teaching, but the *spirit* of the teacher. And so the thought culminates in our Lord Jesus Christ Himself: "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come".
I have felt free to bring these thoughts before the dear brethren at this time so that we may be examples, that the young men may be learning how to do things, how to say things, and how to be things;
{561}
and this applies to the young women, too. The younger are to learn from the elder. There are a good many amongst us who are quite advanced in years, and the young ones do well to see what such do, and do as they do, because it is a learning time and the Spirit of God is here and will bring things to the attention of the younger.
And now, just a word as to the last scripture: "Obey your leaders". In verse 7 it is, "Remember your leaders", but here it is to *obey* your leaders. That is to say, on the one hand, we are to think before we do anything we have not done before; think of the leaders that have been before us and learn from them how to do things; and on the other hand we are to obey our leaders who are presently with us and be submissive to them. It is not that persons would rule over the faith of the brethren -- surely not, far otherwise; but the word is to be submissive -- to obey and be submissive, "for *they* watch over your souls as those that shall give account; that they may do this with joy, and not groaning, for this would be unprofitable for you". So that the young people cannot afford to do unprofitable things, nor learn unprofitable things. We want to get things right, and to get the elders to know what they do. And, of course, the elders learn from those who go before; it may be those who have gone *long* before; it is a question of how they have done things.
Some of us were speaking on Lord's day about the word, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them" (@Matthew 18:20). That is, it is not simply being gathered, but being gathered *together* . It is a time for learning as *together*, not simply that we all come into the meeting room at a given time, but we are to be together in the spirit of what that means. It enters into the way we open the door and come into the room and hang up our
{562}
hats and sit down; it is the spirit in which we do things, and the example we pass on to others.
Well, that is pretty much what I have to say, dear brethren; that we all may be learners, and especially the younger from the elder, in spirit and in manner, so that things are carried on and passed down to others. The things to be learned are amongst us. They have been set out in the Lord Jesus Himself: "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come". There is no change in Him.
{563}
PREACHERS AND PREACHING
Paul says, "We preach not ourselves but Christ Jesus the Lord" (@2 Corinthians 4:5). He was converted and saved from his own importance. Christ Jesus is the One to preach. Then Paul said, "and ourselves your servants for Jesus¬ sake". So with Peter, when Cornelius would have worshipped him; in @Acts 10:26 Peter did not simply tell Cornelius to get up, but he *took* him up, saying, "Stand up; I myself also am a man". That is the preacher; he is saved from himself.
Peter is thinking of Cornelius, that he might be saved, and entering into his house he finds there a fine congregation, not a vast one, but one of quality. Cornelius says. We are "all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God" (@Acts 10:33). They were not there out of curiosity, but to hear what Peter had to say. And what did he have to say? He spoke about Jesus, that God had anointed Him -- not that God had anointed Peter, or made him an apostle, but that God had anointed Jesus, "who went about doing good and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him"(@Acts 10:38). That is the kind of preaching. And so Peter preached. I am sure his words were with power; the Holy Spirit records the words and He gives the sense conveyed in the words, and that has to be understood. As Peter preached "the Holy Spirit fell on all those who were hearing the word" (@Acts 10:44) -- those who heard the word, not who heard Peter simply; the true preacher preaches the word, for that is the thing. Those who heard the word are taken possession of by the Holy Spirit, that is the idea of salvation. You cannot be saved without the Holy Spirit. You cannot be saved without the death of Christ, surely; but you cannot be saved without the Holy Spirit, who is the great power for salvation in this present time. We need that power, the Holy Spirit here, sent down by Christ to effect salvation completely in those who believe.
{564}
EXTRACT
"That disciple whom Jesus loved saith ... It is the Lord" (@John 21:7). How much followed upon this is left for the reader's reflection. The Lord did not announce Himself -- He was recognised in His features by those who had already known Him. How gracious and beneficent was His reception of His needy followers!
If the Lord causes us to hear His voice or see His hand in our circumstances it is to remind us of Himself -- that we may be drawn to His side, so as to see Him in the sanctuary.
{565}
THE TRIBES
We see throughout the Old Testament, and in the New, that the tribes are always in view *for faith* . Elijah, you remember, built an altar of twelve stones, recognising the twelve tribes. In the Psalms the tribes always come in for affectionate recognition. Jerusalem is a city compacted together; it was divinely regulated, "whither the tribes go up" (@Psalm 122:4). One loves to think of the saints in assembly order as before God; the psalmist says that the tribes go up for "a testimony to Israel", @Psalm 122:4. So the apostle Paul speaks of them; he says before Agrippa, "our whole twelve tribes" (@Acts 26:7). What a witness! No one can explain how that is, only we see that it is on the principle of faith. James writes, "To the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad" @James 1:1, for him they were all there. I only speak of it in regard to the assembly, my desire being that we might always have before us the entire assembly, as being under the eye of the Lord. If anyone writes today, he writes as having all the saints on earth in view. Scripture not only speaks of speakers, but also of writers; every scribe is like unto an householder, we read. James writes to the twelve tribes, and so if you write it is not only for the few you know; it is for all. Anything that the Lord gives, He gives for the whole assembly, because His thoughts of the assembly are never narrower than to include every member of it. "The Lord knoweth them that are his" (@2 Timothy 2:19); they are not lost in this sense.
{566}
ACCOUNT OF THE DEPARTURE TO BE WITH CHRIST AND THE BURIAL SERVICE OF MR. JAMES TAYLOR
Our beloved brother fell asleep through Jesus at about 6.10 p.m. on Lord's day, March 29, 1953, at his home in Brooklyn, New York. He was 83 years old. He had been happily free among the brethren during the preceding week, especially so at the city reading on Thursday evening and the care meeting on Saturday evening. During Saturday night, however, he complained of pain and on Lord's day morning he was noticeably unwell. The doctor was called and he indicated that Mr. Taylor's condition was serious. During the day his condition worsened and breathing became difficult. In the afternoon he seemed more comfortable and lapsed into sleep at times. It was while asleep that the Lord gently took him to Himself. Mrs. Taylor and members of the immediate family who were available were present at the time.
The burial service was held in the Nostrand Avenue meeting room at 1 p.m. on Wednesday, April 1st. By noon all seats were filled. There were probably 750 present, many standing round the perimeter of the room, while others stood in the vestibule or were seated in the basement. Many were present from distant meetings.
The meeting commenced with the singing of `238:1: "When peace like a river attendeth my way", given out by Mr. E. A. Lyons; Mr. V. C. Lock, of Summit, followed in prayer; Mr. S. McCallum, of Detroit, then spoke, followed by Mr. E. E. Hoyte, a local brother. (Text of what these two brothers said follows this report.) Mr. A. N. Walker then gave out Mr. Taylor's own hymn -- `350:1 -- and the
{567}
meeting was closed with prayer by Dr. R. W. Stollery.
About 75 cars proceeded to the cemetery. The number of brethren assembled at the graveside was quite large. (Mr. Taylor's grave is in the Bethany section of Evergreen Cemetery in the plot purchased by him in 1901.) A number of brothers were privileged to participate in carrying the body of our beloved brother to its resting place. The service at the grave commenced with the singing of verses 1 - 3 and 8 - 10 of `160:1, given out by Mr. R. H. Smith, of Cranford. Mr. C. A. Markham, of Cranford, then prayed; Mr. C. H. Howell, of Boston, gave out hymn 113; Mr. A. Robertson gave out hymn 105 next, and then Mr. Wragge, of Victoria, gave out hymn 311. Mr. E. A. Lyons then spoke from @Genesis 18:17 - 19; @Genesis 49:33 and @Genesis 50:1,10. Verses 4 and 5 of hymn 294 were then sung, being given out by Mr. M. Coulter and Mr. L. Wilkinson; then Mr. A. Robertson read @John 1:38; Mr. James Taylor, Jr., committed the precious remains to the Lord's keeping, in prayer, and the occasion was concluded by singing verses 4 to 6 of hymn 179, given out by Mr. P. Case, of Flemington. The service at the grave was more extensive than is usual, but the brethren seemed loth to leave, being deeply affected by all that had taken place.
WORD BY MR. STANLEY MCCALLUM
@2 Chronicles 35:24 - 26; @John 14:15 - 17; @John 16:19 - 22
You will see, dear brethren, that thoughts of sorrow and joy enter into these passages from which we have read. At this time we are not without sorrow and grief, for while we do not sorrow as those who have no hope, yet there *is* sorrow and grief in our hearts as, in holy affection, we enter upon this service in connection with the burial of one so greatly
{568}
beloved. He is beloved in heaven, but beloved here on earth. What a loss the assembly has suffered in the departure from our midst of this great vessel! He was a man honoured, indeed, of God, and signally raised up in relation to the last features of revival in this dispensation.
I have read about Josiah that we may see the feelings that entered into the occasion of his death. It says that "all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah; and all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day". Josiah was a remarkable man who was raised up of God, whose service and ministry related to the last revival in the Chronicles, which was peculiarly marked by the distinctive place into which the ark was brought, according to the writing of David and Solomon. We can see something analogous to this in the days in which we have lived, dear brethren, in regard to the service and ministry of this great vessel in affection for whom we are gathered here at this time. Think of the extent of the feelings expressed in the words, "all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah". It was the time for feeling such a loss; and it is now a time to feel the greatness of *our* loss! What a loss it is, as we think of all that has entered into the last fifty years of such unique and distinctive ministry! Think of all that we have had brought to us in regard to the truth through the service of our beloved brother! And then it says, "Jeremiah lamented for Josiah". What a feeling man Jeremiah was! Jeremiah, too, was a minister -- what a minister he was! And what a time it is now for those who serve to take account, feelingly, of the loss that has been sustained through the departure of our dear brother. Jeremiah was a priestly man. Priestly feelings would help us to rise above the pressure of a sorrow like this, but the heart of a priest enters,
{569}
feelingly, into the inestimable loss that is ours at the present time. We can visualise, in some measure, the grief throughout the assembly at the loss of such a vessel who served us so well and so faithfully. He has been a model to the flock. He not only ministered in power and with authority according to the commission he had, but he set out as a living exponent of the truth all that he had brought forward in the truth. So that we are entering into this matter feelingly now, as it says, "All the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations". As we think of the service of song and of those that are linked with it, we think of the distinctive part our brother's ministry has had in relation to it. His ministry has given character to much that is embodied in the service of song as we have it at the present time; so that, as singing men and singing women, we take up this service appreciatively, entering into this great matter feelingly at the present moment. It says that they "spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day". So that, from this viewpoint, dear brethren, we are not without sorrow; we are not without grief, as we think of the loss that has been suffered by the whole assembly.
I have read from @John 14 to remind us of another set of circumstances. The Lord Jesus was about to go away and He was reminding His disciples that it was expedient for them that He should go away. What feelings were in their hearts! They had accompanied and surrounded Him in His pathway here. But He brought home to their view another Comforter, the Paraclete, as He said, "I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him". What comfort this brings into our hearts! As we sorrow in relation to the great loss the assembly has suffered we are reminded
{570}
that there is One with us who abides with us for ever. The Holy Spirit, that wonderful Comforter from on high, will never leave us! The last words that one heard our beloved brother express publicly were spoken in a meeting in Plainfield last November. One remark which he made in the reading that afternoon was. 'The greatest thing that I know of at the present time on earth is the presence of the Holy Spirit in the assembly'. What a fact that is, dear brethren! He is with us now; and He is in us; He is to be with us for ever! What a Friend! Our beloved brother used to say, 'Our greatest Friend on earth'. We used to sing, 'What a Friend we have in Jesus'. How true those words are as we think of Jesus on high! But then, what a Friend we have in the Holy Spirit, also! So that, as we think of the vicissitudes ahead -- of what may be before us -- as the Lord Jesus contemplated what His disciples would face, we would be reminded of the presence of the Holy Spirit who will journey with us through all the vicissitudes of the wilderness, whatever they may involve. He is never to leave us; going on with us in all the way; and what holy communion we can enjoy with Him! What a word that is for our hearts, dear brethren, as we think of His desires for the saints and for the assembly, that they be not as sheep without a shepherd. What a word to our hearts! A divine Person is here in sovereignty to take charge of our affairs, the Paraclete. What a comfort and stay it is to our hearts that this wondrous Person, this divine Person, the Holy Spirit, is to be with us for ever! Servants come, dear brethren, and servants go, but this blessed Person remains with us for ever! What a wonderful comfort it is to know this! How we should be helped more and more in our regard for Him! Our brother's ministry signally pointed to the need for honouring the Spirit. We might say it was the climax to all his ministry -- this present, blessed
{571}
touch as to the Spirit objectively, a Person to be known and worshipped, to be spoken to and communed with. What a legacy has been left in this ministry for the assembly! May we be helped, dear brethren, to follow it through and have our hearts stayed by it.
I read the last portion to remind us of the truth of the resurrection world. While we mourn over the loss of our brother and are comforted by the sustaining service and presence of the Holy Spirit, our hearts are also filled with joy as we anticipate what the full result of the wonderful power of resurrection will be. The Lord Jesus said to His disciples, "And ye now therefore have grief; but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice". What a word that is, dear brethren! I want to apply it to what is immediately before us now. Our beloved brother looked expectantly for the rapture. And we are expecting it to take place at any moment -- when we shall see the Lord face to face. There may be grief connected with the present little while and all that enters into the assembly's sojourn through the wilderness, but what a word from the Lord when He says, "Ye will be grieved" (I am applying the principle to ourselves) "but your grief shall be turned to joy". He spoke of the figure of a man being born into the world. I know that this alludes to the resurrection of Christ, but think of what the resurrection day will bring forth in its fulness! Think of the full effect of resurrection power, not only as it has applied to Christ, but as it will come into view in regard to the saints! Our brother will be amongst those who will be raised first, as it says, "The dead in Christ shall rise first; then *we*, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord" (@1 Thessalonians 4:16,17). We shall see Him, dear brethren, the One whom our brother loved and whom we love;
{572}
we shall see Him face to face and we shall be like Him!
May the Lord encourage our hearts as we sorrow. Grief fills our hearts on the one hand, because of this great loss, but on the other hand we have the sense that the Holy Spirit is continuing with us. And also, we have before us, in prospect, the full application of resurrection power when we shall find our part together with those who have gone before, in actually seeing the Lord face to face.
WORD BY MR. E. E. HOYTE
@Mark 6:31; @Revelation 14:13
I wish to make just a few brief remarks, dear brethren, on these verses by way of comfort, first, for our beloved sister and the family, and then for ourselves, for we all need comfort. I want to remark on the thought of rest. How sweet is rest after toil! It says, in @Genesis 2:2, that God "rested on the seventh day from all his work", working for six days and on the seventh day finding rest and refreshment. It says, in @Exodus 31:17, that He "rested and, was refreshed". So, dear brethren, if the home-going of our brother to his Lord and Master is a loss to us, we are to regard it as a *calculated* loss. The Lord Jesus, his Master, surely knows the end from the beginning. We might say that it is a loss to Him, too, for he was His servant; but nevertheless I think it is a calculated loss. The Lord could have sustained him here for 120 years if it were His will; He could have done that. We might say. What a loss it is to the assembly! It is, but the Lord has calculated the loss and has considered for His servant.
I have read from Mark's gospel because it is the servant's gospel. I see that the Lord Jesus is very considerate of His servants. They do arduous work, and who can dispute the fact that our beloved
{573}
brother has done some of the most arduous work -- not only in this city, but universally. His has been very arduous, rigorous work, but he has finished it, dear brethren. My point is that the Lord Jesus was considering for His servants in this chapter. It says, "Those coming and those going were many, and they had not leisure even to eat". Think of that! The work was demanding. I remember our beloved brother often saying, 'There is much to be done'. Those were his very words. How much *he* has done! The Lord Jesus takes account of it. He said to His disciples, "Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place and rest a little". So that, dear brethren, the Lord has calculated, and in consideration for His servant, has appointed him rest. And also, we have to regard the fact that his Master had rights over him, and He has exercised those rights. Think of the Lord Jesus exercising His rights over His servant on Lord's day! It was on Lord's day, the first day of the week, that He took him to be with Himself. Our brother has thrilled us over and over with those two thoughts -- the Lord's day, and the first day of the week. He was wont to speak of that day. Think of what it meant to him, spiritually! And the Lord Jesus has exercised His rights over His servant on *that* day! It was on the Lord's day that He took him to be with Himself, to rest. "Come ye ... apart ... and rest a little". It is only for a little while, dear brethren; the resurrection time is coming; the Lord is soon to greet us in the air! And our dear brother is resting till then. How wonderful to think of his service finished and his Master having taken him to Himself!
We can remember that on Saturday night last, at the care meeting, our dear brother, as he was wont to do, attended to every matter. He was using all the strength at his disposal. He moved from his seat to speak to one about a matter that had to be
{574}
attended to. Later, apparently not satisfied that it had been fully attended to, but being assured that it was, our beloved brother sat back in his seat with an air of satisfaction. How wonderful, dear brethren, to think of all this -- every matter finished, and taken account of by our dear brother in his characteristic way! In relation to another matter he had asked if we could wait on an erring brother for another month. How characteristic of the grace that has been exemplified in our brother all these years! Not only was he an arduous worker, but one in whom there was grace -- the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ -- his feelings entered into matters; he was a fatherly person. We all have experienced it, and we shall miss it, dear brethren. But let us give honour to the Lord Jesus; let us recognize His rights over our brother. He has taken him now to be with Himself. How wonderful for him to have the Lord's own approval, "Well done!" That is a word that he has often used himself, as he commented on one servant and another. And may we not apply these words to *him* this afternoon? He has served, and served well. But think of the Lord's own words as *He* says to His servant, "Well done!" The Lord can rightly appraise all that His beloved servant has done for Him.
Now just a word on the last scripture. The Lord is in heaven; the blessed Spirit is here; there is a voice from heaven which says, "Blessed the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth". I do not go into the immediate circumstances to which this scripture refers, but it was a time of dying. It says, "Blessed the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth". The voice is from heaven, but the blessed Spirit, down here in the place of testimony, answers, "Yea ... that they may rest from their labours; for their works follow with them". Think of that! I just close with it.
{575}
The Lord in His consideration for His servant said, "Come ... apart ... and rest a little". We are glad to know that our brother is taking his rest. The blessed Spirit is with us, dear brethren, and He will help us and comfort us. And then we have this word from the Spirit to comfort us in relation to our brother: "Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, for their works follow with them".
