{1}
*Pages 1 to 170. "Readings on the Epistle to the Romans", New York, 1917 - 18 (Volume 194)*.
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (1)
@Romans 1:1 - 32
B.T.F. Would you say that Romans was written with the intent of establishing believers in the principles of the gospel?
J.T. I suppose so. Those to whom Paul wrote are addressed as saints, "called saints", so that the truth of the gospel is in that way communicated to believers and left with them.
A.R.S. It is important to see that the gospel is about Christ. He is the Subject of it.
J.T. It is a letter on the great subject of the gospel, and it is marked by apostolic authority, "Paul" being the first word in the letter. He is "a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God".
C.A.M. Would you say that the epistle met the exercises existing at Rome?
J.T. I would say that.
C.A.M. Say a few words as to how it met those exercises.
J.T. The assembly there was composed largely of immigrants from the East, and being in Rome they needed to be adjusted in regard to God, to each other, and to the governing powers that then existed, indeed, to the whole scheme of God's purpose as to the earth. But although Paul knew many of them personally, he did not know them as an assembly by means of a visit; his letter, however, would take the place of a visit, carrying with it all the authority of his mission from Christ, and at the same time setting out in the most orderly way, first of all the conditions
{2}
that existed in the gentile world, and those existing in what you might call the cultivated world, Greek and Jew, and showing how God met all in Christ through redemption. Consequent on God's intervention in Christ and through accomplished righteousness in His death, the believer is adjusted in regard to all these things. There is also adjustment in regard to sin in the world, sin in the believer and the law. That is how the body of the epistle stands. We have also light as to God's faithfulness in regard to His promises to the Jews, and the believer's position on earth, that believers are one body in Christ; and then also, as I remarked, the believer's relations with the powers that existed, the governing powers.
C.B. I suppose all these adjustments need to take place with us, as they did with the saints in earlier days.
J.T. In these parts, to which we have immigrated, our circumstances are very much, speaking generally, like those of the saints in Rome; we have, at any rate, to come back to Romans constantly for adjustment.
C.A.M. The thought of adjustment is perhaps not very easily taken in -- who or what is adjusted?
J.T. Well, it is man. Man in responsibility is in view in Romans. He is not viewed as dead as in Ephesians or Colossians, but as alive, first in his sins and then as justified, but always in responsibility. He is regarded as alive and in the sphere of responsibility all through.
C.A.M. So that adjustment is for the earth in that way.
J.T. Yes; man is recovered for God here on earth, where the breakdown occurred.
A.N.W. Heaven is not referred to much in Romans; this is worthy of notice, especially in view of the fact that many regard the gospel as simply a means of getting to heaven.
{3}
J.T. It is adjustment on earth that is more particularly in view; the question was as to whether man could be righteously in relationship with God as on earth.
B.T.F. The gospel then should be presented to men as such.
J.T. Yes; the epistle is an orderly setting forth of the truth of the gospel so as to meet the conditions that existed on the earth as the result of sin.
A.N.W. The primary key to adjustment would be the recognition of the rights of God.
J.T. That is the first thing we have to admit.
C.B. Would you say that this epistle presents man as justified through faith, but in responsibility on the earth as under the authority of Another?
J.T. Yes. As we go on in the epistle we shall see how it is worked out. First it is "the gospel of God", and it is "concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord". He is the theme of it, and so at the outset there is an Object for the heart.
W.L.P. "He might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus" -- is that adjustment?
J.T. Yes; that is in regard of God. We have here "the gospel of God", then there are "the glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God" (@1 Timothy 1:11) also "the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ" (@Ephesians 3:8). These latter undoubtedly are extensions or developments, but what is immediately before the apostle here is the adjustment of things in regard to God. It was urgent then, and it is urgent now with everyone -- we must be adjusted in our souls in regard to God and everything that He recognises here on earth.
J.S. That would bring men into righteousness. Righteousness is revealed in the gospel that men might be brought into righteousness; and there is revealed wrath against all unrighteousness, against ungodliness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness.
{4}
J.T. The righteousness of God is revealed, and it is "on the principle of faith, to faith". Comparison between Romans, Colossians and Ephesians helps to show what characterises Romans, namely, the recognition of all that God had recognised before, and all that He then recognised. This is important, especially for young people. Living in the metropolis of the world, people would be apt to make much of Rome; this letter makes nothing of Rome as a city, but the apostle recognises Jew and gentile -- the Jew first, and the promises made to him. These things being taken up in this letter, and their absence from the other two letters help to an understanding of the difference in the teaching.
J.S. Rome was held by men to be the centre, but it was not God's centre.
J.T. No, it was the centre of the Babylonish system.
C.B. Christ's sonship is emphasised here. It is introduced immediately.
J.T. He is said to have "come of David's seed according to flesh", but "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead". Christ is set before us as the Son of God, but He is also of David's seed; this and the reference to the Old Testament scriptures are significant. It is not here an arbitrary statement as to His deity; but one of what had come to light in a Man on the earth. In @John 1:1 we get, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". That is an absolute statement of His deity; here what has been "declared", or "marked out", is referred to. He is marked out Son of God in power by resurrection. It is not here God raising Him, but what He did Himself.
C.A.M. What is the force of "seed of David"?
J.T. I think that it is that God is calling attention to what He had recognised before; Romans goes
{5}
back to that; it is not God's eternal thought. The reference is to what He had set up on earth before, and which He would maintain. He never loses a thread.
C.A.M. Is that why we have so much of the kingdom in Romans?
J.T. Yes; the kingdom is the exercise of God's grace in power in man; it is in Christ that the testimony introduced in David is made good. He was David's seed, but manifestly Son of God in power, for He raised the dead. What a mighty fact that One who had taken the form of a lowly Man was marked out thus as Son of God!
B.T.F. Raising the dead referred to His ministry before He died.
A.N.W. The point regarding the resurrection is most important. Here it is literally, 'resurrection of dead'.
J.T. It refers to the power that marked His ministry; as He said to John the Baptist, "Dead are raised", (@Matthew 11:5).
C.A.M. It does not refer specially to His own resurrection.
J.T. Of course it is true that He raised Himself from the dead (@John 2:19), but, I think, the reference here is rather to what He did for others.
A.N.W. Say a word about "the Spirit of holiness".
J.T. It would show that everything He did was absolutely according to God; the Spirit of holiness was the Spirit in which things were done.
J.S. It is in contrast to the way things were done by others.
C.A.M. Speaking of resurrection -- is that involved in the adjustment of man, of which we have spoken?
J.T. There can be no doubt; but the point here is that it witnesses to the Son of God.
{6}
W.L.P. We have an instance of it in the raising of Lazarus. There was abundant evidence in that act that Christ was "Son of God with power".
B.T.F. "Obedience of faith", the light of God presented in the gospel is responded to in this way.
J.T. The gospel would tend to bring about subjection; we are elect through sanctification unto the obedience of Jesus Christ (@1 Peter 1:2). His obedience is the pattern for us. Here it is the "obedience of faith"; it is not an obedience that is brought about by arbitrary power as in the millennium. In commissioning Paul, the Lord did not have a result, such as Christendom now is, in His mind; He had no thought of making Europe what it has become. His purpose was that there should be "obedience of faith among all the nations".
T.H. God called Abraham and he obeyed (@Hebrews 11:8).
J.S. "Of faith" -- does that represent what is of God?
J.T. It is *that kind* of obedience, in contrast to what would be the result of arbitrary authority. It involves submission to the moral sway of Christ. The Holy Spirit is given to all those that obey Him (@Acts 5:32).
J.S. It involves a moral work in you?
J.T. God comes in in Christ, and the heart submits to Christ; no one is affected by the gospel until his heart is subdued. It is not compulsion in an arbitrary way, but moral; what is presented in Christ subdues the heart. I use *heart* as a general term; I mean that the man, the moral being, is subdued, and subdued willingly, so to speak. Romans is the overcoming of evil with good. All that God is is presented in Christ. This subdues and wins the heart. But it is through faith. Faith is emphasised in this epistle.
W.L.P. Faith could not do anything else but obey.
{7}
J.T. Faith is always marked by obedience. As our brother remarked, Abraham was directed to go out and he obeyed. In answer to Saul, the Lord says, "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest" -- that was grace; and he "was not disobedient to the heavenly vision", (@Acts 26:19).
J.S. Is not faith brought to light by obedience?
J.T. Obedience is the proof of it.
J.S. Referring to the Spirit of holiness, we should be exercised that this should mark us.
J.T. If a man gets up to minister to the Lord's people, much depends upon his spirit. His words are important, because he can only express himself by them, but it is the spirit behind the words that impresses people. Of Stephen it is said, "they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he spoke" (@Acts 6:10).
Ques. Can you judge the spirit of a man by his writings, or have you got to know the man personally?
J.T. It has been remarked by someone who knew Mr. Darby, that what impressed him most was his spirit, manifested specially by his prayers while he was alive, and now that he is gone as seen in his hymns. A letter is a substitute for a visit, but Paul shows here how superior the latter is. He longed to see the Romans that he might impart to them some spiritual gift. Evidently he could not impart a spiritual gift by a letter; he desired to *see them* in order to do that.
W.L.P. Presenting every man perfect in Christ; that would be brought about through his teaching?
J.T. Yes, it is what he aimed at in his ministry.
W.B-w. Paul as out of heaven was perfect; as such he could not be imperfect.
J.T. He says, "I know a man in Christ" (@2 Corinthians 12:2).
W.B-w. He says, he "heard unspeakable things said".
{8}
J.T. That is a side of the truth we want to get hold of in our souls. We want to know the "man in Christ".
C.A.M. He says, I *know* him "fourteen years ago", as though it took him a long while to arrive at it.
J.T. The point of time is not before him, it is a continuous "know", he knew the man all the time.
A.N.W. It would suggest the character of the man he knew, he had not spoken of it before; Paul kept the secret of his being caught up for fourteen years.
J.T. I suppose he would not have spoken of it then, were it not that they compelled him. In @2 Corinthians 5 we have new creation. "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold all things have become new". This is normal of a Christian.
B.T.F. Our place "in Christ" would bring us to the wonderful truth that we are loved of God.
J.T. Returning to our chapter we might notice how the apostle was identified with the gospel; he speaks of himself as "a called apostle" separated to it, and then says he is not ashamed of it. It shows what an appreciation he had of it, and the reason assigned is, that it is "the power of God unto salvation". He was not ashamed of it, because of its beneficial effect on man. It was the "power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith" (verses 16,17). I would like that we all should see that -- Paul, an apostle, separated to God's glad tidings, appreciative of what he had to present, and his reason, its beneficial character manward; it shows how sympathetic he was with mankind, to both Jew and Greek.
W.L.P. Sympathetic, too, with God's heart.
{9}
J.T. He is in keeping with the moment. It is remarkable how he emphasises it in his opening words, as if to remind us that christianity was set up in the Western world in faith; it is "on the principle", he says, "of faith, to faith". It was not intended to be emphasised as a national religion at all; as seen on earth, christianity is of faith. St Peter's at Rome is all of sight. Faith links up with what is unseen. Christianity was not intended to be national or continental, it is *taking out from the nations*. Anyone that is national denies the faith. We must refrain from being national in our thoughts. The gospel does not help a nation as such; it is to deliver one from nationalism. I think what we all need, and what the saints of God generally need, is to see that the house of God is universal, not national; faith takes me out of all that is national.
A.N.W. "The just shall live by faith", of whatever nation.
J.S. Abraham was called out of country and kindred.
J.T. It is remarkable how we go back to Abraham as a pattern of faith. Speaking again of the gospel, it says, "righteousness of God is revealed therein". I think it is God's rights asserted in mercy. The rights of God in mercy are revealed in the gospel. One can understand a man like Paul being set apart to present such a gospel as that!
C.A.M. Wrath is also revealed.
J.T. But it is not revealed in the gospel.
A.N.W. Wrath is revealed from heaven.
J.T. Wrath is revealed, it is a standing fact; but the gospel had not that in view.
J.S. What is "unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness"?
J.T. It is men who had the light of God, light that Noah handed on, for instance; men held on to
{10}
certain features of it, but did their own will. Holding the form of truth marks Christendom now.
J.S. Men are not subject to Christ. The test is that God has brought in His own Son.
J.T. I think God has shown His abhorrence of sin; now His wrath is revealed from heaven.
B.T.F. You can see the wrath on the Jew at the present time, but can you see it now on the gentile?
J.T. It is revealed only here, not brought into effect; the righteousness of God is revealed and is of faith, to faith.
P.H.P. Wrath comes from heaven. The flood gates of heaven were opened for the flood.
B.T.F. At the end of our chapter we see death as God's penalty.
J.T. Yes. It speaks of those practising such things being worthy of death; that is quite evident. But I think the allusion is that the state of things described forms a dark background to bring into greater display the gospel of God.
{11}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (2)
@Romans 3:1 - 31
Rem. It may help, if you would give a few words as to what leads up to this chapter.
J.T. Our remarks last time did not go beyond the earlier verses of chapter 1. We dwelt at length on the fact that Christ is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead"; and that it is "the gospel of God ... concerning his Son".
I think what came before us especially was that the epistle sets out the gospel in an orderly way; showing how God has come in in Christ for the recovery of man. So that the opening passages are rather introductory. Then, the state of the whole race of mankind is depicted in the second half of that chapter. Then, that division of the race that was, so to say, civilised and cultivated, especially the Greek, is taken account of in the early, part of chapter 2. Then the Jew, who had the law, is treated of. So that, "every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God". And now, in the latter part of chapter 3, God opens up His remedy in the gospel.
Rem. The epistle thus becomes very comprehensive. There is nothing in scripture like it, as a presentation of the gospel to *all* men. You have been summarising up to the point where the righteous judgment of God rests upon all. It suggests, morally, what we get in the flood: God said, "The end of all flesh is come before me" (@Genesis 6:13). Here the end of all flesh has come before God morally. Everyone is shut up to God.
J.T. So that God is now free, having convicted all, to open up what He has in His mind as a remedy.
{12}
W.L.P. Is that the reason both Jew and gentile are brought under the same judgment?
J.T. At the end of chapter 1 it is man in general; but in chapter 2 the cultivated, or enlightened, sections of the race are dealt with, the Jew and the Greek. It says, "to Jew first and to Greek". I was noticing in the early part of chapter 2 how man is addressed, "O man".
Rem. So that really it is a voice universal, not only to the Jew and the Greek, but to the barbarian; and not only in Paul's day but in every day. It is a universal voice, "O man".
J.T. The address to man is very suggestive both in regard of judgment and of blessing. "Thou art inexcusable, O man, every one who judgest". The thought of *man* is prominent in certain sections of the Old Testament. In Ezekiel we see how that God, on the ground of the breakdown of the flesh in Israel in the presence of the law, widens out. Ezekiel himself is habitually addressed as "son of man". As if God were speaking to man in *the Son*.
Rem. I suppose that in the gospels the counterpart of all this would be found in Luke.
J.T. Luke is a sort of confirmation of Paul's doctrine, hence it is the "Son of man" who is presented there, having man in view.
Rem. So that the point reached in chapter 5 would correspond very much with the prodigal son brought into the Father's house. "We are making our boast in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom now we have received the reconciliation".
B.P. Had Judaism to break down before the general title, man, could be brought in?
J.T. Judaism had broken down, so that in addressing man God shows what is in His mind. Only, in chapter 2 it is in a condemnatory way, "Thou art inexcusable, O man, every one who
{13}
judgest". That is to say, man had forfeited the title to judge -- to judge another. There was reserved to him the responsibility of judging himself; but the incongruity of judging another, when guilty himself, is shown.
Rem. It is significant that this aspect of the gospel should be addressed to the Romans, because all men were under the dominion of Rome; it was then the centre of the world. Now God would meet them on the ground of His righteousness. How masterly it is that everyone is first brought under the judgment of God. How can we judge one another? We are all a set of sinners -- criminals!
J.T. That is the feature emphasised in chapter 2, the inexcusability of man, however cultivated, for the Greeks were cultivated; but how could they judge others when doing the same things themselves?
B.T.F. Chapter 2 refers to Greeks who, perhaps, did not know God.
J.T. I think so. The address at Athens by Paul formally states that they did not know God; in fact, their altar bore the inscription "To the unknown God". Paul says, "Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you" (@Acts 17:23). But they had certain knowledge which distinguished them from the ordinary heathen, and, on the ground of that, they set themselves up as judges. So the early part of chapter 2 is intended to convict the Greeks, and all such in all time, and to show the inexcusability of attempting to judge when the principle of self-judgment has not taken effect. It is that which brings in habitually, as you will observe, the judgment of God. "We know that the judgment of God is according to truth". That is, there was a judgment about these things; the very things they pretended to judge; but the only judgment which was of any account was the judgment which was according to truth.
{14}
A.F.M. They had a measure of light, but had no power with the light they possessed, and so practised the same things they exposed in others.
Rem. Is not that because they intentionally used the light they had to enhance themselves as men on earth? They had no intention that that light should advance in the universe anything superior to themselves.
C.A.M. How would they be acquainted with the judgment of God? Chapter 1 seems to allude to what we call God's governmental ways. I mean, in the things that happened to them as evil doers -- they suffered.
J.T. "Who knowing the righteous judgment of God, that they who do such things are worthy of death, not only practise them, but have fellow delight in those who do them".
C.A.M. Did they know of the righteous judgment of God through His governmental dealings?
J.T. I think so. The flood was a known fact. The flood really stands at the beginning of the history of mankind viewed generally. It is a monument of God's judgment, and all the families of Noah would have that testimony. Besides, there is the statement: "The invisible things of him are perceived, being apprehended by the mind through the things that are made, both his eternal power and divinity, -- so as to render them inexcusable". There is, in that way, a witness in creation, and in the government of God, therefore, adequate testimony as to what He is as against evil. Chapter 1 is on that ground.
A.R.S. Man had a witness. For instance, "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth his handywork" (@Psalm 19:1). Any ordinary man must know the heavens were called into being by some power.
{15}
J.T. Besides, they had the government of God which continues. Government had been committed to Noah. The flood too was the evidence of God's judgment of sin, and the testimony of the flood is known in all nations.
Rem. There was the character of God also, as seen in creation. In @Acts 14 we have "We also are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein: who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness". So there are His power and goodness seen in creation, and His government as given to Noah, and witnessed in various ways among the nations. Every day brings an evidence of God's goodness. "His compassions ... are new every morning" (@Lamentations 3:22,23).
Rem. God's goodness "leads thee to repentance".
J.T. The existence of death in the world was a standing testimony to the judgment of God. Men were dying constantly. The apostle says, "Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses". That was a witness to all of the government of God, so that men were without excuse. They knew the righteous judgment of God and, yet, they continued to do such things as were worthy of death and to have fellow delight in those who did them.
P.H.P. The goodness of God leads to repentance; if a man accepts God's thought of him, he would be led into the light.
J.T. So it says, "To them who, in patient continuance of good works, seek for glory and honour and incorruptibility, life eternal. But to those that are contentious, and are disobedient to the truth,
{16}
but obey unrighteousness, there shall be wrath and indignation, tribulation and distress, on every soul of man that works evil, both of Jew first, and of Greek; but glory and honour and peace to every one that works good". Wherever self-judgment comes in, and feeling after God, He is near at hand to help and to bless. It says, "That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us". He was not far from any one of them. For instance, Naaman the Syrian and Cornelius; these are only samples. There were doubtless numberless similar cases. Wherever men took cognisance of the testimony which God placed before them, He was not far from any one of them. God was near all the heathen nations to help them in self judgment. So there was "glory and honour and peace to every one that works good". These are the conditions.
Rem. Ruth was a beautiful example of that.
J.T. And do you not see in the Book of Job another witness brought in as to what went on under these conditions, aside altogether from the law or the special promises made to Israel? There was a man who was exercised, and exercised by the testimony that was available. He alludes to the different things which witnessed to what God is, the heavens, and so on, and we see how God wrought for him.
B.T.F. In what way would you say the gentiles "are a law to themselves"?
J.T. Their *conscience* bore witness, but their *thoughts* accused or excused them. Instead of accepting the testimony which God presented, they went by their own thoughts and feelings. All the accusing or excusing was between themselves -- God was left out.
B.T.F. Did not that imply that they were guilty as to wrong doing, although they had not the law as the Jew had it?
{17}
J.T. They did the things the law condemned. So that as sinning without law, they were judged without law. There was plenty to judge them without the law. They left God out of the moral codes, but He was taking account of everything, and so "the secrets of men" are to be judged by Him. What is alluded to here is the universal manner of God's dealings in Old Testament times. We are apt to confine Him wholly to the Jew, whereas this is not at any time the case. Time after time He goes out of His way, as it were, to show the gentiles He has His eye on them for blessing, or for judgment. He is the God of the gentile as well as of the Jew.
Rem. If the gentiles see God in His government, in His works, and in His character, and respond to Him, and seek after Him that becomes a law to them. These are principles which God has ever acknowledged from the beginning.
J.T. "These, having no law, are a law to themselves; who shew the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or else excusing themselves between themselves". God has put the whole history of the gentile into that small compass. He is looking at what goes on in their hearts and consciences and all will be judged by Him: "in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, according to my glad tidings, by Jesus Christ".
A.N.W. Chapter 2:8 is remarkable in that connection. It brings in disobedience.
J.T. "But to those that are contentious, and are disobedient to the truth, but obey unrighteousness, there shall be wrath and indignation, tribulation and distress, on every soul of man that works evil, both of Jew first, and of Greek". These verses help us in meeting the question constantly raised as to what testimony the heathen had, or have. God knows the testimony, and He knows the effect of it on their
{18}
consciences and hearts. So whatever accusing or excusing of themselves there may have been, God holds them accountable for the testimony presented and the effect on their consciences.
A.F.M. Does not chapter 1:19,20, show that? Every man has a testimony wherever he may be.
Rem. I suppose the pivotal point is really the conscience. When sin came in, the conscience came into evidence and that is the universal possession of every sane person. So that the judgment of condemnation rests upon the nations as such; but then, those who discern, such as Ruth, Ittai, the Queen of Sheba, and all that came along searching after Him, found Him. It is a principle that always holds good.
J.T. The conscience remains and will remain, even eternally. I suppose, it will be the vehicle of greatest torment in the lost.
A.N.W. Is not that the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil?
J.T. It is what man acquired through disobedience. Among the heathen, it was there. So it says, "their conscience also bearing witness".
C.A.M. They were supposed to recognise God's eternal power and divinity. Was it not to value what they saw in creation? Would you go as far as to say that they had before them what was suggestive of Christ?
J.T. Yes, although they were ignorant of what created things represented. David, who was accustomed to look into the heavens had, I suppose, some thought of it when he said, "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork", and, "In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun, which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race" (@Psalm 19:4,5). One would gather that there was a glimmering of light in his soul of something beyond the mere orbits in the heavens. One feels David, being an
{19}
astronomer in a spiritual sense, had some glimmerings as to Christ. The sun is a beautiful figure of Him.
Rem. They had also that which spoke of God's goodness: "He maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust" (@Matthew 5:45). All that was a testimony to His goodness; but death was there, death reigned; everyone came under its power. Why was that? The conscience of man should surely make that inquiry. So there was a witness to the just and righteous judgment of God upon sin in man.
A.F.M. The last verse of chapter 1 confirms that, "who knowing the righteous judgment of God, that they who do such things are worthy of death".
P.H.P. I suppose this governmental dealing on the part of God in regard of men in the past is now superseded by the gospel.
J.T. There is another feature. He says, "For there is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety". This comes in as a background to the gospel. The wrath of God as revealed from heaven seems to be an additional thought here and, hence, it only enhances the conditions of the gospel. It brings home to man the seriousness of rejecting the gospel. Note the expression here, "is revealed".
B.T.F. Describe how it is revealed.
J.T. With one other exception, it is the only mention of the word 'heaven' in the whole epistle. This is to be noted. God is graciously withholding His wrath in order that man should have every opportunity to believe the glad tidings. Yet, there it is, not hidden, but revealed, and revealed from heaven. So that it will be *overwhelming*. We all know that everything that comes from heaven is beyond human control. So that the wrath that comes from heaven is to be overwhelming.
{20}
B.T.F. Is it not in the sense of judgment to come?
J.T. It is not judgment at the present time, for "now is the accepted time" -- the world is in reconciliation. The wrath is revealed not against men exactly; but against their unrighteousness and impiety.
Rem. In regard to our brother's question, I take it that where the gospel has never been proclaimed these foundation principles that we are going over are still maintained. Where Christ has never been spoken of, or known, the testimony of God is seen in His government and in creation.
A.F.M. Referring to wrath, it is not the judgment of the nations as such, as in @Matthew 25, is it?
J.T. I think the wrath spoken of here would go on to the final wrath against all impiety, the unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. It refers to men, and, inasmuch as it is a question of men, God deals with their secrets. As it is put here, "in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, according to my glad tidings, by Jesus Christ". He speaks of a day. It seems as if it would, in this epistle, go on to the great white throne and the final expression of it in the lake of fire.
A.N.W. I suppose it would hardly be said to be revealed until Christ had died. I was thinking of @John 3:16; yet the last verse of that chapter ends with, "The wrath of God abideth on him", which I very much doubt would be mentioned without verse 16. I suppose there it is on account of not believing on the Son.
J.T. The reference there, in the mind of the Spirit, is undoubtedly to the Jew. They were guilty of rejecting the Son's testimony; and so were the subjects of the wrath of God, and of it *abiding*; it *is* abiding on the Jews, as such, at the present time.
A.N.W. I was putting it in contrast to "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
{21}
Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". If the gift is not recognised, the wrath is the consequence.
Rem. So the statement here is not specific as to any particular period. "For there is revealed wrath of God from heaven". And it embraces everything until the final separation of evil from good. I think it is an abstract presentation of the thing. You would expect it in an epistle like this, which really treats of God's relation with men.
J.T. You would expect it would be emphasised that God has entered into judgment and must of necessity deal with every detail of evil, not only with national evil, for He does deal with that, but He deals with personal guilt. His wrath has reference to personal guilt. It says, "shall judge the secrets of men". Not national counsels here; but the secrets of men. Their secrets are known and they shall be dealt with.
Rem. Morally, this epistle in the middle of chapter 3 answers to @Genesis 6, "The end of all flesh is come before me". For Noah and his family an ark was provided, whereas here we get the mercy-seat. "But now without law righteousness of God is manifested ... righteousness of God ... towards all, and upon all those who believe". The contrast is very beautiful.
C.A.M. You alluded to "revealed wrath" as a background for the gospel.
J.T. It is. But wrath is something which stands out prominently as revealed during this whole dispensation, not as applied or executed, but as revealed, as a witness against evil. The question might be raised as to how God regards men and their wickedness which exists all the time. What are God's thoughts about it? Is He indifferent to it? It seems to me that these two chapters set the conscience of the Christian at perfect rest. Wrath is revealed
{22}
against all unrighteousness of men, not only national things, but individual guilt.
A.F.M. Would you present this in the glad tidings? You spoke of wrath as a background for the gospel.
J.T. Most certainly. It is most essential that the judgment of God against sin should be presented. I suppose this epistle is the lesson book as to how the gospel is to be presented. We must bring in the principle of God's judgment of individual guilt. It seems to me that that is emphasised here. "The judgment of God is according to truth upon those who do such things". It is unerring. He does not forget anything. The guilt of the whole human race, and the guilt of each individual, shall come before Him, and shall come before that individual. He will see to it that every individual shall bow to His judgment. Emphasis is laid on the existence of books at the great white throne, which is most remarkable. So each one has to face his guilty history there, if not before. And I am sure his conscience will justify God in consigning him to the lake of fire.
B.T.F. Will you discriminate between conscience and new birth.
J.T. A man is *born anew*, but his conscience is affected by the light presented to him. I think that as born again a man recognises responsibility to God.
A.N.W. Would one be responsibility and the other sovereignty, conscience referring to responsibility and new birth to God's sovereign act?
J.T. Man received a conscience by partaking of the tree of knowledge of good and evil; but he does not lose it when he is converted. It is an element in him God-like, for he can judge between good and evil. Adam as fallen had not the power to refuse the evil; the Christian has, and power too, to choose the good.
{23}
Rem. Conscience always connects itself with responsibility.
P.H.P. Does @Romans 3 deal with man in his *guilt* simply?
J.T. Man was proved guilty, or subject to judgment before God. The reference, I think, is to a court of law. "We have before *charged*", the apostle says. We all know that courts of justice have reference to acts committed; not to what one is, although the latter may be in evidence by the facts presented.
Rem. That is emphasised with remarkable clearness in connection with the mercy-seat in the second section of chapter 3. There we see that even deeds in Old Testament days are all held up, as it were, waiting for the mercy-seat. That is, God held them in abeyance. It is the deeds that are in view not the state of the persons who do them.
J.T. That is how it reads, "whom God has set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood, for the showing forth of his righteousness, in respect of the passing by the sins that had taken place before, through the forbearance of God".
C.A.M. God is not going to judge a man for what he is but for what he has done.
J.T. A great point in the epistle is to vindicate God. He is righteous in whatever He does. These chapters are an immense relief to the enlightened conscience in regard to the evil that exists in all the different nations. These chapters show that there is not one item of sin that God is not taking account of, all is carefully noted down.
Rem. The Old Testament, which is cited here, shows that God is not really looking for the evil; He cannot help seeing it. In @Psalm 14, "The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God".
{24}
B.T.F. Is the great object of these opening chapters to bring the whole world in as guilty before God?
J.T. That is the point. "Now we know that whatever the things the law says, it speaks to those under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world be under judgment to God". It is very touching to see that God is looking for good, not evil. How eagerly He looks for the good!
C.A.M. We have had the philosopher and the heathen, we might say, but what about the Jew?
J.T. His mouth is closed as well. He is spoken of; "But if *thou* art named a Jew, and restest in the law, and makest thy boast in God, and knowest the will, and discerningly approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the law; and hast confidence that thou thyself art a leader of the blind, a light of those who are in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, having the form of knowledge and of truth in the law: thou then that teachest another, dost thou not teach thyself?" He gives a remarkable description of a typical legal Jew here. "*Thou* art named", he says, and then how that such an one is by the law condemned.
Rem. The end of all that was: "The name of God is blasphemed on your account among the nations". That was very terrible. They had been given a place of peculiar blessing and privilege; but the end was that there were blasphemies of God's name on their account. This made their sin the more enormous.
J.T. And then another principle is brought out at the end of chapter 2, "For he is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither that circumcision which is outward in flesh; but he is a Jew who is so inwardly; and circumcision, of the heart, in spirit, not in letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God". Wherever such an one is found, in the whole earth, he is a true Jew.
{25}
Rem. There was no such one found, was there?
J.T. Not as in the flesh. But we have been speaking of people like Job, like Rahab the harlot and Ruth, Cornelius and others. These were circumcised in heart and spirit; but then, they were the fruit of God's sovereign work.
Rem. Paul takes up that idea in @Galatians 6:16. "As many as shall walk by this rule, peace upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God". It is a question of the heart.
B.P. You were saying that this section dealt with acts committed. Is not the state of man taken up later in the epistle?
J.T. It is; state is taken up formally from verse 12 of chapter 5 to the end of chapter 8. That which troubles a man first of all is not his state, but the sins he has committed.
B.T.F. Is the Jew referred to in chapter 3 a *true* Jew?
J.T. That is the nation. "What then is the superiority of the Jew? or what the profit of circumcision? Much every way: and first, indeed, that to them were entrusted the oracles of God". They had the oracles of God.
Rem. It is a historical fact to which he is alluding here -- the advantage they had on account of having the oracles of God. The Lord said to the woman of Samaria, "Ye worship ye know not what; we worship what we know, for salvation is of the Jews" (@John 4:22). The oracles of God are not connected with Christians. Peter says, "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God".
J.T. It gave an immense superiority to them over all the other nations that they had the oracles of God.
C.A.M. But it increased their responsibility.
B.P. What would become of one in heathendom who found God through what he saw in creation?
{26}
J.T. I think the book of Job is the light that God has graciously given as to what obtained in the, so-called, heathen world. He is not far from any one who feels after Him. He has His own way of taking care of them. If a sparrow does not fall on the ground without His attention, He will take care of all who feel after Him.
Rem. "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" (@Genesis 18:25). What may be the manner of His workings in detail is another matter; but we know He will do right.
C.A.M. It is remarkable that Job had the light of resurrection. For instance, he said, "Then call, and I will answer" (@Job 13:22). Would it be right to think he got the light of resurrection from creation?
Rem. There is a witness to it every autumn when the crops are gathered in. "Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die" (@1 Corinthians 15:36). Every incoming of life is a suggestion of resurrection. Even such a simple thing as lying down to sleep. When we lay ourselves down in the night we expect to rise in the morning.
Ques. Do you think Job lived immediately after the flood?
J.T. He may have been a contemporary of Abraham. At any rate, he had regard for the testimony presented to him. He feared God. But it was not until the end of the book that he said, "I know that thou canst do everything" (chapter 42:2). He learned that through what God said to him.
A.F.M. Do you think a man in a heathen country today could be converted by the testimony of creation?
J.T. The testimony now, of course, is Christ, who is presented in the gospel. God has His own way of meeting men in every circumstance. If there is genuine exercise God will send the gospel message, as we see in Cornelius; and He will set such an one
{27}
in relation to the saints too. I think the knowledge of God in our souls settles all these questions. Job says, "I know that thou canst do everything". God can connect a soul with the church wherever he may be found.
Rem. The Lord sent Philip to the eunuch.
J.T. If a sparrow does not fall on the ground without the Father -- mark that, it is not only without His knowledge, but without *Him* -- how much more would an enlightened heathen be cared for. Whoever and wherever he may be, God can take account of him and care for him in His own way.
Rem. The great thing for us is that we have divine principles, and "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?". When it comes to certain details we may not know just how God may act; but we know Him, and therefore we know He will act according to those principles.
{28}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (3)
@Romans 4:1 - 25
J.T. It may be helpful to point out that chapter 3 from the 21st verse has reference to *revelation*, the word "manifested" being suggestive; whereas chapter 4 is more on the side of the believer, what he *finds*. The chapter opens with, "What shall we say then that Abraham our father according to flesh has found?". So that the two chapters, in that way, form a whole, one referring to what is for *all*, the other to what an individual *has found*.
C.A.M. The end of chapter 3 would be far greater than what we have in chapter 4; as you say, it is a question of what God is. Would you mind, in that connection, saying a word upon this righteousness of God which is revealed?
J.T. It has been called, His 'rights in mercy'. God has a right to be merciful; His nature really shines here. Paul in chapter 1 says, "I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to everyone that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith". That would not refer to His rights in judgment but to His rights in mercy. He will have mercy on whom He will have mercy. It pleases Him to have mercy upon all as this epistle shows. So that "the righteousness of God" would refer to His rights in mercy, coming out in Christ, and dealing with sin in Christ, viewed as a vicarious offering. As it is said, "that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus". That kind of righteousness should appeal to us.
A.F.M. Hence it is introduced here so beautifully. God had a right to deal with man in judgment, but
{29}
He has taken up His rights in the way of mercy for the salvation of man.
J.T. Yes; and it is without the law. "Now without law righteousness of God is manifested, borne witness to by the law and the prophets; righteousness of God by faith of Jesus Christ towards all, and upon all those who believe". That is, perhaps, the most concise statement you could find of the gospel.
B.T.F. What does, "Borne witness to by the law and the prophets" refer to?
J.T. The types and general teaching in the law and in the prophets. We have been going over Exodus and Leviticus; for example, those books abound with references to the gospel as seen in the sacrifices and so on. The prophets, too, we know, abound with references to the same.
C.A.M. So in chapter 1 it says, "which he had before promised by his prophets in holy writings". The gospel was the subject of promise.
A.R.S. Is not one of the points in chapter 3 that man has his mouth stopped? There is no righteousness as far as man is concerned. Then God's righteousness is brought out and shines in all its grandeur, and it is on the ground of that that God blesses man.
J.T. "Without law righteousness of God". It does not say *the* righteousness of God; but that kind of righteousness.
Rem. God would have been perfectly righteous had He wiped out the whole scene and terminated it in judgment on account of sin; but He is also perfectly righteous when He presents Christ Jesus as a mercy-seat. "Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood". There is thus a point where He can bless and redeem, instead of removing. He is equally righteous; and His righteousness works that way.
{30}
J.T. He retains man.
Rem. Yes. He recovers him.
C.A.M. In chapter 1 the apostle says, "I am ready to preach the gospel to you that are at Rome also". It is remarkable that he should wish to preach the gospel to the *saints*.
J.T. The saints at Rome evidently needed the moral foundation laid in their souls strengthened. This is also true of many at the present time. The gospel is not only to give us peace with God, but to establish us in regard to the world, and what is in it, because Christians are exposed to the world. The question is, are we to stand or be carried off our feet? At the present time nothing could be more essential to us than the knowledge of God, as presented in this epistle; for it is God as He is towards man in righteousness, and dealing with man as he is here, setting him up on this basis, so that he might stand here for God.
A.F.M. We then are able to justify God in the presence of all that is without.
J.T. The evil remains; but the light comes into our souls and sets us up here. We are constituted righteous and are made to live. I suppose these are the two great features on our side: righteousness and life.
Rem. The epistle to the Romans has very largely in view manifestation in the world to come.
A.N.W. Is your thought that Romans solves the problem of both trees -- the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and the tree of life?
J.T. That is the idea. The believer is made righteous and yet retains his conscience and then, he *lives*. So there is perfect reconciliation of the two principles -- responsibility and life.
B.T.F. What is the force of, "by faith of Jesus Christ"?
{31}
J.T. I think it brings in the order of Man here. According to the reading, it is not faith *in* Him, or *on* Him; but, '*of* Him'. It seems to me to suggest the light as to a new order of Man that the believer has in his soul. It is initial, but it lays the basis for what is to follow in this epistle, Colossians and Ephesians. Further on it says, "that he should be just, and justify him that is of the *faith of Jesus*".
Rem. We get there the point that is referred to in @Titus 2:11, "For the grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men has appeared". It is universal, I mean, in its presentation. The only limitation is its acceptance. It is, "towards all, and upon all those who believe".
B.T.F. Does the expression "by faith of Jesus Christ" refer to man in responsibility?
J.T. I think, "faith of Jesus Christ", and "faith of Jesus" lay the basis in the soul for the new order of Man. God has in His mind the transference in our souls from what we are as in Adam to Christ. He is presented to us objectively, and in believing we get light, but then, light about the Man who did the will of God. That is a formative principle.
C.A.M. Would it be like the opening verses of chapter 1, "concerning his Son ... Jesus Christ our Lord"?
J.T. "Jesus Christ", or "Jesus" is the order of Man. "Christ Jesus" refers more to the *anointed Man*. So you will find in this epistle, when things are said to be in Him, it is "Christ Jesus"; but when things are said to be *by* Him, it is "Jesus Christ". It is Man.
Rem. In contrast to Adam.
J.T. Yes. Jesus Christ, who accomplished the will of God.
Rem. What we get here is really preparing for what we get at the end of chapter 5, that is, transference
{32}
from Adam to Christ. There it is said to be "by Jesus Christ our Lord".
Rem. Would you give us a thought as to the anointed Man?
J.T. The anointed Man has finished everything and has sat down. "God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ" (@Acts 2:36). There, I apprehend God has set Him in heaven, and exalted Him as the Head and Centre of everything. He is the Head of everything. All therefore, is in Him. But, if I look at Him down here, as a Man doing the will of God and going into death, it is "Jesus Christ".
A.F.M. How about the expression in verse 24, "through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth a mercy-seat"?
J.T. There it is again. Redemption is in Him; "Through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood, for the shewing forth of his righteousness, in respect of the passing by the sins that had taken place before, through the forbearance of God; for the shewing forth of his righteousness in the present time, so that he should be just, and justify him that is of the faith of Jesus". It seems to me that the one who is "of the faith of Jesus" is the one who is to be justified; because God has in His mind a race of men like that Man.
Rem. It is "his grace" in verse 24, but "his righteousness" in verse 25.
J.T. I think the point in verse 25 is righteousness of God -- His rights in mercy, and the mercy-seat is the expression of it. It is there that God sets out what He is towards man, the point is, "whom God has set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood". The reference is to @Leviticus 16. It is a question of what is on the throne of God, really. So
{33}
that it is *set forth*. I apprehend it is universal; Christ the mercy-seat is the centre of the universe, as it was in the tabernacle figuratively.
Rem. I think "mercy" and "grace" are never far separated. In @Exodus 33 they are linked together: "I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and I will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy". I hope we all understand the tremendous importance and blessing of this twenty-fifth verse. It is the basis for every one who enters into the sphere of God's eternal blessing. Everything that is for God comes to this point of contact, namely, the mercy-seat, "whom God has set forth". We get, set forth here, the rights of God to intervene in mercy, in the person of the Lord Jesus Christ, in virtue of His redeeming work. I think we scarcely apprehend the greatness of the thoughts contained in this verse. Every one who is in the sphere of blessing rests on what it presents.
J.T. The mercy-seat is the great central point of the whole moral system. God sets out in that Man, as having died (for it is a question of His blood here), His rights in mercy.
Rem. It is a throne. It is universal; the whole moral universe is centred there.
A.N.W. Why do you change the word to 'throne'?
Rem. In the holy of holies, over the mercy-seat rested the cherubim, which were expressive of the government of God. The government of God goes out through His mercy, through redemption; therefore the cherubim are viewed as contemplating the blood upon the mercy-seat. The idea of the mercy-seat is really a throne -- God enthroned in the midst of Israel, but in mercy through the blood.
J.T. It was a question of His sovereign rights. So the cherubim looked down on the mercy-seat. The blood of the victim was brought in and placed
{34}
there; God was vindicated in regard of the whole universe. If one gets that thought into one's soul it lays a wonderful basis.
T.H. Why is it here the "mercy-seat"; in Corinthians, "judgment-seat"; and in Revelation, "A great white throne"?
J.T. This, I think, is necessarily the greatest of all; because it is a question of the whole universe and God setting Himself in relation to it in righteousness. How wonderful that He could do that! But the study of @Leviticus 16 enables us to see how it has all been accomplished -- that the blood of Christ was efficacious, as under the eye of God, for the whole universe. So every one who now is, "of the faith of Jesus" -- of that Man, is justified. And God is also justified in Him, "so that he should be just, and justify him that is of the faith of Jesus". The mercy-seat here is the great central point in the whole moral system. God puts Himself, in the eyes of all, as just in regard to the passing by of sins. As it says, "In respect of the passing by the sins that had taken place before, through the forbearance of God; for the shewing forth of his righteousness in the present time, so that he should be just". He waited all these years and in so doing exposed Himself to attack, looking on to the time of the incarnation and death of Christ, when He would be justified. And now that Christ has died He is justified in the eyes of the universe in regard of sins. That is the point here. Every one, who is "of the faith of Jesus" is linked up with God on that principle. So one can see how the thing is developed on the principle of faith before we get any mention of the Spirit or love. Here it is a question of linking the soul with God in righteousness.
Now, when you come to @2 Corinthians 5, things are more limited. Because it is not a question of the universe; it is rather a question of adjustment,
{35}
so that there should be a final adjustment in regard of the course of every christian. Every detail of the life has to be gone into and judged. So everything is seen according to God. "For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad". It is a question of adjusting my life in flesh; whether before or after conversion, my whole life has to be gone into there finally.
W.L.P. Even if one has judged his course here, has it to be reviewed there too?
J.T. Yes. The believer has to be brought into line with God there, and will be there as wholly apart from the evil done; but enabled there to judge all as God has judged it. In regard of the "great white throne", first of all, the very term "white" shows that it is against sin. It is a question of sin; so the earth and the heaven flee away. "I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled". It is not now God's rights in mercy; there is nothing to draw or attract here. In the mercy-seat, there is everything to attract; the conscience is set free and drawn to God as known in grace therein; but the great white throne repels evil, even the heavens and the earth are not pure in His sight; they flee. It is a question of God's holiness. The dead, great and small, stand before the throne and are judged out of the things written in the books, and then those not found written in the book of life were cast into the lake of fire. There is a search made in the book of life but only to make certainty doubly certain. There is no thought of mercy in the great white throne.
Rem. What is set forth in the character of God in the mercy-seat at the present time becomes the test for those who had rejected the gospel when before the great white throne. For, if that character had
{36}
been responded to, there would have been no occasion on the part of such for the great white throne.
J.T. Evil is put into its own place at the great white throne; but, at the present time, God is showing forth His righteousness in justifying the sinner through the blood of Christ. This is what He delights in.
C.A.M. Its being the great central point is very beautiful. Every man in that way may have to say to God direct.
J.T. It is not inside the veil now. It is *set forth*. It is presented to all, but can be apprehended on the principle of faith only. First, you have, "whom God has set forth a mercy-seat". Then, "for the shewing forth of his righteousness". It is a question of God vindicating Himself.
Rem. I like to hear a preacher emphasising the rights of God in forgiving sins.
J.T. Some of us were speaking of this dispensation as being marked by sitting. And, I think, the point is that God rests in certain conditions. Hebrews emphasizes that Christ, having completed redemption, "sat down ... at the right hand of God". It is like @Numbers 9. The tabernacle might rest "two days or a month, or a year". I think we are now in the *year*. God rests now in Christ, presenting Him to men in the gospel.
Rem. It is the preaching of "the acceptable year of the Lord".
J.T. The Lord is said to have sat down in @Luke 4. It says, "He closed the book ... and sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him. And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears". The mercy-seat is before the eyes of the universe, and it is for us to be attracted to it. The Lord spoke of "the acceptable year" -- the longest period of measured time, in that way.
{37}
A.F.M. It has been the longest period. There were different ages before Christ: "But now once in the consummation of the ages he has been manifested for the putting away of sin by his sacrifice". And has brought in this wondrous year.
Rem. From now on everything is marked by finality. The mercy-seat is final, the judgment-seat is final, the great white throne is final.
J.T. Chapter 4, in the light of all this wonderful setting forth of God, is what a man finds. The opening of the chapter gives the key. "What shall we say then that Abraham ... has found?".
Rem. I suppose David is brought in in the same way. Abraham illustrates what is found on the principle of faith. David speaks of the *blessedness* of the man to whom God reckons righteousness without works.
B.T.F. Would you emphasise "before God"?
J.T. Yes; for you do not want anything except that which is before God. Abraham had much cattle, silver and gold, but these are not referred to here. What did he find? "Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness. Now to him that works the reward is not reckoned as of grace, but of debt: but to him who does not work, but believes on him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is reckoned as righteousness". So that he is justified.
C.A.M. Is your thought that we should raise the inquiry in our own minds as to what we have found?
J.T. Yes. What one has found in the light of all this. We have found righteousness -- the righteousness of God.
C.A.M. Chapter 4 is all on our side.
J.T. Chapter 3 is largely a question of justifying *God*; but chapter 4 presents *our* justification; "who
{38}
has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification".
C.A.M. He found the *seal* of it too.
J.T. Yes, circumcision. The seal of the righteousness which he had on the principle of faith.
Rem. It signified the application of death.
J.T. Yes, and I think the Spirit. "The Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect" (@Genesis 17:1). That raised a question not only of His righteousness but of His power. I think chapter 4 implies God's power. That is what Abraham came to. Typically he came to the realisation of the power of God. So he received the sign of circumcision which meant that there was no power in the flesh to effect anything for God; but what takes the place of that in the believer now is the Spirit.
C.A.M. Was there something special in the mind of the Spirit in referring to these two men, Abraham and David?
Rem. Abraham shines forth as an illustration of the response to the call of God and as living on the principle of faith, hence, he is introduced as the father of all those who believe. David was marked by transgressions, and so he becomes an illustration of the blessedness of such an one whose transgressions are covered: Compare @Psalm 51.
{39}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (4)
@Romans 5:1 - 21
J.T. In dwelling on chapter 5 it is important to bear in mind that chapter 4 emphasises the "principle of faith". The principle of faith is seen throughout the book, we know, but chapter 4 seems to emphasise it as coming in after the mercy-seat. There is a point or two in chapter 4 to which it might be well to refer. It says in verses 13 - 17, "For it was not by law that the promise was to Abraham, or to his seed, that he should be heir of the world, but by righteousness of faith. For if they which are of law be heirs, faith is made vain, and the promise made of no effect. For law works wrath; but where no law is neither is there transgression. Therefore it is on the principle of faith, that it might be according to grace, in order to the promise being sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of Abraham's faith, who is father of us all, (according as it is written, I have made thee father of many nations)". It seems to me that we should pay especial attention to chapter 4 in that way; it is a sort of pivotal chapter from our side -- from the side of apprehension and appropriation. The light of chapter 3 being so wonderful, and then the blessings flowing therefrom in chapter 5 being also so wonderful, it is of great importance that attention should be paid to chapter 4 as showing how things are appropriated.
B.T.F. You were pointing out the importance of Abraham *finding*.
J.T. That is how chapter 4 begins. "What shall we say then that Abraham our father ... has found?" Being the father of believers, his history is dwelt upon in chapter 4.
{40}
Rem. Abraham is "the father of all them that believe", and the "father of many nations". He comes in upon the principle of faith, "Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness".
J.T. "Father of many nations" is really in the light of resurrection. God said, when he appeared to Abram, "I am the Almighty God"; and changed Abram's name in the light of that revelation. Abraham could be a progenitor through the power of God only. He believed in the power of God. He believed not only that God could justify, but that He could quicken the dead.
Rem. Two great points come out in chapter 4, righteousness reckoned in the light of a God who raises the dead and transgressions covered as shown in David.
B.T.F. There is faith as exercised, and there is the "principle of faith". Perhaps you would say a word regarding those two.
J.T. The *principle* of faith is that on which God has set things; it is the ground on which divine blessings are administered now. It is the principle on which justification is based. It is, "on the principle of faith, to faith". But we have another thought added here. "Therefore it is on the principle of faith, that it might be according to grace". It is on that principle as established by God that it might be according to grace, for law is not of faith.
Rem. So there is a contrast suggested, when the principle of faith comes in, with what had been before, that is, law. "For the law was given by Moses: grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ". I suppose in the Old Testament these principles were enunciated. We have a proof of it in @Habakkuk 2:4: "the just shall live by his faith". But it waited for the manifestation of the mercy-seat; now
{41}
we see that God would bring in everything on that basis.
J.T. Grace and truth subsisting in Christ gives, one might say, the character of the present dispensation. "For the law was given by Moses: grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ". Grace and truth go together in the Person of Christ -- they form one idea in the mind of God. The verb is in the singular in order to emphasise that there is one indissoluble idea set forth in Christ -- that of grace and truth, not truth alone but grace and truth.
Rem. There is a suggestion here in Abraham and David being brought in that, really, there was no change in the actings of God. He acted with Abraham and David on the ground of grace as His sovereign prerogative, notwithstanding that in David's day the law existed. His workings were always on that line. None in Old Testament times were brought into blessing on the basis of the law; all were brought in on the principle of grace and truth.
B.T.F. Would you say that where there is faith in the soul there is the accepting of things which cannot be substantiated other than by the Word of God?
J.T. That is the point. We know the definition given in @Hebrews 11:1, "Now faith is the substantiating of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen".
B.T.F. When you touch on the principle of faith, it leads on to things that are not seen; but are substantiated by God's word.
J.T. In that way the support of faith is not evident; the natural mind is incapable of understanding what faith lays hold of.
W.L.P. We see more than faith in Stephen's case.
J.T. It developed to sight.
Rem. That was in the power of the Holy Spirit. "But being *full of the Holy Spirit*, having fixed his
{42}
eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God" (@Acts 7:55).
J.T. Abraham here is a great model for believers. Indeed, inasmuch as he is formally called our father, it is well that he should be studied in that regard.
W.B. Is his faith in the end of chapter 4 what you would call advanced faith?
J.T. The faith of @Genesis 15 is the faith that believes in the God who *justifies*; regarding which it says here, "And Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness". @Genesis 17 is an advance on that. God not only justifies but *quickens*. So in chapter 4:17 we have, "The God whom he believed, who quickens the dead". I need not only to be justified, but quickened. So that @Genesis 17 is an advance on chapter 15.
Rem. It is interesting to see that in @Hebrews 11 there is still another advance. There it is connected with Isaac. "By faith Abraham ... offered up Isaac ... accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure". He reckoned God was able to give Isaac back to him from the dead.
J.T. It is a great thing, in that way, to have a right model; if Scripture sets one before us as in Abraham, we should study the model. It helps us in the history of our souls to see how faith worked in a man of like passions as ourselves.
Rem. I think the Lord emphasises that when He calls attention to Himself, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad". That, I think, is further light as to the principle of faith. Abraham could not naturally see Christ; but in the light of the revelation from God he embraced it, he exulted in it. He was really in the light of the world to come.
W.B. Does faith here in the end of this chapter embrace the world to come?
{43}
Rem. F.E.R. used to tell us that this was in view of the world to come.
W.B. I was thinking of the expression we find here, "that he should be heir of the world".
J.T. Faith would scarcely stop short of the full, divine thought, however imperfectly he might apprehend the *full* bearing of the world to come. Each man of faith had it in some sense before him, otherwise he must have been living in the world of sight, which was not so.
C.A.M. In that sense faith would imply another world.
J.T. I think so. Faith looks on to a world that is "not seen as yet", but which will ultimately come into display.
Ques. Is that also true of those saints before Abraham, those who had faith?
J.T. I think so. It is said of Enoch that he prophesied saying, "Behold, the Lord has come amidst his holy myriads, to execute judgment against all" (@Jude 14,15).
Ques. What then was the difference between them and Abraham?
J.T. One difference is that before the flood there was no call *out of the world*. Abraham was called out of it so that he is, strictly, the father of all believers, because believers are essentially called ones, called out of the world. And of Abraham it is said that he looked for things, that is, he got impressions in his soul and looked for their verification or accomplishment.
A.N.W. Do you think it would suggest that the world had reached a stage of darkness which had not been before?
J.T. I think that Satan had not acquired the place in the world before the flood that he did afterwards. Also that through the introduction of the element of government in Noah a place opened up to
{44}
Satan in that relation; hence the political development which followed: first, centralisation as seen in Babel; then, imperial power as seen in Nimrod. All this, and other things, developed idolatry, of which we hear nothing before the flood. Satan evidently acquired greater power after the flood, he intruded himself into the minds of men and idolatry developed. So Abram was a worshipper of idols; but God has His own thoughts. It says, "The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia", where he was still in his own surroundings, and said, "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred". The political idea is put first -- that of patriotism -- he is to leave his country; then his kindred, and then, "Come into the land which I shall shew thee". It is a *call*; and we Christians, in that way, are the children of Abraham because we have faith according to his faith.
A.N.W. We feel that our faith is severely tested today. It is in just such a day that God would look for faith.
Rem. I think it helps on that line to see that no empire has ever succeeded which has not been backed by the religious power. No doubt the principle of idolatry supported the governing powers in Abraham's country; in breaking from his country he had to break from his religion. I think it may be seen all through that the political power is allied, for its support, with the spiritual power of evil; so it takes all that is in a man to separate from the world; politically, socially and religiously. I was struck by a remark made, that faith is in view of the world to come. I believe, in some form or other, faith has always the world to come in view.
J.T. "The God of glory" -- in what those words convey, the world that God has in mind is all bound up. In @Genesis 14 we have two groups of kings fighting one with another; and there is "Abram the
{45}
Hebrew", as it says, set over against them. These two groups would undoubtedly represent the political interests of the world -- the contending interests, as we have it today -- but there is a third party, that is, "Abram the Hebrew". I suppose, the word 'Hebrew' there does not signify what it did in Saul's mouth (@1 Samuel 13:3); that was the *natural* way of looking at them for Jacob's name had long been changed; but in Genesis it is, "Abram the Hebrew", possibly alluding to the fact that he was not of that country; he was distinctly apart, but was marked by brotherly affections. "And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan" (@Genesis 14:14). There was an institution at the command of that man of faith and by itself; but it was on the principle of faith, it would not be employed in worldly political interests, not on either side; but to rescue a *brother*.
Rem. The only intervention was to rescue a brother.
C.A.M. You would say the world to come comes into view in Melchisedec.
J.T. The thought of the world to come follows on that incident. Melchisedec comes in and blesses Abram. We know, from the setting of Scripture, that the title "Most High God" and "Melchisedec" refer to the millennial day.
A.N.W. Where would Abram have stood in regard of chapter 13 of Romans?
J.T. You remember, he recognised the king of Sodom. I think he was very deferential to the rulers of the land. He did not revolt against them in any way. He waited God's time. It was said to him that, "The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full" (@Genesis 15:16). He humbly waited, but he had the light in his soul of the inheritance. When Lot separated
{46}
from him the Lord said to him, "Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward: for all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it" (@Genesis 13:14,15). He had the light of the inheritance in his soul; but he recognised the king of Sodom and also the sons of Heth in a later period. He was deferential to the rights of each.
Ques. How far does @Romans 5 bring a believer?
J.T. I think it shows what is available -- the great things which accrue to the believer -- to the one that has the faith outlined in chapter 4. After so much has been said about Abraham's faith, it is said, "Now it was not written on his account alone that it was reckoned to him, but on ours also, to whom, believing on him who has raised from among the dead Jesus our Lord, who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification, it will be reckoned. Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ". Then the Spirit of God gives an outline of the great things that accrue to us, the blessings that are available at the present time.
Ques. After @Romans 7 do we come back to chapter 5?
J.T. Chapter 5 is from *God's side*. It sets before us objectively what is available. Of course, the apostle speaks as if he were in the gain of it and enjoyed it individually, yet he speaks in the plural, showing it is *characteristically* true of christians to enjoy these things; but they are presented as the great result of the gospel, and as available to every believer.
B.T.F. The thought in justification is that it is before God, is it not? Not before men; it has in view the manifestation.
{47}
J.T. Clearly. It is a question of being justified in view of another sphere. It is "the God of glory" who has established a new world and it is a question of my being suited for it. But, in regard of responsibility here, you have forgiveness and the consciousness of it; but, even as to that, you cannot show any one you have it. You have the witness of the Spirit that you are forgiven; but what you are concerned about is that you should have a place in that world in the presence of God.
Rem. Referring to our brother's question, as to how far @Romans 5 brings a believer, I suppose it includes reconciliation. It brings us to the point where the prodigal son is kissed.
J.T. It is @Luke 15 in that sense, because "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit". Just as the father impressed upon the son the love he had for him, so the Spirit impresses upon our hearts the love God has for us.
Rem. @Luke 15 really helps to unfold this chapter.
J.T. Take verse 11: it says, "And not only that, but we are making our boast in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom now we have received the reconciliation". I was thinking of the expression, *the* reconciliation. It is presented as an element of the testimony to be *received* in this chapter. I apprehend I am to be reconciled according to Corinthians; but here "the reconciliation" is presented as an element of the testimony because it refers to man being before God in Christ to God's pleasure; that is *the* reconciliation.
A.N.W. Is it forgiveness in @Luke 15?
J.T. The prodigal said, "I have sinned against heaven and before thee". He acknowledged his sins. Now the kiss of the father undoubtedly involved forgiveness, without it being said; but there was more than that. He says, to his servants, "Bring out the best robe and clothe him in it, and put a ring on
{48}
his hand and sandals on his feet; and bring the fatted calf and kill it, and let us eat and make merry: for this my son was dead and has come to life, was lost and has been found. And they began to make merry". I have no doubt that that is *the* reconciliation. It is not only that the Jews will have God's laws put into their hearts, and written in their minds; but the christian is after the heavenly. Reconciliation involves the second Man. "The first man out of the earth, made of dust; the second man, out of heaven" (@1 Corinthians 15:47). While there will be a representation of Christ in the Jew on the earth in the millennium, he does not fully answer to what God had in His mind about man. He had Christ in mind and Christ is said to be, "the second man, out of heaven". You have to go the full length to get the divine thought. The Jew is not out of heaven: he is not even intended for it; although there will be in that nation a representation of Christ, that is, God's laws put into their hearts and written in their minds, and therefore they will love God and their neighbour; but the second Man is out of heaven. "As we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly" (verse 49). That is the full, divine thought as regards the mind of God.
Rem. Verse 10 of this chapter gives us reconciliation as individually presented, "reconciled to God by the death of his Son"; but in verse 11 we reach the point of @2 Corinthians 5, "the ministry of reconciliation". But it is not developed here as it is in that epistle.
J.T. I see the full bearing of the truth of the gospel presented in this chapter for our appropriation. It is, so to say, hung up for our view. It is *in* Christ. So we get a list of things all hung up before us and to be appropriated.
J.S. You are brought on to a sort of vantage ground here.
{49}
A.N.W. You cannot go beyond this.
J.T. As regards the *gospel*. But you have not the ministry of the church here. You have the ministries of the gospel and the church in Colossians. As far as the ministry of the gospel goes, you cannot exceed what is presented in this chapter. The second half of the chapter is also part of the gospel, that is, "eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". The second half also enlarges upon the *much more*, the *excess* of things: what was in Christ in contrast to what was brought in through Adam.
Rem. Really, there is reached a climax here. You cannot, in a way, go beyond it. You reach reconciliation. Then, there is a turning back, as it were, and a taking the truth up on another line, that is, the life line!
J.T. In @2 Samuel 8 you have lines for life and death. David measured with two lines for death and one full line for life. Now, I think, this chapter is the life line. The law would be the lines to death -- that would measure us all for death; but this chapter (Christ having died for us, and living now) is the life line for us -- the "much more". It is not only that I shall live; I shall *reign* in life by the One, Jesus Christ. "Much rather shall those who receive the abundance of grace ... reign in life by the one Jesus Christ".
J.S. The two lines are here clearly: "death passed upon all men" and "reign in *life* by the one".
C.A.M. It says, "being enemies, we have been reconciled to God". It is not in the sense that we are reconciled enemies, is it?
J.T. It is that grace has abounded over enmity, and now being reconciled we are saved by Christ's life. You would not deny you were an enemy once. Romans shows that the man who was an enemy is now reconciled. The epistle shows how things have taken place on earth. The idea of new creation
{50}
scarcely enters into Romans. It rather shows God's greatness, and how He has triumphed; that in spite of our being enemies, we have been reconciled to Himself.
A.N.W. But it was not the same prodigal son.
J.T. We know that from the epistles; but @Luke 15 is to establish what God is in Christ, and it corresponds with the early part of Romans. It is the grace side -- *how* grace acts; *how* God can rise above all the rebellion of man's heart. It is the "much more" line. This epistle shows how great God is morally. Notwithstanding what I have been, God reconciles me. He justifies the ungodly, "in due time Christ died for the ungodly". "While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him". That thought is carried all through -- the triumph of grace. This chapter shows *what God is*; that is the first great feature of the gospel. After this it is a question of what one is in oneself; then, one learns very bitterly what is there.
Rem. Up to the end of verse 11 it is what man has done -- the apples on the tree. After this it becomes a question of the tree itself -- the root and the nature that produces the fruit.
T.H. Why is the new covenant not mentioned?
J.T. It is involved in the love of God being shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, and "God commends *his* love to us". Why should He *commend* His love, seeing it is so great in itself? Yet He does. All these things are to show the *moral* greatness of God. It is not simply His power in raising Jesus from the dead but His moral greatness; He commends His love to us.
A.N.W. And it was, "while we were yet sinners".
J.T. I think it is very affecting in that God should go to the pains of *commending* His love to us.
{51}
W.B. How do you apply reconciliation in the millennium? You do not get a new man there.
J.T. God's laws will be put into their minds, and written in their hearts, they will love God and their neighbour; but they come short of, "the second man, out of heaven". Therefore, there is no idea of that continuing eternally. God triumphs in it as regards His promises, but the national idea does not continue. Finally it is simply -- God and men.
Rem. Israel entering into the world to come is regarded as new; but short of the heavenly Man. So it is Israel *without guile*. Jesus said of Nathanael, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile" (@John 1:47).
J.T. They do not go inside the veil. It is a provisional state of things, God showing that He can retain a nation like Israel here on earth. He does not have to destroy the nation. According to @Ezekiel 36, He says, "I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean ...", so that they can become morally according to Christ, and yet they come short of @Luke 15. But mark, the elder son might have gone in, but he was angry and would not go in. The Jews could have gone in on the day of Pentecost, but there was only one day of Pentecost. It is not simply that the Holy Spirit comes *upon* us, as in the millennium; according to our chapter He sheds abroad in our hearts the love of God.
H.L. Has faith no place with the Jew then?
J.T. In @Leviticus 16, which rightly fits in with Romans, we have one bullock and two goats. There is only *one* bullock -- meaning that there is only one for christians, and nothing for sight. Whereas there were two goats. The blood of the bullock and of one goat was carried into the holiest of all; but the other goat is *seen* going into the wilderness bearing the confessed sins of the people -- they *see* the goat go away. The Jews will *see* Christ when He returns without their sins. When they *see* Him they
{52}
will know their sins have been borne away; but we do not wait for that. We have the Holy Spirit who witnesses to us that our sins and iniquities are remembered no more. The Jew will be blessed on the principle of sight; but the Lord says, "Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed". There can be no doubt that the remnant in Revelation will have a measure of reconciliation; but they will not have the best robe on, although they learn a heavenly song, nor will they have the enjoyment of things we now have. The remnant will cling to certain hopes; but they will not have the Spirit, as we, therefore they do not go within, nor do they get the best robe; but He shall appear to those that look for Him, without sin for salvation. They look for Him and *see* Him.
Rem. They will appreciate chapters 9 - 11 of this book as seeing the link in the ways of God. They will glean a great deal from the New Testament, no doubt.
Ques. At the end of the millennium, when the Lord delivers up the kingdom to God, what becomes of the Jew?
J.T. We might be free to say this: they merge with the *men* who are alluded to in @Revelation 21:3, "the tabernacle of God is with men".
Rem. There is a significant verse in @Ephesians 3, "of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named". It leaves a wide scope for even the eternal day. Romans, as often pointed out, treats of God's ways on the earth, hence, the nation of Israel is taken account of there, but not in Colossians or Ephesians.
C.A.M. One of the difficulties in one's own mind is as to how things are taken care of at the time of transition -- when "the heavens will pass away with a rushing noise, and the elements, burning with heat, shall be dissolved, and the earth and the works in it shall be burnt up" -- how it is that men, who have
{53}
been accustomed to live in flesh and blood condition here, shall be taken care of and changed to participate in what is wholly spiritual, that is, in the eternal state?
J.T. That is undisclosed. But we can well understand how God can change them as He will us when the Lord comes. The knowledge of God in our souls settles all such difficulties.
B.T.F. "As sin has reigned in the power of death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord".
J.T. The great question of life was intended by God to be settled and the second part of this chapter shows how it is abundantly settled -- not only do we live; but we "reign in life by the one Jesus Christ". Grace also *reigns* through righteousness, "even as sin has reigned in the power of death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". In that way God shows His complete victory.
Ques. Would that be connected with those in the millennium?
J.T. It looks on to it, but this epistle up to chapter 8 is for christians; it is what we hold on the principle of faith. It will not be enjoyed in the millennium as we have it. No matter what we have, it is the *best*.
Ques. Will eternal life be the same to the Jew as it is to us?
J.T. The indwelling Spirit necessarily constitutes a difference with us. The Spirit is the power by which we enjoy eternal life. Whereas, they will enjoy it as death is removed from them. We enjoy it in spite of the fact that death remains here.
J.S. "Even as sin has reigned in the power of death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". Reigning here is in the sense of complete victory.
{54}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (5)
@Romans 6:1 - 23
Rem. It was suggested last time that we should have a word or two as to the advantage in the change of headship from Adam to Christ. The deliverance we get in that way is most important to understand. "By one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death" -- God's way out is through another Man, and *such* an One. It is to the end that "grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life".
J.T. It forms in that way a turning point. The heart is drawn to that one Man, a necessity for whom existed from the outset. There is a great need of one man now, but the world is not prepared to make room for the true One. This chapter shows that all depends on Him, and that He has solved the question of righteousness and life.
A.N.W. In this chapter the Lord is spoken of as "Christ Jesus", in the fifth as "Jesus Christ".
J.T. I was going to remark in regard to that that the form of the expression alters in this chapter, it is "in Christ Jesus", whereas in the fifth it is "through Jesus Christ". The thought of the Man is prominent, I think, in the expression "Jesus Christ", and that of the anointing in the expression "Christ Jesus". "Jesus Christ" would be in accordance with your thought, the "One man" *by whom things are brought to pass*; here the great problem of righteousness and life is manifestly solved.
Rem. Divine intervention is indicated as soon as the ruin comes in, for Adam was a figure of Him that was to come. God was not taken unawares; He had a Man before Him. Now this Man is brought into view here, and the blessed fact of
{55}
transference from Adam to that Man, Jesus Christ. He is also indicated as Lord "through Jesus Christ our Lord".
J.T. The heart rests, it seems to me, in the expression in verse 15, "the free gift in grace, which is by the one man Jesus Christ, abounded unto the many".
C.A.M. How do you understand the words, "much rather"?
J.T. I think it suggests the abundance of things as compared with what Adam brought in. "Much rather" in this chapter suggests the abundance of the result come into the world through Christ.
C.A.M. In what way do you mean abundance?
J.T. Look at verse 17, "Much rather shall those who receive the abundance of grace, and of the free gift of righteousness". Notice the expression, "reign in life", not only *live*, but "reign in life by the one Jesus Christ". And so in verses 20 and 21 "Where sin abounded grace has overabounded, in order that, even as sin has reigned in the power of death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life".
A.N.W. It is not only one Man, but "much more" by Him; and it is for all.
J.T. Quite so; and what suggests it is the moral question involved, that of good and evil; it could not at all be solved through Adam even though he had remained in obedience. He could not have solved the great question of good and evil. This involved the attributes of God, all of which were infinitely satisfied and harmonised in Christ.
Rem. The consequence flowing from Adam's deed is not only met, but God is glorified in respect of it, and there is a wondrous excess of grace; it reigns through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ.
{56}
J.T. I think an examination of the Scriptures which treat of the divine attributes, such as righteousness, faithfulness, and you might say, love, will show that they enter into the abundance, the *much more*. The wonderful excess therefore is the result of what God is as revealed in Christ. It is therefore infinite.
Rem. Is that not the basis of the question raised at the beginning of chapter 6? Sin abounding has brought out a marvellous excess of the grace of God.
J.T. The question, "Should we continue in sin, that grace may abound?" is the point of view of the natural mind. How absolutely wanting in moral conceptions is the natural mind! That thought must be banished for ever out of the world in which these wonderful thoughts apply. The puny mind of man must be shut out when dealing with the thoughts of God; "Far be the thought", says the apostle.
B.T.F. When is God's thought, expressed in the last verse of chapter 5, reached: "So also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life"?
J.T. I suppose the conditions required for it began with the presence of the Spirit here, on the ground of accomplished righteousness. The conditions of eternal life became effective then.
B.T.F. What is the sense of "to" -- through righteousness *to* eternal life?
J.T. Eternal life is the result of the reigning. Sin reigned *unto* death, and so grace reigns *unto* life.
Rem. It is the wonderful consequence of the change of head. We do not make enough of the gain we have in our new Head. The result is wonderful!
W.L.P. Say a word about headship -- just exactly what it is; our minds do not grasp it at once.
J.T. I think headship is introduced here in principle and on *moral* grounds. In Colossians it is introduced on *personal* grounds, and in Ephesians
{57}
on the grounds of *sovereignty* -- "gave him to be head". In Colossians He is Head because of what He is personally. Here it is what He is morally -- because He has glorified God in respect of sin through His obedience.
Rem. The need existed, and any one who could meet it would necessarily be head. The need was expressed throughout the Old Testament, but no one came forward. Christ brings in what is moral; but what He is in His creatorial right is seen in Colossians.
W.L.P. The expression "Jesus Christ" in this chapter is connected with what is moral?
J.T. Yes, and it is important to see that, because it shows how the Lord acquires a place in our souls -- that which is His right; and what God is as revealed in Him.
Rem. In @Hebrews 2 He is brought in as Head, all things put under Him, but we do not get this in the chapter before us.
J.T. His headship is a fixed thing in your soul after a right understanding of Romans.
B.T.F. "What then shall we say? Should we continue in sin ... ?" Open out the bearing of this for us.
J.T. It is the suggestion of the natural mind, which is entirely devoid of moral conception. There is a great moral defect in the mind of the person who asks such a question. The question shows that sin has not been judged in the one who raises it, and the apostle meets it by, "Far be the thought", and proceeds to reason it out. The apostle in writing to the Romans reasons things out and enforces the truth on moral lines.
Rem. As an illustration, I heard of a priest who influenced Russia a year or two ago, who taught that the more men sinned the more they glorified God, because they thus furnished occasion for the grace
{58}
of God. That is the question raised here. If the grace of God is so magnified by sin, we should go on sinning. The apostle meets that, he says it is forever impossible because sin brought Christ into death and He died to it.
J.T. "We who have died to sin, how shall we still live in it?". It is a question for the soul, and if one has the moral element there, he answers to it.
B.T.F. Our souls are in bondage until we are wholly free from sin.
J.T. To meet the question the apostle introduces the teaching of baptism. God said, "Out of Egypt have I called my son" (@Matthew 2:15). That is God's affection for the Son; but the believer (who is also a son) has to ask, why it is that he has to leave Egypt; so that baptism is the great issue of this chapter, and the apostle opens up the truth of it here (see verses 4,5). If you compare baptism in this chapter with the teaching based on it in Colossians, I think you will see that here we are regarded as dead to sin, whereas in Colossians as dead *from* it. In Romans the christian is here in the presence of sin, but the death of Christ is between him and it, it is a constant daily exercise; whereas in Colossians it is "from the elements of the world"; the believer faces heaven in Colossians.
Rem. @2 Corinthians 4:10,11 would run somewhat on these lines -- "always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body; for we who live are always delivered unto death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh" -- the constant daily application of the death of Christ.
P.H.P. Baptism places one in a certain position, but is there not power to maintain it?
J.T. The Holy Spirit is the power. In Colossians your face is heavenward and your life is hid. But
{59}
here it is "newness of life"; we should walk in newness of life. The life of Jesus should be manifested in our bodies. In Romans christians are before the eyes of the world; whereas in Colossians our backs are to it, and we are going to heaven.
C.A.M. The type of baptism in Romans is the Red Sea, that in Colossians is Jordan.
J.T. In the latter you are going out of the world, but in Romans you bring in the death of Christ by baptism; as maintaining this you are saved from the influence of sin.
P.H.P. As baptised you change your position into the wilderness; Colossians leads into the land.
J.T. The Spirit carefully avoids saying *we* are raised in Romans. But we are said to be in Colossians.
Rem. In Colossians you are indifferent to public gaze, to the estimate that may be formed of you in the world; your life is hid. It is a question of heavenly life and heavenly privilege.
J.T. Colossians enables us to enter into assembly privileges because we are really on the platform of our own resurrection with Christ on the principle of faith. In Romans it is only that we "shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection".
C.A.M. It suggests you are a different man from what you were without defining *fully* what you *are*; the emphasis is on the fact that you "should walk in newness of life".
Rem. A different man from what you were, but in the same sphere, and liable to be affected by the same things, so the death of Christ is the preservative.
A.N.W. Baptism brings in the lordship of Christ, for it is in His name.
J.T. Yes, but the emphasis here is that it is to His death -- "as many as have been baptised ... unto his death".
{60}
Rem. We are not baptised to Jesus as a living Man on earth, but to Him as having died, and so it is to His death; hence there is to be a walk in newness of life. If it had been 'unto Jesus Christ' and stopped there, it might well have been turned to all sorts of imitation of the life of Jesus in the flesh, the natural man attempting an imitation of Him, therefore the whole emphasis is on the fact that it is "unto his death".
J.T. Baptism "unto his death" should be emphasised; it subverts the whole idea held in christendom. There christianity is adapted to the world, and baptism is the outward sign of it; but there is no practical recognition of the bearing of the death of Christ. What is insisted on in this chapter is that baptism is to His death.
W.B-w. The eunuch arrived at it when he came to the scripture, "His life is taken from the earth" (@Acts 8:33).
J.T. He would die too! He would be baptised and so identify himself with Christ's death.
Ques. Has He a claim on us through His death? are we to recognise Him as Lord?
J.T. I do not know that it is so much a question of the lordship of Christ in this chapter, although the blessing is said to be "through Jesus Christ our Lord"; it presses home on the mind the import of His death so that sin should not reign in your mortal body. "Reckon yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body to obey its lusts. Neither yield your members instruments of unrighteousness to sin, but yield yourselves to God as alive from among the dead, and your members instruments of righteousness to God". In Romans God has come in in Christ, and His *moral* title to us is established. God has come to us through the death of Christ, and we are brought to Him in Christ. I am for God in the wilderness. My members are to be instruments of
{61}
righteousness to God. He would have the practice of righteousness here, and this result is reached through the body of the believer.
Rem. Very touching to see that fruit comes in: "Ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end eternal life".
C.A.M. How are we to use our physical members in relation to God?
J.T. The whole man is set up on the ground of redemption, so that my members are to be for God. All my members are held for God's service.
Rem. We get that illustrated in the cleansing of the leper in @Leviticus 14. There is the blood in connection with the ear, the hand, and the foot. What the ear receives, what the hand does and where the foot takes -- all is in relation to God.
J.T. The whole man is in that way secured for God. The application of the oil to the cleansed leper afterwards would show that the believer is to be governed by the Spirit in his activities. In chapter 8 of our epistle, it is said that the Spirit is "life on account of righteousness".
T.A. Man, once lost, is thus fully recovered to God.
Rem. We see this in Paul at Damascus. The same mouth through which he breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the people of the Lord is immediately occupied in announcing that Jesus is the Son of God.
B.T.F. "Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body". Say a word on that.
J.T. That is our responsibility. We have to hold the house now for God. I am referring to @Ecclesiastes 12 -- the house is a figure that Solomon used to describe the whole body: he describes the different organs, as you might say; there he is referring to dissolution, but here it is the believer's body, as alive on earth that is in view.
{62}
Rem. So that as being made free from sin, to admit it again would be like letting an intruder in; we would not let a burglar into our house and welcome him, so that henceforth sin is an intruder to be kept out.
J.T. Sin *may*, alas, gain an entrance at times, but certainly it is not to be allowed to *reign*.
T.A. The body of sin is annulled.
J.T. Quite, that is the *totality* of it. It is annulled for the believer. We do not undertake to set evil aside in the world, but we will not allow it in our body. Sin in this chapter is what is *in the world*, not as in chapter 7 working in our *members*. The legislators of the world little realise what they have to contend with: they cannot really cope with sin, it is too strong. All the legislation from Noah to the present time has not remedied it. The reign of Christ alone can solve it. When God's "judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness" (@Isaiah 26:9). God has given assurance to all as to this in that He has raised Jesus from the dead. I cannot remedy sin in the world, but I can remedy it in my own body. I am not going to let it reign there, so that the body of the believer is an instrument of righteousness for God. The bearing of the crucifixion of "our old man" is therefore effective in the believer, although sin remains in the world as before. Sin has power as the old man is recognised. Statesmen do not see this, so continue their efforts to improve the world.
Rem. No matter how perfect the legislation may be it always breaks down, because human nature is never changed.
J.T. But God "hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead" (@Acts 17:31). The moral issue was settled at the cross, and this chapter shows how it is settled in the believer, but the direct intervention of God alone
{63}
can annul sin's activity in this world. In this chapter we *reckon* ourselves dead to sin and alive to God; in chapter 8 we get the power for this. Here we get the doctrine governing our position. The Roman christians are said to "have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered" them.
W.L.P. The want of power in christians is because there is not much light.
J.T. Our wills too stand in the way. Obedience *from the heart* is spoken of here. This is what is needed amongst God's people, I am sure.
A.R.S. You may have light but if the heart does not obey there is no power. Doctrine gives you light, and then when the heart moves in accordance with the light the Spirit helps us.
J.T. Soul difficulty is generally on account of disobedience.
A.R.S. We have known brethren who have had great light, but they have dropped behind, because the heart has not been subject.
J.T. Obedience is the principle.
P.H.P. Paul himself is an example of that, he says, "I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision" (@Acts 26:19).
J.T. The Holy Spirit is given to those that *obey* Him (@Acts 5:32).
Rem. I am glad that you emphasise obedience, because we sometimes get an idea that love comes first, whereas obedience comes first.
J.T. And it must be maintained: "to obey is better than sacrifice" (@1 Samuel 15:22). The man who has light, and yet is rebellious in heart is to be dreaded.
A.N.W. What about verse 14, "For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under law but under grace"?
J.T. As regards failure, I suppose we may as well confess that "we all often offend". If failure does occur, Satan occupies you with it, so as to darken
{64}
and distress your soul. In such circumstances one is likely to turn to @Hebrews 6 and 10 and reason that he is lost. For such an one there is precious light in this passage: "Ye are not under law but under grace". God is the same to you that He was before you were converted; He does not give you up whatever happens. Of course, sin is sin, and has to be judged, but it does not change God's attitude towards me. The knowledge of this is armour against Satan's attack, and it aids in judging the sin that dishonours God and interrupts communion. The law holds the mind to sin, whereas grace turns you away from it and occupies you with Christ.
B.T.F. This chapter is to set free from the domination of sin as a principle that characterises the world.
J.T. Before closing it would be well to dwell for a moment on the subjective result in this chapter, what *we have*, what is worked out in our souls. He says in verse 20, "For when ye were bondmen of sin ye were free from righteousness. What fruit therefore had ye *then* in the things of which ye are *now* ashamed? for the end of *them* is death", the question is answered. Then he goes on to say, "Having got your freedom from sin, and having become bondmen to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end eternal life". What has the Christian? He has his fruit unto holiness, and the end of his exercise -- eternal life.
W.B-w. Where does holiness come in?
J.T. It is the great essential for seeing God: without holiness "no man shall see the Lord" (@Hebrews 12:14).
W.B-w. It is a question of state of soul and it fits us for the house of God.
C.A.M. The end is eternal life.
J.T. It is put at the end of the soul's experience here. It is an immense thing that through the practice
{65}
of righteousness I have my fruit unto holiness and the end everlasting life. Then the apostle tells us *where* eternal life is -- it is "in Christ Jesus our Lord". It is the gift of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
{66}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (6)
@Romans 7:1 - 25
J.T. That which has engaged us heretofore might be regarded as referring to what is external, or outside of one, but this chapter deals with what is inside; the apostle speaks of it as "sin that dwelleth in me".
Rem. As regards what was outside Paul could say, "Touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless" (@Philippians 3:6). But, here, he makes it clear that there was one thing from which he could not escape, namely, what was inside, and to which "Thou shalt not lust" applied.
J.T. In taking up man as fallen, God first takes account of the things characterising him that are undeniable and public -- his sins, and then, after chapter 5, certain things that affect him externally, especially death, and sin as dominating the world. Then He shows how sin is replaced by righteousness and death by eternal life. So all that which relates to man, viewed externally, is disposed of in the first six chapters -- the whole question of what has taken place on earth is answered. In verse 18 of chapter 6 we read, "Having got your freedom from sin, ye have become bondmen to righteousness". Then in verse 23, "For the wages of sin is death; but the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord". One's external position is thus adjusted in the latter part of chapter 6. In the place of sin there is righteousness, and instead of death being upon one's spirit, there is eternal life. Whereas, in this chapter and the following one we have that dealt with which is within the believer, and that is a more difficult problem to solve -- it is more complex.
Rem. The young man, who came to Jesus, said, "All these things have I kept from my youth up:
{67}
what lack I yet?" (@Matthew 19:20). So with Paul, outwardly there was nothing that anyone could put a finger upon, and yet there was the question of the *nature* -- of that which was inside, and it made itself known in lust. It is that which makes a man cry out, "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of this body of death?"
J.T. The young man had kept all these things; but the Lord said, "Go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me. But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful: for he had great possessions". I suppose the Lord's words discovered covetousness in his heart.
Rem. There was nothing inconsistent externally; but there was that within which marks the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. No one of us can escape it naturally.
B.T.F. Do you take @Romans 7 as soul history?
J.T. Yes. It refers to what goes on *within*. Chapter 6 adjusts you in regard to what is *outside* of you, a very difficult problem to solve -- how a christian is to conduct himself in the world, in view of the fact that he is converted, has the Spirit of God, and has been baptised. This chapter has regard to what is inside of one and which is therefore more complex. It is more difficult on account of the contracted area -- you have to deal at close quarters.
Rem. I suppose all of us who have had to do with God have sooner or later experienced something of what we get in this chapter.
J.T. No one really knows deliverance, as we call it, without this experience. I use the word 'deliverance' to refer to what is inside -- sin that dwells in man naturally. It becomes a difficult problem for our souls, and unless it is gone through, in some sense, the soul is not really free before God.
{68}
Rem. I would go as far as to say that if there are any who have had the joy of forgiveness of sins, and afterward you see no deep concern about sin itself, such souls have yet a good deal to go through. The time will come when they will experience a great deal of sorrow on account of what they find inside. I see some who go along for years with very little exercise; satisfied with the forgiveness of their sins, but they have a big lesson yet to learn. It is the explanation of what we sometimes see -- some who have been for years in the place of believers, breaking bread maybe, and there comes a time when they pass through real misery of soul -- they then begin to learn this lesson.
C.B. What is the light that enters one's soul that causes one to get into this deliverance?
J.T. "The married woman is bound by law to her husband so long as he is alive; but if the husband should die, she is clear from the law of the husband". The law rules over a man as long as he lives. The law is still in force -- it is not abrogated, it applies to those who live in the flesh. It applies to those who are lawless, impious, sinful and the like, hence the only way from under its rule is to die. "If the husband should die, she is clear from the law of the husband ... So that, my brethren, ye also have been made dead to the law by the body of the Christ, to be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead". That is the light which enters the soul. Death has intervened and the law has no more force in that Christ has died. Only you have to accept the fact that you have become dead to it by the *body* of Christ.
E.H. Why the *body* of Christ?
J.T. Because it was that in which the will of God was carried out and in which the curse of the law was borne.
{69}
Rem. "Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree" (@Galatians 3:13). He took up the curse of the law, as well as taking up the question of liabilities, so in this chapter we have the way in which the body of Christ, the death of Christ, is our deliverance from law, because our death is seen in His death.
J.T. The book of Deuteronomy deals with this subject. If a man were hanged, his body was not to remain all night upon a tree, "For he that is hanged is accursed of God" (@Deuteronomy 21:23). It was a commandment as to what was to take place *after* the Israelites were in Canaan, which enables one to form a judgment as to what hanging signifies. The suggestion is found in @Genesis 9, "cursed be Canaan". As soon as they take possession of the land hanging becomes prominent. It is the form of capital punishment Joshua used in regard to the *Canaanites* -- not in regard of Achan (@Joshua 7 and @Joshua 10).
Rem. In regard of Ham there was the violation of what might be called an original law of nature, so the curse rested.
J.T. Disregard of parental authority.
B.T.F. Would you say we get here in the opening figure a new principle of life, by which the soul is enabled to see the way of deliverance as set forth in the two husbands? The first was the law, then married to Another, upon which you get the supply of affection, which is really important in regard to deliverance.
J.T. So that the new Husband comes in at the end, I suppose. "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". There must be a new marital link.
B.T.F. But you get a new link mentioned at the outset of the chapter.
Rem. I suppose the curse of the law brings in deadness Godward, while that which is taken up in connection with the death and resurrection of Christ produces fruit unto God.
{70}
A.N.W. I wondered whether the rod of priestly grace might answer this somewhat. Moses rod brought condemnation; but God could continue with them under the rod of priestly grace.
Rem. That rod had fruit. It not only budded, but bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.
A.N.W. It seemed to bring them to the brazen serpent.
P.H.P. The book of Ruth suggests the new Husband?
B.P. Is it essential for the soul to pass through this chapter?
J.T. As we remarked at the beginning, it is essential if the soul is to be really free before God -- in liberty. Many begin well but do not go on to the full recognition of the Holy Spirit. In the history of Israel we see how they began with a song of triumph, which would correspond with a soul newly converted -- all external matters adjusted and brought to God, happy in one's conversion, and so on, but then, that song dies out. Miriam joined in the singing of @Exodus 15. Our brother has just been remarking about @Numbers 20. The rod of priestly grace was in the divine mind; but Moses used his own rod. The rod in God's mind was the one which had budded -- wherein was life. Miriam had just died, that is, her song ended. Many a young soul goes on brightly and happily for a while in the joy of the light they have received, but they do not go on to the judgment of sin in the flesh and the liberty of the Spirit. In @Numbers 17 the principle of resurrection life is introduced in connection with the priesthood. There was typically the support of Christ as Priest. God was gradually leading up to the displacement of the flesh. What the flesh is, had not been learned up to that time. Chapter 21 tells us that "the people spake against God, and against Moses". It shows
{71}
that after all the favour and divine guidance vouchsafed the flesh remained undetected and unjudged, and at this point exposed itself in opposition to God, and to Christ. It is what we find in our own breasts, though converted for years, hence to meet this painful discovery our resource is found in the Spirit in type, in the springing well, which answers to chapter 8 here; but chapter 7 is the transition from @Numbers 20 to 21 where we discover how incorrigible the flesh is.
B.P. This experience would be in view of life for God here, would it not?
J.T. Yes. With a view to our being here for God's pleasure -- that we might go into the land.
Rem. "In order that we might bear fruit to God". I like that suggestion of the rod that budded -- that of priestly grace. There was not only testimony in the buds and blossoms, but it yielded *fruit*.
A.N.W. How many of us, I wonder, really reach the point where we say, "I had not had conscience also of lust unless the law had said, Thou shalt not lust". Do we reach that?
J.T. We ought to do so. I believe there are many christians who are not intelligent as to indwelling sin; that is, according to the statement here: "sin that dwells in me". They may know it is there; but how to deal with it, and how to be happy with God in spite of it, is really a great problem.
C.A.M. It does not refer to acts of sin; this is more the state, is it not?
J.T. The subject really begins with verse 5, "When we were in the flesh"; it refers to a *past state*. The passage does not refer to normal christian state at all, but to a past state. That is to say, after the first four verses the Spirit of God goes back in our history to bring out this great subject of sin in man, which had its motions at a time when we were
{72}
in the flesh. This could not be said of a christian in the true sense of the word, for such is not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. The passage is not dealing with a christian strictly speaking. The Spirit of God goes back (verse 5) to a state which existed in its nakedness before christianity came in, "when we were in the flesh". There was such a time in our previous history. It goes on to say, "The passions of sins, which were by the law, wrought in our members to bring forth fruit to death".
C.A.M. "When we were in the flesh". Is it not a matter of exercise as to whether we can really use these words?
J.T. I think a christian, according to the light the gospel affords, is entitled to say that he is not in the flesh.
A.N.W. Would you not say this chapter is light? The apostle speaks as he does so that a sense of the moral power of the light might be known in our souls.
J.T. It is light just as chapter 6 is light. This is light as to what is *inside* of me, and in order to present the subject fully he goes back to the time when I was in the flesh. It applies, strictly speaking, to the Jew before christianity; even if he were converted, as we speak, as David was, or others, he was still "in the flesh".
J.S. When do you discover it?
J.T. I think it is really discovered after one gets the Spirit; but you see, in order to present the subject rightly, he goes back to the time before we got the Spirit -- before man could have the Spirit -- because he wants to present it in its entirety. It is one who has the Spirit who is writing it.
C.B. I have heard some christians say they were in doubt as to whether they were converted or not. Yet one would be assured they were christians.
{73}
J.T. A believer is labouring under a great disadvantage unless he is in the light of this chapter; hence the importance of it. It arms one against Satan's attacks in after years. This chapter is "armour of light" in regard to what is inside of me. There is conflict inside of men, according to Galatians: but whatever suggestion may be made, I say, I am not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. Sin in the flesh is *condemned* (not forgiven); I accept this and am free of it.
Rem. When a man is really getting on in his soul, and begins to come under spiritual exercises, he passes through one of the worst hours in his life, for he then discovers what sin in the flesh is. He is then ready to say, 'Why, I could never have been converted if this is true of me'. I was going to suggest a very simple illustration: in the previous chapters, leading up to chapter 5, we have fruits, that is, what grow on the tree; but with the young man, to whom we have alluded, and Paul, there had not been any external fruits; but notwithstanding that, the root, the trunk and the branches and the twigs, everything was exactly the same as in others producing the fruits. Now, here in this chapter the nature of the tree is being dealt with, and when I come under spiritual enlightenment, I become aware of the nature of that root and stock; and I am brought to say, "I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing".
J.S. Christ comes before the soul as Deliverer at that point, and the Spirit as forming a state, takes the place of the flesh.
Rem. And the death of Christ comes in as adjusting all for the conscience.
J.T. It is well to make it clear that verse 5 is not really dealing with a christian, as some have held. Paul makes it clear that it was what belonged to the past. Then he says in verse 6, "but now"; verse 5
{74}
refers to a past dispensation; verse 6 to the present one, to the gospel period. "But now we are clear from the law, having died in that in which we were held, so that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of letter". So that christianity involves serving in newness of spirit. Christians thus serving answer to the mind of God.
P.H.P. When the soul desires to do good, as is supposed here, does not that suppose a germ of christianity in him?
J.T. The desire to do good was present in Old Testament times. It existed in those who were converted, as we speak, in the Old Testament. The desire to do good was there, as is expressed in verse 18, "To will is there with me, but to do right I find not" -- such were hampered. How different the position in verse 6, "But now we are clear from the law, having died in that in which we were held, so that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of letter". The soul is happy now in the performance of good and is not hampered in it.
P.H.P. It seems strange that a man in the flesh should desire to do good.
A.N.W. I see that; but in the young man there was a desire to do good; yet not with the same spring in his heart as seen in this man.
J.T. Even though one were converted, as living in Old Testament times, one could never be in any other state than "in the flesh". There was no other state before God until Christ died. No matter how good one's desires, there was no other state, and in it they were held under the law.
C.A.M. This is simply light. It is not describing a state that a man actually went through, is it?
J.T. I think the writer went through it.
C.A.M. Is it not then, looking at it abstractly?
J.T. There is nothing in the way of experience or conduct presented abstractly in Scripture, that is
{75}
not possible concretely. It has been already passed through. The more sincere a man was, the more force the commandment would have. Mark you, it is the spirituality of the law that kills him. It seems to me the whole force of the ten commandments for him is in the tenth, "Thou shalt not covet". That was the commandment which slew him.
A.R.S. Is not this the experience of a quickened soul, like Cornelius, for instance?
J.T. More especially one who is under the law. Verse 7 raises the question of the law, "Is the law sin? Far be the thought. But I had not known sin, unless by law: for I had not had conscience also of lust unless the law had said, Thou shalt not lust". So that he discerns, it seems to me, that the whole force of the law is in that one commandment, "Thou shalt not lust". His condition is absolutely hopeless now -- he has no standing before God. Why should he have these exercises? Were he not the subject of the work of God, he would not have them.
Rem. One greatly admires the wisdom of the whole passage, "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law; but with the flesh sin's law". It does not stop at saying, 'serve God'; but "serve God's law". See the wisdom in it! The law is not obsolete; with the mind I take pleasure in serving it.
J.T. It clears the ground for the next chapter where it says, "In order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit".
A.N.W. What is the difference between "law" and "commandment"?
J.T. "Law", I think, is a general term, referring to what is permanently established; "the commandment" is more specific. A study of @Psalm 119 helps as to the variety of terms that a spiritual man uses in dealing with that which expresses the will of God; and I think it would be found that the word
{76}
'commandment' is to show something specific. Here, I judge the writer refers to the tenth, that is, that one commandment which came home to him so forcibly.
P.H.P. I would like a little help upon the last verse: the *mind* serving God's law, and the *flesh* sin's law.
J.T. Let us look at the verses preceding: "For I delight in the law of God according to the inward man: but I see another law in my members, warring in opposition to the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which exists in my members. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of this body of death? I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law; but with the flesh sin's law". I think the "inward man" is a being; he says he delighted in the law of God according to *it*. Whereas, the "mind" would be the active, or combative part -- it is that by which the battle is fought, so to speak. It succeeds now through deliverance. The responsible man ("*I myself*") is delivered through Christ, and the mind is wholly subservient to him; with it he serves God's law.
Rem. In chapter 12 the mind is viewed as the seat of the intelligence; it is renewed, so as to prove how good and acceptable God's will is. Then in @Ephesians 4 we get, "being renewed in the spirit of your mind", which is a step further.
J.T. Here it is initial. The mind has come definitely to take sides with God's will -- it is now subject to it.
B.T.F. You have, "*I myself*", as it were, a new person; and then you have the old state -- "the flesh".
J.T. You have first, "the inward man". That is the point to get hold of. The inward man is a divine creation; the truth of it is developed elsewhere. In
{77}
@2 Corinthians 4 we read of it being "renewed day by day". Here it is the beginning of the thing; he delights in the law of God according to that man; and then he cries out for deliverance from this body of death, and receives it through *thanksgiving*; "Who shall deliver me out of this body of death? I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". Now he has deliverance and is victorious. It is not yet the Spirit; he has worked it out by *light*, and the Spirit comes in later to support him. He has battled it through and has arrived at the point where he thanks God, and now calmly says, "so then, *I myself* with the mind serve God's law".
Rem. The question is worked out through the appreciation of the death and resurrection of Christ. So the gospel really fits in in its fulness, when he asks the question, "Who shall deliver me?" The answer is found in the gospel, "through Jesus Christ our Lord". He thanks God.
B.T.F. When is the deliverance, spoken of here, *actually* brought about?
J.T. It is worked out on the principle of light. The next chapter gives us the support -- you are supported in this by the Spirit. In spite of the fact that he has reached victorious ground, he would soon be displaced, if he had not the Spirit; so the Spirit is emphasised in the next chapter, and takes the place of the flesh. "*Ye* are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you".
B.T.F. Some have said it is a moment when the believer would not only be set free in spirit but in body -- in actuality.
J.T. This is soul history, because he still recognises sin there. It is the present condition of the christian which is in view.
C.A.M. It is a matter of the mind because it is light.
J.T. The Spirit is not mentioned in this chapter.
{78}
A.N.W. Would you say he has discovered the inward man, because he has discovered Christ -- the new Husband?
J.T. I think the inward man is a moral being. It is spoken of more definitely in @2 Corinthians 4. Here, he delights in the law of God according to the inward man. Then he says, "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". It is complete deliverance. He says, "*I myself* ... serve God's law".
E.H. What was on your mind about this giving of thanks?
J.T. It is normal christianity. The apostle begins in chapter 1 with man in the flesh. An unthankful state marks him. Even in regard of the ordinary benefits of creation, there is no real giving thanks to God on the part of man. The moral value of giving of thanks is very great. I think it is just there that deliverance comes. He asks the question, "Who shall deliver me out of this body of death?" He then thanks God: the answer is in thanksgiving. And I think the Deliverer becomes the Husband.
{79}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (7)
@Romans 8:1 - 17
Rem. I suppose we get here, in the first three verses, a summing up of things which have been developed in the previous chapters, in order to introduce the great subject of the Spirit. Verse 4 opens it up by saying, "In order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit". So that, as we were seeing, in chapter 5 it was deliverance from Adam in order to come under Christ. In chapter 6 it was a question of deliverance from the practical power of sin in the world; and in chapter 7 it was a question of the issues of the law. It has been pointed out that the first three verses of chapter 8 correspond to those three things, so making room for the Spirit.
J.D-s. I would suggest that the positive side of things is to be introduced in a special way. You spoke of the Spirit. "In order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit".
J.T. The Spirit brings in practical righteousness.
Rem. There is a new power working in the christian.
J.T. The introduction of practical righteousness is prominent at the outset of the chapter. "The righteous requirement of the law" is not a full expression of practical righteousness, but involves much in the way of a moral victory. This is what the law was aiming at. The law is not null or void -- it is retained in its righteous requirement. I suppose the expression, "the Spirit life on account of
{80}
righteousness", would go on to full practical righteousness.
A.F.M. Have we in this chapter what corresponds to the plains of Moab?
J.T. I think so. The full recognition of the Spirit involves not only the plains of Moab, but Mount Nebo.
A.F.M. Hitherto the law had not been kept; but now every requirement of it could be fulfilled because we have the Spirit.
J.T. We were noticing last evening about things being done when the sun was hot (@Nehemiah 7:3), that is, when it is in the meridian. That would be the objective side -- the truth developed in chapters 3, 4, and 5, which bring God in Christ into His full place in the soul objectively. Having thus His *full* place, chapter 8 gives the Spirit a corresponding place in the believer. In the type, @Numbers 21, we have, "Sing ye unto it". The Spirit, typically, becomes recognised *fully*.
J.S. He is recognised as a source of power.
J.T. Yes; instead of the flesh.
A.N.W. Where is the flesh dealt with in this chapter?
J.T. It is dealt with doctrinally in chapter 7. Of course, actually on the cross, that is, @Romans 3 and @Romans 7 took place at the same time as to fact. Therefore chapter 8 comes in immediately. Paul's 'therefores' and 'ifs' are links in the teaching. Now, I think, the "therefore" of chapter 8:1 links with chapter 7, not with chapter 3. It is not exemption from wrath to come exactly, but rather condemnation of conscience. He was consciously condemned as in the state described in chapter 7. Those "in Christ Jesus" are immune from that.
Rem. I was wondering if you would not bring in chapter 6 also in connection with the question of the flesh.
{81}
J.T. "The body of sin" (chapter 6), refers, I think, to the totality of sin *outside* of me; that is, in the world. It is broken up in the old man having been crucified; but victory over sin in the flesh, I think, is wrought out in the individual.
Rem. There is that difference between chapters 6 and 7.
J.T. In chapter 7, the man has discovered the power of the flesh. It is there; but he does not see it formally condemned. Mark, it is not said to be crucified as chapter 6 says of our old man; here the flesh is condemned, as a principle, so I need not regard it any longer.
A.F.M. In the end of chapter 7 it says, "So then with the mind I myself serve the law of God". "I myself". There seems to be the connecting of oneself with what is of God. Then, "with the flesh the law of sin". There is the ability to distinguish between the one and the other.
J.T. I think the man has arrived at the truth experimentally; he has come to recognise an *inward* man. I suppose it is some formation which answers to Christ in me. And, then, he defines the position more clearly, saying, "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". He is now in control, so to speak, of the house. If sin's law is served, it is the flesh, so the position is clear. Chapter 8 takes that as a basis, "There is then now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus".
Rem. Having, so to speak, isolated and brought into view the inward man, chapter 8 brings into view the power by which that man can effectively live to God, namely, the power of the Spirit.
J.T. "For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death". This goes beyond chapter 7, which is a mental process; but "the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus" is a positive thing in a new position;
{82}
and governs that new position. Then he says, "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh".
A.R.S. In connection with this expression, "in Christ Jesus", is Noah in the ark an example, or illustration, of this? For instance, Noah was placed in the ark, the Lord shut him in, and he was beyond the judgment.
J.T. I suppose so, only that the word 'condemnation' here refers rather to what is going on in one's self. The expression "in Christ Jesus" of chapter 6 would be more in accord with the type of Noah, for in Noah you have the principle of baptism: salvation from what is *without* -- the world, or the polluted system outside. "The like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us". So you reckon yourself to be dead to *sin* -- not sin within you, but sin outside of you. You are dead to it. In Colossians dead *from* it: "from the elements of the world". Your back is toward it. In Romans it is before you, but it has no power over you; you reckon yourself dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus.
A.F.M. In chapter 6 it is a reckoning -- you reckon yourself dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus; but in chapter 8 it says, "There is then now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death".
J.T. There is no idea of reckoning there, it is a fact.
Rem. I would suggest, in connection with our brother's question, that the point of contrast is "in Christ", instead of being 'in Adam'. Adam was the man of condemnation, and condemnation is in my conscience as of Adam; but, through being
{83}
transferred to Christ, with all the blessed effects of His redemption work, I am in the sphere in connection with a Man who is in resurrection, beyond the power of death, and who has not to do with sin in any way. I am in One with whom the idea of condemnation can never connect itself.
J.T. I think this question of position helps very much in the understanding of Romans. In chapter 6 it is: "Reckon yourselves ... alive to God in Christ Jesus". Then, in that same chapter, "Eternal life in Christ Jesus", that is its position; but in this chapter it is not that I reckon myself alive to God in Christ Jesus simply; but there are those who are definitely *in* Christ Jesus, and there is a law governing the position, namely, "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus".
J.S. So that condemnation does not apply to that position. You have changed your position, as well as your man, have you not?
Rem. The position is based really upon resurrection. It is based upon One who, having passed through death, has dealt with sin, and has come into resurrection, where the elements of sin and death could never intrude; therefore the whole matter of condemnation is disposed of forever.
B.T.F. Would you say the great point after "in Christ Jesus" is the Spirit as power for walk?
J.T. The chapter really develops, so to speak, the functions of the Spirit; but as you suggested, we begin with the new position -- that of those "in Christ Jesus".
J.S. In this new position the Spirit of God is free, is not hampered at all.
J.T. The apostle adds a thought about himself to the general statement, which shows the working of it, and which is valuable to any one who goes in for it, namely, "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of
{84}
death". He is the typical man positionally -- he is free. The next thing is, "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh". Where did He condemn it? *In the flesh*.
C.A.M. Do you connect responsibility with the state, "in Christ Jesus"?
J.T. Yes. I think Scripture does; it says, "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution" (@2 Timothy 3:12).
A.N.W. Is it not remarkable that the apostle begins to develop state as soon as he has mentioned the position?
J.T. Yes. It shows the bearing of the chapter. He wants to make prominent that there is a new state. Not only a new position, but a state corresponding with it.
A.N.W. Does not chapter 8 present the climax of deliverance?
J.T. It shows you the *way* of deliverance, that is, Christ is presented as the Deliverer -- "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". He is the *means* of it, but then, you change the preposition in chapter 8, it is "in Christ Jesus". The believer is now in that position.
A.N.W. I thought that chapter 8 discovered the new Husband.
J.T. It does. Verses 1 - 4 of chapter 7 lay down what is to be reached in the chapter. We do reach the Husband, but chapter 8 is more than that.
A.N.W. I thought that Christ became prominent in chapter 7, God in chapter 6, and the Spirit in chapter 8.
J.T. The great thing one sees in spiritual things is that finality is reached. Not only am I delivered from the consequences of sin but He places me in a fixed position, where all is perfectly secured, as here,
{85}
"in Christ Jesus". The position is so marvellous; would that we could lay hold of it! Paul says, "who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ" (@1 Corinthians 4:17).
A.F.M. Do you connect the expression, "in Christ Jesus", with the land or the wilderness?
J.T. I think with the land; you have nothing *fixed* in the wilderness.
A.F.M. If the chapter is typical of the plains of Moab, how is it that we start with this remarkable expression?
J.T. He says it only in the abstract. He does not say it formally of the Romans. It is "to those", not 'to you'.
Rem. I think @Romans 8:1 is like many of the psalms. It states the conclusion that is eventually reached, and then goes back and works along to the details that lead up to it.
J.T. He can state it of himself. In the second verse he says *he* is set free, but the whole chapter is that all might be set free.
Rem. It works up to that end.
B.T.F. When you have, "those in Christ Jesus", that is spoken of a people who have the Spirit; then the Spirit sets you free and becomes power.
J.T. That is the teaching of the chapter; but as we have been remarking, the first verse is the great end to be reached -- it is not in the wilderness; it is in the land, "in Christ Jesus".
W.B. Is this new law for the wilderness, or for the land?
J.T. "In Christ Jesus" always connects itself with a fixed position, and that is not in the wilderness. We must be careful to notice how it is put: "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death". He only says it of himself.
{86}
Rem. We need, perhaps, a little word of explanation here, that the use of the "law" does not always, or generally, mean the covenant at mount Sinai. It is the principle or rule, of life in Christ Jesus; or the principle or rule, of sin and death.
T.A. "The law of sin and of death" cannot be the covenant at mount Sinai. What then is it?
J.T. I think it is wrought out in chapter 7. "I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members". It is the state of man in the flesh. He is governed by that law, and whatever legislation might do for him, it remains the same in principle until the end. It is death, not, however, in the sense in which it is spoken of as "the wages of sin"; but rather, the state in which he is as away from God.
Rem. "Dead in trespasses and sins" and "Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world".
A.F.M. Some may not have connected responsibility with the land.
J.T. Our position in Christ necessarily enters into our walk and ways here. The apostle in writing to the Galatians connects it with new creation: "For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision; but new creation. And as many as shall walk by this rule, peace upon them and mercy" (chapter 6:15,16). Now, new creation is obviously in the land; it belongs to it, and yet, it is a *rule*. I think that in your daily life and circumstances you are governed not only by the initial thoughts which you received at your conversion and which continue, but you are governed and coloured by the greatest, the most precious, light you have in your soul.
A.N.W. "I ... beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called".
{87}
J.T. That is it.
Rem. I would suggest that the epistle to the Philippians gives us the light in which responsibility is viewed for one who is "in Christ Jesus" -- who is in the land. It is the light for those who come out from that position and who walk in the light and power of it. Responsibility is connected with Philippians, but for one who knows his place in the land.
A.R.S. The very expression "in the land" helps, because the children of Israel were placed in the land, and were responsible to obey what God told them to do. It was distinctly stated, if they did not obey, they would lose the land.
J.T. I think, however, whilst "in Christ Jesus" involves the land, it is well to remember that Romans does not develop it; when you come to the epistles which treat of the land, or the inheritance, you have added thoughts to "in Christ Jesus". In Ephesians we have "who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (chapter 1:3). You have the added thought, "in the heavenlies". Again, He "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus" (chapter 2:6). Ephesians is, properly speaking, the epistle which develops the truth of our position in the land. Romans is more the Person in whom I am. I think the question raised as to responsibility is helpful; also that we should see that our responsibility flows from the full height of our position, or privilege, rather than from any prescribed law.
A.R.S. It used to be said, 'The greater the privilege, the more responsibility'.
J.T. "For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the nations that are upon the earth" (@Deuteronomy 14:2). Responsibility for Israel was based on this. The Lord, Himself, is the best example -- He walked here as the
{88}
heavenly Man. He magnified the law, and made it honourable; but His walk and ways went far beyond that.
A.F.M. So you have the light of it in the Lord Himself, and we are *in Him*.
J.T. Quite. We are "in Christ Jesus" and the position, necessarily, gives colour and dignity to my walk.
A.A.T. The responsibility attaching to us necessitates the new state in the Spirit.
J.T. Yes. He goes on to say, "In order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit. For they that are according to flesh mind the things of the flesh; and they that are according to Spirit, the things of the Spirit. For the mind of the flesh is death; but the mind of the Spirit life and peace. Because the mind of the flesh is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of God; for neither indeed can it be: and they that are in flesh cannot please God. But *ye* are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you". Notice it is "*ye*" here, christians characteristically. Therefore he puts all christians on a common platform in this -- those in whom God's Spirit dwells are not in the flesh.
A.N.W. You get a remarkable expression in chapter 16 of this epistle, a man named Apelles, "approved in Christ".
J.T. Righteousness is in view here in chapter 8. Firstly, "that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us". Secondly, the Spirit is life in view of righteousness.. It is righteousness that is in view. Now it is quite clear to me that practical righteousness in this world is a great point with God -- it is a point in His testimony. The judgment of Sodom would have been stayed if there had been fifty, or forty-five, or even ten righteous within the
{89}
city, showing what righteousness is in God's account; and I think @Romans 8 brings it in. It brings in practical righteousness on the ground that sin in the flesh has been judged and I have the Spirit. So the law does not fall to the ground; but more than that, the Spirit being in the christian his body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit is life on account of righteousness.
J.D-s. Do you connect that with the thought farther on, "For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit"? That is the form the kingdom of God takes today. God established before-time righteousness; but He shows here how He works it out.
J.T. If we would go through the Scriptures with that in view, we should be repaid in seeing what a wonderful place righteousness has in God's ways. And it comes out now in christians before its public manifestation.
J.D-s. It is really anticipating the time when righteousness will mark the course of things that will be established by God.
Rem. The fact is every avenue along which God has worked, as long as it is connected with time, has righteousness in view. Whether in the individual, or the assembly, or the kingdom, we find, from the divine side, righteousness always in view.
J.T. Righteousness *suffers* now; but it will *reign* in the millennium; and will *dwell* in the eternal state. I think that is how it is set; but it is morally greater to see it in suffering than in any other position, and this chapter shows where it is found -- in those who are "in Christ Jesus", who have the Spirit.
Rem. I suppose the thought of dwelling in eternity is that it rests; there is no further need for its exercise.
{90}
J.T. Peter treats of the subject of righteousness. He assumes that it is here in christians and regards it as suffering. Righteousness is suffering, and it will suffer; but he looks on to a time when it shall *dwell*.
J.D-s. What definition would you give for righteousness? There is no doubt that God's object in the law was to secure righteousness, but righteousness by law failed because of inherent weakness in man.
J.T. "The righteous requirement of the law" does not really include the full thought of righteousness. This epistle develops the righteousness of God -- that *kind* of righteousness, and I think the Spirit being given to the christian in view of righteousness involves a *full* answer to the righteousness of God.
J.D-s. The law was an indication of what God had before Him to secure.
J.T. I think John's epistles develop practical righteousness. He begins with what God is, and says, "If ye know that he is righteous, know that every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him" (@1 John 2:29). The one who practises righteousness is begotten of Him, that is the way John puts it. He traces it from Abel. Abel was a righteous man; his works were righteous and on that account he suffered.
B.T.F. The new man goes beyond "the righteous requirement of the law".
J.T. John's epistles develop that he that is born of God is righteous even as God is righteous. The new man is "created in truthful righteousness and holiness".
Rem. I was thinking that, really, what came out in such men as Abel, Enoch, and Abraham exceeded in moral value the requirement at mount Sinai. What was required at mount Sinai was in accord with the divine mind; but not the full measure of it.
J.T. I suppose the gospels, presenting as they do the life of Christ, give us the full idea of practical
{91}
righteousness. In @Matthew 5:21,22 we have, "Ye have heard that is was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment: But I say unto you ...". He unfolded a system of teaching which would be law, embodying the great principles of righteousness; answering to this we practise righteousness according to God. The word 'requirement' here necessarily limits you, whereas with God it is a question of His rights in mercy -- what He does sovereignly. It is God acting from Himself and according to Himself, in Christ. So the answer to that in the christian is, "He scattereth abroad; he giveth to the poor: his righteousness abideth for ever" (@Psalm 112:9).
Rem. It is more than a question of righteous acts: It would not do to limit righteousness to acts; it is a question of the moral being behind the acts. So seen in the Lord Jesus -- "I delight to do thy will, O my God" (@Psalm 40:8). There was a spring there whether He was doing or not, so to say. So we are brought under the light and sway of that which goes beyond the covenant of Sinai: the righteous acting of the believer, in the power of the Spirit, is a question of what comes out of the new nature.
J.D-s. In christians righteousness is not only demanded but *produced*.
Rem. It is really the outcome of the divine nature.
J.T. "He that practises righteousness is righteous, even as *he* is righteous" (@1 John 3:7).
A.R.S. Will you explain what is meant by, "When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both" (@Luke 7:42), and how God does it righteously?
J.T. The incident is recorded in @Luke 7. In a passage preceding what you quoted, it says, "And all the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized
{92}
of him" (chapter 7:29,30). That is, the righteousness of God was there in Christ -- John bore witness to it -- and Jesus Himself said, "Suffer it now; for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness" (@Matthew 3:15). In saying that He submitted to baptism. Now, he says, the Pharisees and lawyers did not submit to baptism, so that the publicans and harlots would go into the kingdom of heaven before them; and the example is in a woman, who came into the Pharisee's house and submitted to the righteousness of God -- she had faith. The righteousness of God is, "on the principle of faith, to faith". It was there in Christ in all its fulness; but the Pharisees and lawyers did not submit to it, they did not recognise Him who was there; whereas this woman did, by the manner in which she treated Christ -- she wept, washed His feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. So the Lord sets forth His position in His speech to Simon, It was the expression of the righteousness of God. They were both on the same platform; but only one submitted. So He says to the woman, "Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace". She had the faith. What would that woman be afterwards? What would she be in the light of our chapter? She would be righteous; and her righteousness would take the form, not of demand or accusation, but of forgiveness.
A.F.M. True righteousness is based upon love to God and one's neighbour; this woman would be found in a righteous orbit henceforth, as having affection for Christ.
A.N.W. In @Romans 13:8 we have, "Owe no man anything, but to love one another". But in @Ephesians 4:28, "Let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him labour ... that he may have to give to him that needeth". There seems to be an extra obligation resting on the man in Ephesians.
J.D-s. Righteousness is really the recognition of the relationships that God has established, either
{93}
between Him and myself, or His creatures and myself.
Ques. You could not be righteous apart from Christ?
Rem. The law could not make us righteous, it was dealing with material that was hopeless, therefore righteousness cannot be apart from Christ.
W.B. The standard of righteousness which most of us have in our minds is too low; is that your thought?
J.T. I have no doubt it is too low. Our walk should flow from Paul's light. "Arise, shine! for thy light is come" (@Isaiah 60:1). It should be in reference to that. We were noticing yesterday that recovery from Babylon was not only to the Mosaic system; but also to David's system. So recovery today is to Paul's doctrine -- it is to the full light of the church's position with Christ in heaven.
W.B. So it is a mistake to limit the Lord's life and ministry on earth to "the righteous requirement of the law" being fulfilled; it goes beyond that.
J.T. Whilst maintaining, "Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled", yet He said, "I say unto you"; He added to what the law required. He said, "Be *ye* therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect" (@Matthew 5:18,48).
{94}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (8)
@Romans 8:18 - 39
B.T.F. Would you say that what is developed from verse 5 to verse 14 has regard to the statement made in verse 4?
J.T. Verse 4 is the result that God had in His mind which should be reached; but I think there is more in the following verses than the fulfilment of "the righteous requirement of the law"; that is, there is, as we said this afternoon, the full result of righteousness in the christian on account of the Spirit -- the Spirit is life in us. Then, that which follows the period of practical righteousness is resurrection, and that also is based on the Christian being indwelt by the Spirit -- our mortal bodies are said to be quickened on account of His Spirit dwelling in us. "If the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you". It is as if the apostle pursues the results consequent on the presence of the Spirit in the saints, first in the expression of practical righteousness and then in the quickening of the mortal body -- all being dependent on the Spirit. "But if the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ ...": the change from "Jesus" to "Christ" is suggestive.
A.F.M. Of what?
J.T. I think "Jesus" is the Man in whose personal walk God was pleased -- glorified; as we have it in the meat-offering. Whereas "Christ" is more what He was as anointed for the testimony.
Rem. "If so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you ... the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
{95}
the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you". If the Spirit of that God, who took such infinite pleasure in the Man, Jesus -- if His Spirit dwells in you, He that raised up Christ, as Head of every man (I suppose that is the idea), shall also quicken your mortal bodies on account of His Spirit dwelling in you. Our mortal bodies will be taken good care of, if indwelt by His Spirit.
B.T.F. I thought the connection was that in verse 4 you have "who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit", and in verse 14, "for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God".
J.T. "Who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit", refers to our *walk*, and brings out the thought of what a man should be here on earth according to God, such as Jesus was. But then there is another side to the presence of the Holy Spirit, that is, He leads us, "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God". That is not a question of our walk, but rather of what we are in connection with the counsels of God; "*these* are sons of God".
A.N.W. It is "the Spirit of God", not simply the Spirit here. It is important to pay attention to the forms of expression employed.
J.T. This chapter, one might say, is a treatise on the functions of the Spirit, and the different connections in which He operates in the christian.
Rem. We get, "the Spirit of life", "the Spirit of God", "the Spirit of Christ" and "the Spirit of adoption".
J.T. The last is written with a small "s" in the better translation, "a spirit of adoption" -- showing that it is characteristic of the believer.
{96}
A.F.M. It is rather a new thought to me, that we are led by the Spirit of God into divine counsels. I am thankful for it.
J.T. One is marked off as a son, by moving in that way.
Rem. It is akin to @Hebrews 2, "bringing many sons to glory".
A.F.M. Would you mind saying what it is to walk "after the Spirit"?
J.T. The thoughts are very much akin, only walk in verse 4 is more in the wilderness; but, then, there are great things which the Holy Spirit leads the soul into which suggest sonship, or our relations with God. "The righteous requirement of the law" is fulfilled in those who walk according to Spirit -- that is a wilderness thought. *Where* the law broke down, it is maintained in those who have the Holy Spirit; but then the Holy Spirit has great things before Him, and He leads us into them.
A.F.M. You might say that one results in righteousness and the other in counsel.
Rem. @Galatians 5:16 supports that: "Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh". That, I suppose, clearly indicates it is a question of our responsible walk down here.
J.T. "If we live by the Spirit" (@Galatians 5:25), would refer to our relations with God, known inwardly; then, "let us walk also by the Spirit", refers to our responsible life.
Rem. A very important distinction.
T.A. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness" (chapter 8:10). There is an advance on the possession of the Spirit, is there not?
J.T. I think so. That is a bit of Colossian truth. The thing is not designated of any special ones. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead"; if one thing is true another is true; but it is not stated as being
{97}
true of them. *If* it were true such would be the consequence. It would be, I should say, an appeal to the consciences of the local company. If the body was not dead (that is, if the body was simply a vehicle of lust) then Christ was not there; He was not in them.
Ques. Would it show there was a formative work of the Spirit there?
J.T. "Christ in you" is Colossian truth. It is said to be the mystery. In Colossians it is not 'Christ in you' only; there is an added thought, 'the hope of glory'. It is Colossian truth, brought in here to complete the subject as to the Christ's position. We were remarking yesterday about the sun being hot in the heavens (@Nehemiah 7:3); I think the Holy Spirit brings Christ into the affections, just as the servant of Abraham brought Isaac, in the way of testimony, to Rebecca, so that he found a place in her heart. Christ being in the saint leaves no room for the lust of the flesh: "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness" (verse 10).
A.F.M. It brings things to a climax. What about the expression, "If any one has not the Spirit of Christ *he* is not of him" (verse 9)?
J.T. That is a terrible word for any one in the christian company, because it suggests the possibility of one being outwardly there without the Spirit of Christ.
Rem. You cannot disconnect that from the previous part of the verse, "But *ye* are not in flesh but in Spirit", and then, the apostle seems to pause and adds, "If indeed God's Spirit dwell in you; but if any one has not the Spirit of Christ *he* is not of him". All has to be taken together. It raises a serious issue.
W.B. "The Spirit of Christ" -- is that different from the Holy Spirit?
{98}
J.T. I think it is the character -- the Spirit of that Man. This translation seems to favour, however, the thought of the Holy Spirit, although the translator tells us frankly he is not sure always. The original does not help, it is a question of spiritual judgment as to whether it is the Person of the Spirit, or the character that shone in Christ as Man, and, it seems to me, the latter is the thought in it. It is a question of the *kind* of spirit one is of.
Rem. Yes, rather on the line of @John 14:30, "The prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me". He is of another order, of another spirit.
C.A.M. In connection with the statement, "If so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you", how do you know you have the Spirit dwelling in you?
J.T. That is a very important question. I am sure it requires attention. The Holy Spirit, broadly speaking, makes Himself *felt* in the christian; it is a poor thing if one has to refer to the Scriptures as the only evidence that he has the Spirit. The Scriptures, of course, are full of teaching as to the Spirit being given to believers; but surely we are to be conscious that He indwells us. @Galatians 5 gives a list of the fruits of the Spirit.
C.B. Love for the brethren would be one of the evidences, would it not?
J.T. The Holy Spirit would surely make Himself felt in the christian, and it seems to me, the facts recorded of His actings with Christ help us. It is said of the Lord in @Mark 1:12, "The Spirit driveth him into the wilderness". That is, He was impelled to go. He was led into that into which, naturally, He desired not to go. The Holy Spirit in that way was recognised. He made Himself felt. I am speaking reverently of the Lord; but He was there as a Pattern for us. Then, it says in @Luke 4:14, "Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit". As if,
{99}
in the first instance, it was the Spirit's initiative, whereas, in the second instance it was the Lord's initiative, and the Spirit was available for Him. He returned in the *power* of the Spirit. So, I think, the christian should look for those marks -- whether there is a power in us taking the initiative, and we doing that which would not be done by us as left to ourselves.
Rem. The word used in Mark is very emphatic in that way, "driveth him into the wilderness". There was an impelling power to which He yielded; and as you say, would suggest Christ as Pattern for us. With regard to us, it would indicate the positive power of the Holy Spirit that drives, or makes way, against what is of nature. I think that is a very important point.
A.F.M. It was Deuteronomy ground the Lord occupied, not that part of the wilderness which denoted self-will working.
J.T. The Lord referred to Deuteronomy. So His position in the wilderness corresponds with this chapter. Further, the Holy Spirit makes much of Christ in the soul, so that one discovers that one thinks of, and delights more in Him. Then, He makes much of the saints; that is a very good test, I think; the saints become interesting and invaluable to us. One sees it in young christians; they think more of the Lord; they read the Scriptures more; they pray more, and enjoy meeting the Lord's people. All these things are evidences of the Spirit in the believer.
Rem. Response to the knowledge of Gad, as Father, is a very marked sign of the Spirit; this is seen when the soul cries, "Abba, Father".
A.F.M. What about self-judgment?
J.T. It is another mark. It is, "By the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body".
{100}
A.A.T. When you are preaching how do you know whether you are preaching in the power of the Spirit, or from memory?
J.T. It is difficult to say much about it. I am quite sure that one may be conscious of the Spirit's power in ministering. You feel led beyond what is merely natural ability, in the sense that Christ fills the soul -- light comes in that has not been there before. One evidence of the Spirit is that divine things which you have had in your soul become expanded -- that is one distinct mark of the Spirit in ministry.
J.D-s. We are in the Spirit's day, and everything depends upon the place the Spirit is given.
Rem. I recall that Mr. Wigram remarked that it was when he became conscious of God as Father that he knew he had the Spirit. He had the sense of being able to say, "Abba, Father"; it was the Spirit of adoption.
J.D-s. That is one of the characteristics of the babes in John's epistle, they know the Father.
J.T. Another thing may be noted here -- the word 'dwell'. You may have the Spirit; but He may not *dwell*. It is very different for one to come into your house out of the cold -- you extend a shelter -- to inviting and preparing for one, and making him perfectly free and at home in the house. Many christians give very little room to the Spirit, that is quite evident. The idea of *dwelling* is not simply that you are under the roof -- it is more than that -- it is that you are *restful*, that you are not disturbed by contrary elements. So @Galatians 5:17 contemplates an abnormal state in the christian, "the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh". That is not proper christian state. If the Spirit is *always* contending, I do not think He is dwelling.
A.F.M. He *abode* upon Christ.
{101}
J.T. Quite; all was infinitely complacent there.
Rem. There is a great difference between contending and witnessing. "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are children of God". That is very different from @Galatians 5:17.
J.T. It is like a loving visitor speaking with all gentleness and tenderness to the children of the family as to their place with their father. He "bears witness with our spirit, that we are children of God".
T.E.H. If I do not allow the Spirit to dwell in me, do I defeat the object of God in principle?
J.T. Yes, for dwelling in or with men is the great thought with God. It is that which He had in mind from the outset. This is not Ephesians where God dwells in us Spiritwise; but it leads on to Ephesians. If the Holy Spirit does not dwell in us, God does not dwell in us; that is evident.
A.N.W. There is another scripture, "Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption" (@Ephesians 4:30). That is unchangeable, is it not?
J.T. There is the sealing, the earnest and the witness, all that; but I think dwelling is the great thought. It is what God has in mind.
Rem. Referring to our brother's remark, do you not think the epistle to the Galatians indicates the way in which the Holy Spirit was grieved? They were on a line which was destructive of the truth and, it seems to me, that it illustrates what it is to grieve the Holy Spirit.
J.D-s. Is that what you had in your mind in the use of the word 'contending'?
J.T. I referred to the passage, "The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh". The figure in Galatians is Isaac and Ishmael. They could not continue together. If Ishmael is retained -- amiable, religious, cultivated flesh -- the Spirit of God is grieved. Sarah, who
{102}
represents the energy of the Spirit, says, "The son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son". She demands that he must be cast out, and God supports her.
Rem. Is there not a difference between "receiving" and "dwelling"? The Galatians had received the Spirit.
J.T. The question of His being there was indisputable. It is assumed they had received the Spirit by the hearing of faith; but, then, the things which they were admitting were incompatible with it, so the apostle brings in the figures of Hagar and Ishmael and Sarah and Isaac to show that Christ, and the man born after the flesh, must not be allowed in you at the same time. Otherwise, the Holy Spirit is disturbed, and so combats.
Rem. That comes out very clearly. "This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?". They had received the Spirit -- the apostle does not dispute that. "Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?"(@Galatians 3:2,3). The issue as you say, was Ishmael and Isaac. He does not dispute that Isaac was there.
B.P. When the Spirit dwells in a believer, is it possible for the Spirit to be grieved so that you could not say He is dwelling?
J.T. I should say it is. One may sin, and the like, and get away from the Lord; but if restored, he is restored to what he left.
J.D-s. The original idea was that the Spirit was to dwell. That is what the Lord intimated in regard to the coming of the Spirit (@John 14:15 - 17). The normal condition is dwelling.
J.T. It shows that God would not only be complacent in us, but restful. The dove that Noah sent out is a type of the Spirit. She found no rest for the sole of her foot, so she returned. It would indicate
{103}
the conditions obtaining in Old Testament times; there was no one to whom the Holy Spirit could come and abide. He could come *upon* this one, and that one; but not to abide. But, when Christ becomes Man, there is a point of restfulness: when He was thirty years of age, "the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove upon him" (@Luke 3:22). It meant that the Spirit was wholly there. No believer could receive the Spirit in that way in entirety. But He dwells in the saints -- in measure in each one, according to the measure of self-judgment.
J.E.H. Would you say the Spirit dwells consequent upon fulfilling all righteousness? Is that the point? The Lord had just said regarding His baptism, and immediately before the Spirit came upon Him, "It becometh us to fulfil all righteousness" (@Matthew 3:15).
J.T. The Spirit of God is not going to dwell in any house where there is not practical righteousness. So practical righteousness comes first, then you have the idea of dwelling, and then what there is for God, "ye have received a spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father". Not 'He cried'; but "we cry, Abba, Father". In Galatians the Spirit cried; but here the full thought of God is stated; that is, "we cry, Abba, Father", by the Spirit. That, I suppose, is what the Father seeks from the Christian. He loves to hear that cry.
B.T.F. Is the thought that sonship is reached in the soul?
J.T. That is the way it is stated here, "For ye have not received a spirit of bondage again for fear, but ye have received a spirit of adoption" (or sonship), "whereby we cry, Abba, Father". So that we are brought to Christ's platform here; these are the exact words He used.
A.A.T. In one place the apostle says, "If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit" (@Galatians 5:25). What is the difference between "living" and "walking"?
{104}
J.T. I think what came out this afternoon was that "living" refers to the relation of your soul with God, "the Spirit is life". It is in the power of one's relation with God that one walks here. You can walk better for God after a good meeting or after prayer or communion with God. The nearer you are to God in the power of the Spirit, the more power you have in walk.
A.F.M. Even though the Galatians went back, the apostle states of them as a fact, "ye are all God's sons".
J.T. "By faith". It is well to remember that sonship is a matter of light. We are sons of God by faith; but then, it says, "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father".
Rem. Sonship is a matter of light. That is, the full manifestation of it is a matter of light; but we have the Spirit of sonship now.
J.T. It is a matter of light as justification is. I am a son by faith. I get the Spirit on that ground. I do not get the Spirit to make me a son; but because I am a son.
A.F.M. Here, is it not rather the consciousness of sonship? The Galatians were recovered by the truth of sonship; but here we are conscious of being sons, so we cry. As you were saying, the Spirit cried in Galatians; but here it says, "We cry, Abba, Father". That seems to be the highest point reached.
J.D-s. Yet there is something beyond this later in the chapter, beyond the Spirit of adoption, we get adoption.
J.T. "Awaiting adoption, that is the redemption of our body".
J.D-s. It shows that, as to the actuality of the thing, we have to wait for it; but we are in the light of it, and because we have the Spirit we are able to speak in the way indicated here.
{105}
Rem. In comparing Romans and Galatians it is, perhaps, helpful to see that we do not exactly have failure presented in Romans. It is rather the line of teaching which brings individual saints up to the point of what there is in store for them. There is such a thing as being "in Christ Jesus", and what they have in store in connection with sonship, the one body, the purpose of God, and so on, and then it leaves them to find the development of these things. The Galatians had had the thing, but were slipping back from it in a very serious way; so their recovery is in view in the presentation of the truth.
W.B. In @Romans 8 it is, "We cry, Abba, Father". Was it a slight on the Galatians to say the Spirit cried, "Abba, Father"?
J.D-s. But they were not behaving as sons, were they?
J.T. Anyone under the bondage of the law, could not be in the good of sonship. I suppose that was so with the Galatians.
Rem. They had the Spirit which involved sonship, but were going back to bondage; that was the drift.
J.D-s. The apostle reminded them of what was theirs, but what they were not enjoying.
J.F-r. Would you mind mentioning the difference between "sons of God" and "children of God"?
J.T. The term "children of God" refers to us as here in this world. We are not children of God by faith, if you understand me. It is not a term that applies to God's counsels, but, rather, to us in an adverse scene, where we suffer. So, immediately, you have, "And if children, heirs also: heirs of God, and Christ's joint heirs; if indeed we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him". It refers to us as here, where Christ was and suffered, and where we suffer. Did you have any other thought?
{106}
J.F-r. I think it has been said that it is God being with us as children, and we being with God as sons.
J.T. That is true. John's epistle develops the subject of children: "Beloved, now are we children of God, and what we shall be has not yet been manifested; we know that if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is" (@1 John 3:2). We are that *now*. As children of God we are marked off by certain traits in this world.
Rem. So in @2 Corinthians 6 God assumes the place of Father to sons and daughters here in this scene. The idea of sons and daughters would never come into sonship; it would in connection with children. I suppose that to which you referred in John's epistle, "what we shall be has not yet been manifested", has reference to sonship.
J.T. Quite. You would not wish to be other than like Him; that is enough.
J.D-s. I suppose the idea would take in what we have in @Ephesians 5:1, "Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children", as well as the place we are in, and the suffering involved as a consequence.
Ques. In walking through the wilderness, have we the consciousness of being sons or children?
J.T. I think both.
A.N.W. I thought being led by the Spirit of God, being sons of God, was rather across the Jordan.
J.T. Yes; but there is the other side, what the Spirit is to the christian here. There is no time in one's experience when one is not free to enjoy the great fact that he is a son, that he has a place in the counsels of God. It is a question of the fact as light in your soul; but you need to be in the circumstances to go in for it and to enjoy it as it can be enjoyed.
A.F.M. I suppose the same thing would apply to eternal life. It is enjoyed in the land -- -in that
{107}
sphere, but you always enjoy the fact that you have it.
A.N.W. It has been remarked, the wilderness is more God with you, and the land, you with God.
J.T. A man enjoys the fact that he has a family, for instance, although he may be away from it. You cannot take eternal life out of its setting; nor can you take sonship out of its setting. All these things are in *their* place; but I have light about them, and I have always got that light.
Rem. When we come to types, we have to be very careful to remember that they will only serve us a certain distance. When the children of Israel were out of Egypt, and in the wilderness, they were not in Egypt. When in the land, they were not in the wilderness; but for us, we touch the sphere of the world, we are in the wilderness, and, in a moment of time, we may have passed into the holy of holies -- to know what is inside there. While each sphere is distinct, and is capable, in a way, of spiritual analysis, yet we ourselves are in very close contact with all at the same time.
A.N.W. In @Joshua 5:12 the Spirit is very pronounced in saying, "The manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land". There is a point at which we pass from one sphere into another.
J.T. There are certain conditions upon which the enjoyment of christian privilege depend. As I was remarking, in natural things you would always enjoy the fact that you have a home and a family; but you have to come back to the family to actually enjoy it. This holds good in regard to divine things: one may always enjoy the knowledge of the fact that he has a place in the counsels of God, but he has to come to the assembly to have the enjoyment of the things themselves. The manna supports one individually; but when you come to the collective sphere,
{108}
which necessarily depends upon the saints, you have another order of things, a sphere of affections and all that. I believe that is what the Lord has sought to make very plain in recent years. These things were made to be available to the individual, *without the conditions*; whereas it was insisted upon, by the Spirit of God, I believe, that the enjoyment of divine blessings and privileges are dependent *upon those conditions*.
Rem. Hence the warning in @Hebrews 10:25. If you do not respect, and appreciate, these conditions you are in danger of apostasy.
B.T.F. Would you say we have the affections of sonship in the Spirit?
J.T. Yes. The relationship is as true now as it ever will be. The word here "awaiting adoption", does not refer to the *relationship*; but to the *condition* of the sons; to "our body".
J.E.H. If one enjoys the thought of being one of the children, can it be apart from being one of the sons?
J.T. The two things go together. One refers to what I am with God; the other to what He is to me here. The Spirit witnesses to me that I am one of the children. It is really a question of the comfort one has in adversity. God is Father to me and I am one of His children. Heirship is brought in so that one is sustained in adversity by such knowledge.
Rem. They had the principle of being children even in Old Testament times. God took that attitude towards them, and it was a great thing for them.
J.D-s. Was not that of a national character?
Rem. "Will be a Father unto you" is the basis of an appeal to us, and it was true, in principle, to them and He dealt with them accordingly. "Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him" (@Psalm 103:13).
{109}
J.T. It is not here simply a matter of light. The point is, *what the Spirit* does for us. He witnesses with our spirit -- a most blessed experience -- that we are the children of God.
A.N.W. That agrees with John's line.
W.B. Do we enjoy the privileges of children or sons in the house of God?
J.T. In the house you enjoy the privileges of children; but in the assembly the privileges of sons. Whilst they are interchangeable expressions, in a sense, "God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth" (@1 Timothy 3:15) -- the assembly conveys a different thought from the house. You find it in the type of Aaron and his *house*, and Aaron and his *sons*. Now, the idea of the assembly does not go with the house, but that of affection; when you come to sons it is counsel, interchange of thought, and so on. So, I would say, the assembly is the place of supreme privilege.
W.B. It is a higher thought.
J.T. The idea of the "house" in 1 Timothy is extensive. It covers a wide area; but, then it says, "Which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth"; it suggests counsel, so the Lord says, "My assembly".
{110}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (9)
@Romans 8:18 - 39
Rem. It has been suggested many times that in Romans we get things indicated without their being expanded, or fully developed. I was thinking that in the section read we get two things of high importance, first the light of the world to come and the liberty of the glory connected with it, and then the purpose of God, which touches what is eternal.
J.T. The first section gives us the Holy Spirit in us as a present state; then we are seen looking on to the coming glory.
B.T.F. These verses provide wonderful sustainment for us while we are left here amid the groaning and the suffering.
J.T. The christian here is seen as waiting adoption, that is, the redemption of his body. Whereas, the creature generally is looking out, or expecting the revelation of those who have adoption, namely, the sons of God.
C.A.M. You made a distinction between a christian and the creature.
J.T. "For the anxious looking out of the creature expects the revelation of the sons of God". The "creature" refers to creation. How that may be true concretely is, perhaps, difficult to show; but it is taken account of abstractly here.
A.N.W. All that came under the fall.
J.T. Yes, it goes on to say, "The creature has been made subject to vanity, not of its will, but by reason of him who has subjected the same, in hope that the creature itself also shall be set free from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God". It refers abstractly to the whole realm of creation which was affected by Adam's fall.
{111}
J.B. Would that bring in the animals too?
J.T. Yes. A distinction is made between the believer and creation here. "For we know that the whole creation groans together and travails in pain together until now. And not only that, but even *we* ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, we also ourselves groan in ourselves, awaiting adoption, that is the redemption of our body".
Rem. What is indicated in the prophets will then be effectuated. Compare @Isaiah 65:17 - 25. This is connected with @Hebrews 2, "We see not yet all things put under him. But we see Jesus ... crowned with glory and honour". He is there in connection with the establishment and maintenance of the world to come.
J.T. The passage quoted adds, "By the grace of God he should taste death for every thing". Clearly here it is to work out the truth of the gospel, not only in regard of the believer, but to show its bearing in respect of the whole realm affected by sin. Having touched on the sufferings of this present time, which he reckoned were not worthy to be compared with the glory which should be revealed to us, the apostle is led to speak of creation. It is most interesting and touching, because it shows the extent of divine sympathy in the gospel. It is not simply man, although he comes in first here, the believer's place is emphasised by the repetition of the word 'ourselves' (see verse 23). He shows the dignity and prominence of the believer. But the Spirit of God shows in the passage the extent of divine sympathy in the gospel in that the whole realm of creation looks out anxiously for deliverance. Everything that came under sin is in His mind and will come into the benefit, according to its measure, of the gospel.
Rem. One sees that God has ever been exceedingly thoughtful of the creatures of the universe. He made His covenant with Noah to protect them. "A
{112}
righteous man regardeth the life of his beast" (@Proverbs 12:10). And with regard to sparrows, "one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father" (@Matthew 10:29). Also the prophets speak of peace and restfulness coming in for the creature. The Lord Himself groaned. It may be helpful to read a word or two of the footnote of the New Translation on @John 11:38. It says, 'Or' groaned '... But here as within in spirit, it is not the expression of anger. It was the feeling produced by the deep pain caused by seeing the power of death over the human spirit. There was so far indignation that there was deep antagonism to the power of evil and Satan in death'.
A.N.W. Does it not help to notice that this is still the subject of the Spirit? A kind of a counterpart to it?
B.T.F. Verse 15 is the *upward* cry, but this which we are now considering refers to the *lower* part of creation in connection with which the Spirit is sympathetic.
A.N.W. The Spirit of adoption does not lead us so high that we forget what is here.
J.T. We are not indifferent to what is being endured in creation on account of sin.
A.F.M. We are now able to take an intelligent account of it by the Spirit, considering what has been before us in the earlier part of the chapter, and to look out and see the final result of everything -- all being recovered for God.
J.T. The christian would be sympathetic with his beast, according to the Proverb quoted, and indeed, with the whole realm of suffering creation.
J.S. The conditions of the body are taken account of, "even we ourselves groan within ourselves".
J.T. "Awaiting adoption, that is the redemption of our body".
Rem. A christian becomes sensitive as to creation. One cannot help feeling, when one sees a horse
{113}
cruelly treated: it is part of the depravity of man that has come in through his sin, and is repulsive to God; one feels for the thing injured; and regards the world as an intolerable place. "The whole creation groans together and travails in pain together until now". The Lord at the grave of Lazarus felt the power of sin over man. Here it is all creation which He will deliver.
A.F.M. When Adam fell, all creation fell with him; we have to take that into account. There is the other side presented in verse 21.
J.T. I think God is regarding what we call the lower, the inanimate, creation as not guilty. The guilt is charged to the head. The four living creatures in @Revelation 4 represent what God secures in the way of sympathy in His own doings, from the creation. The throne is there supported by the representatives of creation, as if in triumph. The four and twenty elders would have in view those experienced and intelligent who are qualified to reign and are able to give an account of things; but the creation itself is represented as secured through the gospel in the four living creatures -- they are living! A remarkable testimony to the power of the gospel.
J.B. What is the "glory to be revealed to us"?
J.T. It is all that God has displayed in Christ. But, to follow up the thought of the living creatures, it is a great point to see, in the description given, that they are not angelic figures. They are figures taken from the lower creation, lest Satan might assume that God had to bring everything out of heaven, the whole lower realm being lost to Him. Whereas, the gospel secures all. The living creatures are seen in the four heads of the animal kingdom in @Revelation 4:7.
A.F.M. I notice that after the living creatures are described, the twenty four elders fall before Him,
{114}
and then "Every creature which is in the heaven and upon the earth and under the earth, and those that are upon the sea, and all things in them, heard I saying, To him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb, blessing, and honour, and glory, and might, to the ages of ages. And the four living creatures said, Amen; and the elders fell down and did homage" (@Revelation 5:13,14). Here again the elders are introduced after the living creatures, suggesting that what is set forth in them is now found in the redeemed, as the result of the gospel.
Rem. I think that is strikingly supported in @Revelation 4:11, "Thou art worthy, O our Lord and our God, to receive glory and honour and power; for *thou* hast created all things, and for thy will they were, and they have been created". That is, the pleasure of God is emphasised in connection with bringing into view the four living creatures.
J.T. There is also what is secured in the way of sympathetic interest in these four heads of creation -- the four living creatures. "The first ... like a lion" suggests the security of that dignity which man lost in the fall. "The second ... like, a calf": the foot of the ox is very firm and steady; patience also is suggested, which God has secured. Instead of man's feet being swift to shed blood, he is steadily employed in the carrying out of God's will and maintaining His interests here on earth. "The third ... having the face as of a man" denotes intelligence, not angelic in character, but what God originally purposed in Eden; therefore man's countenance is no longer in hiding. "The fourth ... like a flying eagle" -- in that powerful bird, swift for the prey, is suggested man as swift for God's will. It is the rapidity with which man as recovered now carries out that will. All divine thoughts connected with earth are again set up; but by means of the *gospel*. In this we see God's great triumph!
{115}
A.N.W. It says: "four living creatures, full of eyes, before and behind".
J.T. Everything is seen by these agents of God's government.
Rem. The absorbing of light and the expansion of intelligence. Returning to our chapter we have in verse 19, "the revelation of the sons of God"; and in verse 21, "the creature itself also shall be set free from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God". There is a distinction there -- "*sons* of God" and "*children* of God".
J.T. I suppose "sons of God" would refer to the saints as of heavenly origin and calling; whereas "children of God" would be those who have suffered here, but in suffering bore witness to the nature of God.
Rem. So the argument would seem to be that when the children of God are in their place -- when they are seen in the liberty of the glory -- everything else in creation will, so to speak, be automatically right.
A.N.W. Do you understand that this remarkable paragraph, from verses 18 - 30, flows out of the expression, "suffer with him"?
J.T. Yes, I think that right, it all flows out of it.
A.N.W. Is it not striking that in this paragraph he reaches, as an accomplished fact, what in the previous paragraph is still in prospect? In verse 30 the glory is accomplished, whereas in verse 17 it is still in prospect.
J.T. Is not that stated as only God can state things? That is, the full thought in His mind is presented, aside from the historical fact, except that the glorification is *involved* in the Spirit being in us. As to the historical fact, it is still future. "But whom he has predestinated, these also he has called; and whom he has called, these also he has justified;
{116}
but whom he has justified, these also he has glorified". If we say that that means the Holy Spirit is in us, of course, we can understand it; but I apprehend that it must assume the full result -- our having glorified bodies.
Rem. Verses 29 and 30 really involve Ephesians; it is a question of eternal purpose; the truth is there presented from the divine side; failure and an interval of time are not contemplated.
J.T. It is what God does, as the passage clearly shows, "For we do not know what we should pray for as is fitting, but the Spirit itself makes intercession with groanings which cannot be uttered. But he who searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit". Then the two 'becauses': "Because he intercedes for saints according to God. But we *do* know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to purpose. Because whom he has foreknown, he has also predestinated to be conformed to the image of his Son, so that he should be the firstborn among many brethren". That is one great thought in the passage. Then, "But whom he has predestinated, these also he has called; and whom he has called, these also he has justified; but whom he has justified, these also he has glorified".
C.A.M. The word 'called' is in *time*, "whom he has called".
J.T. The word "justified", too. "Foreknown" is historically true and "predestinated" is historically true also; but you could not say that it is historically true that I am conformed to the image of His Son. Could you?
A.N.W. Only in a moral sense.
J.T. He has predestinated us to be conformed; but we could not say we are so definitely, nor can we say we are glorified definitely; we must therefore take it as the full divine thought for us.
{117}
Rem. That is it. It seems to me it is abstract.
A.N.W. Why do we not say what Scripture says, "These also he has glorified"?
J.T. Because it is not put as *historically* true. It must be viewed from the divine side, just as in Ephesians. God only can say these things. He "calleth those things which be not as though they were" (@Romans 4:17).
A.N.W. I notice that the words, "with him", used in verse 17 are left out here. In verse 17 it is glorification with Him which is prospective; but in verse 30 it simply says, "these also he has glorified".
J.T. As Mr. Raven pointed out, the gift of the Holy Spirit was in principle the glorification of the believer; but, I think, when you come to look at it from the divine side, God has in His mind the change of the believer's body; for we are to be conformed to the image of His Son. The complete work is in view. If we are to be glorified, it is to "his body of glory" that we are to be conformed.
Rem. The idea of time does not enter into it, it seems to me. It is what is abstractly true.
B.P. Would you say we are fully justified now?
J.T. We are justified on the principle of faith; but when you come to analyse it, it would be difficult to say that one is absolutely (that is, taking account of one's daily life) justified now. Therefore, I think, it is the *full* divine thought as to believers which is in view here ( verses 29,30). Our wilderness circumstances are not contemplated. It is not a partial justification, nor a partial glorification, but the full result in the mind of God, which necessarily involves the change of the body.
Rem. So that verse 33 is not by faith. *God justifies*.
C.A.M. The assurance of the whole thing is that we have the Spirit.
{118}
J.T. Surely. Not only that, but the possession of the Spirit, in a sense, does glorify, "for the Spirit of glory ... rests upon you".
C.A.M. It connects the body we shall have with our present bodies.
J.S. There is a certain triumph on the Spirit's line, as reached in the end of the paragraph, that God does not stop at any half-way measures -- He goes right on to the full divine thought.
T.H. What is "the image of his Son"?
J.T. I think we shall be fully like Him, so that there is perfect representation.
Rem. It is not the image of Adam, but the image of His Son.
J.T. And it is, "that he should be the firstborn among many brethren". It is on account of what God thinks about Him.
C.A.M. Is it right to say that "image" is external?
J.T. That is what we shall be, I understand, as we come out. "We shall be like him" @1 John 3:2 says: "it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is". We *shall be* like him; that is the point.
Rem. "Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself".
A.F.M. Would the thought of being "conformed to the image of his Son" be in view of presentation or display? It would be rather in view of the former, would it not?
J.T. I think both. "When he brings in the firstborn into the habitable world". The Firstborn! "He says, And let all God's angels worship him" (@Hebrews 1:6). But then He has others: He is the Leader of a race, or family, and they come into view.
{119}
Rem. It goes further than presentation. It establishes the eternal status -- what is*ever* before the face of God.
J.T. "What shall we then say to these things?" Now we come to a full stop, and attention is called to "these things". Evidently he has reached the thought that was in his mind, and the believer is now to ponder "these things".
Rem. If one understands this, he will be hungry for Ephesians.
A.N.W. He individualises himself three times in this chapter, in verses 2, 18, and 38.
J.T. In verse 2 he says he is set free. In verse 18 he reckons, and in verse 38 he is persuaded.
Rem. There is an interesting distinction between the love of Christ and the love of God.
J.T. You would say that the love of Christ is spoken of here in connection with wilderness things.
Rem. Yes, material things.
J.T. The other things (verses 38,39) mentioned are more of a spiritual nature. Indeed, the whole universe is challenged.
Ques. Does the love of Christ refer to Christ as Priest?
J.T. Yes, I think so. It is the love He has for us as a *Man*. It is to be distinguished from the love of God, which was in Him. We have to work out in our souls the difference between Christ for us as Man, "who loved me, and gave himself for me" (@Galatians 2:20) and the love of God *in* Him. As become Man, He has a man's affections and He begets affection. So you have "my delights were with the sons of men" (@Proverbs 8:31), implying personal interest in men. I suppose, "sons of men" properly are a product, spiritually, of what Christ was as a Man here as seen in the gospels. There is a peculiar interest in a son. It says of the young man, "Jesus beholding him loved him" (@Mark 10:21). There is the charm of youthfulness.
{120}
The Lord found His delight in such; but I think they were the product of what was seen in Him as a Man down here. Then there is the love of God, and the love of God is enjoyed by the sons of God.
A.F.M. We get these two thoughts suggested every Lord's day morning, in the bread and the cup, do we not?
J.T. The first is the love of Christ, "This is my body which is given for you" (@Luke 22:19). That is His personal love for them, so that He goes the full length of giving Himself for them -- He gives Himself! But then, there was besides that, and at the same time, in Christ the full revelation of the love of God; although immeasurable, it was all there and the witness of that is the cup.
Rem. It is most interesting to set over against the love of God all satanic and spiritual powers of wickedness, things which did not originate in connection with wilderness circumstances but which go far back into the very origin of things, just as the love of God goes back into the origin of things. The love of Christ may be connected with the throne of grace: "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need" (@Hebrews 4:16). In Hebrews we get sympathy and power in connection with the priesthood and the throne. But the love of God takes account of spiritual wickedness, principalities, powers, and the like, height and depth, everything in the created sphere; the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, is that from which none of these things can separate us.
J.T. The set of circumstances that surrounded the Lord at the last supper may be made to correspond with the first set of circumstances here, and in spite of them all, He was unaffected by them, and told out His personal love for the disciples. But, after that, Gethsemane comes in; there is another
{121}
cup -- the cup of wrath. Satan would have come between the people of God and the love of God, he could have prevented Christ from taking that cup.
A.N.W. Would spiritual powers attempt to raise moral issues between man and God?
J.T. I suppose they would. I suppose these are elements that are encountered in ourselves, more than in our bodies.
J.S. Is it the consciousness of the love of Christ that sustains one in wilderness conditions?
J.T. He makes you feel His love is ever present; He can sympathise with us, for He has been through everything. Verses 35 - 37 present circumstances in which He once was. "For thy sake we are put to death all the day long; we have been reckoned as sheep for slaughter". The Lord has been just there, "He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth" (@Acts 8:32). It is the position of a saint here in the wilderness -- he is in the minds of others as one intended for slaughter. They have no other thought; you are not fit for their system of things.
Ques. What is the idea of conquerors?
J.T. One is not under the circumstances spoken of -- one is not depressed by but superior to them. Being accounted as sheep for the slaughter is a very terrible thing for the flesh, when not resisting it. As @James 5:6 says, "Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you". It is hard for the flesh to refuse to resist. But how can it be done? Through the love of Christ; to refuse to resist through the power of the love of Christ is victory. One can only be a victor, divinely, as corresponding with Christ in conflict. So it is coming out in the Spirit of Christ that the victory is assured. "We are more than conquerors through him that loved us".
{122}
Rem. One gets wonderful gain out of it. If I am delivered from death, I have the sense of my deliverance; but here is a suggestion: you may not be delivered outwardly, but you get wonderful gain in the sense of the support of the love, and power of Christ.
A.N.W. It would be easier to be put to death once, than to be killed all the day long.
{123}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (10)
@Romans 9:1 - 5; @Romans 10:1 - 4; @Romans 11:22 - 36
J.T. We have already had before us that this epistle is the adjustment of things on the earth. The chapters we have considered show how man is adjusted individually with God. These chapters show how the promises are reconciled with the truth of the gospel, and how Israel came into their place according to God's counsels as regards the earth.
Rem. In a way, what we get unfolded here is as necessary as the ark in the days of Noah. That is, if the ways of God are to be performed on the earth, clearly it must be in connection with Israel brought into adjustment with God; therefore, we must have something to make clear how God adjusts the promises made to the fathers with the present position of Israel, and it is here unfolded.
J.T. The chronology we get in Genesis as regards the family of Noah ends with the statement, "And by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood" (@Genesis 10:32). And then later we see how the nations are to be blessed through Abraham. But in 1 Chronicles the idea of chronology is to show how all are to be connected with David. This section shows, in the adjustment of things on earth, how God has all the nations before Him; they are taken up provisionally now for blessing on the ground of faith (Israel is blinded for the moment, but ultimately, according to the original purposes, Israel will come in for the first place on earth). So that Chronicles contains the spiritual link -- how the nations are linked up typically with Christ. In Genesis we have the outward facts stated, so that a believer can account satisfactorily for himself as to the origin, or history, of any nation he may have to
{124}
do with; but in Chronicles the links are spiritual, and Christ, as typified in David, is the centre for all.
B.T.F. What was the point about David in contrast to Abraham? I did not quite get it.
J.T. I was remarking that in 1 Chronicles the genealogies all merge in David -- beginning with Adam, Seth and so on. So that 1 Chronicles is spiritual chronology in that way. It fits in here because this section shows how the nations are in the mind of God for blessing and are brought in for the moment on the ground of faith; but not continuing in the goodness of God, they lose the place they now have, and Israel will return to their own place again. So that the principle of election stands; whatever may seem to contradict it outwardly, God ever reverts to His original thought.
B.T.F. That would make the present moment a wonderful one in connection with God's ways.
J.T. It is a great moment in that He is pleased to take up the nations in Christ on the principle of faith. And of course, we come in there. The word for us is that we are to *continue*, "Take heed lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: ... toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness: otherwise thou also shalt be cut off".
Rem. So that, Jew or gentile, in the final result everything is established on the basis of the sovereignty of God. It is a question of election.
C.A.M. Man's responsibility and God's sovereignty go together, do they not? They both seem emphasised in this section.
J.T. Yes. God's sovereign purpose must ultimately prevail.
C.A.M. Thus one is safe in putting everything on that ground, and yet one has to bring in the thought of responsibility too.
{125}
J.T. Certainly. We are to continue in God's goodness.
A.F.M. Would you give us the setting of these three chapters?
J.T. Chapter 9 is especially marked by the thought of sovereignty -- the principle of election -- showing that whatever claims the Jews had in the way of priority, they were necessarily founded on the sovereignty of God. The fact that Ishmael and Esau were shut out, although elder brethren, establishes the fact that Israel's position was on the ground of sovereignty. The feature in chapter 10 is, "The word" -- the preaching. "The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach". That was their position then. @Deuteronomy 30 is cited, when Israel is regarded as having failed absolutely: "For the word is very near to thee". It was not far away from them. So we have the sovereignty of God in chapter 9, the word and the preaching in chapter 10, and the ultimate reinstatement of Israel in chapter 11.
A.F.M. Salvation is very prominent in chapter 10. Then the natural branches are graffed in in chapter 11, where all are seen as coming in on the ground of sovereign mercy. It is this which enables the apostle to utter his doxology at the close.
Rem. In chapter 10 the preaching goes out to the extremities of the habitable world. So the sovereignty of God is by no means confined to Israel; but embraces all the nations of the earth. It is by the way of preaching, but the preaching of itself carries the idea of sovereignty; that seems to go right through this section. If Israel are finally to come in again, it is because the sovereignty of God works in that way.
J.T. So, "God hath shut up together all in unbelief, in order that he might show mercy to all".
{126}
B.T.F. Chapter 10 is a most interesting account of the way that God is pleased to work at the present moment; "How shall they hear without one who preaches? and how shall they preach unless they have been sent?"
A.N.W. One is struck in observing the number of quotations from the Old Testament that these three chapters contain.
J.T. The apostle intended to justify God's position, as seen in his ministry, in the eyes of the Jews and so brought in these scriptures. In a masterly way he weaves a fabric with material from the Old Testament.
A.F.M. The point of departure with the Jew was that he stumbled at the stumbling-stone, and that paved the way for the grace of God to go out to the nations. The apostle shows clearly God's right to address all men in Christ.
W.B-w. Was it the sovereign rights of God in mercy in connection with the world?
J.T. Yes. The apostle adjusts everything on the earth in relation to God. Here His faithfulness in regard of the promises to Israel is established.
W.B-w. Chapter 3 would be God's rights in mercy to the believer.
J.T. But there was this outstanding question from the times of Abraham, which had to be adjusted; and the adjustment of it involves the sovereignty of God and the faithfulness of God. This latter is very important, and these chapters show how He is faithful -- whatever He has promised He brings to pass, and Christ is the Vessel through whom it is brought to pass.
Rem. I think the Jew would be apt to overlook the fact that the nations were included in the promise, "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed" (@Genesis 22:18). The Jew would confine things to himself as a son of Israel; but the promise of
{127}
God extended to all nations of the earth. So here, things are brought out side by side and adjusted. Nothing fails.
C.A.M. The apostle had such knowledge of the ways of God, and yet he speaks of himself as going through such sorrow in connection with Israel: why is that?
J.T. Does it not show that he intended to bring out the great affection he had for his nation after the flesh? That affection runs right through these chapters, and lends force and lustre to what he says. It is not a cold outline of the faithfulness of God in connection with Israel; it is an outline by one whose affections are bound up in it. He virtually says, If there is any question as to Israel's blessing, I am personally an answer to it: I am an Israelite and have the blessing; therefore the blessing is unquestionable which God has in mind for every true Israelite.
A.N.W. The climax of all their favours was Christ, "Of whom, as according to flesh, is the Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen".
J.T. He sets out in that verse what Israel's privileges are from the divine side. First, he says, "I say the truth in Christ, I lie not". I think we might note, particularly, that in dealing with the promises of God, Paul should bring in this question of veracity. In @2 Corinthians 1 Paul refers to the Corinthians charging him with lightness; but he bases everything on what God is: "But as God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay. For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us ... was not yea and nay, but in him was yea. For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen". So here he says, "I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing witness
{128}
with me in the Holy Spirit". A most forcible way of putting the facts. Then he says, "I have great grief and uninterrupted pain in my heart, for I have wished", not, I wish, "I myself, to be a curse from the Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen, according to flesh; who are Israelites; whose is the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the law-giving, and the service, and the promises; whose are the fathers; and of whom, as according to flesh, is the Christ". All their advantages and privileges are stated there. One who could speak thus is competent to do so, and should be heard, for his affections were in the subject which engaged him. He virtually says, 'I am not behind Moses'. Moses had said, "Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin -- ; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou has written" (@Exodus 32:32).
Rem. In fact, he expressed here most beautifully the sacrifice of Christ -- He was blotted out for them. I was thinking of the depths of his affection. It was that affection which forced him to go to Jerusalem. He would go to see if he could not win them for Christ. The Spirit witnessed that he should not go up to Jerusalem; but, his heart was set on winning them for Christ.
A.F.M. Do you think we have a parallel here with what we get in @Matthew 11, the Lord there speaks of the unrepentant cities where His mighty works were done, and then retreats into the purpose of God -- there were the babes? So here he says, "Not however as though the word of God had failed"; and brings in the line of purpose.
J.T. "Not however as though the word of God had failed; for not all are Israel which are of Israel; nor because they are seed of Abraham are all children: but, In Isaac shall a seed be called to thee. That is, they that are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God; but the children of the promise are reckoned as seed". It is remarkable
{129}
that he should use the expression, "children of God" there.
J.D-s. I have thought that these chapters give us the past, present and future of Israel. And, as has been justly said, the apostle shows how the promises of God are quite consistent with the truth that he had enunciated in the early part of the epistle. This parenthesis comes in so that there might be no question as to that. While God is dealing very freely today, He is not forgetting what He has promised. And further, taking more the spirit of what we have in these chapters, it would appear as though God had a remnant among His people to bring forward at the right time. I do not say they are acknowledged publicly; nor can they get blessing apart from the church; but it occurs to me that it is clearly in the apostle's mind and it is what he had before him.
J.T. He says, "Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace".
Rem. I suppose Paul himself was an example of that very thing. He was an Israelite, therefore an expression of the faithfulness of God, and was added to the assembly. One does not doubt that in all ages, a line of Israel has been added to the assembly, fulfilling the faithfulness of God as to His promises to the fathers, which will go right through until Israel is turned to again.
J.T. The citations from Hosea would concur with that. In verse 25, "I will call not-my-people My people; and the-not-beloved Beloved" (chapter 2:23). Then in verse 27, "But Esaias cries concerning Israel, Should the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, the remnant shall be saved" (@Isaiah 10:22). Again in verse 29, "And according as Esaias said before, Unless the Lord of hosts had left us a seed, we had been as Sodom, and made like even as Gomorrha" (@Isaiah 1:9).
{130}
Rem. So Isaiah prepares us for that in chapter 6 of his prophecy, "But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof". There is preserved a remnant.
W.B-w. It will not be merely sovereignty on God's part; there will be faith on their side as well, will there not?
Rem. There must be. It could not be apart from faith.
J.T. Historically the remnant were added to the assembly just on that ground, and Paul himself is an example here. So that the thoughts of God do not lapse; they are ever present in a living way. Paul was an Israelite indeed.
Ques. What connection has the remnant of Israel at present with the Israel to come into view in the future?
J.T. Divine thoughts do not lapse. All the features of the testimony that centred in Israel, according to Peter's epistles, are connected with the saints now. Although we may not have literally converted Jews amongst us, we have those who are really Jews; that is, every converted person is a Jew according to Romans, as chapter 2:29 shows. So that the features of the testimony are continued. But at the beginning of christianity the Jewish remnant was incorporated in the church, and in that way preserved (@Acts 2:47).
Rem. In connection with the promises to the fathers, I think that in the assembly there has always been a representative of the seed of Abraham. While I fully go with what you say, as to the spiritual significance of what is Israel indeed, yet the promises to the fathers and the perpetuation of the line of the seed of Abraham is a matter to be considered. As we get at the beginning of chapter 11, "I say then, Has
{131}
God cast away his people? Far be the thought. For *I* also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin". There is an indication that, preserved in the assembly, the line of the seed of Abraham is carried over until the world to come, and one rather cherishes that thought.
J.D-s. When God comes to take up His dealings with the earth, Israel will be the centre and He will have the nucleus in the remnant to bring forward.
J.T. Whether there are literally converted Jews in the assembly at the present moment or not, we know they were there at the outset. Paul's statement proves it.
Rem. So God has not cast away His people. It is like the preservation of a line in the carrying over from the remnant at the outset to the remnant introduced in the world to come.
A.F.M. I suppose every one who comes gets the blessing; he gets it on the ground of sovereign mercy, whether Jew or gentile.
J.T. I think it is a great point -- the sovereignty of God, the sovereignty of mercy, and then His faithfulness in carrying out what He promised sovereignly.
A.N.W. Do you not regard the bringing in of election here a bold stroke on the part of the apostle in a treatise on the gospel? When preaching the gospel you hardly bring in both sides.
J.T. You can see the force of his argument because he is dealing with those whose claim depended on it. Whatever privileges they had, they were based on sovereignty, therefore it was a strong argument.
A.N.W. It is a wonderful argument, and Paul is remarkably vigorous in bringing it in here where the responsibility of man is raised. "I have loved Jacob, and I have hated Esau". Then the case of Pharaoh is introduced but he justifies God on both sides.
{132}
J.T. The cases he cites establish the principle of election, and so whatever the Jew might say as to his ministry, he was fortified.
Rem. I think his own case is a very remarkable one. If you take Peter, James, John and the others, they were brought in before the rejection of the Holy Spirit, and before the Lord had written upon them, "Lo-ammi", -- not My people; but Paul himself was taken up, not only after the rejection of Stephen, but as identified with it, so that he becomes a remarkable example as to how the sovereignty of God asserts itself in connection with Israel, even if governmentally He has to give them up.
J.T. He calls attention to that in @1 Timothy 1. It is well worth noting. He is an example, or "a delineation": "But for this reason", he says, "mercy was shown me, that in me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole long-suffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal". He was in that way an example of God's sovereign mercy.
J.D-s. It is remarkable how he speaks of mercy too. It corresponds with the subject we have before us, because all is put on the ground of mercy in these chapters. While sovereignty has its place, and the faithfulness of God, the way it works out is in the mercy of God. At the same time I think that the sovereignty of God should be introduced in preaching the gospel.
A.N.W. As a rule, we rather impress the responsibility to believe in preaching.
J.D-s. That is quite right; we need to be balanced regarding the two sides.
J.T. Only you have in view that the *elect* "may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus".
A.N.W. What strikes me is that the apostle in bringing in this argument reaches such a climax -- that God's judgments are unsearchable and His ways
{133}
untraceable, on account of which he bows in a spirit of worship.
J.T. The beginning and the end of the subject, we might say, is the cream. There is the great affection he had for the people first of all, and then how his heart is moved in the presence of God, so that he is a worshipper. The working out of the counsels of God in regard of the earth itself becomes the occasion of worship.
Rem. His doxology really breathes the spirit of the final psalms, that is, when the whole earth is brought into the light of the adjustment of God's ways -- everything that hath breath praises the Lord. The doxology here suggests that.
W.B-w. God is not defeated. None of His thoughts are lost.
J.T. No. I think there is food for our souls in the affections that underlie the statement of the facts. For it is a beautiful piece of fabric, woven out of Old Testament material, coloured and ornamented with New Testament threads, and yet an earthly thing. The colour is not blue; we might say it is crimson and purple, and withal beautifully woven.
A.F.M. The casting off of the Jew is the world's reconciliation; is not that an important factor for the gentiles?
J.T. It is brought in incidentally; but the point is the reception of the Jews at the end. "If their casting away be the world's reconciliation, what their reception but life from among the dead?". It is a new thing: Ezekiel enlarges upon what it shall be. It is life from the dead. They stand on the earth "an exceeding great army" (@Ezekiel 37:10).
Rem. There is a contrast between these chapters and Moses in @Exodus 33; "And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee; and will be
{134}
gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy. And he said, Thou canst not see my face". But these three chapters are the weaving together, and the display of the adjustment of all the ways of God, so that everything is perfectly harmonious. This doxology of praise takes up what Moses could not; all is brought into view and the heart is delighted and worships.
J.T. The weaving out of this fabric from Old Testament material is very fine, adorned with New Testament thoughts; only all connected with the earth, but founded on the death of Christ. The heart of the apostle is moved at the end in the light of what God effects on the ground of His sovereign mercy, "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable his judgments, and untraceable his ways! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counsellor? or who has first given to him, and it shall be rendered to him? For of him, and through him, and for him, are all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen". It is like @Ephesians 3 as regards the church, although it is the heavenly side there, "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages. Amen". In Romans it is the adjustment of things on earth leading to worship. @Ephesians 3 is the accomplishment of the counsels of God in connection with the church. It is a higher thought; but the heart is moved in both cases to worship God.
B.T.F. Do you think that expression of praise is drawn from these three chapters, or includes the whole epistle?
J.T. It is especially suggested by the skill with which God works out His own purposes in regard of Israel, in spite of the difficulties.
A.F.M. His judgments and His ways, would you say?
{135}
J.T. Yes. When you come to @Ephesians 3 you are on a higher platform. It is not there a question of His ways but of His eternal counsels, "to him be glory ...".
A.N.W. The counsels are not said to be unsearchable.
J.T. No. I think the unsearchableness of things has reference to what we have to do with today -- the labyrinth which has been brought about by man's will in connection with the nations. Men have just done as they pleased, and there has been no thought at all in the arrangements of the nations as to the purpose of God. It never once enters into the minds of the statesmen of the world. But this chapter is a question of the mind of God and He is behind all that goes on here on earth. This doxology shows a heart that is in the secret of that. The things which occur publicly are the veil of providence which the statesmen of this world cannot penetrate; but the christian, like Paul, goes behind these happenings and knows what God's mind is, and is restful, and worshipful; for he sees a moment when He shall set His King upon the holy hill of Zion. He has the wisdom to bring it about, hence the apostle is moved here to utter this wonderful doxology.
C.A.M. The meaning of all this has been treasured in the assembly, so the assembly in the day to come will be intelligent as to the working out of it; the one who speaks here is one of the assembly -- the light he has belongs to the assembly.
J.T. In Colossians and Ephesians we have the mystery. This leads on to it because it is a question of God's wisdom. The mystery is really the solution of everything. Paul had the light of it but does not develop it in Romans. Touching on it in the last chapter he says, "According to the revelation of the mystery, as to which silence has been kept in the times of the ages". It means that God had kept it
{136}
from the nations throughout those dark ages -- the light of His counsel concerning Christ and the assembly. That is the point in the mystery, "that in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him".
Rem. So in this very chapter the apostle says, "I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, of this mystery". Things were in mystery; but he did not want them or us to be ignorant of it. John comes in, in the Revelation, and shows us the light of the establishment of things, according to heavenly counsel, and the adjusted condition of things upon earth -- the two are blended in @Revelation 21.
J.D-s. It is remarkable how the apostle saw his way through things -- through the maze of things as they were affecting him and the saints of God in that day. And as he saw his way through them, he was able to give praise to God -- to fall back on the sovereignty of God and to call into his argument that God would be God, and would act for Himself, and from Himself, apart altogether from the failure. And when he saw how God was going to bring to pass that which pertained to the earth in His own good time, he was filled with praise and wonder. That was the meaning of the doxology -- the way God was going to effect things for Himself, and according to His pleasure, in connection with all pertaining to the earth; but more especially, in connection with His people to whom He had made the promises.
J.T. In order that the christian should be qualified to take up the mystery, as in Colossians and Ephesians, he has to be adjusted as regards his position on the earth; because Colossians and Ephesians involve elevation. How can one go up, unless adjusted below in regard of the righteousness of God,
{137}
and the power of God, and the love of God, and the faithfulness of God? One has to be adjusted in regard of these things in order to be free to ascend.
J.S. The church, as such, is not introduced in these three chapters; but on the other hand, the light of all the arrangements in respect of the nations and Israel is treasured in the assembly.
T.H. Is that why we have in @Galatians 6:16, peace and mercy "upon the Israel of God"?
J.T. Yes, "the Israel of God".
W.B-w. It is not the ascension of Christ here: but the *resurrection* of Christ.
C.A.M. When Paul said to king Agrippa, "Unto which promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day and night, hope to come" (@Acts 26:7), you do not regard that as applying to individuals?
J.T. "Our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night", he says. It is difficult for us to reconcile that with the literal fact; but it is best to admit that Paul must have known what he said. So James writes, "To the twelve tribes which are in the dispersion". They evidently had an existence then known to the apostles.
C.A.M. While the other two tribes we know will come into blessing, yet the birthright always was with the ten, was it not? In Joseph.
J.T. Joseph had the birthright.
C.A.M. So that is the assurance that the twelve tribes will be brought in.
J.T. We were noticing last week that in @Genesis 37 it says, "These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brethren". That is all you get for a good many chapters; all the others are ignored until their faces are toward Joseph -- until they are seen going down to him in Egypt. So the whole of the twelve tribes shall come into recognition when their faces are Christward.
{138}
Rem. When the Lord comes into the temple Anna is there, of the tribe of Asher. She is of the ten tribes. It helps one, as seeing that God has kept His eye on that which appeared to be lost; so that when Paul says before king Agrippa, "Our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night", one thinks of Anna, of the tribe of Asher: she departed not from the temple, she was waiting for the Lord. I have not a doubt but that the promise of God to the fathers keeps at all times the line of the twelve tribes, even as Anna was on that line. She was the spiritual element gathered out from the twelve tribes which otherwise were lost.
J.T. So, if we go by Paul and James, we must not say the ten tribes are lost.
{139}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (11)
@Romans 12:1 - 21; @Romans 13:1 - 14
J.T. We have now come to the practical effect of the great doctrines which have been before us in the earlier chapters. Here the believer's body comes into view.
G.W.W. His body is to be the vehicle in which what precedes is to be displayed.
J.D-s. In contrast to what we get at the beginning of the epistle when the body is entirely dominated by sin; now it is set free for the service of God.
J.T. The believer, in that way, has always something to sacrifice -- his body.
Rem. The believer becomes light in the place where the Lord was light. If we contemplate this chapter, we see that what is exhorted came out in the Lord Jesus Christ, in the days of His flesh, in large measure.
B.T.F. What is the force of "a living sacrifice"?
J.T. I suppose it is in contrast to the dead ones they offered in Israel under law. In chapter 8 we have: "The body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness". So the body would be, in that way, the vehicle of the Spirit. It is living.
B.T.F. So much more pleasing to God, inasmuch as it would be the working out of living affection.
J.T. Intelligence too, I suppose.
J.S. It is to be a continual thing. Not simply periodically, as in the Jewish economy; it is a service rendered all the time.
A.N.W. All sacrifice is to God, is it not? Whatever we may do may be for one and another, yet the sacrifice is to God.
J.T. God is rightly the legitimate Object before our souls in our sacrifice.
{140}
J.D-s. The verse says as much -- "acceptable to God".
J.T. The believer's body is his own property, as it were, and he has it, as now relieved from the domination of sin, and he is free to sacrifice it; so that things are put on moral ground.
G.W.W. The body having been set free from the domination of sin, it is not now that God says, 'I demand it'; but it is handed over to the believer that he may yield it as a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God.
J.T. The moral element in Romans is an important thing to get hold of, because it suggests that God is not acting arbitrarily -- it is a moral question -- He is entitled to it, and we are exhorted by the mercies of God to present it.
G.W.W. The believer yields it constantly. It is held at the disposal of the will of God, and in that way it becomes a sacrifice.
Rem. It touches chapter 6, "Now, having got your freedom from sin, ye have become bondmen to righteousness". As you say, it is first liberty and then, What are you going to do with your body?
W.L.P. We must be conscious of the mercies of God so as to acknowledge His rights over us.
J.T. I think He has creatorial rights over us; but Romans is not on that ground. It is on the ground of His compassion. "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice".
G.W.W. Although He has His rights, it is something He is prepared to accept at our hands.
Rem. It is on the ground of intelligence; we are enlightened. It is no longer the ignorance of distance; as brought near you are in the intelligence of what God is.
J.B. "Ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God".
{141}
J.T. It is not arbitrary -- things are *worked* out; you *prove* what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
Rem. That is what I had in mind as to occupying the place that was the Lord's, because one can see the fitness of it. As regards His sacrifice, His service, it was good and acceptable and in accord with the perfect will of God. It is a wonderful thing, that endued with light, and in the sense of the grace of God, we can take up that position.
J.T. It would be helpful to see that christianity is established in this world on moral grounds: that there is that here which has been proved superior to all other things. Religions have been enforced on the ground of theory -- mohammedism and the like -- but christianity is established here on grounds that are moral.
G.W.W. Even the law was pretty much on that ground -- the law laid down a rule to be adhered to.
J.T. The basis which Romans lays in our souls is that one is consciously superior to everything in the world. You do not feel that you are giving up, or losing anything. Romans impresses upon you that things are morally greater in christianity than in anything existing here; therefore, we have at the end of this chapter: "If therefore thine enemy should hunger, feed him; if he should thirst, give him drink ... Be not overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good".
Rem. What religion ever taught us to love our enemies? Nothing but christianity.
J.T. "For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die. But God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us" (@Romans 5:7,8). There is a good deal made of what is being done now in the world, but Romans eclipses
{142}
that -- nothing can come up to the moral greatness of what came out in Christ.
B.T.F. Would you say we get a beautiful picture of kingdom truth here?
J.T. I think so -- the moral superiority of it. This chapter gives us what is worked out in *you*. In the earlier chapters, up to the fifth, things are worked out through *Christ*.
J.B. Last month reference was made to mount Nebo. It was from mount Nebo that Moses beheld the land, and this chapter supposes that we are in the good of the land.
J.T. Conduct here is based on *what God is towards us*. It is not like Ephesians, where you are brought into the land. Here it is the result of what God is in Christ in the way of deliverance. It is the compassion of God here.
G.W.W. I suppose what Romans contemplates is the sphere out of which Christ was cast, and in which the believer is set up, the moral traits of Christ coming forth. It is not so much the heavenly position.
J.T. The point which came before us in a previous reading was that headship is worked out in Romans on *moral* grounds. He is obviously the Head because of what He has shown Himself to be.
C.A.M. If one gives up one's life, as is being done in the world today, it is really a forfeited life which is given up.
J.T. The body of the believer comes into great prominence here. It is what has been divinely accorded to him now, as it were, given back to him.
W.B-w. Has the believer any other property?
J.T. He may have; but there can be nothing to compare with his body. It has been released from the dominion of evil, and is the only link we have with this present world.
Rem. So that redemption is the great feature in it.
{143}
J.F.C. It involves suffering. "He that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin; that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God" (@1 Peter 4:1,2).
G.W.W. What really comes out, in the way the body is held, is the measure in which one has been affected by the light of God. The light is shining, but whether the light of God has really had its effect on the soul is seen in the way the body is held. One desires that we might increase in the apprehension of the light so that we may understand what is suitable to God. The soul is not held by rule, but by the measure in which it has apprehended the light of God.
Rem. In other words, the power of your spiritual life is to be relative to the light of God presented to you objectively.
G.W.W. Yes. It is well to bear in mind that the light is shining for everyone and the responsibility of all is to be in the full apprehension of that light.
J.S. It is a great thing to carry out the will of God in our bodies.
J.T. It is the beginning of the testimony.
A.N.W. Is that the thought that the Lord brings before us when He speaks of the body and light? "If therefore thy whole body is light, not having any part dark, it shall be all light as when the lamp lights thee with its brightness" (@Luke 11:36).
J.T. The body there is fully under the control of the light. There has been a full apprehension of the mind of God and it is shining out of the body in every direction. "The light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is single, thy whole body also is full of light". The light is received and diffused in the body so that the body becomes luminous. Not only that one has light for oneself, but he emits it.
{144}
Rem. So this chapter raises the whole issue of what we are left here for. One has often said that if it were a question of fitness for heaven it would not require our being left here. The whole issue of our being left here is sharply raised in this chapter.
J.T. It is the beginning of testimony. God takes possession of the believer's body and thus triumphs! That which was once dominated by sin, is now for the will of God.
G.W.W. One is struck with the thought of that which shines out through the believer's body. It is not what one says, but the way in which light has so completely got possession of the believer that his body is luminous.
J.T. It is a great triumph for God, that one who before has been governed by his own will, should now be here for God's will.
G.W.W. "For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light" (@Ephesians 5:8).
J.S. Is not this more than light? It is more active, bringing God in, in a sense. He has a vehicle here for His will.
G.W.W. The light has taken effect in the believer's soul, and has done its work; one might say it has become life in his soul, and now it is coming out.
J.S. So we have a "living sacrifice".
J.T. God has a vehicle for His will in my body.
W.B.W. He wants us to prove it.
J.T. He comes in. God comes into the world on moral grounds in the way of testimony. He can come in at the present time, only through believers. Chapter 12 suggests what is the beginning really of witness.
Rem. I would like to suggest that we get here in Romans the godly, intelligent believer in the wilderness prepared for Colossians, which will lead him across Jordan and prepare for Ephesians, association
{145}
in the heavenlies, and that that prepares again for the coming out, as it were, in Philippians -- a heavenly man walking -- here.
J.T. I think that is right. Colossians is a step beyond Romans but Corinthians is parallel with it. Romans, first of all, brings in the boards for the tabernacle and in this chapter puts them together. The idea is that the believer is for God's will. Then Corinthians enlarges on this: that the believer's body is the *Lord's*, that is, He has title to it, and it is God's temple. This runs parallel with our passage because Corinthians views us as in the wilderness, but in a collective sense. This chapter goes on to show that we are not to think of ourselves unduly; it lays the basis for unity. One has surrendered his own will, and works out in his soul that God's will is good, acceptable and perfect -- that is the attitude. Then, "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me, to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith. For, as in one body we have many members, but all the members have not the same office; thus we, being many, are one body in Christ". Not, 'ye are the body of Christ' yet; that is Corinthians, but we are "one body in Christ".
Rem. The boards are to be put together.
J.T. We are set up by the binding influence of Christ. It is not by any man's regulation, or creed, it is that we are "one body in Christ".
G.W.W. Romans really prepares the individual for the collective thought that you get in Corinthians.
J.T. Yes, that is the idea.
G.W.W. The failure at Corinth came in through individuals being bad Romans, if one might so put it. If they had been good Romans, the collective thing would have been in order. The failure was in the apprehension of Romans.
{146}
Rem. Romans comes in with what is normal -- it is not corrective -- but Corinthians has in view the breakdown and the failure, and therefore is corrective.
J.T. Corinthians is distinctly collective. The saints are addressed as "the assembly of God which is in Corinth", and, whilst it is a corrective epistle, it is also a constructive one.
G.W.W. The Lord's right over my body is more in connection with the company.
J.T. Romans brings in the triumph of God, and that triumph is great. The individual is taken hold of, and completely recovered to God in his soul. He does not merely acknowledge that christianity is right and superior to everything else which exists, but the man is now for God. So if you have a number of men like that, you have material for the dwelling place of God. This epistle lays *the basis* for independence of Jerusalem. Jerusalem previously had been the centre. This epistle lays the basis for independency of all that was earthly. Paul leads up to the thought of believers being put together as "one body in Christ". The idea of "in Christ" is worthy of attention in this epistle.
G.W.W. This chapter suggests the rings of gold attached to the boards of the tabernacle; it prepares for the collective position. The believer no longer thinks of himself as an individual simply, but begins to take account of his collective position as in the mind of God. This chapter is like the believer having his rings attached.
J.T. I would like to read again the verse which confirms that: "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me". Take note, the apostle is not speaking here in an arbitrary way; it is, "through the grace which has been given to me". He is speaking on that ground. "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me, to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he
{147}
should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". I think we should note that expression. Each one is to think of himself so as to be wise. He does not say he is a cipher, but as it were, God has taken me up, and suited me for some thing. He has an estimate of himself according to God. As you say, he has a place in the structure and he thinks of himself "so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". For the reason that it is all to be living, and we are really only living according to the measure of our faith.
B.T.F. The more you see yourself connected with the structure by the Spirit of God the more lowly it would make one.
J.T. One cannot be more, and one cannot be less, than what God has made one. God has made each of us something; but it is according to the measure of our faith.
C.A.M. According to this verse there would be a danger of one thinking too much of oneself.
J.T. Yes, but there is a danger of being too humble minded, in a legal sense, so that the company of the saints is deprived of what God has given to you. Why should there be such long pauses when together? There is often such timidity which is really the outcome of false humility, that it tends to clericalism and as a result things are thrown into the hands of one or two. The idea here is, that each one has a measure of faith (if he has not, he is not a christian at all, and should not be in fellowship), and belongs to the one body in Christ, and so is to contribute to it. Verses 4 - 7 show how it is worked out; it is in the body, and it is "as God has dealt to each a measure of faith".
C.A.M. Do you not think it a difficult thing to arrive at -- the measure of faith?
{148}
J.T. I do. But to form a true estimate of oneself is of great importance. Not to assume you are more than you are, nor pretend to be less. It is what God has made you, and involves the giving up of all fleshly sentiment amongst the people of God. We are then simple, free, and transparent with each other, and in our relations one with the other.
J.S. Alluding to the tabernacle, you have each board standing on its own sockets, but in relation to the others.
G.W.W. I would suggest that, as well as the rings, there were the bars. The believer must accept his responsibility to take the bars. I think there are a great many who are glad for the sockets of silver, and for the overlaying of the gold, but the moment we come to the question of taking the bars there is a tremendous amount of work to be done. You do not want to let the bars go by without your having a link with them. The bars speak of the unity of the Spirit, and what the Spirit is maintaining here; the believer has to accept his responsibility in that connection.
J.S. According to the measure of faith.
J.T. It is the apprehension one has of the divine thought. It is only in thus apprehending that one can have one's place in the tabernacle. "See ... that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount" (@Hebrews 8:5). The pattern is Christ.
Rem. In verse 3 we get: "As God has dealt to each a measure of faith", but in verse 6 it is, "according to the grace which has been given to us". The faith is dealt and the grace is given.
J.S. I suppose you really come to the divine pattern here. You have the reflex of Christ.
C.A.M. A practical difficulty in my mind (granting you have a sense of the measure of your faith) is that we are told here: "As to honour, each taking
{149}
the lead in paying it to the other" -- how that is to work in all?
J.T. We have to wait on one another, and be subject to one another. So that what underlies christianity is the spirit of mutuality. That is always a check on clericalism.
W.L.P. In what sense do we wait on one another?
J.T. There certainly ought to be, as together, a sense that there are others present who may have grace to participate as well as oneself.
B.T.F. A great check to clericalism would be in souls entering into their responsibility as being in the body.
J.T. If we have neither faith dealt to us nor grace given to us we are not christians, but as having both we are obligated to contribute to the end that all should be edified.
Ques. You were making a distinction between the body and what we have here, "one body in Christ". What was the distinction?
J.T. Let us see how it reads: "For, as in one body we have many members, but all the members have not the same office; thus we, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other". Now, that is what is *in* the body. You have to go to Colossians for "the body". Where you come to the expression, "of the body", you have a definite thing, distinct from other things; so in Colossians Christ is said to be "the head of the body, the assembly". That is the whole body. Here in Romans it is "one body in Christ", because it is a question of laying the basis of unity. It is no more than that, you and I are members of the same body in Christ.
G.W.W. It is the body looked at as present, at any given moment, in this world. It is that in which one is as long as one is here.
J.McN. This is the body held in the sense of responsibility.
{150}
J.T. You take part in the meeting according to the measure of faith dealt to you, and grace given, not according to the measure of knowledge of doctrine.
G.W.W. We apprehend what our present position is in relation to the divine system here, and if we get that in our souls, we shall understand how to conduct ourselves towards man's system.
J.T. Chapter 13 shows how you conduct yourself in regard of the powers that are ordained of God.
G.W.W. Yes. That is man's system.
B.T.F. These chapters not only give us instruction as to how we should act with each other, but supply important thoughts as to how we should walk through this world.
J.T. At the end of this chapter we read, "If therefore thine enemy should hunger, feed him; if he should thirst, give him drink ... Be not overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good". That is a great moral triumph.
Rem. Really, the turning point comes with verse 17. "Recompensing to no one evil for evil: providing things honest before all men". *All men* are introduced. Then, it goes on to say, "If possible, as far as depends on you, living in peace with all men; not avenging yourselves, beloved, but give place to wrath; for it is written, Vengeance belongs to me, *I* will recompense, saith the Lord". That is the turning point as to what is outside, and leads on to the way you should treat your enemy, and being subject to the powers that be.
G.W.W. You cannot expect man's system to regulate itself by the principles of christianity; but *we* are to be regulated by these principles.
J.T. Chapter 13 is dealing, not with christianity, but with what existed before it -- government as set up by God.
{151}
G.W.W. We have to learn that the blessed Lord came into this scene and found certain conditions here; He acted according to God in those conditions -- He did not seek to change them. Herod was on the throne, but He did not interfere. He moved through it all to the pleasure of God. So, in our measure, we move through what was in existence before we came into being; we found it here, and must act according to God in relation to it.
J.T. What the apostle is dealing with is not what was set up at Babel, but in Nebuchadnezzar; he alludes to that government which had been introduced by God. It is remarkable that in @Zechariah 6 the four gentile monarchs are alluded to as "the four spirits of the heavens". It is a very remarkable fact that their government is out of heaven. The principle of it is that the heavens rule. This was introduced in Noah, had been taken up in Israel, and then in Nebuchadnezzar. It is of God; the christian is here and is not going to set aside that which is of God.
J.D.S. That is very important. It is not that I have to submit to something which is evil; but to that which is ordained of God. The authorities are really acting for God in the sphere in which God has put them; it is their responsibility to do so.
J.T. If there is any man in the world who regards government in its right light, it is the christian. He has learned in his soul what the rule of God is morally, so that he can take account of government -- what it is in the abstract.
Rem. Another point the christian should observe is that it is not a question whether the ruler is good or bad; it is rule, therefore he is subject to it. Where this very chapter was written it is very probable that the one who was ruling was Nero or someone not much better. It helps us to see this, because if Paul could write thus under that rule, we can observe and obey under any rule.
{152}
J.T. There is no idea put forth that the government may not miscarry -- those in office may dishonour the office. I suppose every one did. Nebuchadnezzar certainly did, and God virtually said to him: I cannot have government dishonoured in you, the first vessel I have taken up in this way: "They shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field ... till thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will". This was fulfilled, and at length the needed lesson was learned. "And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me". As if God would give the world government through a *man's* heart. So he learned that the heavens rule and, when he lifted up his eyes to heaven, he became as a man, instead of a beast (see @Daniel 4).
J.D.S. Is not the argument that government is *good*? The point in this scripture is not that it is bad, therefore I think, if we contemplate it as being bad, it is not exactly the idea in this scripture.
J.T. The gentile monarchs are symbolised by four horses which are said to be "the four spirits of the heavens, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth ... Then cried he upon me, and spake unto me, saying, Behold, these that go toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north country" (@Zechariah 6:5,8). So God, in that way, is served by these horses. They have not hearts like men; but He can control them. Over against that, in the same chapter, you have a Priest upon His throne, who is*a Man*. That is what we have.
G.W.W. A brother came back from dwelling amongst savages, and was sitting at table with his host, when the tax collector passed in his bill. The host, rather grumbled about the tax collector and the bill, but the brother said, 'If you had been where
{153}
I have been, amongst savages, you would thank God for the tax collector'.
Rem. I remember a man who was not a believer, but a prominent, intelligent man in the world, who said to me, 'I would not like to live in any country in this world where the Bible was not respected'. It is the restraining power there is for good in such instances.
J.T. That there is provision made for the conscience of a christian by some governments today shows that God is overruling. We should recognise this, and thank Him for it. There will be no allowance made for a believer's conscience under the beast (see @Revelation 13). The dragon will give to him his power.
{154}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (12)
@Romans 16:1 - 27
A.F.M. What would you say is the object of these last chapters of this epistle?
J.T. I suppose, to apply the truth in a practical form to the saints in their varied relations, beginning with chapter 12. That chapter adjusts us in relation to one another, chapter 13 in regard of the government of the world outside, chapter 14 in regard of those who are weak in the faith; that is, there is consideration in the kingdom of God for the weak; instead of as in the world, the weak going to the wall, they are to be supported in the kingdom of God. In chapter 15 the Lord is brought in as a Pattern for us -- One who did not please Himself. In connection with the weak ones, we are not to please ourselves. The suggestion of what Christ is in that way leads on to the apostle's remarks about himself and his ministry. Chapter 16 is what you might call a letter of commendation. Chapter 14 is very applicable to the present time in view of questions arising which have to be settled with the Lord.
A.A.T. What kind of questions?
J.T. Questions arising from government claims and such like. The authority of the Lord is emphasised in chapter 14 so that each individual involved is directly responsible to the Lord. Motives have not to be judged by others.
B.T.F. We have care for each other in chapter 14 -- the spirit of a brother, that is, care for the weak ones, as you were saying.
J.T. In the kingdom of God the weak are supported, in contrast to what is seen in the kingdom of men.
{155}
A.N.W. I suppose the great difficulty today is to determine who are weak. What is this kind of weakness?
J.T. "Him that is weak in the faith", it says. It does not suppose that his will is active. Scripture does not provide for that.
A.N.W. The question is as to how you are to know whether the will is at work or not.
J.T. Evidently from the instructions referred to, the weak are assumed to be *known*.
W.C.R. They appear to be actually weak here. It is really weakness, not will.
A.N.W. The apostle is very careful not to link himself with them. He links himself with the strong.
J.T. "We that are strong".
A.F.M. I suppose it contemplates a Jew newly come to the faith.
A.A.T. A gentile too.
J.T. I do not know about that. I do not suppose the apostle would make a provision for a heathen festival. The day of which he speaks would undoubtedly be a day accredited under the old economy. First of all, the thing is to determine the status of such a one as this, which the first verse does, "Now him that is weak in the faith receive, not to the determining of questions of reasoning". He is not to be received to the determining of doubtful questions. He is not admitted into the counsels of the saints, he is not as yet qualified to judge of things.
W.L.P. But he is in fellowship, is he not?
J.T. Surely; but you would not place him under obligation to judge -- he has rather to be carried. I think that is the first thing to determine -- the status of this man; he is classified as weak.
Rem. The apostle condemns the Galatians for observing days.
{156}
J.T. When it became a recognised custom, then it was evil; but this is simply the matter of a man not being able to get beyond as to his conscience, hitherto recognised. He is unable to see that one day has no moral value above another day.
C.A.M. You would say he was not a spiritual man. A spiritual man would be free.
A.F.M. He would be marked by spiritual judgment, which was lacking in this case.
B.T.F. You would say we get great principles in this chapter; but we do not get the same condition of things now.
J.T. Hardly, because days observed in christendom are heathenish in their origin, and I do not suppose the Spirit of God would make provision for them. This, I suppose, would refer to days recognised under the law.
A.A.T. I have heard this scripture quoted to support people being received into fellowship who are weak, especially, when the ones in question were the children of the saints. We have heard much of late as to being sure that those who are received have on the best robe, and have the Spirit, and so on.
J.T. They ought to have the Spirit, I am sure; but it is quite obvious in christianity that the weak are not to be left out in the cold to look after themselves.
J.B. What is the contrast between the weak spoken of in verse 1 of chapter 14, and those in verse 1 of chapter 15?
J.T. I think it is the continuation of the same subject, only chapter 15 emphasises the obligation of the strong. Instead of stumbling the weak, you are to support them. As it says: "But *we* ought, we that are strong, to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves". It seems to me, the point is to establish that in christianity, or in the kingdom of God, the weak are to be taken care of.
{157}
It would be a poor thing if we should leave weak christians to look after themselves; it would not be in keeping with the spirit of christianity.
W.L.P. The main thing would be to support them.
J.T. As it says in chapter 15, "We ought, we that are strong, to bear the infirmities of the weak". The opening verses of chapter 15 are really an amplification of chapter 14 in regard to the obligations of the strong. "But *we* ought, we that are strong, to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. Let each one of us please his neighbour with a view to what is good, to edification. For the Christ also did not please himself; but according as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproach thee have fallen upon me".
A.N.W. Is not the whole instruction addressed to those who are strong rather than the weak?
J.T. That is the point. It is the obligation of the strong. It is a poor thing if in christianity there is not care. The weak have to be cared for.
A.F.M. Would you say a little more about the kingdom of God, in relation to chapter 14, as a sphere of protection for the weak?
J.T. What it is, is stated in a very terse way: "The kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". That is what it is; but then, the thought of the Lord is enlarged upon. If you will observe, first it says as regards the weak: "Who art *thou* that judgest the servant of another? to his own master he stands or falls. And he shall be made to stand; for the Lord is able to make him stand. One man esteems day more than day; another esteems every day alike. Let each be fully persuaded in his own mind. He that regards the day, regards it to the Lord. And he that eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks; and he that does not eat, it is
{158}
to the Lord that he does not eat, and gives God thanks. For none of us lives to himself, and none dies to himself. For both if we should live, it is to the Lord we live; and if we should die, it is to the Lord we die: both if we should live then, and if we should die, we are the Lord's". Then, further it says: "For it is written, *I* live, saith the Lord, that to me shall bow every knee, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then each of us shall give an account concerning himself to God".
W.B-t. It seems to come in in very strong contrast to the general idea of the survival of the fittest. I was just wondering as to how it works out amongst us.
J.T. Certainly it is not the principle here of 'might is right'. Here, the strong use their strength for the support of the weak.
W.C.R. Is not the question of individual conscience brought before us? "Let not him that eats make little of him that eats not; and let not him that eats not judge him that eats". So there is to be the recognition of one another's conscience.
J.T. That is what I see at the present time. The Lord being brought in in such a prominent way, we have to learn to leave each other with the Lord in certain things, assured that the Lord is able to make the brother stand in regard of any weakness he may evince.
C.A.M. The matter of eating and the observing of days would apply only in principle to us; it would refer to other matters really, would it not?
J.T. There are a great many things today which might be easily enumerated, which have to be left with each one involved, in the light of the Lord -- that He will help each of us. Of course, no allowance for our wills can be made.
C.A.M. That is where my difficulty comes in. You could not go on with a person, even if they
{159}
were weak, if they were allowing what was wrong, could you?
J.T. One could not. Only, it is a question of helping him if you see his conscience cannot overcome a thing which he once observed. You would seek to help him -- you would not judge his motives. You would be assured, if the Lord converted him, that He would take him out of that slough of despond.
A.N.W. You might be quite right in enquiring as to whether he did it as unto the Lord.
J.T. Quite so. The test would be as to what he had before him in it.
W.C.R. You would endeavour to bring his conscience up to the light, that he might be free.
B.T.F. Is the weakness referred to here largely a point of the education of conscience?
J.T. Yes. The weakness refers to defectiveness as to the faith. "Him that is weak in the faith". I suppose "the faith" there refers to the system of christianity. It is not that he has not faith in his soul; but he is not fully instructed as regards the principles of christianity.
A.F.M. There are two things brought before us. First, the respect due to individual conscience and responsibility to the Lord; then, the protective care that the strong should exercise toward the weak.
J.T. Yes, and the position in which such a one is as regards the Lord. He rules over both the dead and the living. You could not go on without the greatest dismay and discouragement as regards the saints, unless you took that into account -- that the Lord is ruling over the dead and living. As Paul elsewhere says, "I have confidence in you through the Lord" (@Galatians 5:10). You could not go on otherwise.
W.B-t. I do not understand His ruling over the dead and living.
{160}
J.T. He has authority over both -- those who have gone to be with the Lord are under His sway, just as they were when here in the body, and under His care too.
W.B-t. That was clearly seen on the mount of transfiguration, where two of them appear. You think it means then, not morally dead, but physically dead.
J.T. Yes, I think it refers to those physically dead here. "If we should live then, and if we should die, we are the Lord's. For to this end Christ has died and lived again, that he might rule over both dead and living".
W.B-t. In regard to "the faith", is it the thought of God bringing in His Man and disposing of the man after the flesh?
J.T. That is involved in it surely. "The faith" is a remarkable expression. I doubt if it could be used in regard of any other dispensation, because things are entirely on that principle now. If it is simply 'faith' it is a question of the state of your soul; but 'the faith' I understand to be the truth of christianity.
Rem. "Whatever is not of faith is sin" (@Romans 14:23).
J.T. But that is *faith* as to the state of your soul; but "the faith" is the system of christianity.
Rem. "Follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart" (@2 Timothy 2:22).
J.T. That is faith simply.
C.A.M. "The faith once delivered to the saints" (@Jude 3).
J.T. That is "the faith". "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith" (@1 John 5:4). "Our faith" that is the christian's faith -- the system of truth held by faith in the saints.
J.McN. Having faith would be, being fully persuaded in your own mind as it says in verse 5, "Let each be fully persuaded in his own mind".
{161}
J.T. Surely, only the thing is that one should be fully initiated in all the principles of christianity so as to be in "the faith".
Ques. Could you substitute the word 'truth' for 'faith'?
J.T. The truth is a different idea, but "the faith", I believe, covers the whole system of truth that is held in the soul. If it is "the faith" it is not simply what is in a creed -- it is held in the souls of men. "The law" was the term under which the old dispensation was referred to, whereas the new dispensation is "in faith".
W.B-t. The distinction is maintained in @John 17: "Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth". It is a different thought from "the faith" here.
J.T. The principle in connection with "the truth" is that it *adjusts* us. In the giving of the law, there is nothing said about man receiving it on the principle of faith, whereas on the day of the Lord's resurrection it is emphasised throughout that the disciples did not believe. As if to say, aside from faith the dispensation cannot be inaugurated. The whole point in the Lord's movements and actions on the first day after He arose was to establish faith. He upbraided the eleven as they sat at meat because they did not believe the testimony of those who had seen Him after He was risen. That was the reason why He upbraided them. As much as to say, If you do not believe testimony, the dispensation cannot be inaugurated. Even the apostles, although they were accustomed to seeing Him, were placed by Him in such a position that they must believe accredited testimony. Before the Lord appeared to the eleven after He arose, He is careful to hide Himself. He appears to this one and that one, all to put them under obligation to believe accredited testimony. They must learn to believe thus because that
{162}
is the ground on which the dispensation is to be inaugurated -- it is "God's dispensation, which is in faith".
W.L.P. Will you explain that a little?
J.T. Let us look at @Mark 16:5, "And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right, clothed in a white robe, and they were amazed and alarmed; but he says to them, Be not alarmed. Ye seek Jesus, the Nazarene, the crucified one. He is risen, he is not here; behold the place where they had put him". Then verse 9: "Now when he had risen very early, the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary of Magdala, out of whom he had cast seven demons. *She* went and brought word to those that had been with him, who were grieving and weeping. And when these heard that he was alive and had been seen of her, they disbelieved it. And after these things he was manifested in another form to two of them as they walked, going into the country; and *they* went and brought word to the rest; neither did they believe them. Afterwards as they lay at table he was manifested to the eleven, and reproached them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they had not believed those who had seen him risen". That is the way the Spirit of God brings forward this great point of faith. They had missed it. They did not believe all these witnesses; so I believe the point the Lord desired to emphasise in speaking to the eleven apostles was that the saints throughout the dispensation should accustom themselves to receiving accredited testimony. Now we have the Scriptures. The apostles all saw the Lord and Paul makes a point of the fact that he too saw Him.
W.C.R. When the resurrection is in question, in @1 Corinthians 15, the apostle speaks of all those who saw Him.
{163}
J.T. Yes, he makes a great point of those to whom He appeared.
A.F.M. Would you also add the testimony of the Spirit?
J.T. Quite, although there is nothing further said; the testimony is complete in the Scriptures.
C.A.M. In 1 John we have three witnesses. Would you regard that as the testimony to be believed, in that way?
J.T. Quite. "For they that bear witness are three: the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and the three agree in one". "And it is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is the truth".
C.A.M. Is not the weakness with us that we are not able to recognise the testimony of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes, I would say that He witnesses to the whole truth.
A.N.W. A contrast in the character of the dispensation would be seen in John the baptist. He had a fit of depression in the prison, whereas the most precious testimony we have as to Christ in the present dispensation emanated from prisons. It is a dispensation of *faith*.
B.P. Why were miracles introduced at the beginning of christianity?
J.T. For those who believed not. The miracles were a witness to the power of God. As we read in @Mark 16: "The Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs following upon it". In the synoptic gospels miracles are intended to confirm the preaching, just as a bell on a church tower calls the people in. But John's gospel is like what is inside after the people come in. John's gospel gives us *signs*. You would not attempt to call a man a mile away by a sign, it would be by a noise, like the bell in the tower. To those inside, the signs signify something. So John gives us signs, and they
{164}
are to lead us to have faith in the Son of God. Of course, the signs in John were works of power, but I speak of how they are presented.
A.J.D. It says in @1 Thessalonians 1:9,10: "Ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God; and to wait for his Son from heaven".
J.T. They believed the testimony and turned to God.
A.F.M. Those who receive this authentic testimony require no proof, do they? If you were asked to prove anything today you would have a difficulty, would you not?
J.T. Yes, you might; of course, the walk and ways of spiritual christians avail as testimony.
Rem. "Blessed they who have not seen and have believed" (@John 20:29). That is faith.
J.T. "The faith" is the system of christianity.
W.C.R. "One Lord, one faith, one baptism" (@Ephesians 4:5).
W.L.P. It requires faith to be connected with "the faith".
J.T. The principle of it is that faith is in men's souls, and they hold the truth thus. The truth is held by faith, not as in a creed.
A.A.T. Was it possible to be one of God's people in the previous dispensation without faith?
J.T. Faith was in Abel and in all those who followed in his line, as we learn from @Hebrews 11, but you do not find "the faith" referred to in the Old Testament.
J.McN. It appears from verse 6, that one weak in "the faith" had "faith".
J.T. At any rate he recognises the Lord, that is the point. As long as a brother recognises the Lord you have hope of him, although he may be defective.
W.C.R. Verse 13 presents the obligation of the stronger ones: "Let us no longer therefore judge one another; but judge ye this rather, not to put a stumbling-block or a fall-trap before his brother".
{165}
C.A.M. And again the end of verse 15: "Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ has died".
A.N.W. The weak brother is not to judge the strong, and the strong brother not to despise the weak one. There is to be mutual consideration.
J.T. The point is that, although weak, he is a *brother*.
C.A.M. Would you say that this is helpful at the present moment? In spite of all the difference of thought about a great many things, we can go on together in the light of this.
J.T. Yes. I think we can go on together in the light of this, although differing, provided we have the Lord before us. If we have the Lord before us, we can leave each other with Him. Still we should be always exercised so as to be of one mind.
A.N.W. I think that is confirmed in verse 18: "For he that in this serves the Christ is acceptable to God and approved of men". It seems to adjust it all in regard of Christ, God and men. Our exercise should be to be approved of by one another as well as by God.
Ques. Would you be quite happy to have a brother in fellowship now who kept days and feasts?
J.T. No, not *now*, because these things have been exposed to us. But we have to put ourselves in the position of the saints at Rome in those days. Great consideration was required.
W.C.R. I have heard you say that christianity is not like the governments of the world. They have immigrant officers at the ports who do not allow any weak subjects to enter, whereas, we have to take them in, care for them, and nourish them.
J.T. Our strength becomes serviceable in that way. If I have surplus of strength there is a good opportunity to make use of it.
C.A.M. This chapter is the kingdom chapter, is it not? God's kingdom.
{166}
J.T. It does not develop the truth of the kingdom. It only shows that in the kingdom of God provision is made for the weak. It is not the whole truth of the kingdom; it is said to be, "not eating and drinking; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit" (@Romans 14:17). So that the one who is in the kingdom of God is not going to have a difference with a brother over a matter of meat and drink.
C.A.M. Where would you draw the line as to what involves fellowship?
J.T. Anything that would set aside what one might call the commandments of the Lord. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me" (@John 14:21). If the will of the Lord is thwarted in any way then you would raise the question as to fellowship; but this liberty is not contravening the will of the Lord, in fact, what the weak brother is doing is *to the Lord*.
J.B. In chapter 14 we have indicated what it is to be weak in "the faith"; but in chapter 15 what is brought before us is more as to how the strong are to help the weak, and get them into the good of "the faith".
J.T. Chapter 15 sets Christ before us as an example: "For the Christ also did not please himself; but according as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproach thee have fallen upon me". Hence, we have to learn, as in the kingdom of God, to bear the infirmities of the weak and, in doing so, we follow in the steps of the Lord -- that is what He did, and it is thus that we please God. Chapter 15 pursues the subject until we reach the thought of unity. In verses 5 - 7 Paul says: "Now the God of endurance and of encouragement give to you to be like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus: that ye may with one accord, with one mouth, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore receive ye one another, according as the
{167}
Christ also has received you to the glory of God". The Spirit of God does not leave us under the impression that christianity is composed of disunited people; He never stops short in His aim of perfection. So if there be differences among the saints we are not to assume that these are justifiable; the reason of these is that there is weakness in "the faith". But the aim of the Spirit is "that ye may with one accord, with one mouth, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ".
A.A.T. In giving an outline of the various chapters, you spoke of chapter 14 as being one which had special application today in view of the claims of the government. The questions that our brother has raised about drawing the line between what does not interfere with fellowship and what does is important; there is divergence of mind as to how far certain claims can be acceded to.
J.T. There is a limit beyond which we cannot go. I am only referring to general principles. We have to take account of things as they are, and have respect for individual conscience, in so far as there is no insubjection, that the individual has the Lord before him, and is not acting in self-will; he is doing what he has liberty to do before the Lord. We have to leave brethren with the Lord. But, as I remarked, the Spirit of God does not leave us with the impression that we have reached a perfect state of things, nor such as is altogether pleasing to God. At the same time, His aim is "that ye may with one accord, with one mouth, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ". Therefore, we have that before us constantly, and, at every opportunity, would seek to adjust each other so that we might be strong in "the faith".
The last chapter is very important although it may seem otherwise. It is important as commencing with a letter of commendation. The apostle takes
{168}
occasion, evidently, of Phoebe's going to Rome to write this letter, sending it by her, who is commended to the saints as, "Our sister, who is minister of the assembly which is in Cenchrea". And, in commending her, he is led on to send salutations to a number of the brothers and sisters in Rome. Thus serving, I think, on the one hand to indicate what a letter of commendation is, and, on the other hand, how it tends to strengthen the links that exist among the people of God in different localities.
A.A.T. Would she have been received without this letter?
J.T. It is not simply that she should be received; but that she should be *assisted*  as well. She is to be received worthily of saints. It says: "Receive her in the Lord worthily of saints, and that ye may assist her in whatever matter she has need of you". So that she is committed to their affectionate care and interest.
J.B. She is a characteristic sister.
J.T. Yes. She represents the activity of the Spirit on the feminine side amongst the saints. She is said to be a "minister of the assembly which is in Cenchrea". It is remarkable that a woman should thus be designated.
A.F.M. So that a letter of commendation supposes that there is something to commend in the person about whom you write. There was something substantial here!
J.T. In a brother or sister being commended to a gathering, having changed their residence, they are added to that gathering. What you are adding to the gathering is denoted by the letter.
Ques. Is the character of Phoebe's ministry given in verse 2?
J.T. "*She* also has been a helper of many, and of myself". The point is, she did whatever was
{169}
needed to be done. The word 'minister' here does not mean merely menial service; evidently she ministered to the needs of the saints.
Ques. What is conveyed to us in the salutations -- so many are mentioned by name?
J.T. The Spirit of God reminding us that He has His eye on each one of us. If the Lord were to single us out and tell us publicly what His estimate of us is, it would be very exercising.
J.B. What would be the difference between those "in Christ" and those "in the Lord"?
J.T. The thought is very much akin. "In the Lord" brings in His authority: one so designated is subject. "In Christ" would be that the person had that spiritual status.
Rem. It is a kind of genealogy. It is not simply the Lord indicating that they are His.
J.T. We may regard it as a roll of honour. It is the Spirit of God showing us that every one is under the eye of the Lord, and taken account of according to spiritual merits. If you run down the chapter you will see the different shades of merit accorded. Prisca and Aquila come first. You will notice Prisca is mentioned first, and of them it says: "Salute Prisca and Aquila, my fellow-workmen in Christ Jesus, (who for my life staked their own neck; to whom not *I* only am thankful, but also all the assemblies of the nations,) and the assembly at their house". I suppose this sister and her husband would be the most estimable couple in the whole of Rome. Then we have a brother mentioned simply as "my beloved". "Salute Epaenetus, my beloved, who is the firstfruits of Asia for Christ". That is all he has to say about him; and so on down the chapter we get different shades of spiritual merit pointed out.
C.A.M. This is the apostle's own thought about them.
{170}
J.T. He was really giving the Lord's estimate of them. Being inspired, the passage would set forth the Lord's estimate of each one named.
A.F.M. Does the chapter afford us marks of a spiritual man, and show how he regards the saints -- the facts about them, which should govern him in his prayers?
J.T. There are certainly saints who stand out prominently in your mind as identified with the Lord's interests. One has constantly before one certain men and women who are especially identified with the truth and for whom we pray especially.
{171}
*Pages 171 to 439. "The Assembly, its Order and Power", Germany 1929, 1933 and 1935 (Volume 195)*.
THE OUTWARD ORDER OF THE ASSEMBLY (1)
@Luke 22:7 - 20; @John 13:1 - 5
J.T. The assembly is to be characterised by outward order, but also by inward spiritual power. The outward order we find in the first three gospels, specially in that of Luke. John brings in the second characteristic, the inward power. The first three gospels give us a comparatively short account of what happened at the inauguration of the Supper, while John devotes five chapters to it (@John 13 - 17). The outward order in the first three gospels is a matter of our responsibility, whereas in the gospel of John, where it is a matter of the inner side, the Lord Himself takes over the responsibility of everything.
In Matthew and Mark the disciples ask the Lord where they should prepare the passover (@Matthew 26:17 and @Mark 14:12). They made the proposal concerning the necessary preparations. In the verses read in @Luke 22, however, it simply says that the Lord sent Peter and John and said to them, "Go and prepare the passover for us, that we may eat it". In Luke the Lord initiated the matter. Today also the Lord gives us the incentive to prepare ourselves for the Supper.
In @John 13:1 it says, "Now before the feast of the passover, Jesus, knowing that his hour had come". It is not a matter that *the* hour was come, as in @Luke 22:14, where the outward preparations of the disciples had come to a close, but in @John 13 the Lord's hour had come, "during supper", when He wished to prepare His disciples for the Father. Jesus rose from supper in this His hour, and poured water into a washhand basin and began to wash the
{172}
feet of the disciples. Then He said to Peter, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me". Instead of the outward order we have here the truth that we have part with Christ in the spiritual blessings of the assembly before God, the Father, and that the Lord must prepare us for it. The preparations for the outward side are left to us, but in what relates to the inward side we must leave ourselves completely in the Lord's hands, for He alone knows what is necessary before the Father.
Rem. Perhaps you will tell us something more as to the outward order of the assembly. I thought we could first consider this.
Ques. Have we that in the first epistle to the Corinthians?
J.T. Yes. The first epistle to the Corinthians is addressed "to the assembly of God which is in Corinth". It is clear that if God has an assembly in Corinth, it should be marked by outward order. Even the types in the Old Testament show how much God regards order. In Exodus the smallest details are given of the construction and the vessels of the tabernacle of testimony. The same applies also to the temple which Solomon built. With David we see in type the inner side of the truth, for he "built round about from the Millo and inward" (@2 Samuel 5:9). This is the ministry of John in whose gospel the disciples on the evening of the resurrection day were behind *closed* doors (@John 20:19). In John's gospel everything comes to this; it is not a matter of that which is visible outwardly, but of what is inward.
Ques. Have we in @Acts 2 the outward and inward sides of the assembly?
J.T. There we only find what is visible outwardly. The parted tongues as of fire sat *upon* each one of them, while in @John 20, the Lord breathed *into* them.
{173}
Ques. When have we to do with the outward order?
J.T. When we are assembled to break bread we must first think of the outward order. The Lord in @Luke 22 sent Peter and John to deal with the outward preparations, for these are left to us. At the breaking of bread we begin with the outward and public side and then pass over to the inner side. We announce the death of the Lord (@1 Corinthians 11:26); that is a public matter. If we take the tabernacle of testimony as a type, the slaughtering of the sacrifices took place in the court, it was visible from outside. If anyone was not a priest and thus could not go inside, he still could see the outer curtains of the tabernacle, and these were made of the skins of slain animals (@Exodus 26:14). In that way death was publicly announced.
Ques. How do the two epistles to Timothy fit in with this?
J.T. The first epistle to Timothy deals with the outward order, and the second epistle the breakdown of christendom. But even in the days of breakdown we must still move in the light of 1 Timothy and 1 Corinthians, for 2 Timothy is addressed to one who had heard Paul's words (@2 Timothy 2:2) and who had been *thoroughly* acquainted with Paul's teaching (@2 Timothy 3:10).
Ques. Is it of special importance that the Lord sent Peter and John?
J.T. In the early chapters of the Acts Peter and John are frequently found together. Peter is marked by experience and in both of his epistles he stresses the matters of outward order and administration. John, the disciple whom Jesus loved, is marked by love and in his gospel he brings in the inner side. It would be well if there were a Peter and a John in every local assembly. They are both necessary to maintain outward order.
{174}
Rem. The place was pre-arranged, where they should prepare the passover.
J.T. Yes, that is right. Peter and John asked the Lord, "Where wilt thou that we prepare it?". The Lord mentions the place, namely "a large upper room furnished", there they were to make ready. Then even the hour is mentioned when the meeting was to commence (verse 14). It says then, the Lord sat down at table, or more correctly translated, "he placed himself at table". That is very important, for it shows that we should sit together in restfulness.
Ques. Punctuality, I suppose, belongs also to the obedience which is due to the Lord?
J.T. "When the hour was come", shows that we should all be punctual. "He placed himself at table, and the twelve apostles with him" shows how we should comport ourselves at the breaking of bread. Anyone who frequently comes late has certainly little idea of what it means to prepare the passover. "The hour" is the time when we have arranged the meeting.
In Matthew, and similarly in Mark, it says, "When the evening was come" (@Matthew 26:20), also in @John 13 the Lord washed the disciples feet during *supper*, but in @Luke 22:14, it says, "When the hour was come". Many think we ought to break bread in the evening, because according to the first two gospels the Lord inaugurated it on an evening. But Luke, who, as a companion of Paul, has more his ministry in mind leaves the hour open for us. We have arranged the hour for the breaking of bread on Lord's day morning. When the hour was come Jesus placed Himself at table and the apostles with Him. The Lord showed them and us how we should sit in the meeting and the apostles copied the Lord. It does not say that He took His place with them at table, but they with Him. The apostles imitated all
{175}
the movements of the Lord. The Lord gives them and us an example of right behaviour in the assembly. We have to learn all from the Lord, even the outward order of the assembly.
Ques. Should we at the breaking of bread be sitting in restfulness before Him?
J.T. Yes. He sat down restfully and we should do the same. To use a figure, if anyone were invited by a highborn gentleman, he would need to know how to behave in his presence. When the Lord at the Supper placed Himself at table and the apostles with Him, we should perceive from that that we are to be outwardly in a condition of restfulness. We should learn everything from the Lord. If we had been present when He was down here, we should have carefully observed all His actions and movements. Every spiritual christian wishes to do all as the Lord has done it. What a path we should tread, if in everything we adjusted ourselves according to the Lord, whom having not seen we love (@1 Peter 1:8). Much is written about the Lord and this is very important for us, and we must receive the testimony of those who have seen Him. It is expressly said in @Luke 22:14 that the apostles were with Him when He instituted the Supper. The apostles were persons who were in the position to bear a powerful testimony to what they had seen. We read in @Acts 2:42 of the new converts that they continued in the teaching of the apostles, for the apostles taught with great authority. They emphasised that they were eye-witnesses of Christ, they were "eye-witnesses of and attendants on the Word" (@Luke 1:2). In @Luke 10:23 the Lord turned to them privately and said, "Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see"; they had evidently special eyes. Their words testified that they had actually seen the facts of which they spoke. We have all this in the written Word and also in the Holy Spirit.
{176}
Ques. Does outward order extend only to the assembly or also to our houses?
J.T. It should also be seen in our houses, but we are engaged just now with the assembly when it is convened. The first epistle to Timothy and other passages are occupied with our houses, but that is a wider sphere. We have now the assembly before us and what should mark it publicly when it is convened. The house of God in @1 Timothy 3:15 includes not only the assembly in a place as in 1 Corinthians, but it embraces all the believers in the whole world. The outward order which is to mark a local assembly should be found in every place. The order of God's house is the same everywhere; there is only one assembly over the whole world. If, however, it is a matter of the coming together of the assembly to break bread, that can only happen in many places, as we find in 1 Corinthians, where the house of God is not mentioned. There everything is local, whereas the house of God which is spoken of in 1 Timothy and in Ephesians is universal. In @Luke 22 the Lord took His place at table and we can only have that in a locality, for the whole assembly over the world cannot possibly come together in one place and then sit down in restfulness together. The apostles who seated themselves at table with the Lord took care that in all the local assemblies on earth the same customs and practices should obtain, for the Lord sent them into the whole world.
Ques. Why did the Lord send Peter and John?
J.T. Peter in his epistles stresses outward order; he writes about what is seemly in the assembly, but John seeks to bring in love. To use a simple example: If Peter says to a sister who frequently comes late, 'You surely know the hour which we have agreed upon', then John says, 'But the sister has several little children whom she has to attend to
{177}
before she can come, we must have patience with her'. John prevents the administration of Peter from being too strict. That, of course, applies only to the principles which governed the two apostles. Peter had also love and John also went in for order, but if Peter insisted that this must be done in such and such a way, then John would say, 'But we must not destroy brotherly love, but must uphold it at all costs, for the Lord has said, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves" (@John 13:35)'. That is the preparation which John makes for the Supper. Peter and John set forth a wonderful blending of authority and brotherly love, and the Lord wishes to see this combination in every local assembly. He sent them both to prepare the passover, and only when two of that kind have prepared the Supper can we sit down together in peace.
Ques. Why does John in his gospel show that Thomas was absent from the first meeting in @John 20?
J.T. John, in spite of all his love, does not give up righteousness, for love is never weak in the maintenance of order. But if John does write that Thomas was not present at the first meeting in @John 20, he does also say earlier that Thomas was ready to die with the Lord. He had, therefore, true love for the Lord (see @John 11:16).
Ques. Does Paul not hold on to the Corinthians with words of love, in spite of all the reprimands?
J.T. In Paul we see very beautifully a blending of authority and brotherly love. He writes to the Corinthians, "What will ye? that I come to you with a rod; or in love, and in a spirit of meekness?" (@1 Corinthians 4:21). He leaves the decision in their hands. But instead of going himself, he sent to them Timotheus, his child in the Lord, so that through him
{178}
they might be reminded of Paul's ways as they are in Christ. Instead of having Paul among them with his rod, they had his "beloved and faithful child" Timotheus in Corinth, through whom Paul gave them his first epistle. I believe Timotheus visited the brethren in Corinth in their homes and admonished them to do what Paul writes to them in his first epistle. Perhaps Timotheus visited a very hard brother and told him that it would be a very serious matter for him to continue further in disobedience. Perhaps he might have referred to Ananias and Sapphira and also called attention to the close of the first epistle to the Corinthians, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema", that is, accursed. Timotheus certainly worked in this way with the Corinthians and he achieved more with Paul's epistle than if Paul himself had gone with the rod. Paul's rod is, "Am I not an apostle?" (@1 Corinthians 9:1). Timotheus had no such rod; he shed tears, and tears are very valuable; they often bring about better results than the rod.
Ques. Had Peter and John only to make preparation for the passover or also for the breaking of bread?
J.T. The passover and the Lord's supper are in 1 Corinthians closely connected, even though they are distinguished from one another. In the gospels the two disciples prepared the passover. In Matthew, and similarly in Mark, it says, "As they were eating, Jesus, having taken the bread" (@Matthew 26:26). They were actually eating the passover when the Lord made an interruption and instituted His Supper. Luke keeps the passover and the Lord's supper separate. In @Luke 22:17 the Lord received *a* cup, that is, one of the passover cups which stood there. In verse 19 He took bread and in verse 20 He took *the* cup of which it says that it was taken "after having supped". In that way the Supper is carefully distinguished
{179}
from the passover meal. The Lord says in verse 18, "For I say unto you, that I will not drink at all of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God come". The passover according to its literal meaning has in that way ceased for us; in @1 Corinthians 5 we have its spiritual meaning and application to us, "our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed" (verse 7); that *has* happened once for all. But the next verse has its full application to us today, "so that let us celebrate the feast", that is, the feast of unleavened bread. In @1 Corinthians 10 and 11 we have then the Lord's supper. The passover and the Supper, although closely connected with one another, are thus kept distinct.
I should like to ask the brethren to receive a few words of adjustment in connection with our breaking of bread this forenoon. I do not wish to criticise but only to present the truth. We were too numerous here this morning, and that is not normal for the assembly. The evangelists Mark and Luke teach us that fifty or at the most one hundred is the normal size of an assembly; @Mark 6:39,40, @Luke 9:14. Because we did not keep to that, we were compelled to give thanks for a vessel from which however we did not drink; indeed we were even obliged to fill up with wine from bottles for which we had not given thanks. The scripture however says, "The cup of blessing which we bless" (@1 Corinthians 10:16), and "as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come" (@1 Corinthians 11:26). We should thus all drink out of *the* cup which has been blessed. In connection with the bread we should also eat only from one loaf, Of course, we had an abnormal gathering this morning. We should not normally do it in that way.
Ques. What would you then suggest doing when as this morning, three hundred brethren wish to break bread in one place?
{180}
J.T. Our Lord had five thousand people to feed and He made them sit down in ranks, in groups of fifty and one hundred. We have to do it according to that principle.
Ques. Can that be remedied by arranging several tables in one large room, each with the one loaf and one cup?
J.T. No, that would give confusion, for the different groups would disturb one another in singing and in worship. We can only remedy it when we divide ourselves into several companies and gather in different rooms. We find this principle in the Scriptures. For example Aquila and Priscilla had in Rome, and in Ephesus, an assembly in their house; @Romans 16:3 - 5; @1 Corinthians 16:19. Certainly all the christians in Rome or in Ephesus could not come together in one house. When the company is too large, the brethren should gather in smaller companies in different houses. The Lord would receive far more praise from six companies, each of fifty, than from a large meeting of three hundred brethren.
Ques. But were there not five hundred together, for the Lord appeared to above five hundred at one time? (@1 Corinthians 15:6).
J.T. Those were five hundred individual brethren who were together. The assembly is, however, an entity, it is the *one* pearl of great value (@Matthew 13:46).
Ques. What would you say about these special meetings of ours in Germany? We only come together once a year in such large numbers.
J.T. That is something abnormal. But the Lord helps us greatly when we are prepared to divide ourselves up for the breaking of bread. We had for years the same difficulty in America and still have it. But it is slowly disappearing there, because the brethren divide themselves up. In Rochester we have had meetings for years when as large a number
{181}
of brethren were present as are here. There we come together now in four places to break bread. The Lord always gives us right thoughts, and also helps us in working them out.
Ques. Could we not put a large vessel on the table, full of wine, and after thanks had been given for it, then pour the wine into several cups and let these go round?
J.T. We had that this morning, but that does not agree with Matthew and Mark. The Lord says in @Matthew 26:27, in regard to *the* cup for which He had given thanks, "Drink ye all of it", that means, out of this one cup which the Lord gave them. In @Mark 14:23, it says, "And they all drank out of it"; that means out of *the* cup for which the Lord had given thanks, and which He gave to them. We are not wiser than the Lord. Thousands were converted in Jerusalem at Pentecost, but they actually broke bread in houses (@Acts 2:46). After Pentecost the bread would have been broken in more than a hundred houses in Jerusalem. The breaking of bread was to remain a family celebration, even after Paul had made it an assembly occasion (see @Acts 20:7; @1 Corinthians 11:18 to 20).
{182}
THE OUTWARD ORDER OF THE ASSEMBLY (2)
@1 Corinthians 11:17 - 26
J.T. Yesterday we were considering the outward order and inward power of the assembly. Almost the whole of the time we were occupied with the outward order and I thought it would be well this morning to follow up the outward and public side. This afternoon, if the Lord will, we can proceed to the inner side. We saw yesterday that the Lord divided up a multitude of five thousand into sections, each of one hundred or of fifty, and I suggested that the brethren should commence to act according to this principle and, during large gatherings, divide themselves only for the breaking of bread, all being together in one large room for the readings and addresses.
Ques. What should we do at small local meetings? I know, for example, an isolated sister. Can I break bread with her when I am on a visit?
J.T. You could not possibly describe an isolated sister as an assembly. We were taught yesterday that the Lord sent Peter and John to make the necessary preparations, and they certainly would not have considered an isolated sister as sufficient for an assembly.
Ques. What does @Matthew 18:20 refer to in saying, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them"?
J.T. In @Matthew 18 the assembly is entrusted with the administration of the interests of Christ down here during His absence. "Tell it to the assembly" says the Lord, 'not to Me'. The verse which has been referred to is to show what two or three can do in the days of the failure and breakdown
{183}
of the assembly. In @Luke 8:26 - 56 the material is indicated of which an assembly should consist. The man, who had earlier been possessed of demons, is sitting, clothed and sensible at the feet of Jesus. The woman had not had demons, but an internal malady; she had been healed and wanted to remain hidden. She fell down before the Lord and declared before all the people what had taken place in her. The Lord regards her now as belonging to the family, for He calls her "Daughter". Last of all we have the daughter of Jairus, who died and whom the Lord raised up again. These are three of such persons who can form an assembly; the man clothed and sensible sitting at Jesus feet; the woman, healed of her infirmity, become transparent, for she told *all* the people the *whole* truth; and the twelve-year-old child whom the Lord had brought from death to life. This does not mean that these are only three persons, but they represent features which should be seen in a local assembly. At least two persons must be together in a place in order to break bread. An isolated sister and a visiting brother hardly form the requisite material for the assembly. The first epistle to the Corinthians is addressed to the assembly of God which is in Corinth, and one sister cannot be that.
Ques. Can several brethren travelling by ship to Australia, who are several Lord's days on the way, break bread on the ship?
J.T. We cannot make a ship which is constantly in motion into a place. It says in @1 Corinthians 1:2, "with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ". The apostle Paul commits the Lord's supper only to the assembly come together *into one place*. The assembly in a place such as Corinth is composed only of the brethren who reside there. Visiting brethren do not pass for local.
{184}
Ques. Why then did the Lord break bread with the two disciples at Emmaus? (@Luke 24:30).
J.T. That was not the Lord's supper or the breaking of bread, but only a meal.
Rem. If some reside there who are already breaking bread, that is all right. It says here "the assembly of God which is in Corinth".
J.T. The word 'in' means that those people really belong to the place, not that they are there on a visit but that they are characterised by actually dwelling there. In @Revelation 2 and 3 we have the same idea, "the assembly in Pergamos", "in Philadelphia", and so on. That shows that the component parts of the assembly should only be sought among the local brethren. Visiting brothers should not therefore put much value upon the fact that they are considered important. The important thing is that the constituent features of the assembly are to be found in those who are actually dwelling in the place. It says in @2 Corinthians 6:11, "Our mouth is opened to you, Corinthians", that is, to persons who were marked by dwelling in Corinth. The same applies also to "the assembly of Thessalonians" (@1 Thessalonians 1:1). God regards us as local where we live.
Ques. Can we look on two brothers and two sisters living in a place as an assembly, if one brother has been ill for years?
J.T. The question is always whether assembly material is present. It is a matter of what the brethren there really are. Are they boards for the tabernacle? It is very important to see that God receives us into the assembly in the same place where we had formerly lived in our sins. God works in us, gives us forgiveness of sins and the Holy Spirit, and sets us upon our feet in the same place where we have dishonoured Him, so that we may glorify Him there. In this way we are boards standing upright on two silver bases (@Exodus 26:15). Such
{185}
boards are then fitted together as an assembly in a locality, and the first epistle to the Corinthians is addressed to the assembly of God in Corinth, not to the brethren who are there. In the reading of that epistle we must hold to this firmly, for everything hinges on this truth. We find there everything that is becoming for the assembly of God in a place, but from chapter 11, verse 17 onwards, the assembly itself is also described. In @1 Corinthians 11:1 - 16, it is a matter of the suitable outward appearance of men and women, but from verse 17 onwards we have the coming together of the assembly. "When ye come together in assembly". That is a new thought which is further treated of in what follows. While the apostle had been with them he had given them instructions about it. He writes in verse 2, "Now I praise you, that in all things ye are mindful of me; and that as I have directed you, ye keep the directions". They kept the directions which Paul had given them. Now he writes further instructions and at the close of chapter 11 he says, "But the other things, whenever I come, I will set in order". We see from that how important the outward order of the assembly is. It is also important for us that every instruction given by the apostle be carefully paid attention to and obeyed. There may be local assemblies which have no care meeting.
Ques. What do you understand by a care meeting?
J.T. It is a meeting which takes care of the interests of God. If we get up in the morning, we consider for our bodies and our apparel, or a woman is occupied with her housekeeping. It says in the scripture that God makes "the barren woman to keep house, as a joyful mother of sons" (@Psalm 113:9). If we would keep our local meetings in better order we should have more sons, more additions.
Ques. Can we not exercise care in the readings?
{186}
J.T. In every local company we should come together once a month and see if we are really answering to the light of first Corinthians. We should then see many things for the first time and could weigh them over prayerfully before the Lord. The Lord gives wisdom. We also have opportunity then for prayer. The word 'care' or 'take care' is in @1 Timothy 3:5, "how shall he take care of the assembly of God?". When the Lord sent Peter and John, these two were to take care of the preparations. The upper room furnished was in good order at the arranged time.
Ques. If there are only a few brethren in fellowship in a place, would you also recommend a care meeting?
J.T. Yes, the principle is always right and sound, to be concerned for God's assembly.
Ques. Could sisters break bread in a place where there are no brothers in fellowship?
J.T. Sisters alone do not form an assembly. We would have to admit, if we rightly understood the scripture, that it is not right for brothers to break bread without sisters. It says, "Let your women be silent in the assemblies" (@1 Corinthians 14:34). It does not say, When your women are present in the assemblies, but this passage supposes that women are always present at the meetings.
Ques. How does a reception take place according to Scripture?
J.T. A reception always takes place on the ground of confidence and witness of two or three brothers who accurately know the person concerned. Barnabas brought Saul to the apostles (@Acts 9:27). Barnabas was one witness that Saul was converted, and the other witness was Saul himself. The apostles had the full confidence of the assembly in Jerusalem when they commended Saul; then he was received by the assembly. It is therefore important
{187}
that at a reception the saints should hear statements from witnesses who have their unreserved confidence. The witnesses when visiting the one who wishes to be received should be careful that the person concerned is washing his robes. "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city" (@Revelation 22:14). The saints can only walk with those of whom testimony is given that they are washing their robes. Such have then a *right* to be in fellowship, and we admit that right in walking with them.
Rem. I once heard of a sister who knew something about a person who wished to be received, telling a brother about it and the reception was prevented.
J.T. Quite right. Therefore we announce to the saints that the person is such as we can walk with in the truth, and will break bread with us next Lord's day for the first time. That gives the sisters time to express themselves. It is the duty of a sister if she knows anything evil about the person concerned to bring it to light immediately. Paul came to know of the critical conditions at Corinth from the house of the sister Chloe (@1 Corinthians 1:11).
Ques. Does the washing of the robes set forth inward preparation?
J.T. It is a continuous washing, it means walking in constant self-judgment.
Ques. In a place where only one family resides, is it right to break bread with them on the occasion of a visit?
J.T. It is a question of whether the individual members of the family are moving in the light of the assembly. If they are doing that, then you can break bread there. Only the surrounding meetings can decide that. Romans prepares the material for the assembly, the boards for the tabernacle. We must
{188}
first have the materials. In 1 Corinthians we have the setting up of the tabernacle, the assembly of God in Corinth. @Romans 16 is occupied with the materials. If the family in question consisted of ten members, it becomes a question if all ten persons are boards. If so, one would have no difficulty in breaking bread there. A board can stand for itself on its two silver bases, that is, on "the redemption which is in Christ Jesus" (@Romans 3:24) and a board can also stand for itself in the testimony. Such a one is not leaning on his father or mother or on his brother, but stands on his own feet.
Ques. Does that come to light at the end of @Romans 7, "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law"?
J.T. Yes, that is the new mind of a board. The family is not then in the assembly as father, mother, brother and sister, but all are boards for the tabernacle. Seen outwardly, we are men and women in the meeting but inwardly we are boards. If wives want to ask something of their own husbands, they are not to do so in the assembly, but at home. We do not come together as in the flesh, but as believers.
Ques. In a meeting where the only brother cannot read, is it right that a sister should read the Scriptures aloud?
J.T. It says, "Let your women be silent in the assemblies", so it is *not* right.
Rem. But the sisters sing the hymns audibly with us.
J.T. We must always read Scripture in its setting. The silence in @1 Corinthians 14:34 obviously relates only to speaking and praying aloud, but not to singing, "for it is not permitted to them to speak; but to be in subjection". They were not to push themselves forward by speaking or praying aloud. During the singing the sisters have no occasion to bring themselves forward, for we all sing together.
{189}
It says here, "It is a shame for a woman to speak in assembly", and nothing is said as to singing. One person speaks alone while the others listen, and the same applies also to praying. It is shameful for a sister to speak or to pray, and in this way to be the mouthpiece of the assembly. It is quite different with singing, for all who are present are singing. For the same reason the sisters can also say "Amen" after a prayer.
Ques. What should then an assembly do if the only brother cannot read?
J.T. That is an exceptional case, but we should not transgress the Scripture on that account. If a sister is to read anything aloud it is at a private meeting, but never at a gathering in the light of God's assembly. If the Lord has gathered the material, there will then be no such difficulties, there will be a brother there who can read.
Ques. Whom should a sister ask, who has no husband?
J.T. Such a sister is at a disadvantage. She is wholly cast upon the Lord and He will not forsake her. In @1 Corinthians 11:3, the man (that is, the male) is the head of the woman (that is, female). It does not mean there husband and wife, but male and female. Thus if a sister has not "her own husband" she can easily find a brother who as head will gladly instruct her. Everything is very plain if only we are simple. If a sister for example has an unconverted husband she can certainly not ask him. We are children of wisdom and it is contrary to wisdom to ask an unconverted person anything relating to the assembly. If a sister is to ask her own husband at home, it is presumed that he is converted and in fellowship. The apostle says, "I speak as to intelligent persons" (@1 Corinthians 10:15), and we surely have enough intelligence to know what to do in such a case.
{190}
Paul writes to the Corinthians, "But in prescribing to you on this which I now enter on, I do not praise, namely, that ye come together, not for the better, but for the worse". So we have here brethren coming together, but it would have been better for them not to come, for they only come together for the worse. There were parties and divisions among the Corinthians. In an outward way we may come together in assembly and yet be already divided in our hearts. The apostle Paul writes to them in the most definite way, "When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper", the Lord in that way through His servant pronouncing their coming together invalid. How serious when the Lord has to write to an assembly, 'You are *not* eating My Supper. I declare your assembly invalid'. There were divisions among the Corinthians, they were choosing special friends for themselves.
Ques. Did that not make the approved manifest among them?
J.T. That is right, but the apostle does not pursue that thought further. He admits that there were approved ones among them, but he is not occupied with them any further. The Corinthians professed to come together as an assembly to eat the Lord's supper, but the apostle declares their whole coming together to be null and void, because there were divisions among them. That shows how we can come together in our own strength and bring the Lord something that we think good, although the Lord has long since pronounced our coming together to be invalid. If we have not the Lord any longer with us, it may perhaps happen with us as with Mary and Joseph. They *supposed* Him "to be in the company that journeyed together" (@Luke 2:44), but after a long search they did not find Him there. Perhaps we also think the Lord is with us when the actual state of the meeting where we are might well
{191}
convince us of the contrary. There really was a shameful state among the Corinthians, for each one took his own supper before others and one was hungry and another drunken. That shows how far astray christians can go in assembly matters. Perhaps even we are coming together with feelings of hatred against one another, and the Lord seeing that withdraws His presence from us. The apostle says that what he had delivered to them he had received from the *Lord*.
Ques. What is then to be done if the Lord has pronounced the meeting invalid?
J.T. Sober self-judgment is urgently necessary. For this reason the first epistle was written to them in order that they might deeply judge themselves on account of these things. When I said the Lord declared the meeting to be invalid I meant that He openly gave expression to His strong disapproval of them. The Lord did not come to them, for He only comes where there is love and not bitterness. Where bitterness exists, sober self-judgment is needful.
{192}
THE INWARD POWER OF THE ASSEMBLY (1)
@John 13:1 - 38
J.T. With the Lord's help we can now pass over to the second part of our subject, namely, the inward power of the assembly. If the Lord will, we can also be engaged tomorrow with this inner side.
Ques. I have still a question with regard to @1 Corinthians 11. Have we there the Supper or the love-feast?
J.T. Jude in his epistle refers to the love-feast, "These are spots in your love-feasts" (@Jude 12). The Lord's supper is a love-feast. The apostle stresses in @1 Corinthians 11 that the Lord delivered to him His supper and that the Corinthians were celebrating it in an irregular and unworthy manner. On this account he gives them the introductory words of the Lord and says that he had *thus* received it *from the Lord*. It is a matter of the correct or the unworthy eating of the Supper. For the Corinthians it was no more a love-feast, for they had no love for one another, but were exhorted to follow after love (@1 Corinthians 14:1).
Ques. Have we the Supper in @Revelation 3:20, "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking; if any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me"?
J.T. No. That shows how the Lord cares for individuals. He wants to lead them into the privileges of the assembly. The Lord goes after erring believers, as, for example, the two on the way to Emmaus, when He ate with them there (@Luke 24:29,30). But then He disappeared from them and they returned the same hour to Jerusalem. The Lord ate with them that evening in Emmaus, but they were to eat with the Lord at Jerusalem in the assembly. At the Lord's supper the Lord Himself does*not*
{193}
eat with us, He Himself does not take part at His supper.
We now wish to proceed to the inner side. @John 13 does not mention the large upper room furnished, in which Peter and John had made everything ready. In regard to the time, it is only stated that *before* the feast of the passover the *Lord's hour* had come. In @John 13 all is spiritual. The Lord knew that He should depart out of this world to the Father. In @Luke 9:51, the Lord set His face to go to Jerusalem, but in John He was going to the Father. He wanted to take His disciples and us with Him to the Father, not yet corporeally, but in spirit. The emphasis in @John 13 is on the movements of the Lord. He knew that the Father had given Him all things into His hands and that He came out from God and was going to God. In this exalted consciousness He rose from supper; He laid aside His garments; He took a linen towel and girded Himself. In 1 Corinthians the passover is to make a deep impression upon us, but in @John 13 it is the movements of the Lord in feet-washing that are to do this. The passover should cause us to "celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth" (@1 Corinthians 5:8). That is *our side*. As we said this morning, when we rise in the morning we have to wash and put our outward appearance in order so that we may be ready for the day. A housewife must care for her housekeeping. A business man must go to his work and set matters in order. In the same way each one must prepare himself for the assembly, "Let a man prove himself" (@1 Corinthians 11:28).
Ques. If a believer is taking part in politics he would surely be neglecting this preparation?
J.T. Then he still has part with this world, he is not yet free from the elements of the world (@Colossians 2:20). It says expressly, in @John 13:1, that the Lord
{194}
was departing *out* of this world to the Father. If we wish to go with Him in spirit to the Father then we must also go *out* of this world. The going out of this world in heart and mind and the celebration of the feast of unleavened bread is *our* exercise, but the going in to the Father is entirely a matter for *our Lord*, for He alone knows what is suitable in the Father's presence. We must, therefore, when we have discharged our responsibility, leave ourselves entirely in the Lord's hands.
It is striking that the Lord does not immediately begin with feet-washing. It says that He rose from supper, that is, from the passover supper. They were thus already eating the passover when the Lord rose up and washed their feet so that they might have part with Him before the Father. When He had washed their feet He sat down again at table, so that the passover meal went on after the feet-washing. In connection with Judas the Lord then refers to the passage in @Psalm 41:9, "He that eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me", and again, "He it is to whom I, after I have dipped the morsel, give it". So that the passover was going on. I should like to remark here that in the four Gospels we do not find the expression "the Lord's supper", the word 'supper' always meaning the passover.
In first Corinthians the passover and the feast of unleavened bread are given as a present and continuous effect on our whole walk. But John wishes to bring before us in chapter 13 that that alone is not sufficient. The disciples might appear to be "clean" and "washed all over", but the Lord alone can decide if we are suitable for the Father. The apostle Paul says, "For I am conscious of nothing in myself; but I am not justified by this: but he that examines me is the Lord" (@1 Corinthians 4:4). When we have put everything in order and are at the threshold of the spiritual privileges of the assembly,
{195}
to enter into the inward side of the assembly, then we have to say to ourselves, 'I do not know myself well enough, the only One who knows me thoroughly is the Lord'.
Ques. Have we that in @Hebrews 10:22, "Let us approach with a true heart"?
J.T. That is *our* side. But although we have our responsible side in @Hebrews 10:22, the "great priest over the house of God" is also mentioned there. When we go into the holiest, in spite of all the preparations on our side, we have to entrust ourselves into His hands. He is the "minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man" (@Hebrews 3:2). He alone knows what is in keeping with the sanctuary and we must pass through His hands. How good that He is prepared to take us entirely into His hands in order to bring us over to His side. He has everything in His hands, the towel and the washhand basin. He laid aside His garments to be our servant.
Ques. Did you say that we do not find "the Lord's supper" in the gospels?
J.T. I said that we have not *the words* "the Lord's supper" in the gospels. In the first three gospels we have the thing itself, the institution of the supper, but the words "the Lord's supper" are never used, "supper" referring always to the passover. Luke writes with great care and says that the cup of the Lord's supper was handed round *after* the passover supper, "the cup, after having supped" (@Luke 22:20). In @Matthew 26:20, and @Mark 14:17, the Lord instituted His supper in the evening, as it says, "When the evening was come". Luke does not mention the evening but the hour, and he does not say what hour it was. The hour is left to us. The Lord instituted His supper on an evening but we can also celebrate it at another hour. The hour, however, if possible,
{196}
should be the same over the whole world, because the apostles were with the Lord. In @Acts 2:46 we read that the early christians broke bread in the house and then following that they received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart.
The apostle Paul then gave the Lord's supper to the assembly and wrote to the Corinthians, "Have ye not then houses for eating and drinking? or do ye despise the assembly of God ... ?" (@1 Corinthians 11:22). We should take our meals at home and eat the Lord's supper in the assembly. The Corinthians debased the Lord's supper to an ordinary mealtime and thus despised God's assembly through their unworthy behaviour. On this account Paul writes to them that it is a matter of *the Lord's* supper. The Lord is to be in control of it, and not a ministering brother or the head of a household.
But we must come back to our real subject. In christendom it is the custom that before one goes to the Sacrament, one has to prepare oneself, and there is a correct thought behind that. We should all go into our chamber alone in self-judgment when we have before us to partake of the Lord's supper. But even so, the Lord must also give us the final touch if we want to have part with Him. @John 13 is very important, it is the key to the understanding of the spiritual truth of the assembly. The Lord says, "Ye call me the Teacher and the Lord, and ye say well, for I am so", but the Lord takes up the attitude of a servant, to wash our feet, to give us the last touch, the last change, so that we may be suitable for the presence of the Father and for the sanctuary. The Lord rose up from supper and laid aside His garments, His great dignity, and took the place of a servant. No one but the Lord can carry out this service for us.
Ques. Is that the service of the high priest?
{197}
J.T. Yes, quite right. In @Hebrews 4:14,15, we have "a great high priest", Jesus the Son of God. He is great enough faithfully to fill out all His offices and He is great enough to take the lowest place of all, that of a servant, and He says to us, "For I have given you an example that, as I have done to you, ye should do also". In His movements in @John 13 He shows us the attitude of mind in which He wishes to take us with Him to His Father. The Greatest of all stands out in the very lowest circumstances of service. One who is really great can take the lowest place of all.
Ques. Is true greatness really sonship?
J.T. Yes, the great High Priest is the Son of God. He does not lose His greatness by taking the lowly place of a servant, but His true greatness really shines forth then. The passover and the feast of unleavened bread help us, for we are to be eating every day only this kind of bread, but in addition to that we have the lofty and precious service of this exalted Person. These two together put us in a position to draw near to God the Father.
Ques. *When* do we have this service of the Lord?
J.T. We ought not to bring time into it. Jesus knew that His hour was come. We must leave the hour to the Lord.
Ques. Can we have that at the breaking of bread?
J.T. It is a matter of grasping the spiritual thought. After the breaking of bread we are wholly cast upon the Lord. We can only commit ourselves into His hands for we are then on spiritual ground. He sends no one before Him to make preparations. It is as if the Lord were to say, 'It is completely *My* affair, no one else can do anything for you and if any one refuses My service of feet-washing he remains outside and has no part with Me'. It is, therefore, for us to lay hold of this thought. The Lord's supper precedes this.
{198}
Ques. Do we enter into the spiritual privileges of the assembly by way of this humble attitude of mind, which comes into expression in feet-washing?
J.T. Yes, that is the thought. In @John 13 we see the right attitude of mind which should mark the assembly. The Lord left the place of His dignity and took the place of a servant. If we also take this place we hold the enemy at bay. We can be sure that those who come together thinking they are something in the meeting or that they have a certain place, always expose themselves to the enemy.
We say perhaps that we are in the holiest, but none the less the devil came into Christ's circle in @John 13. During supper the devil had already put it into the heart of Judas to betray the Lord and after he had received the morsel which the Lord gave to him, Satan entered directly into him. How extremely serious this is! The Lord is present and yet the devil comes in and enters into Judas. It is only when we are humble and dependent upon the Lord that He is ready to protect us.
Ques. Did Paul lay aside his garments when he wrote to the Ephesians, "To me, less than the least of all saints, has this grace been given" (@Ephesians 3:8)?
J.T. Yes, that is right. Paul has the same thing also before him when he writes to the Corinthians who were already reigning as kings (@1 Corinthians 4:8), and who did not want to lay aside their royal robes. On this account the devil wrought so much havoc in their midst. Paul writes to them, "*Ye* are puffed up, and ye have not rather mourned" (chapter 5:2).
@John 13 is the door into Christ's spiritual realm. Then there follow the greatest spiritual thoughts which have ever been given to men (chapters 14 - 17). It is the last testament of Christ, which He has left behind for us, ere He went into death. It is remarkable that John portrays it so extensively. He seeks to lead believers into the spiritual realm. Christ
{199}
came from God and was going back to God, but He would like to take us with Him in spirit. He did not want to return alone to God, but to give us part with Himself there. But He showed us in what attitude of mind we are to be before God the Father. We are to follow His example (@John 13:14,15). He says, "If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them". It is so blessed to maintain this humble attitude of love in the assembly. This kind of mind is the inward power of the assembly.
Ques. What do the washhand basin, the water and the linen towel set forth?
J.T. They are what the Lord has ready to hand. If we compare it with the first three gospels, the Lord probably took the water which the man carrying the pitcher had brought in, whom Peter and John were to follow (@Luke 22:10) But in @John 13 the Lord had all in His hands and He did everything; He poured water into the washhand basin and began to wash the disciples feet. It is a question of the spiritual thought lying behind it all, which is comprised in verse 34 in the words, "A new commandment I give to you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another". Everything comes to that. Paul *showed* the Corinthians the more excellent way of love (@1 Corinthians 12:31). The Corinthians did not yet know it, but Paul showed them this way. Love is always ready to wash the feet of others and to show them the way of love.
Ques. Why could Peter not follow the Lord at that time?
J.T. Christ was not yet risen and glorified and the Spirit was not yet come down. In @John 13 the Lord intended to give us an example of His serving love. We must first of all carefully observe our Lord's example, but when it is a matter of our service of love, which we would like to carry out according to
{200}
the example of our Lord, then we must have the Holy Spirit within us, for without the Spirit we cannot be active in love. Love is called the fruit of the Spirit (@Galatians 5:22). Peter could not follow the Lord at that time because he had not yet the Spirit. It is a question in @John 13 of two things; the Lord by His example shows us the way of love, but then He expects us as following His example to have love amongst ourselves. We can only have that, however, if we have the Holy Spirit and make room for Him.
Ques. What does John on the breast of Jesus represent?
J.T. I was just going to remark on that. It says in verse 23, "Now there was at table one of his disciples in the bosom of Jesus, whom Jesus loved". The name of this disciple whom Jesus loved is not given, though we know it was John. The thought is that in the spiritual realm there was one who was so near to the Lord. That shows there can be in the assembly those who are extraordinarily near the Lord. It is not written to reproach the other disciples but only to bring to light that in this circle there was one who was united to the Lord in spiritual affection. We should expect to come across a brother or sister who is living in very special nearness to the Lord. John does not write, '*I* was on the breast of Jesus', but "one of his disciples in the bosom of Jesus". When a brother speaks of himself, it is either pride or it is necessary for the sake of the testimony. If a servant does that, he should be conscious that he has received something very special from the Lord which he must set forth personally. John, however, generally speaks of himself in the third person as if he spoke of someone else. He would gladly have us also enjoy what he has enjoyed. The Lord says in @John 14:21, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me ... and I will love him". You expect such an
{201}
one to be lying in the bosom of Jesus. Anyone like that does not assure us that he has got something special from the Lord. Others will soon notice it and ask him. The leading brother here, Simon Peter, beckoned to him to ask who it was of whom the Lord spoke. Simon Peter knew and valued the place where John was found. John was consciously in the choicest place in this circle. We should expect, that even today, there are such brethren in the meeting. It is not somewhat beneath our dignity to ask a brother something, if we know that he is near the Lord and at home in His things. If we are so near the Lord's heart we do not require to push ourselves forward, for those who are spiritual will soon notice it and the saints will storm us with questions when they find out that we really have something from the Lord.
Ques. Is there no inward spiritual power in the meeting without feet-washing?
J.T. If we do not allow the Lord to wash our feet there is no inward power present with us. We may maintain outward order but the assembly must also have an underlying spiritual state and in @John 13 the Lord goes from the outward into the inner side, into the spiritual side and we are to follow Him. In His service of love He washes our feet in order to draw us into His down-stooping attitude of love and so give us part with Him before the Father. Only the Lord Himself can set us the example of this mind, which is to abide eternally before God the Father. We must give ourselves wholly over to the Lord.
Ques. What does Peter represent?
J.T. Peter was the leader (@Matthew 10:2) in relation to outward order and he wishes to retain his position as leader in @John 13. He did not want to let his feet be washed by such a self-abased Teacher and Lord. But the Lord says to him, "Unless I wash thee, thou
{202}
hast not part with me". The Lord alone could make him, or us also, suitable for the enjoyment of spiritual blessings. We are entirely cast on the Lord who alone knows the mind in which we can live with Him eternally before the Father.
{203}
THE INWARD POWER OF THE ASSEMBLY (2)
@John 14:15 - 24
J.T. @John 13 is the entrance into the spiritual privileges of the assembly. It answers to the porch of the temple which Solomon built and it is important to understand that the sea stood directly at the porch of the temple, "he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward, over against the south" (@1 Kings 7:39). That means that a whole sea of water stood at the entrance of the house of God. "The sea" was an immensely large fixed vessel which could hold very much water. The lavers, which were there in addition, were much smaller but they could more easily be carried (verse 38). @John 13 refers to the small vessels, the basins, for the vessel in which the Lord washed the feet of His disciples was a washhand basin, that is the meaning of the word in the Greek (@John 13:5). Feet-washing refers more to a locality than to the whole world. In the first epistle to the Corinthians the feet of the Corinthians are washed. The Holy Spirit is occupied with their bad state and the improprieties in the local meeting and seeks to correct them. The Lord poured water into the washhand basin and went to every disciple and washed his feet. The small vessel shows very beautifully how active the service of love is. If we follow its example we come into a state suitable to God.
Ques. Has the water in the sea the same meaning as the water in the washhand basin?
J.T. Quite so, the water was taken out of the sea. In the washhand basin it could be better carried wherever it was required. The sea represents the universal principle of cleansing for all who are in the house of God. The water flowed from the side of our dead Lord (@John 19:34). John writes of drinking water (@John 7:37 - 39), and of water for washing
{204}
(@John 13:5). He connects the drinking water with the Holy Spirit which those who believe on Christ receive and the washing water with the Lord dead upon the cross.
Ques. What does "born of water" mean (@John 3:5)?
J.T. That is the cleansing effect which lies in the quickening power of the Holy Spirit.
Ques. What is the difference between the laver in @Exodus 30:17 - 21 and the ten lavers in the temple in @1 Kings 7:38?
J.T. In @1 Kings 7 we have, in addition to the ten lavers, the sea, which contained three thousand baths. That is a far greater thought than at the tabernacle where only a small laver was provided for the priests. The ten lavers in the temple each contained forty baths and could be carried about everywhere. Exodus mainly sets principles before us, but we do not yet find there the complete extent and range of the truth. It says in @1 John 5:6, "This is he that came by water and blood, Jesus the Christ", and further on "it is the Spirit that bears witness". The Spirit applies to water over the whole world, which answers to the sea, but the Spirit also gives special gifts, which perhaps answer to the ten lavers. In the power of the Spirit the gifts apply the universal principle of cleansing to special cases. In such a meeting as the present the Lord might be pleased to provide by the Spirit that water of purification which would be suited to our needs. The water is applied to special cases, not only universally.
Ques. Why is the capacity of the sea stated?
J.T. The three thousand baths was a huge quantity of water which I believe speaks of the death of Christ. It is the cleansing application of His death, not the judicial application which we see in His blood. From His side flowed out blood and water.
Ques. Is it the purifying action of His death?
{205}
J.T. Yes, it is the moral cleansing which the water should have upon us. The water was already there when the Holy Spirit came down at Pentecost, and, from that time on, the Spirit has been giving gifts in order to apply the water to special cases. The ruin of the church, which set in very early, has greatly hindered the operation of these gifts, for example, through religious observances or through official church activities. From the second century onwards, believers spoke only of the blood of Christ and entirely neglected the water. During the last century the Lord brought about an awakening and set many believers again at liberty, so that the Holy Spirit is once more free to give us gifts which can be exercised under His leading. If one travels today among the children of God one can again apply the word of God to the needs which they have, but according to @John 13 we can even blot that out if we do not give the Lord a free hand with us and the brethren whom we are visiting. It says there, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me".
Ques. Does a local company which is moving independently of the assembly generally, refuse the Lord's feet washing by behaviour of this kind?
J.T. Quite so. If we personally or as a local company behave independently or even entertain this thought, then we are not in the spirit of feet-washing, for this completely shuts out our independence, even if it is covered by a mantle of piety. The Lord says, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me". The Lord alone can take this place. Otherwise we are occupying ourselves, in our own power, with spiritual and heavenly things, thinking we have much intelligence, while at the same time our thoughts are totally false and are bringing about division. The Lord says, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me". The Lord must always have the first word and the pre-eminence, He must also
{206}
commence the washing with us. We have *our* continuation in @Revelation 22:14, "Blessed are they that wash their robes". The Lord begins to wash and we continue it, for in @Revelation 22 we ourselves wash our robes. Under His influence then we wash our robes and perhaps also the feet of other christians.
From the lovely thoughts in @John 13, the principle of faith then follows in chapter 14. In @John 13 the Lord leaves the example of feet-washing for us, but in @John 14 He speaks of going to the Father. He says, "Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe on God, believe also on me". Then He says that He will prepare us a place in His Father's house. That shows how necessary @John 13 is, for feet-washing makes us suitable for the exalted place above. Before the Lord goes to the Father, however, He also brings to light what the Father is: "He that has seen me has seen the Father". It is important for us to see the Father. The Lord has gone to Him and would like to draw us also to Him in spirit in the assembly. If we want to draw near to Him then we must see and know Him. On this account Philip also said to the Lord, "Lord, shew us the Father and it suffices us" (verse 8). The Lord said to that, "Am I so long a time with you, and thou hast not known me, Philip? He that has seen me has seen the Father" (verse 9). That is to say that the Father was present in Christ and was also to be seen in Him. In the Father's house above, the disciples and we are not to expect quite a different kind of Person from Christ, but the same Being whom Christ radiated and lived down here we shall also meet with in the Father up there. That shows very beautifully the oneness and intimate connection of divine Persons. The Lord has made the Father's name known to us (@John 17:26), but in @John 14:9 it is more than that. The love and the whole Being of Christ, which He revealed down
{207}
here, show us the Father. Up there in heaven we shall have nothing different.
Ques. Is that according to the principle, 'Like father, like son'?
J.T. Yes, but really it is much more than that. The Lord says, "Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and that the Father is in me?" (verse 10). That is far more than similarity, for the Father was there in Him according to His nature. "The Father is in me" and yet the Father was in heaven. That is an unfathomable mystery for us. The Lord wanted to lead the disciples out of the legal order of things to the Father. He wanted to lead them over into the realm of the Spirit, where the Father and the Son can be known. In the first three gospels we have the transition from the passover to the Lord's supper. In John, however, the passover has no spiritual worth but what the Lord does Himself has alone value, and He leads His disciples out of the old, over into the new spiritual order. @John 13 to 17 disclose to us extraordinarily deep spiritual thoughts. The Lord, as it were, says, 'I am not only the Father's deputy and representative, but the Father is also in Me'. The works which He did, the Father did (verse 10). The connection existing between divine Persons remains for us quite unfathomable. The Father was in the Son; the works which the Son did, the Father did; and the Son drove out the demons by the Holy Spirit (@Matthew 12:28). The Persons of the Trinity are so intimately bound up with One Another in love and in their operation that in this connection we can make no distinction between them.
Ques. Does not @John 1:1 show how intimately divine Persons are linked with one another?
J.T. Yes, "The word was with God". "*He* was in the beginning *with* God". John in chapter 1:1 wishes to show christians that the same One whom
{208}
they knew as "the Word" has subsisted from all eternity. "In the beginning was the Word". The same One who down here as Man spoke the word of God, existed from all eternity, yet in His own Person He is God, "The Word was God". "The Word" is a name of the Lord Jesus which the early christians gave Him (@Revelation 19:13), meaning that He spoke the word of God. Many would have us believe that before He became flesh He was already the Word, that is, He has already spoken in a way we can understand, but it says expressly that the Son has only spoken "at the end of these days" (@Hebrews 1:1,2). "God ... at the end of these days has spoken to us in Son". The Person of Him who spoke down here, was in the beginning. Only after it has been said, "The Word was God", is it said, "All things were made by him".
Ques. Did Christ create everything as God and not as the Word?
J.T. Yes, He created all things as God, for in the Old Testament it says expressly, "In the beginning God created ...".
Ques. Why does it say in @Hebrews 11:3 that the worlds were framed by the *word* of God?
J.T. That means that God created the world by His omnipotent word. We see in @Genesis 1 that God spoke and it happened. The term 'Word' for the Lord in @John 1 is in the Greek quite a different expression from @Hebrews 11:3, "by the word of God", which simply means 'utterance'. If a man gives utterance to anything it is not absolutely necessary that he should also be the embodiment of the utterance and thus be the expression of what he has spoken. God had already spoken at the creation and since then He had spoken in the Old Testament through mediators, but none of these mediators could be called "The Word". When, however, the divine Person of our Lord became Man, this Man was
{209}
great enough to give expression to all the thoughts of God. All that He spoke was embodied in Him. We can thus understand that the name "The Word" was given to Him.
Ques. What does it mean "And the Word was with God"?
J.T. From all eternity we have three Persons in the Godhead, distinguishable from One Another, but who were not independent of One Another. It says, "*He* was in the beginning with God". In the beginning the Lord Jesus was already there, an entirely distinct Person having part in Deity. That He was with God is to show that divine Persons stand to one another in relations which are unfathomable for us. Each was a distinct Person, and yet They were so bound together in love that for us there is only *one* God (@Galatians 3:20).
Ques. What is the mystery of piety?
J.T. "God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory" (@1 Timothy 3:16). The mystery of piety is our confession of faith, while the theologians seek to make everything fit human intelligence and want to explain all in a natural way. We can only understand a chapter like @John 14 when we have spiritual intelligence. The most clever learned man could understand nothing of what we are speaking about. The Lord says, "Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes" (@Matthew 11:25). The Lord teaches babes and seeks to lead them into the depths of God.
In @John 14:15 the Lord says, "If ye love me, keep my commandments", and in verse 16 "the Father ... will give you another Comforter". If we keep the commandments of Christ we can enter the
{210}
spiritual realm in the power of the Spirit, the other Comforter.
Ques. Why is the Holy Spirit called Comforter here?
J.T. The word "Comforter" means that He stands entirely on our side, but as "the Spirit of Truth". In the Comforter given to us we have always means at our disposal to search into the mysteries of God (@1 Corinthians 2:10).
Ques. Is all that in the assembly?
J.T. Yes, it is the inner side of the assembly. The Lord is gone away from this earth and is up there in heaven, but He can always come to us through the Holy Spirit. If we keep His commandments we are pleasing to the Lord and then the Spirit is free to work in us and the Lord is also free to come to us. He says first that the Holy Spirit is in us (@John 14:17), and then He says that He will come to us (verse 18). Everything in this dispensation depends upon the Holy Spirit. In the Old Testament God appeared to certain believers, but in the main everything was carried out through the service of angels. Now, however, everything is carried out through the Holy Spirit. On the ground of the fact that the Spirit is dwelling in us, the Lord is in a position to come to us.
Rem. He does not say as in verse 3, "I am coming again and shall receive you unto myself" but "I am coming to you".
J.T. "I am coming again" in verse 3 refers to the rapture, when the Lord takes us to Himself, but before that He comes to us, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you".
Ques. Is it not a new thought that the Holy Spirit is to be in us?
J.T. Yes, He came *upon* the prophets, as it says, "Holy men of God spake under the power of the Holy Spirit" (@2 Peter 1:21), but He was not yet come
{211}
as the indwelling Spirit. "The Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified" (@John 7:39).
Ques. What does "I am coming to you" mean? Does it mean that the Lord comes to the assembly or to individuals?
J.T. "To you" is plural so it refers to the assembly, but the Lord says in verse 21, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him". It is a question of the individual. So also in verse 23, "We will come to him and make our abode with him". Verses 21 and 23 allude to the breakdown in which we are living today, while verse 18 relates to the first days of the assembly. John has experienced the ruin and on this account he has stored up this precious treasure for us. When the Lord visited him at Patmos the church was already in ruins, it was necessary to be an overcomer inside the assembly. In the first three letters to the churches the Spirit speaks *before* the overcomer is mentioned, while in the last four letters the Spirit only speaks *after* the overcomer has been mentioned.
Ques. Is that to say that only the overcomer has an ear to listen to the Spirit?
J.T. Yes. In @John 14:21 - 23 we have the overcomer, namely the one who has the Lord's commandments and keeps them.
Ques. Where do we find His commandments?
J.T. In 1 Corinthians (@1 Corinthians 14:37).
Rem. The overcomer must not only have ears but also arms and feet.
J.T. But the ear is very important. The difference between the first three and the last four letters to the churches is very striking. Thyatira represents the great public collapse of the church in the Middle Ages, and from that time onwards a remnant came to light, "the rest who are in Thyatira" (@Revelation 2:24).
{212}
We then find first the overcomer and only after that the activity of the Spirit. If we remain quietly in the churches of christendom we cannot possibly have the service of the Spirit. We must overcome and must also take account of those before us who have overcome and have made room for the service of the Spirit. If we overcome, the Spirit speaks to us and the Lord is free to come to us. The Father and the Son make Their abode with individuals who overcome.
Ques. Is that fellowship with divine Persons?
J.T. Divine Persons making Their abode goes further than fellowship. First I must keep Christ's "commandments" and if I am in a wrong church position the Lord commands me to leave it. That is the commandment. If I obey I am set free, and come into conditions in which the word of Christ can have application to me. The word is what reveals God's order. That calls for conditions with me such as we see earlier in the tabernacle and should see now in the assembly. The Father and the Son can then come to me, as God came earlier into the holiest in the tabernacle. Making Their abode is something very great; it means that the overcomer has divine Persons dwelling with him.
Ques. What then is fellowship?
J.T. 'Fellowship' means 'partnership', something like the partnership in a business. In John's first epistle it is said of the apostles that they had fellowship with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ, and we have fellowship with the apostles and with one another. "That *ye* also [*believers*] may have fellowship with us [apostles]; and our [the apostles] fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ" (@1 John 1:3). We can only have fellowship with divine Persons through the apostles. Whoever disregards the apostles understands nothing of fellowship. The two Corinthian epistles speak of what marks the fellowship, it is the fellowship of
{213}
God's Son (@1 Corinthians 1:9), the fellowship of the blood of the Christ and of the body of the Christ (@1 Corinthians 10:16), and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit (@2 Corinthians 13:14). Those are the characteristics of the fellowship, but John brings in the persons who have fellowship *with* one another (@1 John 1:7). It is a practical bond which binds closely together believers over the whole world who are walking in the light. In @Acts 2:42 we read that the early christians continued in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles; they were under the care and influence of the apostles. Today it is only when we obey their writings that we can have fellowship with one another.
Ques. What is the difference between fellowship and the Father and the Son dwelling with us?
J.T. The dwelling of divine Persons includes great intimate acquaintance with Them, and the enjoyment of this bond of love continues eternally. Fellowship, which is often mistaken for it, is more an external bond that we come into in view of God's testimony down here. The apostles had an outstanding place in the testimony down here. Divine Persons had fellowship with them in the spread of the testimony. Dwelling is another thought. A man lives with his wife but possibly he gives her no fellowship in his business affairs. Dwelling is, however, more precious than business.
Ques. Is every correction which we receive to serve to the end that divine Persons can dwell with us?
J.T. Quite so. All through our life we shall be set right, in that way we come into increasingly intimate touch with the Lord and one another. Then the Lord is free to bring us to the Father. Everything in this chapter leads up to that.
{214}
THE INWARD POWER OF THE ASSEMBLY (3)
@John 15:26,27; @John 16:23 - 28; @John 17:1 - 5,26; @John 20:19 - 23
Ques. To return again for a moment to the close of our last meeting, when we were speaking about fellowship, from what does the blood of Jesus Christ cleanse us?
J.T. "The blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son, cleanses us from all sin" (@1 John 1:7).
Ques. Is this cleansing continually needed in view of our fellowship with one another?
J.T. Quite so, it is the continually subsisting purifying action of His blood.
Ques. Is the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ the same as this?
J.T. It says in @1 Peter 1:2, "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and [*unto* the] sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ". It is that which we have reached in contrast to the Old Testament economy. Under the law the children of Israel were externally cleansed by being sprinkled with the blood of the sacrifices (@Exodus 24:8). Through the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ we are cleansed from all sin. We have come to a different kind of blood-sprinkling; it is now different from what it was then. In @l @John 1:7, the blood of Christ cleanses us from our sinful being and also from our sinful acts, but we have also to confess our sinful acts (@1 John 1:9). God is faithful and righteous and forgives us the sins which we confess. Sin is always in and around us, but the blood of Christ keeps us in the light of God if we walk in the fear of God and do not let sin work in us.
We had better turn now to the thoughts in the passages read in John's gospel. The Lord there is moving to the Father and wishes us to follow Him in
{215}
spirit. On this account He constantly brings the Father before His disciples. He says in @John 15:26, "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who goes forth from with the Father, *he* shall bear witness concerning me". The Holy Spirit was thus with the Father, for He was to go forth "from with the Father". In @John 16:23 - 28 the Lord encourages His disciples and us to pray to the Father. During the days of our Lord's being here, the disciples were accustomed to direct their questions and requests to Him, but He says in @John 16:23, "And in that day ye shall demand nothing of me: verily, verily, I say to you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give you". "In that day" means from Pentecost onwards, when the Holy Spirit descended. We are thus by the Spirit in the position to pray directly to the Father in the name of Jesus.
Ques. Does that day continue until the rapture?
J.T. Yes. He says in verse 26, "In that day ye shall ask in my name; and I say not to you that I will demand of the Father for you, for the Father himself has affection for you". Those are two different words for 'asking'. The first word refers to our asking, it is a supplication, a petition. The second word designates the request of our Lord, and that is more a familiar asking the Father, as is the case with persons who are of equal rank.
Rem. It is always befitting for us to pray to God in the consciousness that we are beneath Him.
J.T. I believe that when the Lord was down here, His disciples spoke very familiarly with Him, but as He was going away from them, He tells them that they should *demand* nothing more of Him, but they were to *ask* the Father in His name.
Ques. What does that mean, "Ask in my name"?
J.T. It is the way we are to ask. In prayer we are to be before God in all the worth of what the
{216}
Lord Jesus is. The name of the Lord has worth and power in heaven. If in a bank I show a cheque with the signature of the name of a well known rich man, then I get the money immediately. All our prayers should go to the Father in the worth of Christ. If the Lord Jesus can sign them with His name, the Father will surely grant them.
However valuable all these details may be, still we must keep to our main thought, namely, that the Lord is engaged in making the Father known to us. The gospel of John presents the household, the Father's family. It says in @John 3:35, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". Immediately afterwards this Son is sitting at the well of Sychar and a poor woman comes out of the city to fetch water. He says to her, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water" (@John 4:10). That has reference to the present time. The Son has all things in His hands, and He gives the Spirit to those that ask Him. God is a Giver. @John 13 - 17 deals with what is collective; the Lord is teaching His disciples about the spiritual realm which He wanted to set up here on earth. In @John 4 it is a question of the personal condition but in @John 13 - 17 of the assembly in its inward power. We are to stand mutually in the full gain of the revelation of God as Father. The Lord attracts our hearts onward when He says, "The Father himself has affection for you". It always says, "the Father", not yet "your Father", as in @John 20:17, "my Father" and "your Father"?
Ques. What is the difference between "the Father" and "your Father"?
J.T. "The Father" is a far more extensive thought than "your Father", for in the coming age "the Father" governs and influences many families in
{217}
heaven and on earth (@Ephesians 3:14,15). The Father is God as He has come forth in grace in Christ. "Neither does the Father judge any one".
Ques. Have we also the Father in John's first epistle?
J.T. Yes. "I write to you, little children, because ye have known the Father"; "I write to you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning" (@1 John 2:13). The fathers knew more than the little children. "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God" (@John 3:1). According to this passage the *children* of God stand connected with *the* Father. The sons of God are more linked up with the thought "my Father and your Father", and that is very much deeper, though not so extensive. John, however, does not call us sons except in @Revelation 21:7, "I will be to him God, and he shall be to me son". Sonship is thus bound up with the eternal state, with eternity, while now on this earth we are already children of God (@1 John 3:2). So it is very important that we know the Father and taste His love. "The Father himself has affection for you", says the Lord.
It says then in @John 17:1, "These things Jesus spoke, and lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, Father". "These things" are what we have been considering thus far. It is as if the Holy Spirit said, 'Just consider what has gone before (@John 13 - 16) and then listen to what the Lord prays to the Father'. Jesus lifted up His eyes to heaven, in order to indicate thus that the spiritual realm over which God is Father, is still upon the earth, but that He as High Priest places Himself on our side when we are in this realm. It is so exceedingly beautiful to see that with the Lord. He had presented to them these precious things about the Father and had told them that they were to pray to the Father in His name
{218}
and that the Father had affection for them, but now He was showing them how to pray to the Father.
Ques. Why are the Thessalonians called an assembly in God the Father (@1 Thessalonians 1:1)?
J.T. That is caressing. The Thessalonians were newly converted. In @Luke 11:1, when the Lord was praying in a certain place and one of His disciples wanted to be taught to pray, He said to His disciples, "When ye pray, say, Father". It is said seven times of the Lord in Luke's gospel that He was praying, because He is there set forth as a Man dependent on God. When the disciple saw Him praying, he surely thought, 'I have often prayed myself and have also heard others pray, but I have never heard a prayer like that'. For this reason he wanted to be taught by the Lord how to pray. In @John 17, however, the words which the Lord used in His prayer are given. He lifted up His eyes to heaven in order to direct our gaze there also.
Ques. Why does the Lord say, "Father" and not 'My Father'?
J.T. The Lord speaks to the Father as one divine Person speaking to another, only He identifies Himself fully with the condition of manhood which He had taken up. He asks the Father as Son, that is as a divine Person in manhood, "Glorify thy Son". It is very striking that at the beginning of His prayer He speaks of Himself in the third person. "Glorify thy Son ... as thou hast given him authority over all flesh, that as to all that thou hast given to him, he should give them life eternal". He is the Son in manhood, and not in His deity.
Ques. Does He say, "My Father" in view of the day when He could say to Mary, "My Father and your Father"?
J.T. Yes, that is right. The Lord never prayed with His disciples but He always prayed by Himself, even when the disciples were there listening. He
{219}
never places Himself on the same level with us. In @John 20 He says, 'My Father is your Father', and that is still more precious than if the Lord had said that He and we had now a Father in common.
Ques. Does He pray in @John 17 as Son, that is as a Man?
J.T. Yes. He always prays as Man, for as a Person in the Godhead He never prayed to another Person of the Godhead, because divine Persons are all of the same rank. But @John 17 shows that this praying Man is a divine Person in manhood, for an ordinary man never prays for a place of glory with God. We understand then that He must have precedence over us; He says, "My Father and your Father" and not 'our Father' in common.
Ques. What does it mean, "that they also may be one in us" (@John 17:21)?
J.T. That is a wondrously beautiful word. It shows on the one hand that the Lord remains in the unity of the Godhead, but on the other hand that He is man dependent on God, for He prays for this.
Ques. Does the name "the only-begotten Son" relate to the incarnation of the Lord?
J.T. It is not until *after* the incarnation that He is the only-begotten Son. Luther taught that He was begotten of the Father in eternity, but he did not get this false thought from the Scripture but from the creed of Athanasius.
Rem. All the disciples heard the prayer of the Lord in @John 17, while in Gethsemane only three disciples heard the prayer (@Matthew 26:37).
J.T. It is possible that the three did not hear the prayer of the Lord in Gethsemane either, for when He came back He found them asleep (@Luke 22:45). In addition He withdrew Himself from them about a stone's throw, knelt down and prayed (@Luke 22:41). I do not know exactly how far a stone's throw is, but it was far enough to preserve the sublime
{220}
dignity of our Lord. We see very beautifully in Gethsemane how the Lord disposed of His disciples. He said as it were, 'You remain here and three of you accompany Me', and He then went alone a stone's throw further. He is a divine Person, who arranges the circumstances. That is very precious for us. He is always in complete control of the situation.
Ques. By withdrawing a stone's throw does He guard His supremacy?
J.T. He guards His dignity. Also on the cross we see His divine power. Even if He was crucified in weakness, yet He died with a loud cry (@Mark 15:37). He did not die as an ordinary man, His cry was unique so that the centurion said, "Truly this man was Son of God" (@Mark 15:39).
Rem. In @John 17 the Lord is bringing His own before the Father.
J.T. The first five verses of @John 17 are a kind of introduction, they stand unique there. From verse 6 onward He speaks then of His own, "I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou gavest me out of the world ... I have made known to them thy name and will make it known" (verses 6 and 26).
Ques. What is the difference between "manifested" and "made known"?
J.T. "Manifested" simply means made open. "Made known", however, goes deeper, for it also brings us into the value and enjoyment of the manifestation. The Lord has made known the Father's name to us, *in order that* the love wherewith the Father has loved Him may be in us.
In @John 20 we find thoughts which go still further than those we have been engaged with. There the Lord sends to the disciples the message by Mary, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". Mary conveyed this message to the disciples. The Lord came at even to
{221}
the disciples who, through fear of the Jews, had closed the doors there where they were. The Lord stood in the midst and breathed into them and said, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you". That characterises our whole dispensation.
Ques. Why had the disciples closed the doors?
J.T. It is noteworthy that it says "the doors", it is plural. It is a spiritual thought, meaning the doors of their hearts. It is not said where the room was where they saw the Lord. Indeed it does not even say that the disciples were assembled at all. Several manuscripts do say, 'Where the disciples were assembled', but the best manuscripts simply say, "Where the disciples were". The reason for that is that John in his gospel does not mention the assembly, but he only brings the persons who form the assembly. The brethren of Christ are greater than the room where they are assembled.
In @Luke 24:33 they were assembled, and the Lord stood in their midst (verse 36) which undoubtedly represents the local assembly. But in @John 20 the word 'assembled' is not there, and the Lord stood in *the* midst, not in *their* midst. These are spiritual thoughts, which mark the inner side of the assembly.
Rem. Every heart was afraid of what was against Christ and on that account the doors of the hearts were closed.
J.T. The opposition to Christ specially came from the Jews. Religious opposition is always the most dangerous and must be kept out.
Ques. Should we therefore be careful in cases of reception?
J.T. Yes, we should be beware of every kind of leaven. In @Matthew 16:6, before the Lord speaks of His assembly He says, "Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees". We have perhaps left the Pharisees and Sadducees, yet still carry their leaven about with us and bring practices and customs
{222}
into the assembly which are carried out in the religious systems round about us.
Ques. Is the playing of musical instruments in the assembly also leaven, puffing up the flesh?
J.T. Yes, we should also keep that outside.
Ques. Is our position today similar to @Exodus 33:7 where we read, "And Moses took the tent, and pitched it outside the camp, far from the camp, and called it the Tent of meeting. And it came to pass that every one who sought Jehovah went out to the tent of meeting which was outside the camp"?
J.T. Yes, we have to do the same today.
Ques. What does "the first day of the week" mean?
J.T. The first day of the week has an important place in @John 20. It says in @Matthew 28:1, "Now late on sabbath, as it was the dusk of the next day after Sabbath", or 'the first day of the week', see note in the New Translation, "came Mary of Magdala". In Matthew the first day of the week is simply the day after the sabbath, but in @John 20 the sabbath is not mentioned; the first day of the week is brought in as if no day at all had preceded it. Taken spiritually, nothing can have taken place before the *first* day. Christ and the assembly have the first place in God's heart, and on the first day of the week they should also have the first place in our hearts. The assembly is no after-thought with God, but it was the first thought of all with God. In @John 20 Mary is in the foreground, setting forth the affection of the assembly. The Lord only reveals Himself to us when we are in this state of heart (@John 14:21), and seeks to lead us into the spiritual blessings of the assembly. On the evening of that day the Lord came to the disciples and stood in *the* midst. He stood there as the divine centre of the spiritual universe. We can only understand His standing in
{223}
the midst in a spiritual way. If anyone is standing, he is prepared to serve.
Ques. Does He wish to lead us on into spiritual blessings?
J.T. Yes. The thought is that this is still nothing final, but that there is still more to come. We should always have this in view in the assembly. Every one who loves Him is always ready to ask Him what He wants to do next. It is a question of our having spiritual flexibility, skill and attentiveness in the assembly, in order to follow the Lord in what He has immediately before Him.
Ques. Why was Thomas allowed to touch the Lord, but Mary not?
J.T. That is an extraordinarily important question. It says expressly in verse 26, "And eight days after, his disciples were again within and Thomas with them". Thomas therefore touched Him within, in the *inner* sphere of the assembly, while Mary was not allowed to touch Him *outside* in the garden (verse 11). The garden is the scene where the Lord has been in His death; it is the outward order of things. We must keep the garden in order, but we cannot touch our ascended Lord there. We may touch Him in the inner sphere, where the Lord can be known in the most intimate way.
Rem. When the Lord stood in the midst the first time, He breathed into them. Thomas missed that, for the Lord did not do it again eight days after.
J.T. Thomas missed the inauguration of the assembly in its inner spiritual side and an inaugural ceremony can never be repeated. Eight days later, when the Lord once again stood in the midst He said, "Peace be to you" (verse 26). You can have that even if you have missed the earlier opportunity.
Rem. We all come now into the value of the breathing of Christ on the first occasion.
{224}
J.T. Yes, Thomas is a type of Israel, who later through seeing will come to believe.
Ques. What does it mean that the Lord stood in *the* midst?
J.T. It is not a local but a spiritual thought. In @Luke 24:36, the Lord stood in *their* midst; that is local and took place in view of our local needs, but in @John 20 He stood in *the* midst, for the whole assembly, seen spiritually, has only one centre. But He *stood* in the midst, He wanted to lead them further into the spiritual blessings with the Father.
Ques. Does that correspond to the tree of life?
J.T. Yes, that is the thought. It says in @Revelation 22:2, "In the midst of its street, and of the river, on this side and on that side, the tree of life, producing twelve fruits, in each month yielding its fruit". If He presents Himself to us as the Tree of Life in *the* midst of the spiritual universe, it is to the end that we are also to eat the fruits which He then gives us in such abundant measure. The disciples did this; for they rejoiced when they saw the Lord. In the assembly the Lord would like us also to rejoice. Then He said to them again, "Peace be to you", that is to say, 'I am so glad that you are spiritually rejoicing, that I should like to maintain you in it in peace'. Then He says, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you".
Ques. Had the Lord in that way the present testimony in mind?
J.T. Quite so. The testimony only goes out in a powerful way from those who know the truth of the assembly, and who thus in a spiritual way come in touch with the Lord, the Tree of Life, inside the assembly.
Tarrying with Him before the Father does not make us unpractical but gives us power for service, which we can then carry out in His attitude of love.
{225}
Ques. What does verse 23 mean, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained"?
J.T. Forgiveness comes first. In @Matthew 18:18, the Lord commits binding and loosing to the disciples, but there binding comes first. @Matthew 18:18 relates to the early days of the church, while @John 20:23 connects with our days of breakdown. We should keep a forgiving attitude towards our brethren who are still in wrong religious associations and when they get free there, we should not retain their sins any more against them. But there are also those upon whom we have to retain sins, for example the woman Jezebel in Thyatira, who will not repent (@Revelation 2:21). Still forgiveness should always be in the foreground with us.
{226}
SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCE
@2 Kings 4:2 - 7; @Luke 24:14 - 43; @Acts 13:1 - 3
J.T. Among the scriptures read I should like to refer specially to the Lord's question in @Luke 24:41, "Have ye anything here to eat?". The Lord directs this question to every local assembly. Something to eat is more than having light, or standing by correct assembly principles or maintaining outward order. Something to eat means fresh and living food. "They gave him part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb". The broiled fish came directly from the fire, it was not boiled but had been roasted. In boiling, the fire works in an indirect way on the offering, because there is a vessel and also water between the flesh of the offering and the fire, while with roasting the fire operates directly. It says of the passover lamb, "Ye shall eat none of it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roast with fire" (@Exodus 12:9). That represents the Lord, as on the cross He came under the direct influence of the fire of God's judgment. After His resurrection He came into their midst and asked the disciples if in the place where they were, they had anything to eat: "Have ye anything here to eat?". They gave Him a piece of a broiled fish; that was something which had been brought into accord with His death. They had a broiled fish and a honeycomb there. The honeycomb was a mutual production; it had been brought about by many bees which had all worked mutually upon it. They had that in the assembly there; the fish was broiled and the honeycomb was complete. Perhaps the Lord comes to Berlin and asks, "Have ye anything here to eat?". What could you then offer to the Lord to eat? Perhaps you would refer to the Bible and say, 'We have the Bible'. Certainly the Bible is of the greatest importance; it is the
{227}
living and powerful word of God. But the Lord in @Luke 24:41 did not mean that; He asked about the food which they actually had there. When the Lord puts this question to us, we must all answer Him as to it.
In @2 Kings 4:2 Elisha put a similar question to that poor woman, "Tell me, what hast thou in the house?". In @Luke 24:41 the Lord asked the company of believers in a place, "Have ye anything here to eat?", but Elisha asked an individual believer, "What hast thou in the house?". In @2 Kings 4 we have a woman who has lost all and who indeed is found in debt (verse 1). When Elisha asks her what she has in the house she answers, "Thy handmaid has not anything at all in the house but a pot of oil" (verse 2). She evidently did not know the value of this pot of oil, for it stood there quite unused. It is certain that if we do not use the pot of oil at home then we have nothing in the meeting which we can give to the Lord. Therefore the first question which must occupy us should always be, 'What have I in my house?'. I myself am the house. What have we then in ourselves? Every true believer has the Holy Spirit indwelling in him. When a believer has the Holy Spirit and knows how to make the right use of Him, then he is able to pay his debts and carry out his responsibilities. The pot of oil is a figure of the Holy Spirit. Many believers need light about the Holy Spirit. We must not only know that the Lord Jesus has sent Him down at Pentecost, but also be instructed how we can make use of the Spirit dwelling in us, the pot of oil.
Ques. Do we find that in @Romans 8?
J.T. Yes, at the end of @Romans 7 the believer, so to speak, stands on his own feet, "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law" (verse 25). The believer there recognises and feels his responsibility to God. In @Romans 8 he is then "in Christ Jesus" and the
{228}
Spirit of God dwells and operates in him, so that instead of being in debt he has great wealth available, he has now means at his disposal. If I have nothing myself then perhaps I find another there who has something, as in @John 6:9, where Andrew makes the remark, 'There is a little boy here who has something'. When anyone makes room for the Holy Spirit then he has vast wealth at his disposal. As soon as the believer allows the Spirit to work in him, he can take some part in the meeting. He is then, as it were, a bee and helps with the others to prepare the honeycomb.
Ques. Why did Elisha not wait for the answer to his question, "What shall I do for thee?", but directly asks the woman further, "Tell me, what hast thou in the house?".
J.T. We mostly refer others to the fact that we have all in Christ in heaven, and that is quite right, but for a believer that is not enough. In @Romans 7:24 the deeply exercised believer asks, "Who shall deliver me out of this body of death?". In @Romans 8 the believer then discovers the Spirit in him. Elisha asked the woman, "What shall I do for thee?", and then he refers to what she has in herself in her house. It is a question of what you possess in yourself.
Ques. Is @Romans 7 the broiling of the fish?
J.T. In @Luke 24 all is the common possession of a company of believers in a place but it is arrived at through personal exercises like those in @Romans 7.
Ques. Do the brazen serpent and the springing well in @Numbers 21 answer to what we find in @Romans 8?
J.T. Yes, the brazen serpent demonstrates that God has already dealt with sin in the flesh according to His own thoughts. The fire, the judgment of God has, so to speak, exhaustively taken effect upon it. The brazen serpent is a type of Christ who has been
{229}
made sin for us, or as it says in @Romans 8:3, "God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh". Our souls should in faith hold on to this great truth. The springing well is a figure of the Holy Spirit. In @Numbers 21:17,18, Israel sang to the well; that for us is @Romans 8. Israel sang, with their faces towards the well, of princes, of nobles of the people, who in the presence of the Lawgiver have hollowed out the well with their staves. The Lawgiver is the Lord Jesus, and under His leading the princes have dug the well. The digging must take place in us, before the oil of @2 Kings 4 can spring up in us. Everything that is a hindrance must first be put out of the way. The springing up of the water or oil speaks of the full recognition of the Holy Spirit in us. When the Holy Spirit has become in us a springing well or fountain, then we also can make a contribution in the meeting. One very often finds, alas! that only a few brothers take part in the readings. In this way the honeycomb, which the Lord is so glad to find in the midst of His own down here, does not come about. If such a honeycomb is really to be completed, then all the bees must take their part diligently in its construction.
Ques. Is that the product of mutual labour?
J.T. Practical working together of all brothers and all sisters is God's thought for the assembly. The honeycomb in @Luke 24 presents this thought.
Rem. Bees fetch their food from afar.
J.T. Yes, some of them have very hard work, we have really to marvel at their industry. When they find no honey on one flower then they go to another. I only refer to that to show that it is very important for us that we should industriously gather nourishment from God's word. Many a time in the reading we leave the taking of part to only a couple of brothers and all the others remain silent. That has
{230}
certainly made many readings of little value or completely ruined them.
Ques. Do the swarm of bees and the honey in the carcase of the lion which Samson slew show that the working together of the bees takes place in the scene of death?
J.T. In @Luke 24 we have both, the dead, broiled fish and then the honeycomb. All nourishment for us comes out of the death of Christ. Paul in 1 Corinthians stresses the cross and the Spirit. If we have both active in us, then there is sure to be something for God there. The apostle begins with the cross (@1 Corinthians 1) which puts us away as men in the flesh. The Spirit is mentioned for the first time in chapter 2 verse 4. The first epistle to the Corinthians begins with the cross, "For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and him crucified" (@1 Corinthians 2:2). Their faith was not to rest on men's wisdom but on the power of God (verse 5). Then Paul further speaks of the Spirit, who searches the depths of God (verse 10). What fulness the Spirit brings into the assembly when we give Him room and liberty to operate! He searches the depths of God and communicates them to us. In @1 Corinthians 3 the believers are the temple of God, where the light of God shines out and the thoughts of God are to be found, for the indwelling Spirit of God makes believers into the temple of God. In @1 Corinthians 3 we are the temple of God, which is holy, but in chapter 6 our body is the temple of the Holy Spirit, "Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have of God; and ye are not your own? for ye have been bought with a price: glorify now then God in your body" (@1 Corinthians 6:19, 20). That shows what the believer's body is; our body is a temple of the Holy Spirit. In @1 Corinthians 7:40 the Holy Spirit is brought in in connection with the marriage of the believer;
{231}
the marriage chapter is one of the most difficult. In @1 Corinthians 12 the Holy Spirit is the administrator of the gifts and service in the assembly, "For also in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body" (verse 13). In @2 Corinthians 1:21,22, the Spirit is the anointing, the seal and the earnest in our hearts. In @2 Corinthians 3, He is connected with the new covenant. In @2 Corinthians 5:5 He is the earnest of our inheritance. The second epistle to the Corinthians closes with "the communion of the Holy Spirit" (@2 Corinthians 13:14). The apostle wishes that we should have part and fellowship in all the blessings which are bound up with the Spirit. We see what an immeasurable wealth is present in the pot of oil which is in my house, and what the assembly can receive from it. Endowed with all these treasures we should really have something in the assembly which we can give to the Lord as food. We should not have everything in the Bible only and carried in our mouth, but should also have it in a living way by the Holy Spirit operative in us.
In Antioch (@Acts 13:1 - 3) the disciples really had something. In the assembly there, there were five prophets and teachers, who served the Lord. They ministered to the Lord and in that way they gave Him food.
Ques. Was that also the case with the women in @Luke 8:3, who "ministered to him of their substance"?
J.T. That is just what we are speaking about. The women had *substance* and served the Lord with it. Perhaps a sister may say, 'What shall I do then? I am not allowed to speak in the meeting'. But if we really understand that the assembly is a body, we should also know how to make use of the spiritual substance of a sister. For @1 Corinthians 12 the body of Christ is regarded as a living entity. If we had a body which could do nothing more than speak, then
{232}
we could not turn to account the spiritual substance of our sisters. We must not forget that speech only serves to express what is present and formed in the body. The Lord has ordained that the brothers are to speak in the assembly but they express what is to be found there. The assembly is in a certain sense a vessel in which spiritual power and spiritual abilities are to be found; these only come into evidence and expression in what the brothers say. Thus a spiritual sister who receives a fresh impression from the Lord will tell the brothers about it at home and see to it that a brother gives expression to it in the meeting. Of course, if the sisters think they have no substance, then the assembly is thrown upon the substance of the brothers only.
Ques. Should not the sisters like the bees go searching, in order to find choice thoughts in the word of God?
J.T. Yes, that would be good. The women in @Luke 8 had substance with which they ministered to the Lord. The woman in @2 Kings 4 had a pot of oil, the Holy Spirit, of which she only needed to make the right use in order to have abundance. Those who were scattered through the persecution on account of Stephen announced in Antioch the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus and a great number believed and turned to the Lord (@Acts 11:20,21). In this way the assembly in Antioch came into being. A few persecuted and scattered believers came to Antioch, their names are not even mentioned, but the result of their service was the assembly in Antioch, from which Paul undertook his missionary journeys. With great rivers the source is often unknown, you do not know exactly where they come from, but they gradually rise to great powerful rivers. Such an outflow of power also proceeded from these unknown persecuted believers. If we were compelled by a persecution to forsake Berlin,
{233}
and had to be scattered, then we should all be in a very depressed state. In what sorrow must those dear saints have been who were scattered on account of Stephen! If I were driven from house and home I should first of all be thinking of my means of livelihood. Those faithful ones, however, made the laborious journey from Jerusalem to Antioch, on which they were exposed to hunger and difficulties and the cruel persecution of the enemy, but they did not think at all about themselves and their hard lot. In spite of their tribulation they spoke the word to the Jews for whom Stephen had prayed. Does that not touch our hearts? Then when they came to Antioch they announced the glad tidings also to the Greeks or heathens and the Lord's hand was with them. That should go to our hearts; in spite of all difficulties and pressures we should go on faithfully with the testimony of God. We hear today something similar from Russia, that the beloved saints there are scattered but, for all that, proclaim the gospel. Also in China the believers are suffering much but they go on faithfully with the testimony. In Antioch the hand of the Lord was with those poor scattered ones and a great number believed and turned to the Lord. That was the beginning of the assembly in Antioch. The names of the scattered disciples who proclaimed the glad tidings in Antioch are not given us.
The revival in Samaria took place through a man whose name is given us. "And Philip, going down to a city of Samaria, preached the Christ to them" (@Acts 8:5), and as the apostles in Jerusalem had heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them (@Acts 8:14). Of the happenings at Antioch, however, not only did the apostles hear but the assembly in Jerusalem (@Acts 11:22). The assembly in Jerusalem had "ears", that is, a lively interest in what was going on at Antioch. They sent Barnabas to them, in order to have a
{234}
living link with them. Barnabas went away to Tarsus, and brought Saul to Antioch (verse 26). Barnabas and Saul taught a whole year among them and the disciples were first called christians in Antioch (verse 26). The nearer we come to the end the greater our difficulties and tribulations will become. Peter writes, If any of you suffer "as a christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in this name" (@1 Peter 4:16). The name "christian" which was first given to those in Antioch, is the name in which we suffer but in which we may also glorify God.
Then another lovely truth comes to light. Antioch is now bound up with Jerusalem by indissoluble bonds. It says, "Now in these days prophets went down from Jerusalem to Antioch" (@Acts 11:27). They were not sent out to Antioch like Barnabas from the assembly in Jerusalem to establish the connection. The fact that they came to Antioch shows that the connection was already existing. One of them, by name Agabus, stood up and signified by the Spirit a great famine which was going to come over the whole earth (verse 28). That set the love in activity, which was present in the hearts of the new converts in Antioch. They had received from Jerusalem spiritual gifts through Barnabas and the prophets and now they gave back material gifts to them, "they determined, according as any one of the disciples was well off, each of them to send to the brethren who dwelt in Judaea, to minister to them; which also they did, sending it to the elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul" (verses 29,30). The link between Jerusalem and Antioch comes very beautifully to light. The spiritual gifts flowed in the one direction and the material gifts in the other direction. Barnabas and Saul had brought back again the material things. As the loops and clasps held the curtains together in the tabernacle, so that the tent of testimony might be one whole (@Exodus 26:11), so
{235}
Jerusalem and Antioch were securely bound one to another. The best proof of the fact that ministry in the power of the Holy Spirit has been received is when brothers with their material substance, commence to serve the brothers who have brought blessing to them. Paul writes of the assemblies of Macedonia that their deep poverty has abounded to the riches of their liberality (@2 Corinthians 8:2). Heaven rejoices when it sees liberality with us; it is not so much a matter of how much we give. The poor widow who only put two mites into the treasury, gave, according to the words of our Lord, more than all, "For all these out of their abundance have cast into the gifts of God; but she out of her need has cast in all the living which she had" (@Luke 21:4). What delight heaven finds in such a small gift!
In @Acts 11:29, disciples in Antioch are mentioned who were *well off*, who possessed material substance and shared it with the brethren in Judaea. In @Acts 13:1, however, five men are named who in the assembly in Antioch, possessed spiritual substance, "They were ministering to the Lord and fasting" (verse 2). The Lord could now come to the assembly at Antioch and ask, "Have ye anything here to eat?". They could give the Lord food in abundance. I have intentionally gone over the whole development of the assembly in Antioch in such detail, because we are shown in it the divine way by which an assembly can arrive at the point, that the Lord has there something for His joy. @Acts 13:1 - 3 represents the ultimate result of this development; in the assembly at Antioch there were these five men with spiritual substance and the Holy Spirit had purposed of two of them in particular that He would have them completely for Himself and His service. The Holy Spirit said, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them" (verse 2). If a local assembly develops after the pattern of
{236}
Antioch then the Holy Spirit will Himself choose out His men in that place and such will have the fellowship of all those who serve the Lord in truth. In Antioch there were such spiritual conditions present that the Holy Spirit in His sovereign position as a divine Person down here could speak to the assembly without being quenched (@1 Thessalonians 5:19).
Ques. Could the Holy Spirit speak so freely to them because they were ministering to the Lord and fasting?
J.T. Yes. The speaking of the Holy Spirit is the highest point of what we have been speaking about. It is a reward for those who are serving the Lord and fasting, that the Holy Spirit separates them entirely for Himself.
{237}
THE BELIEVER'S HOUSE
@Leviticus 23:15 - 18
J.T. In the passage read, our attention is directed to what is to be brought out of our houses or dwellings. It says in verse 17, "Out of your dwellings shall ye bring two wave-loaves, of two tenths of fine flour; with leaven shall they be baken; as first-fruits to Jehovah". At the outset, when God set Israel free from Egypt, the houses stood in the forefront. In Exodus we read of the midwives who feared God and did not do according to the command of the king: "It came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses" (@Exodus 1:21). That is a very important verse for us, because the houses of these midwives are a pattern for the houses which God builds for us in this Egyptian world. We should surely have been glad to see one of those houses. You would indeed scarcely come across such a house in the street *Unter den Linden* here in Berlin, because it does not belong there. The builders of Egypt must surely have wondered when they considered those houses, and asked from whence that peculiar style of architecture came. The same applies also to the tabernacle. No builder of this world ever designed such a plan. God had completed the plan for it and as far as the Holy Scripture informs us about it, Moses alone had seen this plan. God showed him the pattern of the tabernacle, but not on the earth, but above upon the mountain and said to him, "See that thou make them according to their pattern, which hath been shewn to thee in the mountain" (@Exodus 25:40). The tabernacle was not made after the plan of a modern architect, but according to a pattern which no man except Moses had ever seen. Paul writes to the assembly of God in Corinth that he as a wise master builder had laid
{238}
the foundation (@1 Corinthians 3:10). That shows that Paul knew the divine plan and also went and built accordingly.
Even as God has now designed a pattern or plan for His assembly, so He has also a plan for the houses of those who believe in Him, and the houses which God built for those Hebrew midwives brought the divine pattern to light.
In the second chapter of Exodus we have the house of a believer, which, however, carries more the characteristics of a family. Amram, a grandson of Levi, married a daughter of Levi, Jochebed, and she bore Miriam, Aaron and Moses. Amram's house was more than a dwelling; it was also a place for the bringing up of the children. It says in @Acts 7:20, "In which time Moses was born, and was exceedingly lovely, who was nourished three months in the house of his father". The new-born babes were at that time looked after in the houses of the midwives, but the little Moses was brought up in the house of his father. In @Exodus 2, we see how we are to bring up our children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord (@Ephesians 6:4). God gives us houses and families to this end.
In @Exodus 12, a passover lamb had then to be for four days in every house. Then it was slain and its blood protected all who were in the house and who ate of the lamb. The manna also was gathered every morning by the house-father for his household, "an omer a poll, according to the number of your persons: ye shall take every man for those that are in his tent" (@Exodus 16:16). In that way it was specially a matter of the *measure* of the eating, an omer was reckoned for each individual in the tent. It was thus not a question of age, it was the same measure for children as for adults, an omer. If an Israelite had ten children, then he had to gather twelve omers of manna, one for himself, one for his wife and one for
{239}
each child, whether infant or bigger. We should perhaps have asked why the children were then to have just as much as the parents, but the answer is very simple, it is, God has only one measure for us all, and that is Christ. He is the food for the youngest as also for the oldest. In @Ephesians 4:13 we have the omer, the measure for us all, it is "the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". An omer of manna was also preserved in the golden pot in the ark of the covenant (@Exodus 16:33). In Exodus we find the architecture of our houses and that which is brought into them as food, that is, the passover lamb and manna, but in Leviticus and Numbers we also find what is to come out of our houses. If always something is only brought in, but never anything brought out, then our houses are in a poor state.
Ques. Does the passover lamb present the Lord in His suffering and the manna the Lord in His humiliation?
J.T. Yes. The passover lamb had to be four days in the house before it was slain (@Exodus 12:3,6). Then it was not only slain, but also roast with fire (verse 8). That presents the sufferings of Christ. The glory of God required that Christ must suffer. After His sufferings, when He came as the risen One into the company of the disciples in @Luke 24, they had there the broiled fish ready. That shows that they all had fully experienced with Him His sufferings in deepest self-judgment. That should also be found today in our houses, as the result of self-judgment, that is, the eating of the suffering passover Lamb. In @Leviticus 23, the celebration of the passover and of the feast of unleavened bread come first (verses 5 - 8), then it says, "When ye come into the land that I give unto you, and ye reap the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheaf of the first-fruits of your harvest unto the priest. And he shall wave the sheaf
{240}
before Jehovah, to be accepted for you" (verses 10,11). The sheaf is the risen Christ. After the priest has waved Him before God, you begin to count. "Ye shall count from the morning after the sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave-offering, seven weeks; they shall be complete". First of all in continual self-judgment we are to have the sufferings of the passover Lamb before us, then to bring the risen Christ before God, and then after a complete spiritual period, seven full weeks, we can bring something out of these houses. "Out of your dwellings shall ye bring two wave-loaves ... as first-fruits to Jehovah". The food offering out of their houses was a first-fruit, just as also the wave-sheaf. Out of our houses something is to come forth which is like the risen Christ, the Firstborn from the dead.
Ques. Why were they to bring *two* wave loaves?
J.T. "Two" speaks of testimony, there should be a suitable testimony to Christ found in our houses, and that in spite of the sin which is in us, for the two wave-loaves were baked with leaven. In baking, the fire does not operate directly as with roasting. By the baking, the working of the leaven comes to a standstill. The fire operates upon the bread till the leaven is no longer active. With the wave-sheaf the baking is not needed, for it speaks of our Lord Jesus as dead and risen. When the corn is cut down, then the sheaves are formed. The reaping refers to Christ's death, and the waving of the sheaf before God, to His resurrection. Christ personally is infinitely holy; the process of baking and kneading does not require to be undertaken with Him. If we carefully read through @Luke 24, we see there the great difference between the risen Lord and the disciples. Sin was in them, but through the baking it was made inoperative and they became first-fruits similar to Him. It is very important for us
{241}
to weigh that over. We should know what is in our houses and what comes forth out of them for God. God only accepts what resembles the risen Christ, the First-fruits.
Ques. What application has the baking for us?
J.T. It is self-judgment in the power of the Holy Spirit. Seven full weeks and a day are fifty days, but the Lord was only forty days with His own after His resurrection and then He went up to heaven (@Acts 1:3). After ten days more the Holy Spirit came down and parted tongues as of *fire* sat upon each individual disciple (@Acts 2:3). We can only rightly judge ourselves in the power of the Holy Spirit. In @Romans 7 I learn that continual self-judgment is necessary with me, but in @Romans 8 I learn the proper exercise of self-judgment by the Spirit. "If, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live" (@Romans 8:13). Then out of our houses we can bring to God the two wave-loaves for which He is looking. If we are always only taking and receiving what we get in our readings and at the same time are bringing forth nothing for God out of our houses, then something is not right with us. The food which we take gives us natural strength and power and God the Creator is in that way glorified. So also by spiritual nourishment which we take, something must come forth for God out of our houses. On the first day of the week we then present that in the assembly.
Ques. Did the early christians bring their wave-loaves in @Acts 4:24 - 30, as they lifted up their voice to God with one accord?
J.T. Yes, they said, "Lord, *thou* art the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them". They lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and in verse 31 we read, "And when they had prayed, the place in which they were assembled shook, and they were all filled
{242}
with the Holy Spirit". We also read the same of those who were together in one place at Pentecost, "And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit" (@Acts 2:4). Then after the new converts brought their wave-loaves to God by their praying with one accord (@Acts 4:24 - 30) the place where they were assembled shook and they also, as it were, experienced their Pentecost; they all became filled with the Holy Spirit. The first great act of faith in @Hebrews 11 is to offer to God, "By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain". God values in a special way the offerings in Genesis, because at that time He did not yet ask for any but nevertheless He already received some. When we compare the little bit of light that Abel had with the light which we have, we may well be deeply ashamed. Abel was in a certain way a pioneer, a champion of faith. God bore "testimony to his gifts". The offering seemed with him to have been a continuous thing for he presented several *gifts* and God bore witness to them. What an honour for us if God speaks of what we do, as the Lord also says of that poor widow, that she had put in more than all (@Luke 21:3). There was no request or demand made upon her, but she just did it. The waving of the wave offering takes place before God. We move the sheaf of the first-fruits or the two loaves forwards and backwards before God, so that God alone sees it. Simeon did that when he took the child Jesus in his arms (@Luke 2:28). It demands a priestly state with us, for in @Leviticus 23 it says of the sheaf and of the loaves that the priest is to wave them before Jehovah (verses 11,20).
Ques. In @Romans 7:25 do we begin to wave something in a priestly way before God?
J.T. Yes. By @Romans 7 we arrive at priestly service, "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law". We bring the wave-loaves in @Romans 12:1,
{243}
"I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service". That is our priestly service.
{244}
ADDED TO THE LORD (1)
@Acts 5:1 - 16
J.T. In the portion of scripture which has been read it says that after the death of Ananias and Sapphira believers were added *to the Lord*. We read the same also of Antioch after Barnabas was come there, "a large crowd of people were added to the Lord" (@Acts 11:24). In @Acts 2:41 it simply says "there were added in that day about three thousand souls". It is not said to *whom* they were added or *who* added them. A little further on it says then "the Lord added [to the assembly] daily those that were to be saved" (@Acts 2:47), but for the first time we read in chapter 5:14, after Ananias and Sapphira had lied to God, "believers were more than ever added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women". It says that the severe punishment which was meted out to Ananias and Sapphira produced fear, "great fear came upon all the assembly, and upon all who heard these things", but the great fear did not hold any believers back from them, because it was a fear brought about by God, a holy reverence before the Lord which drew them nearer to Him. Multitudes of believers were now added *to the Lord*, which means that in the fear of the Lord they took up an attitude of refusing sin and looseness. The dreadful sin of Ananias and Sapphira brought the terrible judgment of God with it. If we do not refuse sin, then like Ananias and Sapphira we are a source of sorrow and vexation to the believers. If we are only numerically added, we but cause trouble and grief. Often the largest meetings are also the weakest spiritually, but if we are added to the Lord we are under His authority and we recognise His supremacy, for He does not receive any, as added to Him, who has not also been made subject to Him. "Added to the
{245}
Lord", means that we have entered into the kingdom of God. We recognise that it is necessary to be obedient and subject to the Lord and we put away all lawlessness and all human and loose principles.
Ques. Do you think that we can be in fellowship without having the Holy Spirit active in us, making us subject to the Lord Jesus (@1 Corinthians 12:3)?
J.T. Yes, that is very important. We feel perhaps drawn to certain christians but do not recognise the rights which the Lord has over us.
Ques. Does not the baptism of the Holy Spirit into one body (@1 Corinthians 12:13) bring with it the recognition of death upon ourselves?
J.T. Quite so. It also involves that we feel happy amongst the brethren. We are not truly happy amongst the brethren until we confess Jesus as our Lord, in the power of the Holy Spirit. When some of the children of Benjamin and Judah came to David to subject themselves to him, he asked them if they were come peaceably. It says in @1 Chronicles 12:16 - 18, "And there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the stronghold to David. And David went out to meet them, and answered and said to them, If ye come peaceably to me to help me, my heart shall be knit unto you; but if to betray me to mine enemies, seeing there is no wrong in my hands, the God of our fathers see it and rebuke it. And the Spirit came upon Amasai, the chief of the captains, and he said, Thine are we, David, And with thee, thou son of Jesse: Peace, peace be to thee! And peace be to thy helpers! For thy God helps thee. And David received them, and made them chiefs of bands".
This passage shows that persons are to be exercised about *the Lord* if they wish to be added.
{246}
Otherwise, they can perhaps betray the Lord, as David said, "to betray me to mine enemies". The Lord is very jealous, He carefully scrutinises those who want to be added, in order that there may be no treachery to Him and His interests. That is specially important when open sins occur as with Ananias. This has now become a general matter, the whole of christendom is turned away from the Lord. In @2 Timothy 2:19 it says, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". Then it says further that those who have separated themselves are to follow righteousness, faith, love and peace with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart. It is very noteworthy that "out of a pure heart" is added. In @1 Corinthians 1:2, it says "with all that ... call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ", but now it is a matter of calling on the name of the Lord out of a pure heart; that is very noteworthy. As Jehu said to Jehonadab, "Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?" (@2 Kings 10:15). It is a question now of our motives. The great multitude which was added in @Acts 5 had a sense of the terrible things which had happened. Each individual said, 'Through the grace of the Lord I do not want such a dishonour to the Lord to happen again'.
Rem. It makes us sad when we see the judgment which God exercised.
J.T. It was very grievous for the Lord, but it was necessary. Peter first says in verse 3, "Why has Satan filled thy heart that thou shouldest lie to the Holy Spirit ... ?", and in verse 4 he says, "Thou hast not lied to men, but to God", and then in verse 9, Ye have tempted "the Spirit of the Lord". You can thus see that this sin was immediately directed against all three Persons of the Godhead. It was something very serious.
{247}
Ques. Was that a sin unto death?
J.T. Quite so. John says, "There is a sin to death" (@1 John 5:16). He could say that truly, for he had seen it here; he could testify to it.
Rem. The maintenance of a good conscience before God and the exercise of judgment always go together.
J.T. It was so with Phinehas (@Numbers 25:7 - 9). He glorified God in exercising judgment against sin. It was also the same with the three thousand who were slain when Israel had made the golden calf (@Exodus 32:28). When sin comes in, and the power is lacking to take action against it, then we can only separate from it. It says that everyone who names the name of the Lord is to withdraw from iniquity (@2 Timothy 2:19), but in withdrawing from it, he does not merely take up an attitude of condemning it, he does not continue in this separation and remain inactive, but he always finds a way on which he can go further. There are those who call upon the Lord out of a pure heart, and Timothy is told he is to follow righteousness, faith, love and peace with those who call upon the Lord out of a pure heart (@2 Timothy 2:22). It is important that precedence be given to the Lord. Many believers were added, it says, "and believers were more than ever added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women". That shows how God always honours direct judgment upon evil. We are always inclined to think that if we are too severe and maintain the attitude of refusing evil, we shall have no increase in the meeting, but this passage shows the opposite. If we are faithful in the judgment of evil, then God always adds some to us. It says in Balaam's prophecy that Israel "shall dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations". They were separate from all. Then it says, "Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?" (@Numbers 23:9,10).
{248}
That shows that if we really separate from evil, then God increases His people according to His own thoughts.
Rem. Balaam says further, "Let my soul die the death of the righteous" (@Numbers 23:10).
J.T. That was Balaam's wish, which is very significant. If we want to die the death of the righteous we must live the life of such. It says of the Lord that He loved righteousness and hated lawlessness.
Rem. Perhaps it was said after Ananias and Sapphira had done that, that everything was past, but they assembled further in Solomon's porch.
J.T. It is possible that the porch of Solomon refers to the place of judgment. It says at the end of chapter 2, "And every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord" (verse 46).
They were in the temple then, but now they were in Solomon's porch (chapter 5:12). In olden days a porch was the place where judgment was administered. It seems that this refers to the fact that judgment was being administered. Then further it says, "Of the rest durst no man join them".
Ques. Do you connect the maintenance of the righteousness of God with the glory of God, and is Solomon connected with the glory of God?
J.T. Quite so. He gave effect to the judgment which David had not been able to carry out, as with Joab and others. I have no doubt that the time of waiting in Solomon's porch refers to that. If we have not the consciousness that sin is judged, then Satan still has room among us. Unsuitable material will then always come in. The great failure at Corinth was that there was no porch there, where judgment could be given. Even with ordinary affairs of life they went to the world's law courts. The apostle asks, Is there no wise man among you who can put things in order? It says in @1 Corinthians 6:1 - 6
{249}
"Dare any one of you, having a matter against another, prosecute his suit before the unjust, and not before the saints? Do ye not then know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world is judged by you, are ye unworthy of the smallest judgments? Do ye not know that we shall judge angels? and not then matters of this life? If then ye have judgments as to things of this life, set those to judge who are little esteemed in the assembly. I speak to you to put you to shame. Thus there is not a wise person among you, not even one, who shall be able to decide between his brethren! But brother prosecutes his suit with brother, and that before unbelievers". That shows that there was no porch of judgment there.
Ques. Would you also connect that with @Acts 3:11? As the lame man "held Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the portico which is called Solomon's, greatly wondering"?
J.T. It seems that they had arrived at a right judgment about what had happened. That is set over against the false judgment which we find in the high council, the sanhedrim. In @1 Corinthians 6:3 it says the saints "shall judge angels", we are being instructed for that in the way we judge evil. In @Romans 8:3,4 we see how God judged our sins on the cross, God sent His own Son in the likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, and has in this way brought it about that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us. We are thus being instructed and put into the position to judge evil in the assembly. Romans prepares the material for the tabernacle and 1 Corinthians shows how the material is put together. What a lovely testimony it is when others say,. 'These people judge sin. If I do not judge evil in myself I cannot go with these people!' It says, "of the rest durst no man join them":
{250}
Ques. If we are living righteously, does that bring us to a place of dignity? It says in @Proverbs 22:11,12, "He that loveth pureness of heart, upon whose lips is grace, the king is his friend. The eyes of Jehovah preserve knowledge; but he overthroweth the words of the unfaithful".
J.T. That is a very important scripture, "The king is his friend". After all, if the Lord loved righteousness when He was down here, how He must love it now when it is found among His people.
Rem. If we love purity of heart we can also reckon on the Lord that He will help us to have a judgment of all evil.
J.T. The result of the discipline in @1 Corinthians 5 is to be that the spirit of the person concerned may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. We have first the name and then the power of our Lord and the full result in His day. This is the way in which we are to be engaged with evil.
Rem. All is to take place in the light of the day of the Lord Jesus.
J.T. Yes, we find the pure gold then; the Lord will not have anything else. In the day of Christ the pure gold is there, the Spirit is quite free, and the flesh is set aside. David said to Solomon that he had gathered in abundance for the house, and Solomon was to add to it. He was not to add anything poorer in quality. In this way, if the assembly respects the rights of the Lord, then nothing unsuitable will be brought in, as the apostle says, "For other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 3:11). There is to be nothing present which is not in agreement with this foundation.
Rem. In @Exodus 35, where the children of Israel had the privilege of bringing the materials for the tabernacle, they brought gold.
{251}
J.T. If we separate the precious from the vile and put away all that is common, then we shall treasure every little bit of gold.
Rem. Those who were added to the Lord were worthy of it. Being added involves a certain proving of oneself.
J.T. I believe they were new converts. It says "multitudes both of men and women" (@Acts 5:14), that means the kind of people who are needed for the assembly publicly, men and women. We must have both for the assembly, the brothers and the sisters.
Ques. Who are "the rest"?
J.T. Those were they who remained behind, who made no progress, and did not give themselves over to the Lord. They are perhaps those who always come but never ask for fellowship; that is quite a peculiar class of people. Then it says "the people magnified them"; that is more general; these did not come to the meetings at all, but they magnified them. Then comes still a third class, that is the believers, the multitudes of men and women. These are the ones whom we must have, the believers.
Ques. Would these men and women have the hands of the apostles laid on them?
J.T. It does not say that they did so. It says that many signs took place "among the people" through the hands of the apostles. It is a matter of there being a testimony among the people. From the middle of verse 12 to the end of verse 14 there is a parenthesis, which is brought in to show the occurrences in the assembly. There was not only a great testimony present but there were also actual results there in the saints. "They brought out the sick into the streets and put them on beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter, when he
{252}
came, might overshadow some one of them. And the multitude also of the cities round about came together to Jerusalem, bringing sick persons and persons beset by unclean spirits, who were all healed". Verses 12 - 14 are inserted to show the result which comes to pass in the public testimony where judgment is really exercised, as was the case with Ananias and Sapphira. The result was that believers were added *to the Lord*.
Ques. Can we still expect the same today?
J.T. No. We are living today in a day of small things; at that time it was a day of great things. But the day of great things here in the Acts shows principles which are also still to be followed today. The principle is that if we are faithful in the exercise of judgment, then God will also add some.
Ques. "Great fear came upon all the assembly". Does the great fear still come upon us today also?
J.T. It was "the fear of the Lord". It is in a certain way godliness, piety. There is a very striking passage in @Hebrews 12:29. "For also our God is a consuming fire". God is, among other things, a consuming fire. We are not to be afraid that God is a fire, that He consumes what we find in @1 Corinthians 3:12, wood, grass, straw.
Ques. Have we in @Ezra 9 the judgment and in @Ezra 10 the increase?
J.T. You are referring to @Ezra 9:5 - 7, "And at the evening oblation I arose up from my humiliation; and with my mantle and my garment rent, I fell on my knees, and spread out my hands to Jehovah my God, and said: O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God; for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up to the heavens. Since the days of our fathers, we have been in great trespass to this day; and for our iniquities we, our kings, our priests, have
{253}
been given into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword, and to captivity, and to spoil, and to confusion of face, as it is this day", and then to @Ezra 10:1, "And while Ezra prayed, and made confession, weeping and falling down before the house of God, there were gathered to him out of Israel a very great congregation of men and women and children; for the people wept very much". That was the result. I should like too to refer to @Daniel 9:18,19, where we have the same. "Incline thine ear, O my God, and hear; open thine eyes and behold our desolations, and the city that is called by thy name: for we do not present our supplications before thee because of our righteousnesses, but because of thy manifold mercies. Lord, hear! Lord, forgive! Lord, hearken and do! defer not, for thine own sake, O my God! for thy city and thy people are called by thy name". In verses 20 - 22 we see the beautiful answer to it, "And whilst I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before Jehovah my God for the holy mountain of my God; whilst I was yet speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, flying swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation. And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, Daniel, I am now come forth to make thee skilful of understanding". That shows what an answer we receive when we judge sins before God. In one case we get perhaps addition, brethren who are newly added, or in the other case new light, as Daniel received fresh understanding. It says, "Thou art one greatly beloved" (verse 23). We see how God values such. Then he was told what God is doing, "to make an end of sins, and to make expiation for iniquity, and to bring in the righteousness of the ages, and to seal the vision and prophet, and to anoint the holy of holies" (verse 24).
{254}
ADDED TO THE LORD (2)
@Acts 8:4 - 8, 14 - 23
J.T. We have been occupied with the fact that believers were added to the Lord and that this thought came out for the first time when the first declension took place in the church; we spoke of @Acts 5. What we now find in chapter 8 follows more upon the failure in chapter 6, that is the murmuring. Murmuring is not so dangerous as the sin of Ananias and Sapphira, but still it is always serious enough. In @1 Corinthians 10:10, it says, "Neither murmur ye, as some of them murmured, and perished by the destroyer". The murmuring in chapter 6 is not directed against the Lord but against the saints. We read of a murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews. There were perhaps natural feelings or sectarian feelings, party feelings which came up amongst them. These were not remedied by judgment but through grace. The apostles said in verse 3, "Look out, therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we will establish over this business". The murmuring was met in grace through the choice of the seven men, whose names indicate that they were Hellenists. In this way the murmurers were silenced. However, it does not only mean that they were of the same nationality, but they were also men full of the Holy Spirit. So we are to see, if difficulties arise amongst us, that we meet them in the power of the Holy Spirit, not through political machinations. We see what a triumph proceeded from it, first in Stephen, who gave a wonderful reflection of the Spirit of Christ, then Philip followed. This Philip who was made a deacon is the only one who is called an evangelist in Scripture (@Acts 21:8). We see thus, when a collapse occurs and God intervenes
{255}
and restores, that different kinds of blessings come out of it. We see a man like Stephen, who was in the position to unfold the whole history of the testimony until the murder of Jesus Christ, and he sealed his testimony with his own death. Philip is marked by extraordinarily skilful evangelisation. There is today a great need for evangelical activity among the people of God. We see with Philip that his skill followed upon his activity. We read nothing of his ability before he gave himself to the work. There are brothers who say they could not preach the gospel, because they are not evangelists, but if we use what we have, the Lord will add to it.
The Lord does not expect anything from us which we do not have, but when we use that which He gives us, it becomes extended and enlarged. We read here in chapter 8:5, "And Philip, going down to a city of Samaria, preached the Christ to them". It is not said that he had a gift before that. We can never say that we have no gift if we do not give ourselves to preaching. If we simply use what we have, the Lord will take it into His hand and increase it. When David went to Nob he asked Ahimelech the priest what he had there. "What is under thy hand? give me five loaves in my hand, or what may be found" (@1 Samuel 21:3). That is the principle for us. The Lord will always use what we have and make it still more. In the same way Elisha also said to the wife of the prophet, "What shall I do for thee? Tell me, what hast thou in the house?" (@2 Kings 4:2). We have not only what is in heaven where Christ is, but the Holy Spirit is down here in the assembly and the Lord asks, What hast thou in thy house? In every local assembly, what is there is important. We think perhaps it is not much, but let us quietly use it.
Rem. The blind man in @John 9 said what he had.
J.T. He said simply, I was blind before, but now I see. Then he went further and said wonderful
{256}
things. You would not at all have thought that he who had been blind all his life, could have said such things. When Moses said he was of a slow tongue, then God said to him, "Who gave man a mouth?" (@Exodus 4:11). There are many evidences that Moses could speak well, however, although he thought he could not speak. It says that Philip went down to a city of Samaria. It is very beautiful to see that such a man as Philip began to serve, although he had no commission. What follows shows that he did have something, that he possessed ability. His special service was that he was a deacon, but here he takes up other work because he saw that it was needed. It is clear that this stood in connection with the scattering. "Those then that had been scattered went through the countries announcing the glad tidings of the word". It says, "the glad tidings of the word". Of Philip, however, it says that he went down to a city of Samaria and preached *the Christ* to them. Then it says, "The crowds with one accord gave heed to the things spoken by Philip, when they heard him and saw the signs which he wrought". Philip brought something which they gladly heard; it says that they heard him. You will always see, if a brother begins to preach, that he will have some who hear. I believe the Lord is encouraging the brethren to proclaim the word today. It says, "Proclaim the word; be urgent in season and out of season" (@2 Timothy 4:2). "Do the work of an evangelist" (@2 Timothy 4:5).
Ques. Why did Philip preach *the Christ*?
J.T. I believe there is the lovely thought here that Philip felt he could not do much at all. Christ does everything for God. It says that God found David, a man after His heart, who should do His will. If I have the consciousness that there is One who does everything for God, it is certain that I do not do much. But the little bit that I say becomes
{257}
effective. Christ is the Preacher. "Coming, he has preached the glad tidings of peace to you who were afar off, and the glad tidings of peace to those who were nigh" (@Ephesians 2:17), and Peter says that "going he preached to the spirits which are in prison" (@1 Peter 3:19). Christ is accordingly the Preacher, who came and who went. When Christ came and preached peace He used Peter and Paul and all the apostles, but He was the Preacher. God used Noah. Through Noah He preached to the spirits in prison. It has often been mentioned that if we do not preach the gospel then we shall die out. The actual preaching is only for one who has gift. It says here, "Those then that had been scattered went through the countries announcing the glad tidings of the word". They announced it, but they did not preach.
Ques. Are we responsible to preach?
J.T. We are always responsible before the Lord to announce the word, perhaps by tracts or by a word: we are responsible to do it. Then we read further that Philip "preached". That shows that he had a gift. We can be sure that if in a meeting we decide to announce the glad tidings, then there will also be a gift for it.
Rem. We are perhaps hindered by thinking that we have to see results, but we do not see any. When the Lord preached in @Luke 4:22, "All bore witness to him, and wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth", but the words had no effect in their hearts. I believe we are not there for the results but only that we may in any case speak. The results are in the hands of God and He works in the hearts of men as He will.
J.T. In @Proverbs 22:13, the sluggard says, "There is a lion without, I shall be killed in the streets!". Unfortunately that often appears. The difficulties are so great that we remain at home and say nothing. Solomon says there is a "time to
{258}
speak" (@Ecclesiastes 3:7). This dispensation is a time of speaking. Whether we speak now to God or to men it is always a time of speaking. Then we see the results, "the crowds with one accord gave heed to the things spoken by Philip, when they heard him and saw the signs which he wrought". It was not merely that they heard a man who was holding a meeting, but they listened to him and saw that what he said was of worth. "Of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks". When a man makes an impression, people listen to him. It says "there was great joy in that city". The work of Philip, too, made outward progress, yet his converts did not immediately receive the Holy Spirit. We might perhaps have outward results but when they are put to the test, they are perhaps not genuine. That shows again that it is important that everything should be added *to the Lord*. In chapter 8:14,15, it says, "And the apostles who were in Jerusalem, having heard that Samaria had received the word of God, sent to them Peter and John; who, having come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit". The apostles represented the Lord's authority. The work of the most successful servant must be tested again and again by those who represent the Lord here.
Rem. We should be concerned to have the support of the Lord in the preaching. It says of Simon in verse 10, "This is the power of God, which is called great". Simon, of course, was deceiving the people in Samaria.
J.T. Simon deceived Samaria through his wonders. There is much imitation about and therefore we should always be on the watch. The apostles who were in Jerusalem sent Peter and John to them. These were the same ones whom the Lord had sent to prepare the passover. They were trustworthy men. It is important here that it does not say the
{259}
assembly but "the apostles who were in Jerusalem". When it is a matter of reception of persons coming in, then it is important that the persons should also first be proved. With Simon it was proved that he was "in the gall of bitterness, and bond of unrighteousness". There has been no time, when it is so important to keep the doors and to be careful, as today, but with all that, we seek to lay hold of and appraise every little bit of the work of God.
Ques. Peter and John went down to Samaria. What does this going down mean?
J.T. It says first of Philip that he went down and then also of the two apostles. Naturally a moral thought comes into expression in this descending. In Matthew it is a matter of going up (@Matthew 20:17,18), and also @Mark 10:32. There we have a moral elevation, but when it is a matter of the gospel we read of descending.
Ques. Can you not connect with this the way which the Lord Jesus went in @Philippians 2?
J.T. He went lower and lower down, even to the cross, even into the lowest parts of the earth. It says, "But that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth?" (@Ephesians 4:9). We see in this way that Peter and John are also beautifully linked together, not only personally but also characteristically. The Lord had chosen them to prepare the passover. In the Acts they are often seen together. We see in @John 21 that Peter would be separated from John by death. David said, "Saul and Jonathan, beloved and pleasant in their lives, even in their death were not divided" (@2 Samuel 1:23). So also Peter and John -- they were so wonderfully united. The Lord had said to Peter that he was to die a martyr's death and Peter said, "Lord, and what of this man?". But the Lord did not answer Peter's question, He simply said, "If I will that he abide until I come, what is
{260}
that to thee? Follow thou me" (@John 21:21,22). So we know that John could act alone, that is to say, without Peter. How lovely are the gospel, the Revelation and the three epistles which he has written! He was a man who could act alone before God, but he was also a man who could act together with another and could take a second place. Here both of them are together, for it says, "The apostles who were in Jerusalem, having heard that Samaria had received the word of God, sent to them Peter and John; who, having come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit". How much is really contained in this verse! We ask perhaps how many brothers or sisters are in this or that meeting, and we rejoice when we hear of a great number, but the question is, have they all also the Holy Spirit? Peter and John were concerned about that. Not one of these converts had up till then received the Holy Spirit. All members of the assembly are, however, baptised with the Holy Spirit.
Rem. Peter and John prayed that they might receive Him.
J.T. You can see from that how much value they laid upon it, for they prayed for them.
Rem. The reception of the Holy Spirit is in general something which God gives as an answer to prayer.
J.T. I believe it is an answer to the wish of the convert. This wish is perhaps not always expressed but it is previously there. Those who were sent down from Jerusalem were concerned that they should have the Holy Spirit. It is very essential that all should have the Holy Spirit. At the same time it even came out that a very prominent one among them, Simon, was not converted at all. What sorrow this man caused, and Satan would have used him further. That shows how important it is to be watchful in regard to those whom we receive. Simon was
{261}
only animated by a certain ambition, he wanted also to have what the apostles had.
Rem. Is @Romans 8 the answer to @Romans 7? In the beginning of @Romans 7 our hearts are directed to the new husband and then we find that the flesh is quite unsuited to us. Then we have the desire after what is pleasing to God. In chapter 8 we have the Spirit who maintains what is for God. In @Acts 8:9, we read of Simon the sorcerer, "A certain man, by name Simon, had been before in the city, using magic arts, and astonishing the nation of Samaria, saying that himself was some great one". He was not yet married to the new husband.
J.T. We also see in @Romans 7:25, that "*I myself* ... serve". It is the individual, how he comes to himself without a thought of greed or ambition. "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law", that is the man who is consciously come to himself, he serves the law of God. Then like the board of the tabernacle he is overlaid with gold. Simon the sorcerer was not that; he was envious; we do not find in him any acacia wood at all, no correspondence with Christ. @Romans 7 brings the board to light, "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law", and chapter 8 shows the power for that. This Simon the sorcerer did not want the Spirit; he wanted to have the power to give the Spirit. It says in verses 18 and 19, "But Simon, having seen that by the laying on of the hands of the apostles the Holy Spirit was given, offered them money, saying, Give to me also this power, in order that on whomsoever I may lay hands he may receive the Holy Spirit". That is quite a special form of wickedness, when one wants to have apostolic power and presumes to have this.
Ques. Had the gospel failed in its effect on Simon?
J.T. Yes, he was not content that the Lord Jesus should do all; he wanted to do something himself.
{262}
It is a right which belongs entirely to the Lord Jesus to give the Holy Spirit.
Ques. Are there converts even today who have not the Holy Spirit?
J.T. That is just the great lack with many, that they have not yet received the Holy Spirit. Perhaps the cause is that they have had wrong teaching. But those who are really concerned about the testimony and the interests of the Lord Jesus are also concerned that we should have the Holy Spirit.
Ques. When a man is drawn to the Lord Jesus, to the Man in whom God has His pleasure, does not God then rejoice to give him the Holy Spirit? Is He not given to those who ask Him?
J.T. "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" (@Luke 11:13).
Rem. In @Acts 19:3 the apostle makes it dependent upon baptism.
J.T. That shows that there was a lack of teaching about it. It has to do with the teaching which one receives. He says, "To what then were ye baptised?". In that way he is, as it were, saying, 'If you have not been properly taught, you cannot have the Spirit', for the word 'then' means this. They said, "To the baptism of John" (verse 3). But Paul said, "John indeed baptised with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe on him that was coming after him, that is, on Jesus" (verse 4). When they heard that, they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus. They had evidently been hindered through defective teaching. I do not mean to say that the teaching of John was wrong, but it did not go far enough. There are today many kinds of teaching which are actually wrong and saints are confused by them. Then there are also some which do not go far enough. It says of the converts in Samaria that they received the
{263}
Holy Spirit after they had been baptised and hands laid upon them. In @Acts 19 also we read that after Paul had laid his hands upon them they received the Holy Spirit (verse 6). Contact with the apostles had a unique effect and a unique character. The link which the believers had with the apostles at Jerusalem was of quite a particular character. They could say to them, 'You are now received in a particular way'. So the twelve men at Ephesus were also received in a particular way in that Paul laid his hands upon them. So in both cases we have reception by the apostles. That which is to be received must be worthy.
{264}
ADDED TO THE LORD (3)
@Acts 8:26 - 40; @Acts 9:17; @Acts 10:44; @Acts 11:19 - 30; @Acts 13:1 - 3
J.T. The money was sent to the elders at Jerusalem by the hand of Barnabas and Saul (chapter 11) and then it says in the last verse of chapter 12, "And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, having fulfilled the service entrusted to them, taking also with them John, surnamed Mark". They returned to Antioch and brought someone else with them as well, namely John Mark. Then we read in chapter 11:27,28, that still another one came down from Jerusalem to Antioch, namely Agabus the prophet. We see in this part of the Scripture that everything is set in motion. Spiritual wealth came from Jerusalem to Antioch and material wealth came back from there. But I should like to go back a little to chapters 8 to 10. We see in chapter 9 how Paul was added by Ananias, who laid his hands upon him. In chapter 2, three thousand were added, and at the end of the same chapter there were added those who were to be saved. In chapter 5, believers were added, both men and women indeed, and in chapter 8, Samaritans were added. In chapter 9, Paul is brought in and is added as a brother. In verse 17, Ananias says, "Saul, brother". In chapter 10, some from the nations come along; they are added by the Holy Spirit. It is not said that the eunuch was added. That shows how great the work of God is. When he was baptised and as Philip and he came up out of the water it says, "The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no longer", then it says further, "for he went on his way rejoicing" (verse 39). That shows the material which can be relied upon, which can just be left to itself. I do not mean by that that every Christian should be left to himself. The Lord never withdraws
{265}
His eyes from any one of us; in this way we are protected. But it is not said that the eunuch received the Holy Spirit or that he was linked with other believers. He therefore gives rise to the difficult question, What became of him? If any one of us was allowed to go away into a strange land, what then would become of him? I believe that God leaves this question open in the Acts in order to show us that in his soul there was a work of God which could be trusted. When we are converted and baptised as the eunuch here and then simply quietly left alone, the Lord would say in that, 'You can depend on such an one. If I leave him to himself and just let him go on his way rejoicing, I am showing by that that you can trust him'. We read of the man at Decapolis who had been possessed of demons that after he had been found sitting at the feet of Jesus, healed and in his right mind and clothed, he asked the Lord if he might remain with Him, but the Lord said, "Return to thine house and relate how great things God has done for thee" (@Mark 5:15,19; @Luke 8:35,39). The Lord knew His man. He would not have left him alone if He had not been able to trust him. Trustworthiness is a great thing.
Ques. Was Timothy one who could be trusted?
J.T. I believe this thought is specially emphasised with him.
Rem. Paul writes to him, "Have an outline of sound words, which words thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which are in Christ Jesus. Keep, by the Holy Spirit which dwells in us, the good deposit entrusted" (@2 Timothy 1:13,14).
J.T. It is the exercise of every single individual of us that he prove himself trustworthy in the things which have been committed to us by the Lord. With the eunuch it is not shown that there was anything at all in him which could be trusted, but
{266}
only that he was allowed to go his way. Indeed it says, not as is general in the Acts that he went *the* way but that "he went on his way". If the Lord had considered it necessary He would have allowed Philip to go with him, but we have an extraordinarily remarkable happening here, "the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip". That must have made a powerful impression upon the eunuch of the spiritual order into which he had been brought. He was not just made a proselyte but he was connected with what is spiritual. A Jewish proselyte would always have continued in his proselytism. The Holy Spirit did not say to the eunuch, 'I will connect you with the believers because you are a great statesman'. Philip was caught away by the Spirit. Now instead of gazing after him the eunuch "went on his way rejoicing".
Ques. Do you think that He who had begun the great work would also complete it?
J.T. I think that is important and the Lord would like us all to understand it.
Ques. Had the eunuch personal intercourse with the Lord?
J.T. If we had met him later, after Philip was caught away, we would certainly have regarded him as a trustworthy christian. The little word 'for' explains it, it suggests logical sequence. He was content to go on his way with rejoicing. He was not fearful, he did not ask, 'What shall I now do further?'. His joy was not a bit lessened. So every one of us has to learn that he can stand upon his own feet. Of course, we are never left alone, but it is also very important that we can stand alone. Whatever others may do, this is my way and I am going on it.
Then we have already mentioned that Ananias came to Saul and said to him, "Saul, brother". He was received as a brother. The 10th chapter is very long, as if the Holy Spirit had joy in lingering over
{267}
these events. Everything led up to the point where we read that the Holy Spirit fell upon them all. The Lord looked at them all there and He wanted to unite them all with one another. It does not say that it was those who heard Peter preaching, but it says He "fell upon all those who were hearing the word". The words of Peter were God's word. In chapter 2:14, Peter says, "Give heed to my words", but not so here. Here it is *God's* word. Heaven has great interest in those who hear the word of God. It does not say, after they had heard it, but *while* they were hearing it. We see how this book, among many other things, brings together all details of significance. It is like @Exodus 40, where Moses sets up the tabernacle after all the separate parts had been completed.
Ques. It says in the gospels that the Holy Spirit descended upon the Lord, but here it says He fell. What is the difference?
J.T. When the Lord had been baptised the Holy Spirit was not yet upon this earth, as in this dispensation. The Holy Spirit was not yet there, because Jesus was not yet glorified, but here He was present. The word 'fell' does not mean a falling because of gravity. It also says, "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven" (@Luke 10:18). The word here refers to an energetic action of the Holy Spirit. It is the same word that is used when the Father fell on the neck of the prodigal. It is an energetic act of love, of affection. We have here the same thought, the same expression. The time was now come for the heathen to be brought in. This is so precious for the Holy Spirit that He fell upon them. It even took place before they were baptised.
In chapter 11:19 we read, "They then who had been scattered abroad through the tribulation that took place on the occasion of Stephen, passed through the country ...". In chapter 8:4, it simply
{268}
says that those that had been scattered went about and announced the word. In chapter 8 it is merely said that they went to Samaria, but here it is also said that they went to Phoenicia, Cyprus and Antioch. It says here first of them, that they spoke to no one but the Jews, but then it says further of the men of Cyprus and Cyrene that they also announced the glad tidings to those of the nations, "and the Lord's hand was with them". The chapter shows very beautifully that if we move in the gospel, the Lord Himself moves with us, even when there is no special gift available. It does not say that they preached but only that they announced. Then we read "a great number believed and turned to the Lord". They turned to the *Lord*.
Rem. This incident shows that when the enemy wants to destroy the work of God by persecution, it is always extended further.
J.T. The scattering only is not mentioned here but also the tribulation. Although the saints suffered much -- they perhaps lost all that they possessed and they were forced to travel far from their home -- yet they were occupied with the announcement of the glad tidings. How precious that must have been for the Lord! It is not said that they had a commission but they did it out of their own impulse. That is to show us that we should be more occupied with the testimony, the glad tidings.
Then something else comes to light. It no longer says 'the apostles' but "the assembly which was in Jerusalem". It is said that the assembly has "ears"; that is very beautiful and very important. When one travels about, one is always sorry to see how little the brethren in general have knowledge of what God is doing over the whole world.
Ques. Does that connect with what is in the Revelation, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies"?
{269}
J.T. Yes. Of course, that also relates to individuals, not only to assemblies. If we as an assembly had ears, then we should hear much encouragement from the different countries; we should be more in the position to support the work of God by prayer. So in verse 22 it says, "The report concerning them reached the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem, and they sent out Barnabas to go through as far as Antioch". We see here that the assembly acted immediately they heard of it. Today we cannot perhaps any more send out a Barnabas, but we can pray. If I hear of the work of God in India, China and Africa, then I can pray for it. The man who was sent out, Barnabas, was not an apostle, yet he was suited for the moment, like the gold which was used on the tabernacle. It says that they sent out Barnabas that he should go through to Antioch. Then further it says, "Who, having arrived and seeing the grace of God, rejoiced, and exhorted all with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord; for he was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith; and a large crowd of people were added to the Lord". We have here something very remarkable about the addition. It says "a large crowd of people were added to the Lord".
Ques. What does it mean, "with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord"?
J.T. He exhorted them to do so. It is a mark of the ministry that, by it, the different details of the work of God are put together. It refers to what is in the believer.
Ques. Is that a proof of our trustworthiness?
J.T. It is a challenge to our hearts. It does not only mean that I love the Lord. Of course, that is included in it, but it is a matter also of decision, that one has a definite outlook, the determination to pursue a definite line, namely to abide with the Lord. How important that was in the heathen world, where
{270}
the cold north winds blew. Whoever cleaves to the Lord finds shelter. What Barnabas brought before them was something transitory because he wished as it were to do preparatory work for the great master builder of the assembly. The material was held securely in the Lord's hands until the great master builder came. So we read that Barnabas "went away to Tarsus to seek out Saul. And having found him, he brought him to Antioch". Then it says further that they came together a whole year in the assembly and taught a large crowd. The great amount of material which Barnabas had put into the Lord's hands was now being instructed about the assembly. The fruit of their labour is seen at the beginning of chapter 13. The assembly there was in such a condition that from them five brothers were mentioned as serving the Lord.
One can say the building was complete and the Holy Spirit had now the assembly before Him and could speak to it. He asks that these two men, Barnabas and Saul, should be separated to the work to which He had called them. I believe the Lord now has that before Him. He would like local meetings which stand on their own feet and yet have an outlook for the whole testimony in the world. It says "there were ... in the assembly which was there, prophets and teachers", and then their names are given. I believe if we follow out this line there will also be men today who are ministering to the Lord and fasting.
{271}
THE LOCAL ASSEMBLY
@Matthew 4:12 - 17; @Mark 1:21; @John 4:13,14,28 - 30,40 - 42
In recent years the Lord has directed our attention to the local assembly, and the results are to be seen everywhere. Brethren in all parts of the world see the outward order of the assembly much clearer. Where there were large meetings, sub-division has taken place and by this more praise and worship has been brought about for God. Paul was used of God to build up the assembly in its public service and in its outward order. He says that he worked "as a wise architect" (@1 Corinthians 3:10). Architecture is mainly what is visible from without. Although the assembly is in ruins today, we have still to move in the light of Paul's ministry. This then gives the Lord the possibility of giving us John's ministry. John brings in the inner spiritual life, that is, the furniture and the inner ornamentations. That is to say, he insists greatly on love, calling himself the "disciple whom Jesus loved" (@John 21:20), who had his place at table in the bosom of Jesus, and who leaned on the breast of Jesus, as we have already seen. We have to distinguish between the bosom and the breast of Jesus.
The bosom is receptive while the breast represents strength. John lay in the bosom of Jesus but he *leaned* on the breast of Jesus. So in his own person he represents to us life and entrance into the Lord's love, so essential for a local company. John shows in chapter 12:1 - 3 that the Lord was received at Bethany in a very lovely way. That is a picture of what should happen in every local meeting when the Lord comes there. He came to Bethany without being invited, but the family there made Him a supper. Everything was in its right place. The conditions in Bethany were of such a kind that the Lord
{272}
found there such a fine reception and hospitality. The ointment which Mary poured out on Him filled the house. The house was not only filled with the glory of the presence of the Lord, but also with what the saints were in that place. That is the highest thing which a local assembly can have, and the Holy Spirit seeks to bring it about in every place, through the ministry of Paul and John.
I should like to show from the passages read how this can be effected with us. In @Matthew 4:12 - 17, the Lord is the pattern for a local assembly. In our comings together we have often emphasised that we must learn all from the Lord and that applies also to our service and our relations with each other in the local assemblies. It says in @Matthew 4 that the Lord left Nazareth and came to Capernaum and then it says further, He "dwelt at Capernaum" (verse 13). The Lord thus became resident in Capernaum. Then the geographical position of Capernaum is mentioned exactly, "Capernaum, which is on the sea-side in the borders of Zabulon and Nepthalim". That is not in the Bible for nothing. The geographical position of our locality is very important. If God has laid hold of one of us in a certain place and saved us, He has by that the blessing of the whole place in mind. God wishes then that there, where we have dishonoured Him, we should now glorify Him. The Lord glorified God in the temptations of the devil (@Matthew 4:1 - 10), but there came a time when the devil left Him and then angels came and ministered to Him (verse 11). After our conversion God brings about many kinds of testings for us and none of us is usable in the testimony who has not beforehand been tempted of the devil. But there also comes a time with us when the temptations cease and the angels of God serve us. We are living today under great pressure. Satan would like to use the difficulties so as to turn us away from the truth. But God takes
{273}
care that the pressure will cease and the angels serve us. The service of the angels has to do with material things. If we have overcome the temptations of the devil, then we can begin to serve God in our locality where we live. Jesus, "having left Nazareth ... went and dwelt at Capernaum". Then light came into evidence in Capernaum, "the people, sitting in darkness has seen a great light, and to those sitting in the country and shadow of death, to them has light sprung up". My thought is to show how *light* can spring up in a place. It is not a matter of light shining down from heaven but that light shines out from a Person. It is written of Jesus, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men" (@John 1:4). When God lets the light of Christ shine into our hearts then it becomes life in us. It will also then shine out again from us as light for others. Beloved brethren, if in a locality we are walking in the light of the assembly, then light also shines out from us. Our locality is in darkness, as it also says of Capernaum that they were sitting in darkness there. But if the Lord puts two or three of His people in a place into His testimony, they are thus a light for the whole place; light goes out from them.
In @Matthew 4 the light in Capernaum was proceeding from the Lord alone. In @Mark 1:21, however, the Lord went into Capernaum with four disciples, with Peter, Andrew, James and John and the light shone out there from these five persons. In @Matthew 4 the Lord dwelt alone in Capernaum, but in @Mark 1 four other disciples went there with Him. The light shines out from those who live there and not from those who are only there on a visit. The four disciples who accompanied the Lord to Capernaum learned there from the Lord; they obviously already present the local assembly to us.
In @John 4, the same principle is presented in a woman. The Lord spoke of a fountain which was to
{274}
bubble up in her. "The water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". That is a figure of the Holy Spirit, who satisfies the believer, drawing him entirely out of this world and giving him already an entrance into eternal life. The expression "springing up into eternal life" is very important. It refers to the liberating and elevating power of the Spirit. The Spirit gives us power to rise above the whole world, so that we do not any more look back like Lot's wife (@Genesis 19:26). There are, alas! many who have come out from the world, but who are looking back into it again. They grieve or talk about what they have lost or given up. Lot's wife became a pillar of salt, a solemn warning to us all. She looked back behind her husband; she was not transparent like the woman in @Luke 8 of whom we have been speaking. The "springing up" implies that in spiritual power we are looking away out of this world, and are fully satisfied outside of this world. In verses 28 and 29 the woman speaks of Christ in Samaria, in the same city where she had been known in her unworthy behaviour. Every one of us should also be doing that, beloved brethren. She had no gift of evangelisation, she did not preach, but she simply said, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?". Her testimony was effective. It says, "They went out of the city and came to him". In this way a local meeting can begin. This woman had been a great sinner but she became a light in her city and light shone out from her. It says, "The woman then left her waterpot". She had evidently understood the words of the Lord who had told her that she was to have *in herself* a fountain of water. Her testimony in Samaria had the effect that the people out of that city came to Jesus. In verse 42 they said then to the woman, "It is no longer on account of thy saying
{275}
that we believe, for we have heard him ourselves, and we know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world". We see how the light which shines out of a person in a place, always shines further until it fills the whole world. In the Scriptures we do not find any national churches. At the outset this woman had been full of national pride, for she said to the Lord: 'You Jews and we Samaritans', but now the Samaritans say that Christ is the Saviour of the *world*. In that way, I believe, it is shown that the thought of the assembly is to spread out further through the world from the local assembly.
{276}
DIVINE INSTRUCTION
@Isaiah 50:4,5; @Luke 2:46,47; @Luke 11:1; @Acts 11:26
J.T. I thought we could consider together something as to divine instruction. When Paul came to Ephesus he found there twelve-men and said to them, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" (@Acts 19:1,2). They said to him that they had not yet heard anything of the Holy Spirit; they had been baptised to the baptism of John. I only refer to this passage to show how much the people of God can suffer from defective instruction. The teaching of John was good, but it did not go far enough. Today in Christendom there is much instruction which is mingled with errors and there is instruction which does not reach to the height of the Christian position and thus does not go far enough. It is, therefore, so necessary that we come under the whole of divine instruction, as Paul says to the elders of Ephesus, "I have not shrunk from announcing to you all the counsel of God" (@Acts 20:27). Today the Spirit of God also wishes to lead *all* believers to *full* growth (@Ephesians 4:13). We have to learn everything from the Lord, and not only that but we have even to learn how we are to learn. In the passage read in @Isaiah 50 the Lord shows us *how* we are to learn. The Lord Himself down here took up a learning attitude to show us an example. Wondrous grace that He who is God took up such a lowly position. He says in @Isaiah 50:4,5, "The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of the instructed ... He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed. The Lord Jehovah hath opened mine ear". It is noteworthy that we find this passage in the prophet Isaiah, where the "disciples" of the Lord are also spoken of, among whom "the testimony" and "the law" of God are sealed, "Bind
{277}
up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples" (@Isaiah 8:16). A disciple is, of course, one who is instructed, and who then has the tongue of an instructed one. The early christians took up this attitude, for they continued in the teaching of the apostles (@Acts 2:42). That shows how necessary it is for young believers to be instructed in sound teaching. In @Luke 2:46 we see how the Lord sat in the midst of the teachers, hearing them and asking them questions. All who heard Him were astonished at His understanding and answers. That would also be so with us; if we allowed ourselves to be more instructed we should also be able to give better answers. A christian should always have the tongue of an instructed one. Many errors are in circulation and our brethren in other fellowships are much affected by them, so that it is important for us that when we come into conversation with them we should have the tongue of an instructed one. It is not a question for us of knowing how to bring in passages of scripture, but that we can give a wise application which will meet the person's conscience and intelligence. I should be glad if the brothers would say what they think about this.
Ques. Do we see that with Job, when he says to God, "I will demand of thee, and inform me" (@Job 42:4)?
J.T. Job was brought to this attitude and God wishes to bring us all into this place. When we have received instruction in the assembly, God follows us up to deepen this instruction in us. Elihu spoke to Job, but that had not fully convinced him. But then Jehovah spoke to him. Who can teach like God! The Lord says, "And they shall be all taught of God" (@John 6:45).
Ques. Is the instruction suited to our stature?
J.T. Yes, we have different grades, little children, young men and fathers (@1 John 2) but the more
{278}
advanced brother must never give up the attitude of a learner. It says in @Luke 19:11, "But as they were listening to these things, he added and spake a parable". If we take on a listening attitude the Lord proceeds to instruct us further. His attitude in the temple as a boy of twelve years old is very beautiful and instructive, He sat in the midst of the teachers, listened to them and asked them questions.
Ques. Should we take on this listening and learning attitude in the assembly or when we are alone?
J.T. Always. The Lord sat in the midst of the teachers in order to learn. In @Isaiah 50 it says that He always took on an attitude of learning, but then He also had the tongue of the instructed. Mary sat down at Jesus feet and listened to His word (@Luke 10:39). In the sitting attitude she would be less diverted and could learn better.
Ques. Does the sitting not also refer to steadfastness?
J.T. It also refers to meditating on the thoughts which the Lord expressed.
Rem. In this place we find others too, for it says of Mary that she *also* sat down at Jesus feet.
J.T. We learn best when we go to school where we learn along with others. Sitting refers to rest. We can take in the words better when we are not diverted. Martha was careful and troubled about many things; on this occasion she learned nothing at all. The Lord says in @Mark 4:24, "Take heed what ye hear", but in @Luke 8:18, "Take heed therefore how ye hear", so it is also very important *how* we hear.
Ques. Is not the main thing that we hear the word at all?
J.T. But then we must also seek to *understand* it (@Matthew 13:23), and keep it in an honest and good heart, and bring forth fruit with patience (@Luke 8:15). The Lord said to His disciples "Have ye
{279}
understood all these things?". They said to Him, "Yea, Lord" (@Matthew 13:51). We must always understand the instructions which God gives us. The Lord rejoiced that they had understood His words, they were good scholars. The Lord then spoke of a scribe who is like "a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old" (@Matthew 13:52). A scribe is one who is constantly writing. If I write out something, it makes a deep impression on me when I read it again. A writer is generally an exact man. Scripture is extraordinarily exact and our use of Scripture should also be exact. Apollos was an eloquent man, who was mighty in the Scriptures, when he came to Ephesus, but he knew only the baptism of John and in this way he did not know the way of God exactly enough. Aquila and Priscilla took him to them and unfolded to him the way of God *more exactly* (@Acts 18:24 - 26). We too should always be concerned about exactness.
Perhaps we can consider together some thoughts about @Luke 11:1, as well. The Lord was praying in a certain place and when He ceased, one of His disciples said to Him, "Lord, teach us to pray". We have to learn everything from the Lord, even praying. As long as there have been men on earth, there has also been prayer.
Ques. What do you mean by that?
J.T. Cain and Abel brought an offering to Jehovah, and as Enosh was born, "people began to call on the name of Jehovah" (@Genesis 4:26). In Elijah's days we read that the priests of Baal prayed (@1 Kings 18:25 - 29). When the Lord was here the Pharisees as a pretext made long prayers and today in the churches many forms of prayer are read out. But the disciples here heard the Lord praying. How extremely interesting that must have been for them. They saw how the Lord prayed and ceased praying. This awakened the desire with one disciple to be
{280}
taught of the Lord how to pray. But the disciple wanted to learn from the Lord how they were to pray together. "Lord, teach us to pray". If we wish to pray like the Lord, then we must be instructed as to it by the Lord.
Ques. Is there not a lot of prayer today which is not prayer at all?
J.T. Yes, we should ask the Lord to teach us how to pray.
Ques. In the prayer which He taught His disciples then, does the Lord not suggest the lines on which we should pray?
J.T. Yes, for example brevity and depth of thought. Our prayers are generally much too long and have too many repetitions. We have to learn from the Lord how to pray. In @Acts 1:24,25, we see how they had learnt from the Lord short but earnest prayer. In @Acts 1:4 we read that the Lord was assembled with them. Every learner among them had thus carefully observed the Lord. If I had been in that meeting I should even have paid attention to how the Lord had sat there. A true disciple must have observed every word and every movement of the Lord. The requirement for the apostle who was to take up the place of Judas was that he had to be of the men who had assembled with them *all* the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among them (@Acts 1:21). He required to have had much opportunity to observe the Lord.
Ques. What are we to do today when there is no longer anyone who can say like Paul, "Am I not an apostle? have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" (@1 Corinthians 9:1)?
J.T. The Lord says to the disciples and to us, "The Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, *he* shall teach you all things" (@John 14:26). We have still the Holy Spirit today.
{281}
Rem. We find that all who learned were led into the wilderness but we do not like to go there.
J.T. We must keep in mind that disciple means learner. The Lord always presents Himself attractively to a true disciple. In @Matthew 5:1 the Lord went up into a mountain and sat down and His disciples came to Him, because the instruction from His mouth was so precious to them. As the perfect Teacher He was very attractive to the disciples and He is also still that today. His instructions are very precious for renewed hearts. In @Acts 13:12 it says of Sergius Paulus, the proconsul of the island of Cyprus, that he believed, being amazed at the *teaching* of the Lord. The teaching of the Lord through Paul must have made a deep, attractive impression upon him.
Rem. But Satan also was working through this Elymas in that place where God was working.
J.T. That is right. But the proconsul received a deep impression of the teaching of the Lord. It says of him in verse 7 that he was an intelligent man and that he desired to hear the word of God. An intelligent man always desires to hear the word of God and to be instructed in it. The new converts at Pentecost came under the instruction of the apostles. It is very important *who* instructs us.
In @Acts 11:25 Barnabas went from Antioch to Tarsus to seek out Saul and having found him he brought him to Antioch. Then it says further that for a whole year they were gathered together in the assembly and *taught* a large crowd. That is the school, a year's course of instruction in the assembly.
Ques. Does the Lord mean that when He says "Learn from me"?
J.T. No, that is learning from Him through His example, but here it is a question of instruction through gifts in the power of the Holy Spirit. The course of instruction lasted a whole year. For a whole
{282}
year they came together in the assembly and taught a large crowd. We have to distinguish between the crowd and the assembly. During an interval at school, when the children are running about in the playground they are a crowd, but after the interval when they go into their classrooms; order must first prevail before the instruction can commence. We must first of all take up our place in the assembly before we can learn. If we do not learn in the assembly we cannot break bread. We have first of all to learn how to assemble.
Rem. But there is surely only *one* class in the assembly.
J.T. Quite so. Like Peter and John (@Acts 3:1, and @Acts 8:14) so Barnabas and Paul worked together in Antioch. I believe that anyone in this school will have said that Barnabas was a *dear* brother. He was converted and in the assembly *before* Paul but he brought Paul to Antioch and took up a place under him.
Rem. It says, "for he was a good man" (@Acts 11:24).
J.T. The Holy Spirit says that about him. It must have made a deep impression on the brethren that Barnabas could make room for another.
Ques. Does the name "Christians" which was given to them refer to maturity?
J.T. The word "Christians" includes dignity. There is always a wonderful dignity in those who are divinely instructed. There is then spiritual intelligence in our words. It says of the Lord, "Never man spoke thus, as this man speaks" (@John 7:46). It was the *way* in which He spoke. So it also says of the lame man at Lystra, that he heard Paul speaking (@Acts 14:9). Paul's manner of speaking arrested him. That shows the effect which the tongue of an instructed one has upon others.
{283}
WHERE IS THE LORD IN THE MIDST?
@2 Timothy 2:22; @2 Timothy 3:8,9; @Exodus 8:16 - 19,23; @Luke 2:44,46
J.T. Perhaps the brothers have a special wish as to something which we should consider together.
Ques. Can you show the saints from the Scriptures a way out of the present confusion, leading them to where the Lord is *really* in the midst and not only where they claim to be right and to have the Lord in the midst?
J.T. In order to answer this important question let us read @2 Timothy 2:22; and @2 Timothy 3:8,9; @Exodus 8:16 - 19,23; @Luke 2:44,46. The last passage clearly shows that there are christians who think they have the Lord among them, but who do not have Him among them. It says that His parents supposed Him to be in the company that journeyed together, but He was not there. Then it says further that they sought Him among their relations and acquaintances; they sought the Lord where there were natural relationships, while He is only to be found where spiritual relations are fostered. They had to return to Jerusalem. Many christians today are like Mary and Joseph; they think the Lord is in their midst but they deceive themselves. They move perhaps on natural lines, while the Lord can only be known spiritually.
Luke generally regards Jerusalem as the divine centre. In @Luke 24:49 the disciples were to remain in Jerusalem till they should be clothed with power from on high, and in the same chapter the two disciples from Emmaus returned to Jerusalem, after they had seen the Lord. So in @Luke 2 the parents of Jesus also had to return to Jerusalem and there they found Him.
{284}
The fact that many christians celebrate the Supper and hold fast certain customs does not give them the slightest guarantee that the Lord is in their midst. We must seek for other proofs of the Lord's presence. Jerusalem is a type of the divine centre. We must stand in relation to it, otherwise we cannot claim to have the Lord among us. In the same chapter (@Luke 2), we also read that there was a certain man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon. It characterised Simeon to dwell in Jerusalem, and he was led of the Holy Spirit. It says of him that the Holy Spirit was upon him (verse 25), that he had received a divine communication by the Holy Spirit (verse 26), and that he came in the Spirit into the temple (verse 27). When he was in the temple, the Lord also came in. Then Simeon could give a correct account of the Lord, that He was a light for revelation of the gentiles and the glory of His people Israel (verses 28 - 32). That shows us what is present at Jerusalem, the divine centre.
True believers have to seek after other distinguishing features than mere externals ecclesiastically, for these can easily be imitated by others. True believers must seek proof that that with which we are going on is also a living reality and cannot be imitated. Every spiritual christian very soon discerns imitations and separates himself from them. When we return to Jerusalem we find the Lord in the temple. The temple is the place where we are always receiving new and fresh communications from God, as we see with Simeon. If we are not constantly receiving fresh thoughts from God, we cannot claim to have the Lord in our midst. If there is with us a hunger after God's word and we have no living communication from God (@Amos 8:11,12) but live on what was said earlier, for example, or Mr. Darby's writings, then it is clear that the temple of God is not with us. In the temple there
{285}
are to be found continually fresh communications from God. Simeon could take the child Jesus in his arms and he received at that time a completely new revelation as to Christ. That characterises Jerusalem. Simeon could speak of Christ with spiritual intelligence. The aged Anna also coming up the same hour, gave praise to God and spoke of Christ to all those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem. These spiritual characteristics must be found with us if we claim to have the Lord in our midst.
Ques. Is not all that so deceptively imitated?
J.T. Just on that account our spirituality is put to the test. We were speaking earlier of the householder who brings forth out of his treasure things new and old. Such an one will not be deceived by imitations. Where the Lord is really present He makes His presence also felt. He is never inactive, but if He is there He makes Himself noticeable.
Ques. Are there many today like Martha?
J.T. But Martha received the Lord into her house and He also went in.
Rem. But her heart was not right.
J.T. The Lord was not satisfied with her, but she was near enough to the Lord for Him to set her right. Where the Lord is present we are in a safe position for He will then put right everything that is not right with us.
Rem. The two disciples went away from Jerusalem to Emmaus.
J.T. But they also returned to Jerusalem after the Lord had restored them. Martha and the two disciples who went to Emmaus represent believers who can still be set right, but christians who think and claim to have the Lord in their midst, although that is not so, are quite hopeless if they do not become upright and repent. "Ephraim is joined to idols: leave him alone" (@Hosea 4:17). Only if they perceive that the Lord is not with them can they be helped.
{286}
If we once honestly ask ourselves if the Lord is in our midst, then He is not far away from us. The disciples on the way to Emmaus were conversing about the Lord and He walked with them.
Ques. Will all not be restored?
J.T. The Lord would gladly restore all and on this account He is standing at the door and knocking (@Revelation 3:20).
Ques. Does that refer to believers?
J.T. Quite so. If any one hears His voice and opens the door then the Lord goes in to him and sups with him in Laodicea and the person concerned is then transferred into a circle (in Philadelphia) where he can also sup with the Lord. The Lord says, "I will ... sup with him", but then He also adds, "and he with me". The fact that the Lord can eat with him where he is shows that it is a question of a believer, for an unbeliever can provide the Lord with no spiritual food. This shows, however, very beautifully the present attitude of our Lord. When christians say the Lord is with them and yet they have no fresh food, they are manifestly not supping with the Lord. They have no proof of the Lord's being in their midst. It is impossible that the Lord can remain in a dead state of things. If the Lord is really amongst us then as with Martha He puts right all that is wrong, and if all is right with us, then He reveals Himself as with Mary. The service with us is then always in the living power of the Holy Spirit.
Rem. The characteristic of His sheep is that they hear His voice (@John 10:27).
J.T. The sheep also know the voice of the good Shepherd (@John 10:4), and the Lord knows them (@John 10:27). In the addresses to the seven assemblies (@Revelation 2 and 3) the Lord says to each assembly, "I know".
{287}
Ques. Is the Lord at the present time taking up a waiting attitude in relation to believers who are going their own way?
J.T. Yes, He is standing at the door and knocking. It is wonderful that the Lord does this, for this attitude is very humbling for Him. If I place myself in the street and knock continuously somewhere without being opened to, then at last I make myself ridiculous. But the Lord in His great grace is taking up this attitude.
Ques. What does the knocking mean?
J.T. Perhaps the Lord takes away my husband or wife, or my business goes down. The Lord knocks continually on, He knocks and knocks. But it is a dishonour to the Lord if He has to continue to knock and receives no answer.
In @Exodus 8:16 - 19 we have that which cannot be imitated. The gnats were the only sign of which Pharaoh was not previously told, and also it is not written that they were taken away again. It only says that the scribes said to Pharaoh, "This is the finger of God!". That was life. A proof that the Lord is really present among christians is that there is then a living condition of things there.
Rem. The scribes could not imitate that.
J.T. For that reason I suggested reading @2 Timothy 3:9, "Their folly shall be completely manifest to all, as that of those also became". It is as clear as anything for everyone who has eyes to see, that those who from time to time have separated from us are not marked by life and have no fresh food. When the Lord gave us a fresh thought about His Person then they all fought against it with one accord.
Ques. Does that relate to believers, "men corrupted in mind" (@2 Timothy 3:8)?
J.T. I should not like to apply that to believers in its full sense, yet whoever openly opposes the truth always shows that he is corrupted in mind.
{288}
The magicians withstood the truth by imitating it. It is very important that we understand the sign of life, which they cannot imitate. It came to light in creatures which could scarcely be seen with the human eye. These gnats are types of us. If we really live according to God we must take up a small, humble position. We see the power of God in these little creatures, which can scarcely be seen.
Rem. And yet they are such a trouble to people.
J.T. That can only be *God's* finger if such little creatures are brought into being and then such power proceeds from them. It says "There arose gnats on man and on beast: all the dust of the land became gnats throughout the land of Egypt". They were extraordinarily small and diminutive but they made themselves noticeable everywhere, so that the scribes had to confess "This is the finger of God!". Immediately after that, Israel was separated (verses 22,23). As soon as we feel in us the life which cannot be imitated, we separate ourselves from everything else.
Ques. In what way can we be gnats?
J.T. That means that we take up the ground of being "the offscouring of the world, the refuse of all" (@1 Corinthians 4:13), but that from the dust of the earth we have come forth in life, and in this way are a plague for all men. When anyone lives as Christ lived, then men call out, "Away with such a one as that from the earth, for it was not fit he should live" (@Acts 22:22). Every natural man thinks that of a believer who is marked by life. All the dust of Egypt became gnats. Every one who has the consciousness that he is dust becomes a gnat and a plague to other men. Man is dust and when he recognises it, then the power of God works in him. Though I am speaking of it, I have to confess how little I know of it practically. We are scarcely aware that we are the offscouring of the world.
{289}
In the next chapter (@Exodus 9:8 - 11) ashes of the furnace were scattered over the land of Egypt and the ashes became dust which brought forth boils on man and on cattle. The scribes could not stand before Moses because of the boils. The ashes of the furnace goes further than the dust of the earth, for it represents that which has gone through the fire. The three friends of Daniel had been in the burning fiery furnace (@Daniel 3). What could Nebuchadnezzar with all his mighty men do to them then? They had gone through the fire. That which such believers have cannot be imitated. The fire has burned up in them what is of the flesh. The ashes speak of death in a more drastic way than the dust of the earth. Israel had death in this way before them as they celebrated the passover, for the lamb was roast with fire. Even the sin-offering was completely burned up. One who has experienced that of which these types speak now lives only by the power of God. He is truly spiritual, for the flesh in him has come to an end and such a one also knows where the Lord is present.
There are, however, many christians who in the experience of their souls have not yet arrived at this. They must have facts as a proof that the Lord is present. The scripture gives us such proofs in @2 Timothy 2:22 where it says, "Pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". God requires me first of all to pursue righteousness in connection with those to whom I wish to attach myself. That means, however, that I must carefully examine all their previous history. In the Old Testament it always says, 'Give your genealogy; show where you have come from'. I must accurately search out how, for example, the whole movement of Brethren has come about and how, for example, the Open and Elberfeld Brethren originated. I must look into the whole
{290}
previous history. Perhaps they are the descendants of very honourable men, yet they have perhaps to be accounted polluted, like the descendants of Barzillai, who is referred to in @2 Samuel 17:27; and @2 Samuel 19:31 - 39. They were removed from the priesthood as polluted because they could not declare their genealogy (@Ezra 2:61,62; @Nehemiah 7:63,64). We must be able to declare our genealogy.
Ques. What does that mean?
J.T. Our previous history must be clear and transparent.
Rem. If in it we have an unrighteous position, we are to be rejected.
Ques. What is then our genealogy?
J.T. That is a very important question for us. About a hundred years ago the Lord intervened again just as in the days of Luther and directed the attention of the saints to the truth that He is *the Head* of the body, the assembly. Professing christians rejected this truth with the same enmity as marked the Jews who surrounded the Lord in @John 10:24. But from then on, the Lord separated Himself from the Jews and departed beyond the Jordan to the place where John was baptising *at the first*. The same thing happened a hundred years ago in christendom. Since that time the Lord is standing outside of all christian systems and has returned to *first* principles. A hundred years ago the Lord recovered His people to the principles of the apostles. Luther only recovered justification by faith and the gospel, but a hundred years ago every essential feature of the assembly was revived and since then the Lord has maintained His people in these first principles. That is our genealogy. Like the Lord, we have separated ourselves from the unrighteousness in the christian profession and are pursuing righteousness, faith, love, peace with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart. There
{291}
are perhaps many breaking bread with us, however, who do not understand that.
Rem. But the Open and Elberfeld Brethren take the same ground.
J.T. They assert that, but the facts of the history of their division show that they do not do so. In order to prove that, we have zealously to follow up the occurrences at the divisions from 1845 onwards. The pamphlet, *The Whole Case of Plymouth and Bethesda*, is a reliable account of the origin of the Open Brethren and it is to be had by all who in faithfulness to the Lord wish to look into that painful conflict and the consequent division. The Bereans who searched out from the Scriptures what Paul said to them, are set before us by the Holy Spirit as a pattern. The brethren in Bristol, meeting in Bethesda, a former Baptist chapel, were not faithful to Christ, for they received people to them who were in fellowship with a man in Plymouth of whom they also admitted that he was a heretic. In this way they ignored @2 John 9,11.
The Elberfeld brethren wrongly accused F.E. Raven as a heretic. There are sufficient proofs that all their accusations are false. They are, therefore, obviously on unrighteous ground, and the Lord cannot be with false accusers.
Ques. Did Elberfeld in 1890 forsake the way of truth?
J.T. Yes. They not only brought forward false accusations but they rejected the truth as to eternal life. Further, they ignored the teaching of 1 Corinthians as to the local assembly, for according to that epistle a local company where there is a person presumed to be a heretic, must first of all be required to take his case in hand and if possible place him under discipline. Instead of this, Bexhill refused a letter of commendation from Greenwich, where Mr. Raven resided, and the brethren at Elberfeld gave that out
{292}
as a ground for division, for they asserted that Greenwich by this action of Bexhill, was now out of fellowship. Such behaviour is extremely unrighteous, for up till then no one had laid before the assembly in Greenwich anything of Mr. Raven's so-called heresy. Moreover, when the Lord brings a special truth prominently forward, as He did in 1890, then every believer and every local assembly is obliged to take a stand before Him in relation to it. But the assemblies in Germany accepted the decision of Elberfeld without an examination of the matter. Those who behave in this way cannot possibly be pursuing righteousness. On the contrary they identify themselves with the false accusers of F.E. Raven and with the unrighteous action of Bexhill.
Ques. Are there not many with Elberfeld who are in ignorance of the true state of things?
J.T. Undoubtedly, but that does not justify them, according to @Leviticus 4, where one who has sinned through inadvertence (ignorance) is regarded as guilty. When his attention is called to it then he has to own it, and by the death of Christ (typically) to cleanse himself of it. Also, that many of them did not pass through the happenings of the year 1890 does not justify them, for the Lord says to the Pharisees that God would even bring the blood of Abel upon *their* head (@Matthew 23:35). That shows how important it is that before I join a company of christians I have to examine thoroughly their whole antecedents, otherwise I may possibly ignorantly bring blood-guiltiness upon me.
Ques. Could then Elberfeld not have acted ignorantly when they judged Mr. Raven to be a heretic?
J.T. Certainly, but they should have acquainted themselves better as to the facts, for all the accusations against Mr. Raven which Elberfeld received and spread were completely false. If I accuse someone of being a murderer and the person concerned
{293}
and many others show me clearly and plainly that my accusation is false, am I not then a false accuser, and doing the work of the enemy, if I do not withdraw my accusation? Mr. Raven and many others wrote that all accusations of Elberfeld were untrue, but Elberfeld did not withdraw the accusations.
In view of these painful facts one can in no way say that the Elberfeld brethren are pursuing righteousness, and that the Lord is in their midst, for the Lord is only to be found where righteousness is. We can see in @Deuteronomy 19:15 - 21 the judgment which pursues a false accuser.
{294}
THE GLORY IN THE ASSEMBLY
@2 Corinthians 3:18; @Revelation 21:9 - 11; @2 Chronicles 5:11 - 14
J.T. In the first epistle to the Corinthians Christ is called "the Lord of glory" (@1 Corinthians 2:8), while in 2 Corinthians we find "the glory of the Lord" (@2 Corinthians 3:18). The scripture speaks of the "God of glory" (@Acts 7:2), the "Father of glory" (@Ephesians 1:17), the "Lord of glory" (@1 Corinthians 2:8 and @James 2:1) and the "Spirit of glory" (@1 Peter 4:14) so that glory stands related in a special way to the three Persons of the Godhead.
The assembly is the vessel in which God has glory "unto all generations of the age of ages" (@Ephesians 3:21). The passages read show how glory is introduced into the assembly and ever remains there. It is a question for us as to how much we know of the glory in the assembly. The Holy Spirit dwelling in us is the Spirit of glory, who wishes even now to clothe the whole assembly with the glory of God.
In @2 Corinthians 3 we have the new covenant, the Lord as the Spirit of the new covenant being engaged there in making it effective in our hearts. In 1 Corinthians Christ is called the Lord of glory, but the whole epistle is concerned with the adjustment of the outward order of the assembly.
It is only when we are right publicly that we can take on the glory of the second epistle to the Corinthians. In @1 Corinthians 11:25 it says, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood". At the breaking of bread the cup stands before us and it speaks of the new covenant. In @2 Corinthians 3 the glory of the new covenant is unfolded. It is so great that the glory of the old covenant completely disappears before it. Verse 10 speaks of the "surpassing glory", and in verse 8 it says that the ministry of the Spirit subsists in glory. The new covenant unfolds the love of God and the Spirit brings it into our hearts. We
{295}
can enjoy the Lord's supper in an outward way without enjoying its real meaning. The Lord is the Spirit of the new covenant; He gives us actually to enjoy the love of God in our hearts. It is only when the love of God, which by the Holy Spirit is shed abroad in our hearts (@Romans 5:5), is actually enjoyed by us at the breaking of bread that the glory then begins to shine out. We see then not only the visible emblems, but also understand their language of love. When the saints come together in this way, they have wonderful power. They then experience the service of the Lord as the Spirit of the new covenant; they look on Him and are transformed from glory to glory. The glory with which we are then filled shines out from us again. God makes of us a vessel of glory, in order to make known the riches of His glory upon us, the "vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for glory" (@Romans 9:23). That which we are considering is particularly realised at the Supper.
I hope that after these introductory words the brothers will be free to express themselves in order that our reading may be intelligible to both young and old.
Ques. Why do you connect the new covenant with the Supper?
J.T. This connection is quite clear, for it expressly says "This cup is the new covenant in my blood" (@1 Corinthians 11:25). In @2 Corinthians 3 the new covenant is then described more fully. We are there subjects of the divine writing, Christ writing in our hearts by the Spirit of the living God (verse 3). Every believer is a vessel of mercy (@Romans 9:23) and when we come together to the Supper in the consciousness that we are all vessels of mercy, we must also all have the thought before us that we are made vessels for glory, so that the assembly will be the great vessel for the glory of God (@Revelation 21:10).
{296}
Ques. Should this glory be already present now?
J.T. Yes, this is the time when we are being clothed with glory. The Lord is the Spirit of the new covenant. "Now the Lord is the Spirit" (verse 17). Christ as Lord brings the love of God into our hearts.
Ques. What is the difference between the Lord, as Spirit, and the Holy Spirit?
J.T. The Holy Spirit was sent down from the glorified Lord Jesus above (@John 7:39) and He sheds abroad the love of God in our hearts (@Romans 5:5). But in @2 Corinthians 3 it is a question of the Lord Jesus as the Spirit of the new covenant. It says in verse 6, "the Spirit quickens". Then follows a long parenthesis from verse 7 to verse 16. Verse 6 is thus directly connected with verse 17, "The Spirit quickens ... Now the Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". It is a question of the Lord as the Spirit of the new covenant. There is always His power present, but also liberty, though not for the flesh, but spiritual liberty. Christ is "Lord" as Man, but this title also includes His deity. We see the same also in @1 Corinthians 15:45, the last Adam a quickening spirit.
Ques. Should the glory which the disciples contemplated in the Lord (@John 1:14) be seen now in the assembly?
J.T. Yes, that is very important, but before we can see the glory in the assembly we must all look on the glory of the Lord. John writes that they contemplated His glory, but that was a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth (@John 1:14). In @2 Corinthians 3, however, it is more a question of an official glory of the Lord which we are to look upon. It is the Lord in the way in which He makes the new covenant effective in us. The face of Moses shone, so that the children of Israel could not fix their eyes upon it (verse 7). On the
{297}
other hand, we can look upon the glory of the Lord. When we are looking upon the Lord in this official service of love, we become transformed. I use the expression 'official' because it says here "the Lord".
Ques. Is that the same as "the glory which thou hast given me I have given them" (@John 17:22)?
J.T. That goes further, I believe. We cannot say that the Lord received the new covenant for Himself, for He did not require it. The glory of @2 Corinthians 3 is the love of the Lord in which He seeks to make the new covenant effective in us. The prayer of the Lord in @John 17 was to lead the disciples and us as far as possible into His position before the Father.
Ques. Into the divine family?
J.T. Yes, it is a question there of the exceedingly high position into which we are brought, and of the testimony of this in the presence of the world, "I in them and thou in me, that they may be perfected into one and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and that thou hast loved them as thou hast loved me" (@John 17:23). To this end He gives us the glory which the Father gave Him down here, that is, sonship. The glory in @2 Corinthians 3 is a basis for the glory of @John 17:22, that is, sonship, but sonship goes further. In @John 17 there are different levels of glory. In verse 22 the Lord Jesus shares the glory of sonship with us. In verse 24 He asks "that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world". This glory is given to the Lord according to the eternal purpose of God (@Ephesians 3:11). We shall see it but cannot share it with Him. In verse 5, the Lord further speaks of the glory which He had before the world was. He does not say that it was given to Him, like the glories in verses 22 and 24 and also He does not say that we shall behold it or share it with Him. In verse 5 we
{298}
have His eternal, divine glory, which belongs to His own divine Person and of which He never once says that we are to see it. In @John 17 we have thus different grades of glory.
Ques. Why does it say in @2 Corinthians 3:18 that the glory of the covenant transforms *all*?
J.T. That embraces all believers on earth, but first of all we must all behold the glory of the Lord. Then the love of God becomes recognised, enjoyed and warmly responded to. It is precious to apprehend Christ as the Spirit of the new covenant, bringing us into the enjoyment of the love of God.
Ques. Is that His activity as High Priest?
J.T. No, it is a question here of His supremacy as Lord. Christ stands as Lord on the divine side, but as High Priest He is on our side; "We have such a one high priest" (@Hebrews 8:1). It is beautiful that the Lord says to us that He would like to transform us into vessels of glory. To this end He leads us through sufferings, difficulties and chastenings.
Ques. Do we not behold the Lord in relation to that system of things? Did Moses on the mountain not see that world?
J.T. Certainly. We are not looking upon anything in this world, but the Lord. The Israelites could not look upon Moses as he came down from the mountain. In @2 Corinthians 3 the reference is to the second time that Moses was upon the mountain, not the first time. At the second time he had himself to take two tables of stone with him up to the mountain (@Exodus 34). The Holy Spirit refers to this in @2 Corinthians 3. Our hearts are as it were the tables which Christ takes with Him into the mountain.
We see how great our Lord Jesus is, for what Moses could not do, He does. It is a fact that all that is now upon the earth for God belongs to heaven. The assembly is a heavenly vessel upon the earth. Every one of us is a vessel of mercy and the
{299}
mercy of God came into evidence when Moses was upon the mountain the second time. God had said earlier to Moses, "I will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy" (@Exodus 33:19), and on the mountain He proclaimed "Jehovah, Jehovah God merciful and gracious" (@Exodus 34:6). Moses had said, "Let me, I pray thee, see thy glory" (@Exodus 33:18). As vessels of mercy we are fitted to behold the glory of God. Being in the consciousness of the mercy of God, we are material upon which there can be writing, that is, we can receive in us a permanent impression of the glory of the Lord. As Moses then came down from the mountain, the skin of his face shone (@Exodus 34:29). The glory shines in that which the Lord brings down to us from the mountain, namely, the unfolding of the love of God.
Ques. Does the love of God shine out down here?
J.T. Yes, in a special way when we are assembled to eat the Lord's supper. The Lord says Himself, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood" (@1 Corinthians 11:25). The Supper should make a deep impression upon our hearts, but there are perhaps many brethren who receive no impression upon them. If an unconverted person is present, he also sees the bread and the cup standing upon the table, but it makes no impression upon him. It is only when I regard myself as a vessel of mercy that the Supper makes an impression upon my heart. We do not see Jesus above, but the Lord in the way He has come down to us from God to make us vessels for glory. That is the greatest service which the Lord has done, that He has brought the love of God into this world and now is bringing it into our hearts.
Ques. Is that the greatest glory, when we recognise and enjoy the love of God?
J.T. Yes, in a moral way. The love of God in the new covenant I see in the cup standing before me, but the Lord seeks also to bring it into my
{300}
heart, and He does it with the greatest skill. Everyone here should ask himself if he is really enjoying the love of God in his heart.
Ques. How can we then arrive at it that the love of God is effective in us?
J.T. Let us leave the Lord a free hand with us, otherwise we come short. Let us give ourselves entirely to the Lord and we shall see what He can make of us. @2 Corinthians 3:18 shows that we can feel in us this service of the Lord.
Stephen saw the glory of God in heaven (@Acts 7:55). The glory had left the temple and was in heaven, and it is there now, but it has also been brought down here by the Holy Spirit and the assembly down here is already clothed with it. "But whom he has justified, these also he has glorified" (@Romans 8:30). When the assembly comes down later on out of the heaven from God, then it has the glory of God (@Revelation 21:10).
Ques. In @Hebrews 12:22 - 24, have we come to those wonderful things, in order to receive already the glory of God?
J.T. Yes, we have come to that wonderful system which God has established above.
Ques. How can I know that I am actually enjoying the love of God in my heart?
J.T. Our heart then burns within us with blessedness (@Luke 24:32). When the Lord brings the love of God into our hearts, then it will also be felt.
Ques. What does the cleft in the rock mean, in which God hid Moses (@Exodus 33:22)?
J.T. In that case Moses did not represent the mediator, but simply a believer. God hides us in Christ, surely a very comforting thought. Moses in his own strength could not be with God, but only in Christ. @2 Corinthians 3 is extraordinarily great and beautiful. We have there what the Lord wants to do with us at the Supper. As surely as we are still
{301}
in this world, so sure it also is that the Lord transforms from glory to glory.
Ques. Even now?
J.T. Yes, even now. This transformation is inward, not yet outwardly seen.
Ques. In the mind?
J.T. Yes, the Lord has such great thoughts for us, but we take them in so little. The transformation takes place through the Lord, the Spirit. As Moses led the flock behind the wilderness, the glory of God appeared to him in the burning thorn-bush (@Exodus 3:1,2). Moses said to himself, "Let me now turn aside and see this great sight, why the thorn-bush is not burnt" (verse 3). In that moment, as God saw that Moses turned aside, He called to him, "Moses, Moses!" (verse 4). If we would turn aside to behold the glory of the Lord then God would take account of us. The glory of God is worth being looked upon. It shines out in the Lord's supper, and when we are looking upon it we become transformed.
Ques. Why do we look so little upon the glory?
J.T. We are not like Moses. We have no interest in it because we are not continually abiding in Him (@1 John 2:28). It is so precious that the glory has been brought within our range. Israel could not look upon the face of Moses, but we are in a position to look upon the glory of the Lord and if we do that, then we are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory even as by the Lord the Spirit. If we only had more the consciousness in us that we are vessels of mercy, as it says "According to his own mercy he saved us" (@Titus 3:5)!
Ques. Must there be a certain state present with us?
J.T. Quite so, and on this account I read the passage in @2 Chronicles 5:11 - 14. The hundred and twenty priests who were found there had hallowed
{302}
themselves; the ark had been brought into the holiest of all; the trumpets and singers were as *one*, to make *one* voice to be heard; they all praised Jehovah, for He is good, for His loving-kindness endureth for ever. All that was present. Then we read, "The glory of Jehovah had filled the house of God". I have noticed at the breaking of bread that after we have given thanks for the bread and the cup and have given the Lord the place in the assembly which is due to Him, we are slow in following Him as leading us to the Father. When we have really given Him His place as Head, then He directs the whole current of worship to His God and Father. The dedication of the temple in @2 Chronicles 5 is very precious, but we see that certain conditions must be there if the glory of God is to come in.
Ques. The most important thing is surely that they were all one and as *one* man they made *one* voice to be heard?
J.T. Yes, that includes all the saints. We read that at Pentecost they were all together in *one* place (@Acts 2:1). We must read the Old Testament more attentively if we want to become better acquainted with the assembly. It says in @1 Corinthians 10, "Now all these things happened to them", that is, to the Israelites, "as types, and have been written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the ages are come". The whole light of the Old Testament flows into the assembly.
Rem. But it is often said that we should be more occupied with the New than with the Old Testament, because the New contains the substance (Christ) and the Old only the shadow (the types).
J.T. There is something right in that, for we must first have the substance, before we can understand the shadow. But although we have the shadow in the Old Testament, yet we find many details which we do not have in the New. Without the Old Testament
{303}
we shall not be complete, "For as many things as have been written before have been written for our instruction" (@Romans 15:4). Our Lord interpreted to the disciples on the way to Emmaus the things which were written in the scriptures of the Old Testament concerning Himself (@Luke 24:27). We should all have a treasure out of which we can bring forth things new and old (@Matthew 13:52). The Old is a shadow of the New but it has also meaning and value. Let us take for example Abel's offering, for that is more than a shadow of the death of Christ. It says that "Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain". There was substance in it because it was an act of faith on the part of Abel (@Hebrews 11:4).
Ques. Do the hundred and twenty priests in @2 Chronicles 5:12 answer to the hundred and twenty who were assembled in the upper room and who received the Holy Spirit at Pentecost?
J.T. It is noteworthy that both numbers agree. "Twelve" refers to administration, divisible into all possible groups. The number ten speaks of our responsibility. The number 120 (that is twelve times ten) refers to an administration which is under our responsibility. At Pentecost they were all the outcome of the activities of the Lord, but none was absent for they were all together in one place. If we were more frequently at the meetings the effect of it would also be more felt in the assembly. The priests are continually in the house of God: @2 Chronicles 5 shows what should be in the assembly. It is not a question of what the assembly is in testimony to men, but what it is to God. It says in @Ephesians 3:21 that the assembly gives glory to God now and to all eternity. Our offerings of praise and our worship are glory to God.
Ques. Are we priests at the Supper?
{304}
J.T. Yes, we cannot be before God at all except as priests. But priests also live practically righteous and holy. "Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness" (@Psalm 132:9). The priests today are those who call upon the Lord out of a pure heart (@2 Timothy 2:22).
{305}
FORGIVENESS AND SALVATION
@Psalm 32:1 - 11
@Psalm 32 belongs to the Maschil psalms and is the first psalm of this kind. 'Maschil' means 'instruction'. In this psalm David is instructing sinners as to how they may obtain the forgiveness of their sins. David speaks from experience, for he himself had sinned greatly, but had obtained forgiveness.
How can any one obtain forgiveness of sins? David was a great sinner. The apostle Paul says of himself that he was the first of sinners, and indeed every one who has forgiveness of sins will say the same of himself. I would remind you of the parable of the Pharisee and the tax-gatherer which the Lord told (@Luke 18:10 - 14). They both went up into the temple to pray. The Pharisee enumerated all the good things that he had done, but the tax-gatherer smote upon his breast and said, "O God, have compassion on me, the sinner". If one of you this afternoon is convicted of being a sinner, then he will no longer judge other people, nor compare himself any more with others, but his language would be, "Oh God, be merciful to me, the sinner". Such a one is justified. As soon as we confess our sins, God forgives them immediately. God can do that in accordance with His majesty and holiness, for all our sins were laid upon the Lord Jesus on the cross, as it is written, "Himself bore our sins in his body on the tree" (@1 Peter 2:24). The Lord of glory allowed Himself to be hanged upon a cross, and as He hung there all our sins were laid upon Him. The greatest sinner can go home from here justified, if he believes on Christ. It says, "Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ"(@Romans 5:1). Is there one here whose sins are troubling him? Well, we are here to tell you that God wants to forgive you. You
{306}
will receive forgiveness of sins if you believe on Christ. "Every one that believes on him will receive through his name remission of sins" (@Acts 10:43).
@Psalm 32 is written by a man who has gone through these experiences. David had been a great sinner but he had obtained the consciousness that God had forgiven and covered his sins. He can instruct us from experience and this afternoon God wishes to speak through David to the sinners who are here.
David puts at the beginning of this psalm the blessed consciousness that his sins are forgiven. In verse 3 he says that he had long kept silence about his sins. Many make this great mistake: they keep silence about their sins. Possibly you have sins you committed many years ago, but have not confessed. You have kept silence. You have not yet gone to God and uncovered your sins and brought them before Him. You have not yet smitten upon your breast and said "O God, be merciful to me, the sinner". Therefore you have still no forgiveness of your sins, but you have a dread of God and you are afraid of death. That does not need to be the case any longer with you, if you break your silence and confess your sins to God. David had also kept silence; he had passed over his sins, as if they had not taken place. But he was in dire distress of soul. Hear what he says, "When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my groaning all the day long. For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture was turned into the drought of summer". Is that your history up till now? It was the case formerly with many who are here, but it is not so any longer. We have come out from this terrible soul distress. We have given up our silence and have confessed our sins, and God has forgiven us on the ground of the precious blood of Christ His Son. God "is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins" (@1 John 1:9). We want this
{307}
afternoon to present this God to you in the gospel. "God ... gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal" (@John 3:16). David kept silence for a time, but God sent him a message by the prophet Nathan and God is also sending you today the good news, the gospel of your salvation.
Nathan said to David, "There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor" (@2 Samuel 12:1). God in His wisdom weighs up all your circumstances and surroundings. He brings the gospel so near to you that you cannot possibly avoid Him any longer. God always speaks in a language that we can understand. The Lord always took his parables from nature and human circumstances and knew at the same time how to give them a fit application to our heart and conscience. The Lord in His parables often places two persons side by side in order to better draw a contrast. Take, for example, the prodigal son and his brother (@Luke 15), or the rich man and the poor man Lazarus (@Luke 16) or the Pharisee and the publican (@Luke 18). One receives the blessing and the other because of his unbelief is lost. "Two shall be in the field, one is taken and one is left; two women grinding at the mill, one is taken and one is left" (@Matthew 24:40,41). "There shall be two men upon one bed; one shall be seized and the other shall be let go" (@Luke 17:34). Perhaps there are two young people here who will sleep tonight in *one* room. Perhaps the one will be taken, because he confesses his sins before God, but the other be left in his sins because he continues to keep silence. Beloved friends, that is very serious.
Nathan said to David, "There were two men in one city; the one rich and the other poor. The rich had very many flocks and herds; but the poor man had nothing at all, but one little ewe lamb which he ... was nourishing; and it grew up with him ...
{308}
it ... slept in his bosom, and was to him as a daughter. And there came a traveller to the rich man" (@2 Samuel 12:1 - 4). What did the rich man do now? You would, of course, say that he took a sheep out of his large flocks and slaughtered it and prepared it for the traveller. But no, he did not do so, "he took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that had come to him" (verse 4). No doubt you say, what David also said about it, "the man that hath done this thing is worthy of death". Perhaps you say that you are not doing anything like that. But that rich man did what we all have done, he despised the rights of God and of his fellow men. You have despised the rights of God; you have not honoured Him in all your ways. God has created you; you belong to Him and so you have no right to live to yourself. This is the greatest sin of all men, that they despise the rights of God. And how is it with the rights of your fellow men? Have you always recognised them? Have you recognised the rights of your parents, the rights of your wife or husband? Have you guarded the rights of the man by whom you are employed? No, you cannot say that of yourself. That all stands written against you in the books, which God keeps about you and God will bring it before you later, at the great white throne (@Revelation 20:11 - 15) and condemn you eternally. Oh, look these facts today in the face! Say like David, "I have sinned" (@2 Samuel 12:13). The answer of Nathan will then also apply to you, "Jehovah has also put away thy sin; thou shalt not die". Are you not prepared to receive this offer of God's and allow God to put away your sins? How then does God take them away? Through the death of Christ. He had laid all your sins upon Christ on the cross. Where is Christ today? At the right hand of God. Are your sins still upon Him? No, they were all put away in His death. He died for our sins and was
{309}
buried. On the third day He was raised up from among the dead, and He left all our sins behind in His grave. We can now understand the beautiful passage of Scripture, "who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification" (@Romans 4:25). Are you not amazed that it says that Christ has been raised for our justification? God thought of us when Christ died, but He also thought of us when Christ arose. God has raised Him up for *our* justification. On this account He can forgive the sins of every one who turns to Him. However many sins you may ever have committed they can all immediately be forgiven. An honest man will never say that he has only committed a few sins but he will admit that he has committed many sins, as the Lord also said of the woman in @Luke 7, "Her many sins are forgiven" (verse 47).
But let us return to @Psalm 32. After David had been convicted by Nathan's parable, he says further of himself, "I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity I covered not; I said, I will confess my transgressions unto Jehovah, and *thou* forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah". 'Selah' means 'pause'; we are to make a pause here. David here summons us to halt. I should like to ask every one who is here to stand still and take account of the precious opportunity of receiving forgiveness of sins. Confess your sins to God, disclose them to Him, then you will receive the forgiveness of which David speaks. Blessedness will enter into your soul. Like the eunuch of old, you will go on your way rejoicing (@Acts 8:39).
Perhaps there are some young people here who have confessed their sins to God but have still kept silence towards men. They are converted and have forgiveness of sins, but they have not yet confessed the Lord before men. They speak to God but keep silence towards men. You say perhaps that it is
{310}
sufficient if God has forgiven. Everything then is now covered over and such a one is safe for eternity. But forgiveness of sins only secures for me deliverance from the coming wrath (@1 Thessalonians 1:10), but we must still be delivered from many other things, we also need deliverance from the present evil world. Many of you, who have perhaps forgiveness of sins, have not yet confessed Jesus as your Lord. Perhaps you thank God in your own room for the forgiveness which He has granted you, but you have not yet confessed the Lord Jesus in business among your fellow-workers. You have not yet told anyone that you are a believer and consequently you are not yet saved from the world. Perhaps you do not want deliverance from the world because you still want to enjoy it and you gladly have association with the world on account of your advancement in it. Perhaps among your friends you keep silence as to Christ. Should there be such here to whom that applies, I should like to lay this earnestly upon your heart: Confess the Lord in the circle of your acquaintances. The well-known passage in @Romans 10:9 is for such as you; it reads, "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved". My dear friend, you who are not yet truly saved, let me say a word to you. The world, and Satan by the world, have still always power over your soul. That is because you have not yet, in deep reverence and humility, freely and openly confessed Jesus as your Lord. You have believed in your heart, and we thank God for it, but you must still confess with your mouth if you want to be saved. It says, "For with the heart is believed to righteousness; and with the mouth confession made to salvation" (@Romans 10:10).
In the second part of @Psalm 32 (verses 6 - 11) we have the experiences which one who has forgiveness
{311}
of sins goes through in this world. "For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee at a time when thou mayest be found; surely in the floods of great waters they will not reach him. Thou art a hiding place for me; thou preservest me from trouble; thou dost encompass me with songs of deliverance". This part of the psalm relates to believers. On this account one may also proclaim the gospel to real believers. I believe the apostle Paul would have rejoiced to be able to hear the proclamation of the gospel. I even believe that he would have had blessing from it. Paul would gladly have listened to the gospel which Peter would preach; he would have been the most attentive hearer. I have always found that the gospel rejoices and refreshes the people of God. We should not hesitate to preach the gospel in a company where there are only believers present. The instruction of @Psalm 32 is for every christian, young or old. "Every one that is godly shall pray unto thee at a time when thou mayest be found". Many are already converted for many a year, who however still have pressure and sorrow in their hearts. We are living today in a very difficult time, when there is great pressure everywhere. The saints are often suffering more under it than we are aware. How precious it is then that God is still to be found today also. We live in a time when He is to be found. You can pray to Him. "Does any one among you suffer evil? let him pray" (@James 5:13). The gospel invites to this end, to cast our loads and burdens upon Him. The unconverted can cast his load of sin upon Him and the believer his load of care. On this account the saints should hear the gospel too. "Having cast all your care upon him" (@1 Peter 5:7). Instead of being under trouble and pressure, we are then in "the peace of God, which surpasses every understanding" (@Philippians 4:6,7).
{312}
This second part of the gospel is just as important as the first part, which was directed towards the unconverted. The Lord said to the paralytic who was healed, "To thee I say, Arise, take up thy couch and go to thine house" (@Mark 2:11). Before that He had said to him, "Thy sins are forgiven thee" (verse 5). After we have forgiveness of our sins, our couch is no more to carry us, but *we* are to carry it. Instead of being always under pressure and having sorrow, pray to God and cast everything upon Him. Then, you will be freed from it.
In @Psalm 32:8,9, we have still another important part of our message. "I will instruct thee and teach thee the way in which thou shalt go". Perhaps there are many here, who do not know which way they are to take. You do not know at all with which christians you are to walk. We live in difficult times, but no one need fear. God's way always remains the same for us. You have just to set your foot upon it and God offers you his counsel. If you have difficulties on this account, then pray to God. He will not leave you in uncertainty -- He will counsel you.
Then there follows still a word of admonition in verse 9 regarding our wills, which we all easily have working in us. The most terrible disaster will be brought into our souls if our will is active. "Be ye not as a horse, as a mule, which have no understanding: whose trappings must be bit and bridle, for restraint, or they will not come unto thee". Allow me, brethren, to say another word about our wills. Do not let us be like the horses and the mules, which have to be restrained with bit and bridle. Let us be subject to the Lord. His goodness then leads us. When we are subject to Him, beloved brethren, then all clouds disappear and our way will be quite clear.
Verse 10 is very solemn. "Many sorrows hath the wicked". One could shrink back from it. The
{313}
wicked has many sorrows at the present time, and in eternity he has eternal darkness and punishment from God. That is very very solemn for every one here who is not yet converted. When you hear the gospel, then do not harden your heart. Remember the wicked has many sorrows. Turn to God and confess your sins to Him. Then believe on Him and walk the glorious path of faith with us, and then you can also with us be glad and rejoice, as it says in verse 11, "Rejoice in Jehovah, and be glad, ye righteous; and shout for joy, all ye upright in heart".
May the Lord richly bless His word to us all.
{314}
THE ASSEMBLY IN THE WILDERNESS
@Acts 7:35 - 37; @Exodus 19:1 - 6; @Exodus 24:1 - 11
J.T. Stephen's statement about Moses in @Acts 7:38 is very significant in its typical sense. It is said that "This is he who was in the assembly in the wilderness". That is, typically, Christ with the assembly in a scene of contrariety. The assembly is to be apprehended in its own sphere in heaven, but it is also to be apprehended as in a contrary scene, and Christ in it; that is our public position, as taught in 1 and 2 Corinthians. What is proposed is that we might first of all, as considering the assembly in this setting, look at the covenant; then the building of the tabernacle itself; then the priesthood, and the service of God through it; then the order of the tribes in relation to the tabernacle. A consideration of the scriptures in Exodus leading up to these passages will impress us with the place the wilderness has. The word has become common amongst us, but whether its actual spiritual meaning is accepted is a question. This is the first part of the wilderness. What is to be observed is that the passage in chapter 19 contemplates three months experience in the wilderness. It says, "They departed from Rephidim, and came into the wilderness of Sinai, and encamped in the wilderness; and Israel encamped there before the mountain". *They encamped*.
Ques. Is that a special point arrived at by believers?
J.T. Yes, it is a special time -- the first three months -- -in which grace prevailed. The law had not yet been given. It is said in verse 26 of chapter 15, "If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and do what is right in his eyes, and incline thine ears to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of the complaints upon thee that I have put upon the Egyptians".
{315}
At the end of verse 25 of that chapter we read, "There he made for them a statute and an ordinance; and there he tested them". They were to be under subjection in principle, but not yet under the law properly. These three months therefore are a period of grace; not without law, as the apostle says, but as legitimately subject to Christ. The youngest believer recognises that he is legitimately subject to Christ; but nevertheless the burden is light. What prevailed in these three months is more grace. So there is no judgment or discipline executed yet. Young believers have very little burden put upon them. Indeed, it is earlier said that Jehovah did not take them the way of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said: "That the people may not repent when they see conflict, and return to Egypt". Therefore it is a time of peculiar consideration for young christians. After the conflict with Amalek it is said, "they departed from Rephidim", which means young christians have tasted something of the conflict with Satan acting through the flesh. That is an important matter, one of the most important in the whole wilderness period. It is occasioned by the gift of the Spirit as seen in chapter 17. It is not said there that they drank of the water, but the principle is there, and hence Amalek attacks, which is Satan in the flesh. All this experience is behind when we come to chapter 19. "They departed from Rephidim", and now they are encamped before the mountain. That means they have come to the place of divine resources. The idea of the mountain had already been introduced in the history of Moses; indeed, it had been introduced in @Genesis 22. It had become an established principle in Israel that in the mount of the Lord it shall be provided, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" (@Genesis 22:14). It is said here they encamped before the mountain -- the place of resource,
{316}
so that everything we have in the wilderness comes from God; all the furnishings, all the provisions, are from God. That is what is developed in 1 Corinthians.
Then we have Moses called up the mountain; it says, "Moses went up to God, and Jehovah called to him out of the mountain". That is, it is now a question of the mountain. A mediator is there, and Jehovah is speaking to him there. Jehovah reminds them of what they had seen, how He had borne them on eagle's wings and brought them to Himself; and then, on the ground of obedience, they would be for Him a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.
These are the great general facts pending the opening up of the covenant. The first nine verses of @1 Corinthians 1 corresponds to this. The assembly at Corinth was abundantly furnished (see @1 Corinthians 1:4 - 8), and the apostle adds significantly, "God is faithful, by whom ye have been called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord". God here reminds Israel that He had borne them on eagles wings and brought them to Himself.
Ques. Does verse 14 of @Psalm 148 illustrate what is said? "He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints; even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise ye the Lord".
J.T. "A people near unto him", a people to whom He would disclose what is in His heart, so that they might serve Him, as Jehovah said to Moses, "upon this mountain", and according to the word, "Let my son go, that he may serve me", *My service* is the great thought in mind.
A.E.L. A kingdom of priests.
J.T. Quite so.
H.Pf. Would you amplify what is meant by a kingdom of priests, a holy nation?
{317}
J.T. A *kingdom* of priests would show that it must not be limited to a few, all the people of God are in view in connection with priesthood. We have a similar expression in the Apocalypse, "made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father" (@Revelation 1:6). It is not simply that we are in a kingdom, but we are a kingdom, and then priests unto God. In @Exodus 19 Aaron had not yet been appointed; his place up till then was more that of prophet. His being called out for the priesthood in the type, simply means that Christ and the members of the assembly are in the divine economy the great priestly family. It is not a priestly family *amongst* the saints, but all saints are in that family. It is an important matter to recognise that each christian today is a priest.
A.E.L. The apostle Peter says the same thing: "Ye ... are ... an holy priesthood" and then, "Ye are ... a royal priesthood" (@1 Peter 2:5,9).
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Is every young believer qualified to exercise priesthood?
J.T. Yes, the first time he prays he is a priest. It is as priests we pray.
Rem. It was said just now that a believer, as soon as he receives the Holy Spirit, is a priest, but there are believers who have not received the Spirit.
J.T. That is true. The converts of Philip in @Acts 8 did not receive the Spirit until Peter and John came down and prayed for them. Likewise in @Acts 19 the twelve men at Ephesus did not receive the Spirit till Paul laid his hands on them. Lest there be any misunderstanding about this point, I would say that the imperfect teaching the twelve men at Ephesus had received prevented their having the Spirit: but later they received the perfect teaching as to Christ from Paul, but the Holy Spirit did not
{318}
come on them till Paul had laid hands on them. It would look as if the reception of the Spirit as seen in that chapter had the full development of the assembly in view. Paul laid his hands on them. Timothy's gift was by "the putting on of my hands", Paul says. To answer our brother's question as to how one knows he has the Spirit; as a great principle, it is obvious that a divine Person coming into the believer would make some impression; an impression to be remembered, a peculiar sense of divine love coming into the soul.
J.O.S. Are these thoughts gathered up in the way Saul of Tarsus received the Spirit -- Ananias laying his hands on him, and then he received the Spirit?
J.T. I think that is instructive.
Ques. By what means is this done today?
J.T. There is no apostolic representation today. It is for us to understand what is stated in Scripture as to the principles on which the Holy Spirit is given and received. John's gospel speaks of the gift of the Spirit (chapter 4), and the reception of the Spirit (chapter 7). The reception contemplates that the believer values the Spirit.
R.O.St. Would there be any connection with giving the right hand of fellowship?
J.T. That was for service, to show that the apostles at Jerusalem were thoroughly with Paul in his service, which is an important thing now. Although of different nations, we should be cordially in sympathy with each other in the service of the Lord.
Ques. Would it help to see that in @1 Corinthians 12 "No one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit"?
J.T. We may use the literal words; but to say "Lord Jesus" aright depends upon the power of the Holy Spirit. Addressing the Lord Jesus thus gives character to the assembly.
{319}
R. In @Acts 5 the Holy Spirit is given on the ground of obedience.
J.T. Yes, to all those that obey Him. That is the great general principle, those who obey get the Spirit, but they do not get it automatically.
Rem. That is to say, the gift of the Holy Spirit and the knowledge of forgiveness of sins are not one and the same thing for the believer.
J.T. The Holy Spirit is the greatest gift God could give in this way, and surely we must leave it with Him as to how and when He gives this gift. No doubt the consciousness of forgiveness is more known after the Spirit is given than before. There is the light of forgiveness and the *consciousness* of forgiveness. I believe that the consciousness of forgiveness is by the Spirit, but forgiveness is there before as a principle.
F.H.R. The knowledge of this is in @Romans 5.
J.T. @Romans 5:1 is more than forgiveness, it is justification and access into favour; and later in the chapter it is said, "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us". That is the great service the Spirit renders.
Rem. We have the knowledge of that in @Romans 8.
J.T. Yes, we have the lovers of God. In chapter 5 we see that God loves us, and in chapter 8 we love God.
A.E.L. By the Spirit we say, "Abba, Father".
H.Pf. May one who is not conscious of having the Spirit ask for it?
J.T. Yes; see @Luke 11:13.
Rem. It is a most important matter we are now on, as to whether a believer has the consciousness of having the Holy Spirit; and if it depends on the believer being able to say and feel he has the Spirit, there must be many who doubt whether they have the Spirit.
{320}
J.T. The presentation of the truth of the Spirit in John's gospel has in view what is substantial in christianity. I believe that God had in mind that in the last days we should not be theoretical about the Spirit; in the early days there was substance there. The first presentation of Him is in the form of a dove -- He was *seen*. In chapter 3 we have Him under the figure of wind, which is a thing to be felt. Then we have Him in chapter 4 under the figure of water, which is a substance -- also in chapter 7; then in chapter 20 we have Him under the figure of breath. The greatest of all statements is that He is "another Comforter" -- a divine Person here as Christ was here, but not in flesh. All this shows how spiritually substantial christianity is.
To return to the covenant, we have it formally stated here in verse 5: "And now, if ye will hearken to my voice indeed and keep my covenant, then shall ye be my own possession out of all the peoples ... and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation".
It is a question of God opening up His heart to us, and of the great place that we have in His heart, and that we might have His love in our hearts. Now in chapter 24 He says to Moses, "Go up to Jehovah, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship afar off". The thought in mind is that His people are to go up as well as the mediator. Moses represents mediatorship and authority. Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu represent priesthood -- not yet formally appointed as priests, but anticipatively so. The seventy of the elders of Israel are to represent all Israel. They are called nobles later on.
The blood of the covenant is seen in volume so that perfect love would cast out fear, and that we might draw near in a spiritual way, not in a fleshly way -- not only in liberty but in dignity. We are on
{321}
spiritual ground here; indeed this chapter is to set aside all that is natural in us to make way for the spiritual. God intimates His great thought that we should worship Him.
The next thing is: "Moses came and told the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the judgments; and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words that Jehovah has said will we do!". Here we have the principle of obedience definitely asserted, and thus God can proceed. "All the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words that Jehovah has said will we do!". Obedience being thus seen in the people, there is correspondence with Christ. That is, we are sanctified unto the obedience and the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. After the people professed their obedience, Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah; and this book that he wrote is to be brought into the covenant. The people are sprinkled and the book too (@Hebrews 9:19).
R. It is sometimes stated that the people should not have undertaken to obey.
J.T. In one sense that is true, for the righteous requirement of the law is only fulfilled in those who have the Spirit; but we may view this passage as also typical of the element of obedience in christians. Without this all is hopeless. There can be no tabernacle or service of God without the element of obedience in His people. It waited for Christ to bring in the great principle of obedience and to establish it; but here we have the principle of it.
J.O.S. Was it seen at Pentecost?
J.T. Well, it was. With the three thousand, too; they persevered in the apostles teaching. Even here, although we know Israel failed as a whole in its profession, yet there were thousands of those that loved Jehovah. In chapter 20 He speaks about the thousands of those that *did* love Him. Romans
{322}
shows how that comes about, but they were all lovers of God.
Then "Moses ... rose up early in the morning, and built an altar under the mountain, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel"; as if Moses were saying, 'The people have confessed obedience, I can now go on with the mind of God'. He built an altar as though the worship was to proceed. It is quite useless to undertake to establish the service of God without obedience -- it must be there.
J.O.S. Is not obedience the proof of love? "Obedience is better than sacrifice" (@1 Samuel 15:22).
J.T. Quite. There seems to be victory in the way he acts. He gets up early in the morning and builds an altar under the mountain, and twelve pillars according to the twelve tribes of Israel. It seems to me there is a great moral victory in this; God's mind is to be carried out; He has material by which it can be carried out. It ought to appeal to us. On this ground God proceeds with His great thoughts. This is in the wilderness, under the mountain; and the divine thought as to the people in the counsel of God is seen in the twelve tribes. God has nothing less in view, it is not that God says, I will take all I can get; He does, of course; but He has a certain number in His mind and He is to have them. When Joseph was born Jacob virtually says, 'I must go back to the land of Canaan', (@Genesis 30:26). But then Rachel said something about Joseph; she gave him a name which meant 'God will add'. He was the eleventh son of Jacob -- and if there was not another there would be incompleteness; but Rachel says, "Jehovah will add to me another son"; and in that number, twelve, you have the complete number that the counsel of God required. We want to be in that number. That is what Moses means here in the altar and the twelve pillars -- the complete number.
{323}
THE BUILDING OF THE TABERNACLE
@Exodus 35:4 - 29; @Exodus 40:17 - 35
J.T. So that all may follow, it may be repeated that our subject is the assembly in the wilderness, and Christ as known in it in this setting. The thought is taken up from @Acts 7 where Moses is spoken of as "he who was in the assembly in the wilderness". Yesterday afternoon we dwelt on what was considered the first great feature, that is the covenant. We noted in chapter 19 the divine thought, Jehovah saying that He had borne the people on eagles wings and brought them to Himself, and that now, as they obeyed His voice, they would be to Him a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. Then in chapter 24 we noted that Jehovah had in His mind the thought of ascension, the thought of His people being elevated; and it may be added to what was said yesterday that this fact shows that the assembly is in mind in all these types, not Israel in the future. The thought of elevation belongs to the assembly, not to Israel, although the names of the twelve tribes are in the gates of the heavenly city. Then we noted yesterday that, as the thought of elevation was introduced, the words of the covenant were given to the people, and the people undertook to do all that Jehovah had spoken; then Moses wrote the words, and rose early, and built an altar under the mountain, and set up twelve pillars.
L. Would you tell us what those twelve pillars signify?
J.T. What was said yesterday was that now that the element of obedience was present in the people God could proceed with the accomplishing of His thoughts, that is His service, in the altar, and the complete number which His counsels required, in
{324}
the twelve pillars. The twelve would point to the number required in the counsels of God. God would proceed on these lines. Then the volume of the blood points to the fulness of love attested in the death of Christ, whilst the twelve tribes suggest the saints as possessed of love. God is the source, for it is said: "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us" (@1 John 3:16). And hence the fulness of the blood is the testimony to that love in the covenant here; and the basis is thus laid for material for the building.
J.O.S. The Lord said when He instituted the Supper, taking the cup. "This cup is the new covenant m my blood, which is poured out for you". Would that indicate volume?
J.T. That is evidently what is in mind in the idea of pouring out.
Ques. Have we not largely missed the relationship between the cup in Luke and @Exodus 24?
J.T. It would seem that we should link them together. The pouring out in Luke is more towards the members of the assembly, "Poured out for you", whereas in Matthew and Mark it is for *many*. Here the bearing of the covenant is seen in that Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people, and said, "Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words". The covenant was with them.
L. Why was half reserved for the altar?
J.T. I suppose to maintain the balance, the one part bearing on the service of God, and the other for the people themselves -- love in their hearts. The book was also sprinkled according to Hebrews; and there are other additions in Hebrews that help. "Having taken the blood of calves and goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, he sprinkled both the book itself and all the people, saying, This is the
{325}
blood of the covenant which God has enjoined to you" (@Hebrews 9:19,20).
K. Would the reason for the heave offering be the sprinkling of the blood?
J.T. Love known in our hearts would produce the heave offering, our hearts moving towards God. @Romans 5 is the application of the covenant to us substantially, the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit given to us. Then in chapter 8 there are those who love God. That is necessary for service. The heave offering is the spontaneous outgoing of the heart Godward.
J.O.S. In chapter 35 the people's heart is mentioned seven times in the section we read. Is that the answer in the people to the covenant God proposed?
J.T. That is manifestly so. What comes out in chapter 34 is the fulness of the covenant in the second giving of the law. We have spoken of chapter 24 as typical of the covenant which applies to us, but chapter 34 enlarges on that and brings out the thought of the new covenant. It is in connection with this that we have the glory shining; it is to chapter 34 that @2 Corinthians 3 alludes. It alludes to it, of course, by way of contrast, but there is the thought of the new covenant in that the glory shone; and chapter 35 is the normal outcome of the glory shining in our hearts. The thought of glory must enter into the material of the tabernacle. It was the pattern of the things in the heavens, that is to say it is Christ, not only apprehended in death, but in glory. The material all comes thence, it comes from heaven.
Ques. What do the heave offerings signify for us?
J.T. That is the question before us now. They are material for the house of God, that is, it is heavenly. Although it is here upon earth, the
{326}
material is heavenly. It is to be the residence of the glory, and the material is to be in accordance with this. We are said to be vessels of mercy fitted for glory. The residence of the divine glory must in itself be essentially glorious; hence in chapter 40 as each part of the tabernacle is set up it is functioning; every item is serving its part, functioning in its place. That is to say, it is a living state of things where the glory radiates, for service is to be in love; love is really the idea of the glory.
Ques. Is it "Christ in you the hope of glory" (@Colossians 1:27)?
J.T. Just so.
J.O.S. Does that involve the thought that the covenant has become formative in the affections of the people of God?
J.T. Yes, formation must take place, so that we should be material. To be material for the building is not simply that I have got light. Peter represents the material, and in that respect it is not a question of his name, but what he is: "Thou art Peter" (@Matthew 16:18), that is, 'thou art material for the building'.
Fr. Is that what Peter says, "To whom coming" (@1 Peter 2:4)?
J.T. Quite so; it is living material.
R.A. What connection is there between this and the light unapproachable in Timothy?
J.T. We are speaking now of the light that shines, what God is as *declared*. @1 Timothy 6:16 is God in the absolute; that is Deity apart from all other considerations.
F.J.F. Is that Deity considered without reference to anything else?
J.T. Quite so; we have to think of it as apart altogether from creation.
R. I take it that what we are considering would correspond with God shining into our hearts to give us the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ?
{327}
J.T. Yes, that is God shining out in Christ; that is not light unapproachable; that light invites approach. We are to draw near, whereas @1 Timothy 6 means that Deity by itself is unapproachable; "whom no man hath seen, nor can see".
W. It says, "the ... only Potentate" and "who only hath immortality".
J.T. What we have in the covenant here is the shining out of the glory and the shining is, according to 2 Corinthians, in the face of Jesus. It shines in our hearts. Now in the beginning of chapter 35, so as to balance all this, there is an allusion to the sabbath, meaning that as the light comes in, as the love of God comes into us, there is to be a keeping of the sabbath. It is in that way that formation takes place, for after all it is God that works in us; we have to learn to lie fallow, to be restful in His hands. It says, "Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a sabbath of rest to Jehovah: whoever does work on it shall be put to death. Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your dwellings upon the sabbath day". Notice that. There is to be a state of restfulness. The saints have to learn what is meant by the sabbath. If anyone will trouble to look into the subject of the sabbath, he will see that in a period of fifty years something like twenty-eight per cent of Israel's time was devoted to sabbath keeping. There were not only sabbaths of days but sabbaths of years, and an understanding of that will help us to learn to be quiet and restful in the hands of God.
St. Why is the lighting of fire singled out here as a special thing not to be done?
J.T. I think it refers to energy on our side. It is energy on God's side you have to look for now.
J.O.S. In @Jeremiah 17 Jehovah makes a promise that if the people would carry no burdens on the
{328}
sabbath day He would bring about revival of blessing in Israel.
J.T. It was the sign of the covenant, and obviously it was needed. The covenant denotes active love, but there is to be a restfulness, so that God has a free hand for formation. He is the potter, we are the clay, so that we are to be in His hands as in the hands of the potter.
Ques. Is it that before we can contribute we must be in restful contemplation of what is presented in Christ?
J.T. That is the idea exactly, so that we have to learn that we are not always to be bustling about and doing things; we have to learn to be restful in God's hands.
Rem. This sabbath is to be a time of contemplation of what has been seen in chapter 24: they saw God and ate and drank in contrast to what is not seen, as we have noted in @1 Timothy 6:16.
J.T. I think that is right.
Ques. Did Mary have her sabbath day when she sat at Jesus feet.
J.T. Quite so.
B. Is this material for the building the divine wealth secured in the hearts of the saints, as evidence of responsive affection?
J.T. Yes. We should bear in mind that the material is the person, not something in the person, but the person himself. "Thou art Peter", 'thou' is the person.
F. Is that every believer?
J.T. That is another matter; we have to look at the believer abstractly and in a concrete sense also. Each believer having the Spirit is potential material. The idea is set before him, and he comes to it in formation.
F. He is called for that.
{329}
J.T. Yes. The point to take in in this connection is the formative side, The believer is taken up potentially. The idea is put before him. In chapter 25 God proposes the material; He gives a list of what He needs, so that they should build Him a dwelling.
F.Sr. That means it must be there.
J.T. The idea is presented in chapter 25, and then following upon that much occurs that brings out chapter 34; and then you have the concrete thing in chapter 35. A list of things wanted is given in verses 4 to 19 and then in verse 20 it says, "And all the assembly of the children of Israel departed from before Moses". That is they are now on the ground of accepted responsibility, as much as to say, 'Lord, I understand what You mean, I am going to work that out'. The Lord will say to each young believer, 'You are material; it is in My mind that you are to be in the building; but I want you to understand just what it is that you are to be'. And the believer answers, 'I see Lord what You mean'; and now I go and bring this about through exercise; so that it says: "And all the assembly of the children of Israel departed from before Moses. And they came, every one whose heart moved him, and every one whose spirit prompted him; they brought Jehovah's heave offering for the work of the tent of meeting, and for all its service, and for the holy garments".
W. Is that expressed in the willing-hearted and the wise-hearted -- it says they departed, and they came?
J.T. Just so; it says "They came, every one whose heart moved him, and every one whose spirit prompted him". And then it further says, "They came". It says they departed, and they came. The return journey is the test. "They came, both men and women; every one who was of willing heart ...".
{330}
Fl. Would you say there are many sabbaths between the 'departed' and the 'came'?
J.T. I think that is the principle, things have to be worked out according to the light we have.
Ques. Is that to walk in those "good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them" (@Ephesians 2:10)?
J.T. Just so.
L. Does @Romans 12 -- presenting our bodies a living sacrifice -- correspond?
J.T. I think so.
Ques. Does what is presented here correspond with what we have in Corinthians: when they were together each one had a psalm, had a teaching, and so on?
J.T. That is a question of ministry; what we are dealing with refers to our persons, what we are ourselves.
F.Jr. Do we see a type of this in Jacob when he left Padan-Aram to go to Bethel?
J.T. He had the house in his mind, but it is not till we come to @Genesis 35 that we find the Jacob that is proper to the house. In chapter 28 he just anoints the pillar, but in chapter 35 he pours out a drink offering upon it. In the first place one regards oneself as having the Spirit -- anointed, but in the second (chapter 35) one is conscious of being pleasing to God in His house. God actually came down and spoke to him. In chapter 28 God was in heaven and Jacob upon earth.
Dr.S. There was a period of twenty years between the two, was there not?
J.T. That is good, because it confirms what we are speaking of -- a period of formation. With some of us it may take only a short time, with others a long time. But in the material required here God announces that He will have His building on His own terms, with His own material.
{331}
J.O.S. Do we get the thought of the material in Corinthians when Paul says: "Of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus".
J.T. Well that is the potential side. In the first epistle new creation is hardly dealt with, or even in the second. The thought is, however, just touched in the second epistle, "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation" (@2 Corinthians 5:17).
M. In the second-first sabbath in Luke do we have the material coming to light?
J.T. It is the second-first, an extraordinary phrase, showing that the idea of the first is in both. When we are brought to the divine thought it is one thing. It may take twenty years to bring us to it, but as formed we are suitable material.
F.Sr. One has not paid enough heed to the sabbath if one has to walk such a long time.
J.T. That is the lesson to be learnt.
B. Is this period indicated between the 11th and 16th chapters of Matthew; in the 11th it is *things*, in the 16th it is a *person*.
J.T. "Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes"; that was common to all the disciples, but the material took concrete form in Peter in chapter 16. It required the revelation as to who Christ was.
W. Is there a distinction between what was brought, and the wise-hearted women who spun with their hands?
J.T. I think verse 25 is to bring out certain distinctions above the generality; it is more now subjective activity, so that we have the wise-hearted women spinning, and in verse 27 we have the description of the men who brought the onyx stones. These are distinctions; you always find that God makes room for what is special.
You get such activity in the apostle Paul; he had in mind that he might apprehend that for which he
{332}
was apprehended, that is, there was great activity in a certain connection in him, so that he might reach now the divine thought in connection with himself.
Ques. Would the wave offering being connected with the gold be a higher thought than the heave offering? The heave offering seems to be connected with silver and copper.
J.T. The wave offering, I suppose, conveys more the idea of priestly intelligence, and in it the thought of the offerer is more sustained; the action of waving enhances what he is. The wave offering is found in @Leviticus 23 as typical of Christ being presented to God after He rose from the dead.
Ques. When Simeon took the child Jesus in his arms, was that priestly action? Would that be appreciation of the Person of the Lord?
J.T. Yes, you know the value of what you have and keep it before God's eye.
R. What you are saying would give the covenant a large place after the Supper.
J.T. Yes. What comes in after the covenant is the dwelling. The Lord's supper is, I think, celebrated in the court of the tabernacle; then what the saints are in themselves according to the divine workmanship comes into evidence, so that after all the parts are set up and all functioning, God as it were says, 'I want all that for Myself'. The cloud covered the tent of meeting. God is taking it now entirely for Himself. What is He taking? Typically, all the saints as in their places in the assembly and functioning.
R. You would say that of the full development.
J.T. Yes, they are seen in chapter 40, each in his place and functioning: for instance, in verses 20,21 of chapter 40 "he took and put the testimony into the ark, and put the staves in the ark, and put the mercy-seat above on the ark. And he brought the
{333}
ark into the tabernacle". The ark is serving its intended purpose. And then in verse 21 "he hung up the veil of separation, and covered the ark of the testimony". That is what it was intended to do. "And he put the table in the tent of meeting, on the side of the tabernacle northward, outside the veil, and arranged the bread in order upon it before Jehovah". That was what the table was for. "And he lighted the lamps before Jehovah", they were to give light; and in verse 26 "he put the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the veil. And he burnt on it fragrant incense". That was what it was for, and so right down. We come to the laver in verse 30, "he set the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and put water in it for washing". That was what *it* was for. So that Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet at it. What is meant is that every christian is in his place. He is not there negatively but in a positive way before God, and all that is so pleasing to God that He covers it with the cloud, as if to say, 'I am shutting out all else, I want this for Myself'; and then the glory fills the scene.
Ques. Are these conditions to be enjoyed characteristically in every place where the saints are gathered together?
J.T. That is what the instruction is for; that is what we are to learn.
M. Does @John 12 give the ark in its place and the saints functioning?
J.T. That is so. The Lord is in His place in @John 12. He knew what was in Bethany before He came. He had been there before. Now as He comes everyone is in his place. Lazarus sits at the table: that is his place. He was suited for this place as risen from the dead. Martha served, and Mary anointed the Lord's feet with ointment.
{334}
J.O.S. Would that answer to the previous chapter where it says, "And they made", whereas in chapter 40 it is what Moses did?
J.T. Yes, their part is seen in the intervening chapters and then Moses takes all in hand.
M. The odour filled the house.
J.T. That was like the glory filling the tabernacle.
Rem. It is mentioned seven times in this section, "As the Lord commanded Moses".
{335}
THE PRIESTHOOD
@Exodus 21:1 - 6; @Leviticus 8:1 - 36
J.T. Our enquiry this morning led us to the end of Exodus where we saw the tabernacle set up, and God having come in, the glory filling it. As having entered into the tabernacle to reside He is now to be served, hence the subject of the priesthood rightly follows what we had this morning. In the general instructions in Exodus we have in chapter 28 the requirement of the priesthood, "Thou shalt take thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may serve me as priest", and in verse 41 of the same chapter it is said that his sons also are to be hallowed, "that they may serve me as priests". The chapter that we have read from Leviticus tells us that Moses carried out the directions in @Exodus 28 and 29. What may be added to make the subject clear at the outset is that the verses in @Exodus 21 speaking of the Hebrew servant teach us that the service is to be carried on in love. These verses typically set out our Lord Jesus Christ as taking a bondman's form. He does this in love, saying, "I love my master, my wife, and my children". He could have gone out free, as the passage teaches, at the end of six years, but because of love He remained a servant for ever. Now while the Lord Jesus took this lowly attitude in love, @Exodus 28 and 29 show that in this service He was clothed with heavenly dignity. Aaron is brother of the mediator, typically showing, as we see in the New Testament, that the mediator and the high priest are one Person -- Christ. So whether we think of mediatorship in Moses or priesthood in Aaron, it is the same Christ. He is a divine Person whether we view Him as Mediator or High Priest. So we are called upon as holy brethren, partakers of the
{336}
heavenly calling, to consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession. While He in love takes the lowly place as a bondman, we have to regard Him in the dignity of a divine Person, so that in @Hebrews 8 the writer by the Spirit of God says, "A summary of the things of which we are speaking is, We have such a one high priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens". Thus His deity is maintained and His priesthood, but still He has taken up the attitude of a servant in this dignity: and in Aaron and his sons as a type we see that the saints have part in this service. These remarks will help to make the subject clear to us that God, as coming in to dwell in the tabernacle, is to be ministered to in a priestly way.
Fl. Is the tabernacle system a continuation of what was found in the Lord when He was here, morally?
J.T. Yes, in principle He was the tabernacle; it says, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt", or, tabernacled "among us". So you find here the tabernacle and all that was in it was anointed with oil and Aaron is anointed with it without formal reference to his death.
L. "Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up" (@John 2:19). He spoke of the temple of His body.
J.T. Yes, I think the service of God began with Christ. Luke presents Him at the banks of the Jordan; as He came up out of the waters of Jordan He was praying. Of course, He had been praying before, but now He is formally noticed in public as praying. Luke brings us into it; it is said that as the Lord was praying in a certain place, one of His disciples asked Him to teach them to pray. He does and He says, "When ye pray say, Father, thy name be hallowed" (@Luke 11:2). He thus inaugurated the priestly service even as here in flesh; but inasmuch as it is stated here in chapter 8 that Moses brought Aaron near and his
{337}
sons and bathed them with water, we have an intimation that His death was anticipated.
F.R. Would you say something about the difference between the bondman and the priest?
J.T. That is an important consideration. The thought is that the service is to be carried on in love. In truth God has no regard for any other service than that which is carried on in love; and love will go to any lengths to serve its objects, and that is why I think the figure of a slave is introduced in the type.
Dr.B. Does His service go on for ever?
J.T. Well, we have to leave that with the Lord. It is His way of speaking of it. He speaks of serving His own and making them to lie down at table to serve them. Only we can never limit the Lord to an attitude that He takes up Himself from His own side, because whilst He is said to be a servant He is also said to be "over all, God blessed for ever". You will agree with that?
Dr.B. Would He have His part in God being all in all?
J.T. Yes, we have to leave that; this is the inscrutable; but we have to maintain the two thoughts in our minds: whilst He serves, He is also concurrently God over all. Even on man's side, in all things He has the pre-eminence. He is here anointed without the sacrifice.
J.O.S. No one could have part in that.
J.T. No, it is His own pre-eminence even on our own side as priest.
J.O.S. Would it refer to the Lord being anointed in the beginning of the gospel of Luke.
J.T. That is the antitype of this.
R.H. Does the act of emptying Himself alter the fact that He is God over all, blessed for ever?
J.T. It alludes to the incarnation. It was His own act; it was not imposed upon Him. It is said that, "subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem
{338}
it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form" (@Philippians 2:6,7). The taking of the bondman's form is the explanation of the former statement, He "made himself of no reputation", as it reads in the A.V. The taking of the form of a bondman does not alter His Person.
Ques. He remained Lord of all at the same time, even if He took a servant's form?
J.T. Yes, abstractly. We must keep the two thoughts clear in our minds. He retains His part in the Deity, and on the other hand He serves, as we see here. That is one great point in the epistle to the Hebrews, the person who came out in chapter 1 is the person who goes in in chapter 2.
J.O.S. Would the fact in the end of Mark's gospel, that the Lord manifested Himself to them in another form show that we must not limit the Lord to one form?
J.T. Yes, we are dealing with what is inscrutable and have to follow Scripture. Although the Lord is pleased to take a bondman's form it would be very irreverent for us to address Him as a bondman. He says in His marvellous humiliation, "I am a worm and no man" (@Psalm 22:6), but it would be utterly out of place for us to speak of Him in that way, so that whilst He is seen in the type in chapter 21 as taking a bondman's form in love, the official side requires great dignity as seen in His garments.
R. @Isaiah 42:1 speaks of Him, "Behold my servant whom I uphold".
J.T. Yes, "Mine elect in whom my soul delighteth".
F.Jr. If we consider the Lord as being on our side is there not some danger that we should make His place lower?
J.T. Yes, that is why it was remarked that as on our side there is abundant evidence to show He is a divine Person. In @John 13 where He performs the
{339}
service of a bondman He says, "Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am".
S. Do you think the Spirit would help us to understand when He says, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things" (@Ephesians 4:10)?
J.T. Yes, that is a good scripture because it is the same Person that descended that ascended, and it says that He went up above all heavens, that is He went into the uncreated realm to which no creature has access.
K. Are we not much concerned to follow the Holy Spirit as to every thought that would concern His holy Person?
J.T. Quite so.
F.Sr. It would be a danger to believe what we often hear: 'God and man one Christ'.
J.T. That is an imperfect statement because it is making the Person different from what He had been. He has taken another condition, but there is no change in His Person.
L.D.M. In @John 13 the Lord lays aside His garments, and then takes them again; does that bear on it?
J.T. It alludes to His laying aside His dignity to serve, and then taking it on again; hence He says, "Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am".
Fl. Is His taking a bondman's form incarnation or does that take place before incarnation?
J.T. I think the form refers to His manhood; He emptied Himself taking a bondman's form; it alludes to His manhood. It is not simply an attitude of mind, it is a substantial change. I do not think the form of bondman alludes to Him in absolute Deity at all. He emptied Himself, taking a bondman's form -- that is the latter phrase explains the former. The construction of the passage would show that the
{340}
thoughts run into each other. The explanation of the emptying of Himself is in His taking a bondman's form, running on to taking His place in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man he humbled Himself.
Fl. So you take it all those expressions stand in apposition?
J.T. That is right, that is the way to take it.
Dr.B. Is the position of bondman proper to man as such?
J.T. Not necessarily; Adam was not a bondman; but in becoming man the Lord took that position, not only that He would be subject, which was proper to man, but that He would serve in the most abject way in love. Adam was not a figure of Christ in that sense.
R. Hebrews speaks of Christ as Son over God's house.
J.T. Quite so. His dignity is preserved.
Ques. Why had Moses to apply the blood to different parts of Aaron's body?
J.T. Now we have come on; we have left one part of our subject, the Person of Christ. We have now come down to Christ as identified with ourselves so that the blood of the ram of consecration is now brought in. In verses 22, 23 "He presented the second ram, the ram of consecration; and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram; and one slaughtered it; and Moses took of its blood, and put it on the tip of Aaron's right ear, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot" (also quoted verse 24). Now we see Christ typically associated with the saints, brought in to serve through His own death. That is, it is with Him as having died and risen and having been glorified that the saints are brought in in service. We are here in the presence of the greatest spiritual wealth or richness in the service of God. First we
{341}
have the bullock of the sin offering (verse 14), then the ram of the burnt offering (verse 18), then the ram of consecration in verse 22. All the appurtenances thereof (verses 25 - 27) suggest the greatest spiritual richness, because it is a question of the inauguration of the priestly service -- Christ in heaven and the saints as His brethren.
J.O.S. Does Peter, in speaking of the promise of the Father, allude to the anointing of the priests?
J.T. I think that is the antitype of this. "Having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear". The Spirit by which Christ had been anointed is the same Spirit by which the saints were anointed at Pentecost, so we have here in type the great priestly system inaugurated for the service of God, and Peter tells us in his epistle that we are "a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ" (@1 Peter 2:5). So that our reading today is to see what this is and whether we understand it now. It was to continue throughout the whole dispensation.
Ques. By the application of the blood to different parts of their bodies Aaron and his sons were enabled to be priests?
J.T. The first thing is that the blood is put on the tip of Aaron's right ear and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot. Christ's dignity is maintained again there. Then we have the sons and it is put on their right ear and their right hand and on the great toe of their right foot. In wondrous condescension in taking man's place Christ had His ear opened; that is He took the place of hearing.
Rem. As I hear I judge.
J.T. Just so. It is very wonderful that the Lord should take that place, and He is a man in every sense in that way. "He wakeneth mine ear to hear
{342}
as the learned" (@Isaiah 50:4). However, in this type His dignity is maintained in that the sprinkling of the blood was on Aaron separately, and then on his sons. As far as the Scriptures show, the Lord never prayed with His disciples; He is seen praying alone.
J.O.S. Is that why they are brought near after the blood has been put upon Aaron?
J.T. It says as to Aaron that Moses put the blood on the tip of Aaron's right ear, and then it says he brought Aaron's sons near. Our brother's suggestion is that Aaron is not brought near. It is to be noted, however, in verse 6 that Aaron is brought near *and his sons*, but the omission of Aaron being brought near here is the evidence of his distinction as we have been saying. So that in the service of God, according to this type and many others, Christ and the assembly are engaged in it on the ground of His death and by the power of the Spirit. The type does not set forth the Spirit of adoption, but in public we are to maintain the dignity of God's service.
K. As to what Moses did to Aaron, would it be done, so to speak, in God's stead.
J.T. Moses represents the authority of God and all that is carried out by Christ on God's side.
Mm. When you say we do not get the Spirit of adoption in this type, does it represent more the congregation side, the individuals composing the assembly?
J.T. Yes, it is the saints viewed as individuals but in the dignity of sons or brethren; the service, however, has the assembly in view.
J.O.S. Is it in the sense in which the writer of the Hebrews says, "Let us draw near" (@Hebrews 10:22)?
J.T. Well, Hebrews does not give us the sons of Aaron properly. The saints generally are viewed in rather an initial way in Hebrews, so it is a question
{343}
of a great Priest over the house of God to encourage us to draw near.
Ques. Priesthood is connected with the Father?
J.T. No, it is connected with God.
What is to be noticed is another thought here, namely, that this instruction comes in the book of Leviticus after we have had the instruction regarding the individual offerings. The suggestion is, as applied, that this great thought of the priestly system of service cannot be understood apart from the personal offerings indicated in the earlier chapters. The saints are viewed in chapter 1 as having some wealth, a bullock, a sheep or a fowl. God says, as it were, 'I have come in to dwell among you and I am waiting for your offerings'. We have the various offerings specified. If all Israel began to come with their offerings what delight there would be for the heart of God to see them coming with their cattle up to the door of the tabernacle; that is the moral side of the thing. It is practically useless for us to dwell on chapter 8 unless there be an answer to the desire of God for offerings in the earlier chapters. The offerer in chapters 1 to 5 comes to the tabernacle with his bullock, and he slaughters it himself. Then the sons of Aaron are there. That means in bringing the offering so near he takes on himself the priestly attitude, so that one by one the saints come up, and they become priests practically as they enter the court and offer their offerings. If all are offering, then we have a nation of priests, and chapter 8 would be understood. All these priests, acting in love and drawing near to God are related to Christ. That is how we reach the truth of priesthood.
R. In @Hebrews 8:3 it is said that it is necessary that He Himself should have something to bring. Would that be Christ?
J.T. That is Christ Himself.
{344}
F.Sr. Would you explain as to God the Father and the priestly service in reference to God?
J.T. I think priesthood stands related to the covenant. It is a question of an answer on our part to the love shown in Christ in the covenant. Perfect love casts out fear. The appreciation of the covenant constitutes us practically priests; but priesthood viewed officially has in mind that we are still in a scene of defilement; we are a holy priesthood; so that in assembly we shut out, in the power of the Spirit, all that is contrary to God. This goes on; but as we reach heavenly ground, while the thought of God must ever remain; we have the thought of Father, so that there we touch the family side; we get beyond priesthood in other words. In eternity there will be no need for priesthood because there will be no opposition, no defilement. This is an interesting subject, but the time has gone.
Rbt. Would you say that as priests we have to do with God but as sons we approach the Father?
J.T. Yes, that is in the Spirit of sonship.
Whilst we are here we need to maintain the thought of priesthood; it implies the exclusion of what is contrary to God, and moreover it implies intelligence as to what is to be done. They were custodians of the law, others were to hear the law at their mouth; but we can understand, if we think of it, that all that will cease in eternity. We shall be there in the relationship of sons with the Father, nothing to hinder, no adversary or evil occurrent.
{345}
THE ORDERING OF THE CAMP
@Numbers 2:1 - 34
J.T. No book sets out more definitely the assembly in the wilderness than Numbers. The opening words make this very plain. "Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai in the tent of meeting". The position is definitely the wilderness, and the tent of meeting is regarded as in it. The original title of this book was, "In the Wilderness", indicating that in earlier times the position was clearly apprehended. What the book unfolds is the public order of the saints viewed thus. So that we have stress laid on age -- twenty years of age, pedigree, then heads of houses -- persons of known moral weight amongst the saints. In verse 16 of chapter 1 we read, "These were those summoned of the assembly, princes of the tribes of their fathers, the heads of the thousands of Israel". Then there is the numbering, showing that everyone is taken account of, and in relation to his father's house. Each was to encamp by the standard of his father's house, showing that it is the public order of the saints in their local setting. Thus, it is, in the antitypical setting, the assembly throughout the whole world today, and the order and principles that govern the saints universally. I think we can see the correctness of the order in the place Numbers has in the Pentateuch. Exodus and Leviticus, especially Leviticus, contemplate the inner thing, the place the saints have inside the breastplate; each saint has got a fixed place there. Each saint is especially loved, and in correspondence with this each saint has his own position publicly.
Fl. What would the standard represent today?
J.T. It alludes to the testimony maintained in any particular locality. The standard would be a military symbol. A locality is indicated, but it refers to the whole testimony, I apprehend. So that my
{346}
military setting, although local, is universal in its bearing.
Ques. Is it to be compared with a flag of victory?
J.T. It is a military symbol in relation to which we are marshalled, and in relation to which we fight.
K. Is the point of responsibility also connected with the standard?
J.T. Obviously we are to fight in that relation; my position is known in the general military arrangement.
F.Jr. Are these foundation truths?
J.T. Yes.
B. Corinthians, where you have the local thought, is addressed to all that in every place call on the name of the Lord; would not that indicate the banner?
J.T. Corinthians is the antitype of this book. Thus the position is local. The introduction of Corinthians is: "To the assembly of God which is in Corinth". The Galatian epistle on the other hand, is addressed to the assemblies which are of Galatia. That is characteristic, but in Corinth it is a locality; that is, the great primary thought is a local assembly in a place, in a city. Then it goes on to say, "With all that in every place". Universal positions are also in view, so that whilst the assembly in a city has a certain local responsibility, which is left to it, it is not independent; it is "with all that in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours" (@1 Corinthians 1:2).
R.B. Would walking with God in the wilderness, and consequent spiritual intelligence, enable us to raise a standard in the face of the enemy?
J.T. That is what we come to; walking with God in the wilderness implies this. In this chapter it is a question of whether we are set to walk with God, because it is not only the encampment but the order of the march.
{347}
F.Jr. Is that the passage in @2 Timothy 2? "The foundation of God stands ...".
J.T. 2 Timothy deals with an abnormal condition. This passage deals with normal conditions. 1 Corinthians is the normal side of things and so is this book. 1 Corinthians and l Timothy run together.
L. Things are then in order in this book?
Ques. Is there a special colour given to the standard?
J.T. Each assembly would be distinctive; each would have its own colours, so to speak, but they were not independent; they were correlated.
Sc. In a military setting does the thought of princes being spoken of as heads suggest order and authority, so that we take account of the spiritual judgment amongst the brethren?
J.T. Yes, they would represent, in the antitype, elderhood. There were to be elders in every city, but there were also to be elders in every assembly, and these are said to be persons known as summoned, as the note says, 'Those who were habitually called to undertake the matters of the assembly'. They are said to be princes of the tribes of their fathers the heads of the thousands of Israel. They would represent men, not only of official capacity, but of moral qualifications. There were those summoned, meaning that today the Lord would call upon brethren in Mettman, or Sydney, or Cape Town, or New York; He has them under His eye, and He calls upon and uses them according to their ability.
Ques. Is @Psalm 60:4 in connection with that?
J.T. Well, that verse shows what a banner means; it is displayed because of the truth. We are dealing here with the elders of the people; we want to get that before us; we want to see that the element of rule amongst the saints is co-ordinated; it is not to be independent.
{348}
L. What distinction do you make between elders in every city and elders in every assembly?
J.T. Elders appointed in the city would signify that God was providing against the concentrated evil of the city. It is the provision made where the evil is. The testimony is fortified by elders in that place where evil is concentrated.
F.Jr. Do you include in that all the believers in the town?
J.T. They are all in the mind of the Lord as belonging to the assembly; but note it is not an elder that is appointed in a city, but elders, so that the idea of a bishop in a city was never in the mind of God; it is bishops or elders. Elders in each assembly is another thought. That enables the assembly to walk. The assembly is to stand on its own feet; each assembly is to be furnished with the means of rule and order, and hence would include assemblies in country districts or small villages. They are all provided for. The Lord had in mind to shut out the hierarchical system; each assembly has to stand on its own feet, and has to be furnished locally. But then the fact that these men could all be summoned at any time means they are co-ordinated.
Dr.B. Why are elders not mentioned in 1 Corinthians?
J.T. That is a very important enquiry. I think what is in mind in 1 Corinthians is the organisation; while the idea of eldership was supposed in persons of wisdom, yet what is in mind in 1 Corinthians is the organisation, and the organism; that is, *all* are brought into it. The address is to the assembly, meaning that every member is included in the responsibility, and the inner workings imply an organism, the figure of the human body being used; it is the fundamental thought in church furnishings.
Sc. Would the book of Numbers, opening with the whole assembly, save us from being anything but
{349}
interdependent? He says, "Take the sum of the whole assembly" before going into detail. Would that suggest that we are very interdependent, each looked at as part of the whole, so that we cannot go on entirely on individual lines; we are part of one another?
J.T. The whole number is given -- six hundred thousand. That is a suggestion of the whole assembly on earth; but the address to Corinth is to the assembly of God in Corinth, and then the whole is addressed as, "With all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". Hence the address to localities -- all are included.
Mm. Do you think the distinction that Mr. Darby makes between the congregation and the assembly has a bearing on what we are saying?
J.T. There are two words used, according to the note in @Exodus 12. The word 'assembly' signifies a moral whole, involving responsibility. All may not be immediately available, but the principle attaches to those who are. The word 'congregation' means the whole *numerically*, that is all persons are included, an important matter in regard to what we are saying, because some may exempt themselves from responsibility. Here we have the latter thought because we have the exact number. The number is given in the end of chapter 2 -- six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty. Hence what is in mind in Numbers is both ideas: the idea of the assembly in Exodus, and the idea of the congregation. In the idea of the congregation every single person, every christian is responsible; but then, suppose some are absent, not available, can the assembly act? It can, and that is what the word in @Exodus 12 means. It is one moral whole that is responsible and can act even though all may not be present: hence it would correspond to what we call an assembly
{350}
meeting. Some may not be present because of circumstances, but the action is valid without their presence, and it is for them to submit.
R.H.S. Do two or three represent a quorum?
J.T. Well, exactly. "There am I in the midst" (@Matthew 18:20). The Lord is there to support what is done.
J.O.S. Is there anything to be learnt, in that connection, in that all the tribes were not of the same size; some were smaller than others, considerably smaller?
J.T. That fits in properly with chapter 2 which has in mind sovereignty as to how we are placed. First we have in chapter 1 each tribe numbered, so we have each tribe before us according to its numerical strength; then in chapter 2 these tribes are seen as amenable to being set in relation to others. What is suggested is that there is normal spirituality, involving subjection. Independency is entirely out of the question, so that God takes them up sovereignly. The first tribe mentioned in chapter 1 is Reuben. The first tribe mentioned in chapter 2 is Judah. Now I am in the presence of sovereign arrangement. Am I going to rebel against this? Does it suit me? If I am subject it will suit me, because it is the will of God. Thus, when the Lord cast out the demons from the man according to @Luke 5, the man is seen sitting, clothed, and in his right mind at the feet of Jesus. That is the man that can be used in the formation of a local meeting. But he says to the Lord, 'I would like to go across the lake with You'. The Lord says, 'My mind is that you stay', and the man stays there; that is chapter 2; that is: those who are subject to Christ will stay where He places them. So it is a question of the sovereign order of God in the second chapter.
Sc. Is that the great question we have to learn in 1 Corinthians, so that subjection comes in in the end?
{351}
J.T. It is a question of the Lord's authority, but we learn in this second chapter that according to @Romans 12 the will of God is good and acceptable and perfect. It may not seem so at the beginning. It may seem hard. I am placed out at ... Well, it is the Lord's sovereign will. I should prove that God's will in that order is good and acceptable and perfect. It may take time for me to find that out, but I shall find it out. Then another thing is I have got to be in Judah's camp. Judah is given a place here: he is the fourth son of Jacob, but he is given the first place. Well, it says Issachar and Zebulun are to be under his standard, encamping with him. That may test me too. Maybe I do not care so much for Judah, but then it is the will of God, and John says, "He that does the will of God abides for eternity" (@1 John 2:17). It is good for me to see that: to abide for ever is a great matter, and I should prove that this arrangement is the very best that can be made.
Ques. Why were the Levites not numbered?
J.T. We have that stated; it is carefully stated that they were selected for a special purpose: in other words, the will of God will work out that if I accept what God does I shall come into the Levitical tribe, because what is meant by the Levitical tribe in this respect is that they are select. In truth they are taken instead of the firstborn of all the tribes, so that the same believers that are seen encamping as numbered in the second chapter are spiritually also Levites, and indeed they are also priests; that is, it is a question of quality. When you bring in the Levites and the priests you come to the line of quality.
J.O.S. Is that seen with Timothy: he was commended by the local brethren, and then Paul takes him and brings him in a practical way, into the Levitical family, and later he says, "I have no man like-minded" (@Philippians 2:20) -- would that be quality?
{352}
J.T. That is a good scripture to bring forward; it shows how there is promotion and refinement proceeding as we accept the will of God.
Mm. Vessels fitted for the Master's use, is that the same idea?
J.T. I think so, we become refined as we accept the will of God. The order of the camp publicly is a very great study, because as we are speaking of it now it works out in our entrance into the most exalted relations. Here is the great thought, the tabernacle is there in the centre, the divine dwelling. The great thought of every lover of God is that you want to be there. God is there in the holiest of all. Someone has access there. It seems as if Moses could go in there at any time. Well, is that not available to me? If I have that in my mind I will submit to the order of God in my public position. My public position may mean more discipline than others have, but that discipline is in order that I might be a partaker of God's holiness; I am a priest in the true sense. Without holiness no one shall see the Lord, but with it I have access within. But all this shows the wisdom on our part of submitting to the divine ordering of our circumstances, and not finding them irksome and seeking to have them altered, because they are the very best that God can order for us. The tabernacle is in the centre of all the tribes. Judah, and the two tribes with him, are in the east. He has a fine position; he is toward the sunrising. Reuben is down here with two other tribes. He has a good position too, facing towards the south; and Ephraim is behind the tabernacle, he is looking toward the west. That is apt to be depressing; and Ephraim has got to be prepared for that. Dan is toward the north; he gets the cold winds of the north; he has got to be prepared for that. All these positions are divinely ordered. And there is the tabernacle, the divine dwelling. God is shining out on all these
{353}
positions. The high priest has access within before God; and he has the name of every person in all those positions on his breast. Need I think I will be forgotten? No, I will not be forgotten, my name is there before God; He knows the north winds, so He provides for me. Intercession is made for me according to that. Hence the development; growth is all in that setting and all to perfect us and to refine us so that we might have part in the divine service.
B. Titus is directed to labour in a most difficult quarter, in Crete, but he works in the light of the glory.
J.T. Yes, that is the thing. What you see is the glory of God in the face of Jesus shining in our hearts.
Fl. Why does it say at the end of Deuteronomy, "Let Reuben live, and not die; and let his men be few"?
J.T. I think he has refinement in mind. I think it means that as living persons we are countable. I do not belong to the mass that cannot be counted. Living persons are distinguishable; they are taken account of one by one, like John's one hundred and fifty-three great fishes. They are better than a net full of small ones.
Sp. In @1 Corinthians 12:18 it says, "God has set the members, each one of them in the body, according as it has pleased him".
J.T. That is the thought.
W. "Awake north wind, and come, thou south; blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow forth" (@Song of Songs 4:16).
J.T. That shows that in any position I invite the will of God. It will help us that in @Romans 5:3 - 5 the apostle says, "We also boast in tribulations", also "tribulation works endurance; and endurance, experience; and experience, hope; and hope does not make ashamed, because the love of God is shed
{354}
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us". The wilderness position implies that we are walking together. God says, "I taught Ephraim to walk", so that we have the thought expressed in this chapter, first of encampment, then walking. There is encampment and decampment, meaning the assembly is set up and we have our privileges, then it is taken down, and we move on throughout the week, but all in relation to the one thing. The encampment is the great thought, it is privilege, and this governs the whole wilderness journey with its responsibility and toil. The book will open up, as most of us know, wonderful things in regard to the ark, but the general thoughts are in this section. The encampments imply the weekly feature of christianity. We may speak of the saints coming together in assembly on the first day of the week as an encampment. All is in relation to the tabernacle where God is.
Ques. You do not look upon a fresh movement as a result of fresh light?
J.T. Not necessarily, but fresh light may come in as we are together in assembly and this will determine further movements. But normally the saints coming together in assembly implies an encampment, and there is a corresponding decampment when the assembly meeting is over. The fresh light and impressions received will necessarily affect the ensuing journey.
Ques. Doing the will of God is spiritually exhilarating -- He who does it abides for ever. Will it bring us into that scene where everything that hath breath will praise the Lord?
J.T. It leads on to the great end, where God is all in all. "Of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen" (@Romans 11:36).
{355}
PRIESTLY SPEAKING
@Exodus 4:22,23; @Malachi 3:16 - 18; @Malachi 4:4
J.T. The Spirit of God has been calling attention to the service of God in recent years, and would bring all the saints into this service. The idea of it is prevalent in christendom, but the kind of persons employed in it, according to God, is not understood. Generally the idea is of official or paid service; but the Lord says: "The bondman abides not in the house for ever: the son abides for ever. If therefore the Son shall set you free, ye shall be really free" (@John 8:35,36) and in this freedom we serve. That is, we are set free in the understanding of sonship. Hence it says in Galatians: "Thou art no longer bondman, but son" (@Galatians 4:7): and "because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father" (verse 6). It is in speaking to the Father in this liberty and intelligence that we have part in the service. So in Exodus, where the service of God is in view, the word to Pharaoh is: "Israel is my son, my firstborn ... Let my son go, that he may serve me". This statement indicates what was in the mind of God for His people, that they should be in the relationship of sons to Him; and we find at the end of the Old Testament that there are those, however few, who answer to this. God says of those that fear Him, and speak often to one another: "I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him". What comes out further in Exodus is that whilst the service is to be carried on in the liberty of sonship, the One who leads in the service, that is the Hebrew servant in chapter 21, takes the place of a slave, and elects to be in that relation for ever. But it is not the slavery of bondage, but that which is exercised in the liberty of love. That is, the person selects that relation deliberately, saying: "I love". He remains in that attitude of service in the liberty
{356}
of love, and hence it is not the slavery of bondage at all, but implies that he is entirely at the will of his master; and the Lord, taking that relation up, is clothed with heavenly dignity. In chapters 28 and 29, Aaron is to be clothed with the garments of glory and beauty -- heavenly dignity. Then the persons engaged in this service of priesthood -- as we are told later -- are holy and intelligent, so that they know what to do; and what they do, they do in holiness, guarding the holiness of God and His dwelling. That was what I had in mind.
Ques. Would the intercourse that is spoken of in Malachi be found today?
J.T. It is here tonight: "they that feared the Lord" -- not slavish fear, reverential fear.
Ques. So we may be conscious now that the Lord hearkens?
J.T. Yes. The Lord hearkens and hears: that really implies that He has part in the peace offering; Jehovah has His part in that. No one is more interested in what is said in a meeting like this than the Lord.
Ques. It is of great importance that we cannot serve the Lord in Egypt.
J.T. Serving is when you get out of Egypt -- "Let my son go". The proposal was that they should serve at the mountain where Jehovah appeared to Moses; the mountain was Jehovah's appointed place; it was there that He appeared to Moses, calling him by name twice: "Moses, Moses". He told him to take off his shoes because the place was holy, but that was after Moses had turned aside to see; that is that the young brothers and sisters do not come to the meeting only because they are invited, but they are interested, keen listeners, to hear what God has in mind. It is then that heaven takes notice of us. And following on that we have the thought that Aaron met Moses there, and kissed him. Those
{357}
would be two persons who would speak to one another. Jehovah said He knew Aaron; He knew that he could speak well, so that when he and Moses are speaking together you get wonderful speaking. And so it is today with spiritual saints meeting together as fearing the Lord; you get speaking that you do not get anywhere else.
P.L. In the scripture in the end of @Exodus 4 we have Moses telling Aaron all the words of Jehovah, and then Moses and Aaron gathering the elders of the children of Israel and passing on the word of Jehovah; and the culminating thought -- they bowed their heads and worshipped.
J.T. I suppose that Aaron gives the idea of the speaking that is suitable to those that fear the Lord. Jehovah said that He knew him that he could speak well. One would like therefore to hear him speak; and the idea of speaking well would run down to Malachi, so that those saints who feared the Lord spoke often one to another. They would speak well; their conversation would not be light and frivolous; God has no pleasure in that. We are enjoined that our speech should be always with grace, seasoned with salt.
Ques. The priests lips keeping knowledge -- would that be the idea?
J.T. That is right. What they say has some weight in it. In the fulness of the thought it is Christ -- "Never man spake like this man" (@John 7:46); they marvelled at the words of grace which came from His mouth. So that an illustration of it in Aaron's case would be when Israel thought of returning to Egypt, it says Aaron spoke to them (@Exodus 16:10). The children of Israel turned toward the wilderness as he spoke -- a very important effect of his speaking there. The saints instead of turning towards the world turn towards the wilderness, and see the glory of God as it shines there.
{358}
P.L. Would the forty days speaking on the part of the true Aaron result in that? In the upper room in prayer are they facing the wilderness exercises?
J.T. You refer to the forty days after the Lord's resurrection? See how He went after the two on the way to Emmaus. They say: "Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way ... ?" (@Luke 24:32). The speaking was not enough to turn them back, but it made their hearts burn. The thing is to follow that up. If you leave them alone their hearts may get cold; but the Lord followed the thing up, and went into their house with them, and in the house He manifested Himself to them, and then they returned to Jerusalem. So that it shows the importance of a meeting like this. If the speaking is good it makes the heart of the saints burn, maybe. Sometimes we have to follow them up into their houses.
Ques. Is the result of the turning in @Exodus 16 the unfolding of the glory?
J.T. The glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud; that was as they turned toward the wilderness instead of looking back.
Ques. So we get on these occasions something of the glory, do we not?
J.T. I think it is God in grace following up the speaking. The speaking is not enough; the real work is done in the manifestation of the glory.
P.L. So that in Mary coming in with her message in @John 20, does the Lord follow it up with the glory?
J.T. That was the confirmation. It must have been a wonderful time when Moses and Aaron spoke to these elders; the people believed and they bowed their heads and worshipped.
Ques. The Lord says to Martha in @John 11, "Did I not say to thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?"
{359}
J.T. That was what they needed, to see the glory; that is the confirmation.
Ques. What is it to see the glory of God?
J.T. The shining out of what He is. Christ, of course, is the shining out of God.
Ques. Would you say that would be fresh light?
J.T. Well, sometimes it takes that form. Something comes in that impresses you that it is God, and God shining out according to what He is, not in judgment but in favour. This happens more often than we are liable to think. The important thing is to have eyes to see it. What happened at Bethany was the raising of Lazarus -- that was the thing there. What happened to the two at Emmaus was that the glory shone in their own house. It took place in the simple breaking of the bread and the giving of thanks.
Rem. There we have light again.
J.T. And their account of it is how *He* was made known in the breaking of bread.
Rem. The people believed when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, then they bowed their heads and worshipped (@Exodus 4:31).
J.T. The effect was very pronounced; but what gives rise to what we have been remarking is the thought of speaking. I believe that Aaron is typically Christ in this way of teaching us how to speak -- the effect that speaking of that kind has upon the saints. So that when we come to the book of Malachi, spiritually, this mode of speaking has to be learnt. In truth, these persons were the priests. In chapter 2 it says the priest's lips should keep knowledge; they seek the law at his mouth. Well, we never get anything so commendable about either Aaron or his sons as we get here as regards these people. The Lord hearkened and heard. He heard what they were saying.
{360}
Ques. I should like to enquire how we get exercise in speaking?
J.T. That is a good question. We shall need to learn, because heaven is the place for speaking. Paul speaks of the tongues of angels. They must be good speakers, but on the mount of transfiguration the heavenly men, Moses and Elias, are speaking with Jesus. They are able to speak to the greatest Person in the universe. You may say, 'Well, one is Moses and the other. Elias', but Luke does not mention their names first; he just says two men. The allusion is to the heavenly saints, the men that are to be in heaven. They will be great enough to speak to the Lord. So that question is important, how we are to acquire the ability to speak well.
Ques. It will be an exercise in prayer?
J.T. Well, that is it -- a question of exercise before God, that He might teach us how to speak. Hence in Mark's gospel was a man who had an impediment in his speech. He was not exactly dumb. The speaking one to another points to what will be in heaven. So that with this man in Mark, the Lord touched his tongue, and spat, and looked up to heaven, and groaned. Think of all that entered into that. He felt it. He groaned in the presence of all this. Then He says, "Be opened", and the man spake right. That means that his whole power of speech was regulated -- no impediment. The next thing is what he is to speak about. I believe that the whole formation in man's vocal powers is deranged by false thoughts -- "their throat is an open sepulchre" (@Romans 3:13).
Rem. I think we are not able to learn until we have unlearned.
J.T. Quite so. They could not frame to express the word. Our speaking apparatus is so deranged by false thoughts and words passing through that the Lord has to put it right that we might frame to speak properly.
{361}
P.L. In contrast we have: "His lips lilies, dropping liquid myrrh, ... his mouth is most sweet" (@Song of Songs 5:13,16).
Rem. We should be speaking in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs.
J.T. Yes, we must learn how to frame to convey heavenly thoughts and heavenly impressions, a pure language. It was said in Nehemiah's time that they could not speak the Jews language. Evil associations hinder our speaking the language of Canaan. If we wish to speak right we must hear right. "They that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another". We are not told what they said. It was the kind of speaking that pleased God. He hearkened and heard. And then it says: "A book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared Jehovah, and that thought upon his name". And He says, "They shall be unto me a peculiar treasure ... and I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him". So that is why I think we might look at these verses in connection with @Exodus 4. A son is in mind; and the thought of God is carried through, and appears at the close, however few there may be of those that fear Him.
Ques. Do you apply that to the saints today?
J.T. Yes, as they come together in the fear of the Lord. They took to heart what God said. You see what was going on here. Jehovah had said, "Your words have been stout against me". And they said: "What have we been speaking against thee?" They had said it was vain to serve God, there is no profit in it. They were calling the proud happy, and so on. This was going on at the time, and it says, "They that feared Jehovah spoke ..."..
Ques. Would Anna in Luke's gospel be included in this company? She spoke of Him.
J.T. She is the continuation of this company in the New Testament. Then you see in Elizabeth and
{362}
Mary, the Lord's mother, what excellent power of speaking they had.
Ques. Those in Malachi were decidedly before God and felt their responsibility?
J.T. What we ought to say is that God has His true priests here in the last days, and that He is pleased with them.
Ques. Do you connect the priests with keeping His charge (@Malachi 3:14)?
J.T. Yes, they were for that -- keeping the charge of Jehovah. Now in the fourth chapter the verse read calls attention to God's rights in all this, so that whilst our meetings may be happy and our conversation priestly, and delightful to God, we do not forget the great principles that govern the dispensation -- "Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, the statutes and ordinances". God says, as it were, I can trust these people, and I put it on them now to take up the full thought of the dispensation, that they may have that in mind. So that they were directed back to Horeb and to Moses His servant. He stands out as the model servant, faithful in all God's house. That is the reason why the Lord for the last hundred years has been stressing the idea of the service of God, and the principles that govern it. The true saints will leave out nothing, neither the statutes (the fixed things), nor the ordinances (which are more details).
Rem. It is interesting that the same words were used in @Exodus 19:8 and chapter 24:3, before the law and after?
J.T. Some christians think that certain things are non-essential. The order of the Lord's supper, the way we address the Lord then, and addressing the Father -- these are matters of great importance if we are to understand the service of God, and we should
{363}
not think them of little importance. We should see that they have their place.
Rem. I have often thought of @Revelation 22, where it says: "The throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him".
J.T. So you see in the prophet Ezekiel, that he is taken to see the frame of a city, but when he arrives there it is not the city brought before him, but the house. The city is there, of course, as a background, but what is in mind is the house, and the service of the house, and these same people, the sons of Zadok, these are the people. Everything is on the principle of the most careful measurement. The priests are the sons of Zadok. He was the priest who served under David, the great head, who knew what to do.
P.L. And would the remembering of the law of Moses, the commandments of the Lord, make necessary the working of these things out in an evil day (chapter 4:5), after the law of the house is set out? In @1 Corinthians 14 you have room made for the prophetic word. Is that made needful when these commandments are taken up and worked out?
J.T. The prophetic word is the power to turn, "He shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers" (@Malachi 4:6). You feel the need of that today. The households are so deranged. When the will of God is in question what is needful is a powerful prophetic ministry.
P.L. "But I beseech you, brethren, ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruits of Achaia" (@1 Corinthians 16:15). The hearts of the fathers and children were together there.
J.T. All this is in keeping, I think, with David. The service of God brings in the families of the Levites particularly, and the priests.
Ques. What do you mean by the necessity for the prophetic word?
{364}
J.T. The Lord graciously provides in calling attention to these things; and then the prophetic ministry is a ministry of power. It is not simply that it teaches, but it says that he shall *turn* the hearts of the fathers to the children.
P.L. So that it says the secrets of his heart are made manifest under the prophetic word in @1 Corinthians 14. Also the woman in @John 4, her heart was laid bare: "I perceive that thou art a prophet".
J.T. So that a great deal is said not only of what the prophet taught but of the men themselves, what they were. I suppose Elijah represents that side.
Ques. Is that seen in Haggai and Zechariah -- the building went on?
J.T. These two prophets not only prophesied but they gave a lead in the thing to be done. They worked themselves; they built. Haggai is the only book, I think, in which we get actual dates given from the time the word is given until it took effect. The first great message of Haggai took effect in twenty-three days.
Ques. Is it in a certain sense the call of repentance that would flow out of the mouth of the prophet when Nathan came to David? He said, "Thou art the man!" (@2 Samuel 12:7).
J.T. The general thought of prophetic ministry is that there is power in it -- God is there. As the prophetic word is seen in Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, in these last days peculiar light from God is given so as to work out the law given by Moses and all that pertains to spiritual order in a day of ruin. Elijah peculiarly stands for power -- "There shall not be dew nor rain these years, except by my word" (@1 Kings 17:1). It should raise an exercise in our localities unless this word of power is found there.
{365}
SPIRITUAL INTELLIGENCE
@1 Corinthians 10:15; @Genesis 3:20; @Genesis 5:21 - 24; @Genesis 8:20,21
Spiritual intelligence is what is in view in this meeting. What is in mind is to present the way to spiritual intelligence, and to indicate that spiritual intelligence leads out of this world into another world, "that world, and the resurrection". In other words it implies movement in those that have it. God speaks in @1 Corinthians 2 of the hidden wisdom which He prepared before the world for our glory. This could not be opened up to the Corinthians because of their poor capacity, but the apostle intimates to them that there was that which was before the world prepared of God for us. This great fact is presented early in the epistle as an incentive to the saints to go on to what belonged to full growth, so that in the latter part of the epistle the apostle enjoins that in their minds they should be full-grown, but in malice they were to be babes. Now the epistle to the Romans and the epistles to the Corinthians contain the fundamental elements of knowledge. In speaking of knowledge or spiritual intelligence we have to bear in mind the power for acquiring it. That is what is called the mind. In Romans this great faculty in a governing way is to enter into all activities (see chapter 7:25), not indeed his natural, carnal mind, but the faculty itself. Man has what the lower creature has not; he has the faculty of thinking in correspondence with God; and of the christians in @1 Corinthians 2:16 it is said, "*We* have the mind of Christ". The statement implies what is characteristic of christians. The apostle does not say ye, but *we*, have the mind of Christ. Such statements usually imply what is characteristic of christianity; and if characteristic, why not of me? That is how the believer is urged on to greater things. So in Romans, in that well-known analytical chapter,
{366}
namely chapter 7, the writer arrives at a great result. He speaks of the inner man -- some consciousness in his deep inwardness which answers to God, an experience that each believer ought to seek to determine in his own history; and then he says, "*@Genesis 1 myself* with the mind serve God's law". He arrives at it in his own consciousness according to God. In the analysis he has learnt to name things that are inside him. It is no question of anatomy, it is a spiritual analysis, a very remarkable thing and he arrives at the result: "*I myself*". Who is this "*I myself*"? A man arriving in self-consciousness as on God's side against the flesh, standing on his own feet against the inner workings of sin in the flesh. It is as if he were to hoist the flag of victory at a certain point against sin in the flesh. One who does this is potential material for God. It is a great moral triumph that every young person here should achieve, that his mind is enthroned as it were on the side of God. It is to be in this sense an intelligent dictator in the person. Not now the corrupt mind of the flesh, but the renewed mind, at least renewed in principle.
In chapter 12 it is said, "By the renewing of your mind". This word 'renewing' is a very important word for the young believer to understand. The body is subservient to this dominant faculty renewed thus. The person, of course, the ego, is responsible, but the mind is in control: "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". That is the foundation, beloved young believer, of the priesthood in your soul. The Spirit of God comes in immediately through redemption to support in taking up this attitude; and hence in Corinthians, as I said before, the apostle says "*we* have the mind of Christ". What a great thing it is to have a faculty capable of thinking like Christ! Think of Christ, beloved friends, coming into this world as Man, and looking around on what was in
{367}
it! He would name things as they came before Him; and that is one feature of the intelligence that the believer has, it enables him to put right names on things. The Lord found things extremely strange; it is said, "He was in the world, and the world was made by him" (@John 1:10). How different it was from that wonderful world He brought into being as described in @Genesis 1 and 2! One reverts to that account in @Genesis 1 and 2. The God spoken of there who said, "Let there be light" was Jesus. It is said, "All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made" (@John 1:3). It was He who said, "Let there be light; and there was light"; it was He who worked day after day until the sixth day when He made man, and now, according to John, He came into that world, but Oh, how different! Sin had intervened to spoil it. It was so utterly degraded in intelligence and feeling that it did not know its Creator; and so now instead of pronouncing things good, He has got to name things, as they were. One has only to appeal to the gospels for a proof of this. What names He gave things! He hesitated at nothing through fear; He named everything fearlessly, so that the world became exposed. The names He gave things stand, and serve us today as in the same world.
Well, now, dear brethren, how touching that the apostle, in the light of all that has been said, should address the Corinthians as intelligent persons. He has already been saying to them that he could not speak to them as unto wise persons: he determined to know nothing amongst them but Jesus Christ, and Him crucified. I had to feed you with milk, he says, not with strong meat; and then he says, 'Ye are babes', but babes in Christ; that is fundamental; that brings the Corinthians on to christian ground; I believe the apostle in spiritual tenderness and consideration for his beloved children in Corinth says,
{368}
"I speak as to intelligent persons". Were I there with my present understanding I should have said, I am not going to be different from that. If the great apostle Paul out of consideration for me addresses me as an intelligent person, I do not want to deny that in practice. He could address them in this way not in a concrete or actual sense, but in a potential sense. In truth, it is the only ground on which we can address christians. As having the Spirit of God they are potentially capable of taking in divine thoughts, and it is important to bear this in mind, that one can speak to everyone in this room as a christian, and say, 'You are an intelligent person'. Over against that Peter speaks of unconverted people as "senseless". It is a statement of fact. Peter would by no means offend people unnecessarily, but in truth, knowledge according to God is only in the christian; as having the Holy Spirit he is capable of learning; and hence the apostle in approaching the great thought of the Lord's supper, would bring in this thought, that the persons addressed were intelligent. Of all things in christianity the celebration of the Lord's supper requires spiritual understanding. It is the introduction really to the service of God, and spiritual intelligence is required, which, as we had this afternoon, implies that we are priests to God. And if we are addressed as intelligent, the moral result of that in our souls ought to be 'I do not want to be anything different; I do not want to degrade myself in the eyes of heaven and the eyes of the apostle. I have the means to acquire all knowledge; I must therefore lay myself out to acquire it': and so you find in the different epistles which denote progress in the believer's soul we have *knowledge* greatly stressed. The epistle to the Colossians speaks about the new man, and this new man is said to be "renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him". Now that is an advance on what
{369}
we have been speaking of. The new man is a creation, and he is after the image of his Creator. His Creator is really Christ; and the correspondence is in knowledge, showing the great importance of this matter.
Well now, I want to show you how, in the three passages in Genesis, knowledge such as I have been speaking of leads into another world, and enables me to move in that world according to it. So, in chapter 3 you have Adam naming his wife the second time. He had named her in chapter 2, but now he is naming her after he became a poor sinner, and she too had become a poor sinner. In chapter 2 Adam is more a type of Christ, and so Jehovah Elohim causes the creatures to come to Adam to see what he would name them, and whatever he named them that was the name of the creature -- God as it were commending his great creature for his intelligence. As I said, he is there a type of the Lord Jesus; and so, in the naming of Eve in that chapter, Jehovah Elohim presents a woman to him and Adam says, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man". That is, he gives a reason for the name he gives her. There is nothing said as to this with the different lower creatures. We are not told that Adam gave the reason for the names he gave them, but here there is a reason, and bound up with it is the church as taken out of Christ, bone of His bones and flesh of His flesh. But in chapter 3 we have in Adam one like ourselves, a poor sinner, and an Eve like one of ourselves, a poor sinner. I say poor, but yet not poor, for there is evidence that they had faith, for God had clothed them. One of the most interesting transactions of God was the making of suits of clothes for Adam and Eve. Can we doubt that Adam gathered up intelligence in this? Moreover, God had said that the seed of the woman
{370}
should bruise the serpent's head. Was not that the thought of a living one? I think so. I think light shone into Adam's soul as to the coming One, Him who says, "I am he that liveth and was dead; and behold I am alive for evermore" (@Revelation 1:18). He it is that should bruise the serpent's head; and now Adam names his wife Eve. Where did he get the word? It is suggestive of the origin of language. There is light in his soul; a language issuing from a living soul, from a living man, is worth treasuring. It is the language that every christian has characteristically in addition to his ordinary one. It is the language of *faith*. I believe that Adam is the first to use the language of faith; not that he is in the list in Hebrews; he is not; there is a reason for that: but there can be no doubt that his naming his wife Eve is the language of faith. And every name that a christian puts on anything or any person according to God is; the language of faith. Let us learn this language, And as learning it, put right names on everything and every person. I believe that every christian should have a judgment about everything and every person that he knows. You may have to take up names that others have given, but you take them up in faith. That is how the matter stands with Adam, he called his wife's name Eve because she is the mother of all living. Following upon that we have Seth naming his son Enosh, which is a negative thought. We have the positive before the negative. Eve was the mother of all living. Seth's son was a poor, dying, weak creature in Seth's estimate of him. It is not that Enosh may not have been saved; I doubt not he was; but his father called him Enosh, a poor, mortal creature. That was also the language of faith. And the result was that from that time men began to call on the name of the Lord -- a great result. The use of the language of faith induces faith in others.
{371}
The next point in mind is Enoch -- the intelligence of Enoch. His name, it would appear, indicates a man who was highly disciplined. A man disciplined by God is sure to be an intelligent man; in other words he has been in the best school of the universe, the school of God. Enoch's name implies that and what comes out in him is choice of company. It is a question of the use I make of my intelligence to choose my company. I am to move. With whom am I to move? I am to move with God. Enoch made the best possible choice; he selected God with whom to walk. There was plenty of society in those days; the race of Cain had flourished; the world had become developed; and world development means world corruption. There was plenty of company if Enoch sought that kind. But he did not seek that kind; he selected God, as I may say reverently, as his travelling companion. Let me commend this to all of you young people here: "Enoch walked with God". God had been already walking before Enoch. He has been walking ever since. Millions have joined Him. No doubt most of us here have joined God in His holy walk. What a selection to make! Enoch walked with God; and what would be the drift of that walk? Enoch became less and less in view in this world, until it is said, "He was not". You could not find him anywhere in the circumstances of this world. God's walk leads out of this world and finally it is said, "He was not, for God took him". God says, as it were, 'I like this company'. Think of God wishing for your company. How He came to Abraham to seek him out as a companion, -- His friend. So it is said that before Enoch's translation, "He had this testimony, that he pleased God". Doubtless much will come out after we are taken out of this world as to us, but I certainly want to know before I leave that I please God. I should not like to leave except with this sense that I please God. And surely
{372}
that is what God has in mind for us. "How ye ought to walk", says the apostle to the young Thessalonians, "and please God" (@1 Thessalonians 4:1).
The final thought in mind is Noah. What comes out in Noah is that he too walked with God. There can be no doubt that he knew something about his ancestor Enoch. An ancestor like Enoch is worth speaking of. He followed in his footsteps and moreover, he was "perfect in his generations", that is he was commendable amongst his family and relations -- a most important thing to maintain righteousness in every way amongst one's relatives. What comes out in Noah, among many other things, is that he discerned between what was clean and what was not clean. There was nothing said about anyone telling him the difference between the clean and the unclean. Israel in the wilderness was carefully taught of God as to the clean and the unclean, but Noah evidently learnt it instinctively; indeed, one can hardly walk with God without discerning the clean and the unclean, for surely in that walk there will be indications to aid us in this. It is a very solemn thing if God cannot walk with anyone; it means you are unclean. If I am walking with Him I find that out. Evidently Noah found things out that way. Noah passed through into another world, for that is the end of the divine walk. Where is God going? God has not come into this world to stay in it, as I was saying before; the Lord Jesus came into it, but not to stay in it. I mean the world in a moral sense. He says, "Now is the judgment of this world" (@John 12:31). His presence here brought to light what it was and its moral judgment. So that the Lord Jesus is presented as walking in John's gospel. He was walking somewhere. The truth is that He is going out of the world, as He says in chapter 13 that He should depart out of this world to the Father. His blessed feet carried Him *via* the cross out of this world into
{373}
another world. Mary understood that those feet were carrying Him out of this world and she anointed them. That is what comes out in Noah. He passed into another world. Let me appeal to all the young people here to join God in His holy walk. As with Him in this walk you will do great things, for Noah is just the counterpart of Enoch. Noah represents a man who does great things, and such men, men that can do things for God, are wanted in every locality where there is a meeting, in this country and in every country. So Noah arrives in another world with everything intact that was under his hand; he lost nothing on the way, so that arriving at this new world, typically, he is fresher and more vigorous in coming out of the ark than when he went into it. What a vista opened up to him of Ararat as he looked on to the new world. Who is to people this world? Is it again to be filled with corruption? In Noah's mind it is to be filled with God, of whom and through whom and for whom are all things; and hence he built an altar to Jehovah and offered of all clean animals and all clean fowls. His instincts, developed in his walk with God, now stand him in good stead and make him a priest so that he knows what to offer, and he offers unselfishly of every clean animal and every clean fowl, and it says, "Jehovah smelled the sweet odour". Need I repeat that that is a great end reached? Jehovah is pleased to condescend to refer to His nostrils, that He smelled the sweet odour; and that was the outcome of this man's affection for Him, corresponding with the name he bore, for Noah means rest; and God smelled a savour of rest in this man's sacrifice. You can see, beloved friends, how this matter of intelligence enters into another world and establishes the service of God, nothing short of this: travelling with God is not short of this; as it says, "Then shall come the end";
{374}
what is the end? God is to be all in all. May God help us to keep this before us so that His service may continue and enter into eternity, as it is said, "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages. Amen" (@Ephesians 3:21)
{375}
THE WORK OF GOD (1)
@John 9:1 - 41
J.T. The work of God as such is more stressed by John than by any of the other evangelists. In this there is a special correspondence to the book of Genesis, which enlarges upon how God's work brings order out of confusion. The man in this chapter answers to the state of disorder with which God occupied Himself in Genesis. The Lord said that this man had not sinned, nor his parents, but that the works of God should be manifested in him, and so this chapter helps us in connection with all that asserts to be a work of God. The work of God proves itself by certain moral features in those who are the subjects of it. My thought for this reading is that we should acquire a judgment about all that is transpiring and recognise how far these moral traits come into evidence.
H.H. Does not the first chapter of John's gospel show the confusion? It says there "He was in the world, and the world had its being through him, and the world knew him not. He came to his own, and his own received him not" (verses 10,11).
J.T. That passage agrees in a remarkable way with the introductory verses of Genesis. At the outset it is established that God in the beginning created the heaven and the earth, and then immediately the waste condition is referred to, "the earth was waste and empty, and darkness was on the face of the deep". In Genesis God says, "Let there be light. And there was light". In the gospel of John God does not simply say, "Let there be light", but the true Light is there, who, coming into the world, lightens every man; (@John 1:9). The work of God consists therefore in light.
A.M. In what relation does the man born blind stand to those born anew in chapter 3?
{376}
J.T. Everything is taking place here by degrees; one truth building itself upon the other, so that this chapter includes all that has gone before. Therefore when God occupies Himself with this man, His works and not only His work are to be made manifest in him. The works of the devil soon showed themselves. "The Son of God has been manifested, that he might undo the works of the devil" (@1 John 3:8). Whatever may have caused the confusion in material things, God took in hand to put it away and to produce a state of order.
H.H. The first chapter of Genesis is accordingly the introduction of the whole work of God which meets us in the Scripture.
J.T. The unique order of the work of God is very remarkable, and one thing is to be noted, that what God begins, He also finished. It says, "And God had finished ... his work" (@Genesis 2:2).
Ques. Does all the work of God take place according to the same principle in the Old as in the New Testament?
J.T. I thought that, and on that account alluded to the similarity between the gospel of John and the book of Genesis. The first thing is light; God commanded the light; He calls the light day -- there is therefore progress made, in that God gives a *name* to the stage of development. The evening and the morning formed the first day, and so the believer by means of the *work* of God can tell how he is progressing in his soul. It is one thing to call the light day, but another thing to speak of the *first* day. As soon as the conception of time is brought in, one begins to make progress. It says here "the first day", so that time has begun.
Rem. How do we recognise the progress?
J.T. As soon as you have an evening and a morning. The light of God is sure to bring certain exercises with it, the consequences of which you can
{377}
give an account of; but greater light is the result so that you can count the day from the point onwards when the morning has come. God begins with light but with us time begins with the evening.
-- L. Does the state which we see in the Pharisees stand related to the night, "the darkness he called Night"?
J.T. So it is also seen throughout the epistles; believers are looked at as children of the day and not of the night.
H.H. Does the setting sun represent the death of Christ? Does in this way the light come to us and with it also the following morning?
J.T. Just so. There is an experience in the soul which corresponds to that. If we consider @Genesis 15:12,17, a state of darkness followed the light of God. It says "as the sun was just going down", and then the word came to Abram in verse 13. The morning is God's thoughts coming to pass.
H.H. I am impressed by the scripture to which you have just called attention and which shows us how the people of God arrived at blessing through suffering. Abram's seed was to go through affliction four hundred years.
J.T. Many believers, I think, have not learned how to tell the time by means of their experiences.
H.D'A.C. There seem to be many evenings in the history of a believer, by which he arrives at blessing through testing and deep exercise, only to go through another such experience. Is that your thought?
J.T. Yes, quite so, evenings and mornings. God takes the matter in hand according to our exercise of heart.
P.L. The Psalmist speaks, in connection with the work of God, of remembering, meditating and musing (@Psalm 143:5).
J.T. Quite so.
{378}
A.B. The progress with the man born blind can be recognised by the great intelligence he had received about the Lord.
H.Pf. When light came into his soul, is that the evening?
J.T. The darkness which the light exposes in the soul is the evening. Believers are scarcely aware of the terrible state that is in them. In the gospel of Mark the Lord cites thirteen dreadful things which go forth out of the heart of men (@Mark 7:21,22). If we honestly receive the light, we see these things in their true horribleness and that causes us much anxiety and can be regarded as an evening.
H.D'A.C. I should like to say to any who are in those circumstances that a morning is coming.
P.L. When Peter said, "Depart from me" (@Luke 5:8), was that the evening? And "To whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal" (@John 6:68), was that the morning?
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. Is @Romans 7, "Who shall deliver me ... ?" an example?
J.T. Yes, I was thinking of @Romans 7. There we have a dark night of experience, but deliverance is "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord" (verse 25). At first, believers are not aware of these terrible things which had a place in them, but the light coming in exposes them. It says in @Luke 8:2 of Mary Magdalene "from whom seven demons had gone out"; it does not say that they were *driven* out; through the light their position had become untenable. How much it must have meant to Mary Magdalene as they were going out. What a dreadful discovery it must have been to her as the light of God came into her soul.
Ques. Do you mean, we are not to assume that they all went out at once?
J.T. It says that seven went out.
{379}
H.H. In @Luke 8, that is mentioned in connection with healing. It says, "Certain women who had been healed of wicked spirits and infirmities, Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out".
J.T. The discovery of what is within brings the evening; what God has done in Christ, the morning.
H.H. I think that what you said about the light exposing, in connection with the evening, is good.
H.D'A.C. As far as Paul was concerned, his heart was in a waste condition and then the evening came as he found that in him good did not dwell. Then he saw the Lord as deliverer and said, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord", and that was the morning.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Did he learn to know the darkness while he was without sight?
J.T. The "second day" alludes to the place that heaven should have in the believer. It is as if God would remind us that in the work which He has begun He has heaven before Him.
Ques. Is it not striking that the prodigal son says, "I have sinned against heaven and before thee" (@Luke 15:21)? He mentions heaven first.
J.T. That refers, I think, to what God had been to men consequent upon the covenant with Noah. Man, although far from God, participated in the blessing of this covenant. The rain, the different seasons, food, and his heart filled with gladness were everywhere an obvious testimony from God that heaven is beneficent. It appears that the prodigal son had to acknowledge this, for it says "what is known of God is manifest among them" (@Romans 1:19).
Ques. Does not the whole Bible put the relation between heaven and earth in their right place in the souls of men? God puts heaven first, but man the earth.
{380}
J.T. In regard to that, the second day seems to remind believers that God, when He has begun a work in them, wishes to have them for heaven. The third day brings in the earth.
Rem. How does @John 3 connect with that?
J.T. The work of God concerning new birth; light about Christ as the exalted Son of man. "He that practises the truth comes to the light, that his works may be manifested that they have been wrought in God" (verse 21). God works in the light, so that whoever practises the truth wishes to be in the same light. The book of Genesis helps the believer to observe his progress so that he recognises his days and reaches the end in view. In connection with the blind man, the Lord says, "As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world" (verse 5). He Himself was the light in which He was working and so it says further, "Having said these things, he spat on the ground and made mud of the spittle, and put the mud, as ointment, on his eyes". As far as the work is concerned, that is the first thing to note -- a divine Person is down here as Man. The spittle clearly points to what He was according to His own essence. It is something wonderful when that comes before us, outwardly so unapparent. He who was present was no less than God. He made mud of the spittle; that was Himself, in principle, as Man. It is wonderful to dwell upon it, for by this means we receive an impression of His wonderful downstooping. All that He was in His Being was in Him as Man down here, and in such wise that it could find its application to the condition of man.
Ques. Have we in the man born blind the counterpart to the one who fell among thieves in @Luke 10? In John we have probably the reverse, the other side.
J.T. Here we have what the Lord as Man is, according to His Person, but in such a way that it is available for the state of man.
{381}
Ques. Is there a connection between the spitting on the earth and the dust from which man was made?
J.T. That is alluded to here. Adam was formed out of the ground but not by divine spittle. All that was said about it is that God breathed into him and man became a living soul. In the gospel of John, on the other hand, it is dealing with the fact that the Word, God Himself, became flesh.
H.D'A.C. But He was quite separated as He became flesh. He did not make Himself one with the human race as He found it.
J.T. He had to remain alone, except He were to die. If possible, the mud would have made the man's condition worse. It is therefore a delusion to connect Christ with man in this world, as its wise men do.
H.H. What you say about the spittle is very impressive and sheds a wonderful light.
J.T. It touches our hearts to see the Lord presented here in relation to that which He was personally as it comes to expression in this remarkable figure.
A.B. The greater the light, the greater the darkness. That comes directly into evidence through the contrast.
G.R.A. What comes before us in the washing?
J.T. There we find the moral thought of sending. The Lord was down here as the "sent one". That the man answered to that is the proof of the work of God in him and the Lord says in verse 7, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, which is interpreted, Sent. He went therefore and washed, and came seeing". The going and coming shows what a result the work had in him.
H.D'A.C. They were "the waters of Shiloah which flow softly" (@Isaiah 8:6).
J.T. They were refused. It says, "Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah which
{382}
flow softly". These waters were also at that time refused, therefore the blind man here is set over against the perverse Jews who refused to move in the light of God.
H.H. The overflowing judgment stands in contrast to the waters of Shiloah. We have either wonderful grace or a terrible judgment (@Isaiah 8:7).
J.T. The Lord who in the gospel of John had come down in grace from heaven is like Shiloah, He is the sent One. The believer manifests the work of God when he answers to that, and so it says he *went* and washed. The waters of Siloam are connected with that; but then we have wrath of God revealed from heaven (@Romans 1:18), which the waters of judgment correspond to in @Isaiah 8.
Rem. The Lord calls Himself, Him whom the Father had sanctified and sent into the world; have we there the waters of Siloam?
J.T. Just so.
H.H. It is noticeable how often the word 'sent' occurs in John. Why do you think the evangelist uses it so frequently?
J.T. I think, in order to emphasise that He, although a divine Person here, was fully dependent. In no gospel are His subjection and His obedience so much stressed as in John. So in my judgment the mixing of the spittle with the earth speaks of His humiliation, in that the Lord, a divine Person, could so lower Himself and adapt Himself in such a way to the needs of man. The man is now to respond to that and therefore it says, "He went therefore and washed, and came seeing".
Ques. Why was mud put on the man's eyes?
J.T. I think to bring to nought the efforts of the enemy to connect Christ with man in the flesh. I think John wants to show that the man, when that took place, was only worse off, and therefore we have the waters of Siloam, which refer to the death of the
{383}
Lord. The death of Christ alone can recover man to that for which God created him; but hand in hand with that there is something moral going on in the man -- he goes and comes.
H.D'A.C. "He went *therefore*".
J.T. That shows that he responded to the light.
Ques. Did the Lord bring about obedience in the man, so that he went and came?
J.T. If he had only gone, the work would not have been complete, he had to go and to come. One can apply that to a believer, who has not only been blessed but has returned to the Source of the blessing.
Rem. Like the one leper out of the ten.
J.T. Quite so. One leper turned back to give glory to God, and here the man comes seeing.
H.D'A.C. He obeyed the gospel and went.
J.T. You are glad to see, in a young believer seeking fellowship, one who comes seeing. Such know where they have to turn to; they are not making a leap in the dark, as, I fear, some believers do.
Ques. Is the thought here that Christ should be reached in His own uniqueness as the Son of God?
J.T. This man will have connected the spittle in his thoughts with the Son of God. He knew only too well what ordinary mud was. Afterwards he will have understood that the spittle set forth that which Jesus was according to His own Person, so that the Lord on this account said, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?". He answered, "And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?". The Lord said, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he". The Lord lets him look back on his experience. This was in truth the Son of God, of whom the spittle spoke. No other than the Son of God could prepare mud with His spittle, which could open the eyes.
R.K. Is the man in @John 9 not an example of @Ephesians 2:10, "We are his workmanship"?
{384}
J.T. That refers to the completion of the work of God in us. What this chapter brings before us is the blessed nature of the work of God, seen in moral features, so that a believer can mark his days, if he follows this man's history.
Rem. He said "a man called Jesus". Many know Jesus, but only few the Son of God.
H.H. Do you not think, that behind the Son of God there is concealed a divine universe, into which He wishes to lead the blind man?
J.T. Yes, I think that in chapters 11 and 12 we can see that the Son of God brings in a new universe, which is characterised by family relationships, but here we have the moral effect of the light which is streaming out, the work of God in this man. The neighbours ask questions. Then you begin to show the operation of the work of God in the very answers which you give to your neighbours. In this way the believer stands here in relation to the testimony of God.
Ques. Do we see that Nicodemus could stand at the cross of Christ?
J.T. He came forward at that time, but we do not need to put it off so long. This man made rapid progress, but not through his own exertions. The circumstances helped him, the neighbours asked him questions and the local assembly is formed in this way. As someone becomes converted the neighbours notice it and at last he is publicly excommunicated. One cannot stand for God in one's locality if one has not confessed before one's neighbours.
Rem. The neighbours serve to bring us to a confession of the Lord.
Ques. What difference is there between this blind man and the blind man in Luke?
J.T. The wonderful descent of Christ is not brought into expression there. Luke shows Christ down here in His power to heal. @John 9 is very
{385}
attractive because it seeks to attach believers to the Son of God. But I should like to refer to the importance of the neighbours. They received a more detailed answer than the Pharisees; he said, "A man called Jesus made mud and anointed mine eyes, and said to me, Go to Siloam and wash: and having gone and washed, I saw". He was not in a position to say where the Lord was, but he could give an account of what had happened to him.
Rem. The neighbours bring the blind man to the Pharisees.
J.T. We can be sure of being brought before the religious leaders of our locality. The brethren have to reach their decision from the way in which the work of God proves itself thus in a young believer.
H.D'A.C. Therefore what this new convert says to the neighbours is so important.
J.T. He gives a report of what had happened to himself and says then, "I saw". To the Pharisees he only says, "I washed, and I see". That was an irrefutable testimony; he saw as he was talking to them.
Rem. The neighbours seemed to know his earlier history well. They said, "Is not this he that was sitting and begging?".
J.T. Hence it follows that in my present local testimony, what I was *previously* also comes in question.
{386}
THE WORK OF GOD (2)
@John 9:13 - 20; @John 10:1 - 42
J.T. This morning we referred to the difference in the answers of the blind man to the questions asked by the neighbours and by the Pharisees. To the neighbours he said, "Having gone and washed, I saw", and to the Pharisees "I washed, and I see" (verses 11 and 15). The Pharisees set forth the religious leaders and when you are talking to them it is important that they should know that you see. We applied the chapter to a young believer at his home, who is answering to his neighbours about the work of God and then also to the religious leaders who are sounding him. The consequence of the work of God in this man, and of his confession, was a division among them.
H.D'A.C. To the Pharisees he does not speak of the pool of Siloam.
H.H. For our walk it is very important that the neighbours are those with whom we have lived and shall have to live, but the Pharisees those with whom we shall always have conflict. It is the religious opposition. The work of God is necessary, to maintain us in the presence of both.
J.T. A division among the Pharisees weakens the opposition against the truth. There is a great difference between causing a division among the brethren and causing one among the Pharisees. The more divisions among the Pharisees the better; it weakens the opposition.
H.H. That is allowed in the government of God for the testimony.
J.T. I think from the tower of Babel onwards God has weakened the opposition by dissensions.
P.L. According to @Psalm 2, the kings of the earth will tremble in view of Zion.
{387}
J.T. The more unity prevails in the world in a political and religious way, the more power Satan has against the truth. @Acts 4:27 refers to the unity which Satan brought to pass against God and His anointed. On that account every dissension which is caused or maintained in the world, be it religious or political, is to our advantage.
-- .L. You emphasise the words 'I see'. Do you mean to say that it is in the living power of this we can go forward against the opposition?
J.T. It is not only a matter of having the right teaching, but of seeing.
P.L. Paul met the religious leaders at Corinth with "Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" (@1 Corinthians 9:1).
H.D'A.C. The Pharisees pretended to see, although they were blind.
J.O.S. The parents said, "He is of age". Does that follow the seeing?
J.T. Just so. A feature with John is that the work of God speaks for itself, therefore it says, "He is of age: ask *him*". The emphasis in the translation is on him and in this way the object in view is the presence of the work of God.
A.B. In connection with the detailed account to the neighbours, was your thought that the Lord by it would secure some of them for the local company?
J.T. One should expect that God works through the testimony of such a man as that. What is stressed here is how the works of God become manifest just now. You cannot count on one of the nearest on the line of nature helping you, even the blind man's parents shrunk back from the persecution which the confession of Christ involved.
H.D'A.C. Nature fails.
J.T. Then they call him the second time. The interval afforded him opportunity to consider the consequences of his testimony, and now he is just as
{388}
faithful as on the first occasion, indeed he turns to attack.
H.D'A.C. You are thinking of the words, "Do ye also wish to become his disciples?"
J.T. He answers like a man of war, as one in conflict should do. He says, "I told you already and ye did not hear". It was now theirs to defend themselves. That shows that the power of the work of God increases as we follow the light.
P.L. Do the words, "He is of age" answer somewhat to the book of Numbers? Is it like the twenty years and upwards in chapter 1:3? Is he, as it were, numbered for war? He maintains the testimony in every way and does not only speak of the benefit which had been rendered to him.
J.T. They can only have recourse to abuse, and that is morally worthless; there is nothing of God in it. They said, "Thou art his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses". Now we know where they are. We have now two kinds of disciples, those of Christ and those of Moses.
H.D'A.C. But Moses spoke of Him.
-- .L. It is something grand when the opposers say of you, "Thou art his disciple".
H.H. He not only knew that he was of military age but also to what tribe he belonged.
F.W.K. What do you mean by that?
H.H. I think he was the subject of the work of God, and that took on a new form which he answered to. He knew that he belonged to that order of things.
J.T. When the opposition gathers under a definite banner then the ground is clear and we see where we are.
H.Pf. At first there seemed to be a division among the Pharisees but here they become one.
J.T. Here we have the second, the renewed, attack. They had doubtless come together again, and then the blind man proceeds to attack and says,
{389}
"Now in this is a wonderful thing, that *ye* do not know whence he is, and he has opened mine eyes". This passage shows, as already remarked, that a young believer through the force of circumstances comes into conflict and this man's horizon seems to widen out in a wonderful way. He enters now, as it were, upon moral territory and says, "We know that God does not hear sinners; but if any one be God-fearing and do his will, him he hears".
Rem. It is beautiful and at the same time encouraging to see that this young believer keeps strictly to the truth.
H.St. Can one say that he knows himself to be in fellowship, for he says, "We know"?
J.T. I think that expression simply denotes knowledge. How he, a man blind from birth, came to it is the wonderful thing. He proceeds, "Since time was, it has not been heard that anyone opened the eyes of one born blind". How did he know that? It shows that if we are drawn into the conflict and remain faithful, we become equipped with all that is required. He did not say, 'I have not heard that since time was', but "Since time was, it has not been heard". He spoke, as it were, with authority; he emphasises "it has not been heard".
Rem. Had the Lord not said earlier that, brought before the authorities, they were not to be careful for it would be given them what should be said? (@Matthew 10:19,20; @Luke 12:11,12).
J.T. Very good. Then he proceeds further, "If this man were not of God he would be able to do nothing", and in this way connects the help which had been received with God.
H.D'A.C. They had said the opposite, "This man is not of God, for he does not keep the Sabbath", and now they tell a lie point-blank, "We know that this man is sinful", and also what they say to the
{390}
blind man, "Thou hast been wholly born in sins, and thou teachest us?".
J.O.S. That was the worst of all.
H.St. That was the opposite of what the Lord had said, "Neither has this man sinned nor his parents".
Rem. The Pharisees feared for their power, but they recognised the other power which rose up against them.
J.T. One who was blind from his birth speaks with such assurance and says, "It has not been heard".
P.L. Do you mean that that which Paul says of himself in @Colossians 1:29, was also true of this man, "Whereunto also I toil, combating according to his working, which works in me in power"?
J.T. You mean the working in power. This man is a warning to all religious leaders who trust in their human culture. It tells them that God can get along without them, for in fact this man was teaching them. Now we come to fellowship, "They cast him out".
Rem. The Lord must find him outside in order to bring him into fellowship.
J.T. When the Lord heard about it, they had already cast him out.
H.D'A.C. Morally the Lord had gone out previously, but it is very painful to be thrust out.
P.L. That encourages us greatly to pray for those who are thrust out. Someone must have told it to the Lord.
J.T. It appears as a beautiful feature in this history that Jesus heard of it. Although "Son of God" and "the Word became flesh", He takes in love the place of a servant, "Jesus, heard".
Rem. According to that the work of God is synonymous with being taught of God.
{391}
H.H. It will have greatly strengthened him in his exercises that they would not have what he had recognised as true.
J.T. They were to him as those who were opposing the truth which he had accepted.
H.H. He may have had exercises as to whether he should stay with them, but they would not have him.
Rem. In @Hebrews 13:13 it says, "Let us go forth to him without the camp", and at the end of the previous chapter the Lord had gone out, so that He was already outside. Is there a difference between going out and being cast out?
J.T. Just so. According to @2 Timothy 2:19, everyone who names the name of the Lord is to withdraw from iniquity.
H.D'A.C. We should not wait to be cast out.
J.T. We have here the works of God before us and how they reveal themselves. In virtue of them, the believer who is the subject of them is characterised by the fact that he comes to correspond with Christ. This is first seen in that this man was sent and later in that he was cast out. It happened to him as also to the Lord, who according to the prophetic word was to be "despised and left alone of men" (@Isaiah 53:3), and this gospel regards Him from the outset as rejected.
-- .L. Peter speaks of Him as cast away of men (@1 Peter 2:4), and this man was thus far in correspondence with Christ. Because he was able to speak for himself, that brought out the opposition.
A.B. The Lord had been cast out because He did not fit into their religion, and it was so also with this man, who was in correspondence with Him.
F.H.R. What a happy moment it must have been, as they both found themselves outside, both rejected!
{392}
J.T. Just so. Now he is morally suitable to be the companion of the Son of God.
A.B. It is light, attractive light. The Son of God is now waiting upon him. Consequently life shows itself in him, answering to the light.
J.T. In the title "Son of God" it is not the rejection that comes into view, but One who established another world. God is, as it were, bound to do this.
Man will not have the fruits of His work down here and thus the next chapter opens a way out of the religious order of things, which had shown itself opposed to Christ.
J.O.S. When the Jews said, "Until when dost thou hold our soul in suspense?" He then refers to what the sheep did (@John 10:24,27).
H.Pf. Was the education of this young believer finished at the end of chapter 9?
J.T. For him as an individual, yes; he is a worshipper of the Son of God, and could be in that world in the full recognition of the Person of Christ and that really forms the basis of chapter 10. There the Lord now shows that there is a way out.
Ques. Into the fellowship of the Son of God?
J.T. Quite so.
A.B. Would you tell us something about the personal revelation that the Lord gives of Himself as the Son of God?
J.T. He challenges the man and says, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" And he shows how prepared he is for this revelation, for he says, "And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?" He recognises the supremacy of the *Lord* and in answer, the Lord refers him to his experience and says, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he" (verse 37). He says "with thee" and not 'speaks to thee' and by this the Lord refers, I think, to the fact that the relations should be mutual.
{393}
Ques. Is it of importance that it says Jesus found him? (verse 35).
J.T. That He heard of him and found him is of special beauty; it shows how fully the Lord took the place of a servant.
Rem. And that of the good Shepherd.
J.T. He hears and He finds; that shows how fully He was Man. The faithful constant service of Christ is seen in it. And then He speaks with him, not as God from the top of the ladder spoke *to* Jacob, but here He talked *with* him.
Ques. As with Abraham?
J.T. Just so. It says that he stood before Him (@Genesis 18:22).
H.D'A.C. Can we expect Jesus to speak to us in this homely way?
J.T. We have a lovely type of it in Elijah and Elisha when they had crossed over the Jordan and "as they went on, and talked" (@2 Kings 2:11). Here we have a suggestion of mutual relations, the Lord talking with him. Then in chapter 10 He shows that the knowledge which the sheep would have would be the same as that which existed between Himself and the Father (verse 15).
Ques. Was the blind man now suitable to be brought to the flock?
J.T. I think that; he had come to it, that he was in the position to enter into these relations with the Son of God. According to @Matthew 17:26, the Lord says the sons are free, and then the stater was given for Him and for Peter. Every believer, according to my judgment, can enter into the same blessed relations with Christ which the Lord's remark, "for me and thee", denoted.
H.H. It is wonderful that it was one stater for the two persons.
J.T. This believer was brought into a wonderful company. Whoever may come or go, you do not
{394}
leave this company. That is a link which is formed not only for time but for eternity.
A.B. Now we have come to where we have no more individuality. The truth is enjoyed in the light of the whole company and even if you have to stand alone, you can have the light of the whole.
J.T. In the next chapter the flock comes before us. Personally the individuals are viewed as sheep, but the basis of that thought is that all are bound up with the Son of God. Every believer has his personal link with the Son of God, as Paul says, "The Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me" (@Galatians 2:20).
H.D'A.C. We must begin with the personal side, the love of Christ to *me* and what Christ says to *me*.
J.T. It is a wonderful link and it goes right over into eternity.
H.D'A.C. In the vast assembly in glory every one will be conscious of a special part with Christ; he will never lose that. In @Revelation 1:5 it says "who loves us", but in @Galatians 2:20, "who has loved me".
A.B. In our chapter we have a similar thought. In Galatians Paul says as to himself personally "who has loved me and given himself for me", but here the Lord says, "I lay down my life for the sheep".
Ques. Is it not important that the Lord speaks of sheep which He is to lead out of the sheepfold?
J.T. Yes. At the end of chapter 9 He leaves the Pharisees in their sins -- He says, "Your sin remains"; and now He stands there morally justified in leading the sheep out of such a condition of things.
R.St. That the Lord had results from it, the last verse of chapter 10 shows, where it says, "Many believed on him".
H.H. I think it is important to see that the sheep are to follow Him out of love.
{395}
J.T. It is, as our brother says, well to notice that many believed on Him, but they believed on Him *there*. That means that the attention is directed to the place which He now takes up, and that was where John was baptising at the first. That means that the Lord, now that the Jews had rejected Him, has returned to first principles.
Ques. Do you wish to emphasise by that, the inward relation between the individual and the collective?
J.T. We have to consider chapter 10 from the divine side. There we see in verses 1 - 5 what the Lord now undertakes and that in an allegory, as verse 6 tells us. He now guides our attention to His own attitude to the Jewish religion and says that He is the shepherd of the sheep, and that the porter has opened to Him.
J.O.S. Is that John the baptist?
J.T. Whatever had been brought about in the regular way, whatever answered to the thought of the porter, recognised Him.
Ques. Was the Lord here the shepherd of the Jewish sheep?
J.T. In a general way that is the thought. "He that enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep" is naturally an allegory, according to verse 6. When they did not understand this, He said, "I am the door of the sheep. All whoever came before me are thieves and robbers". He had entered the fold by the door, but now He becomes the door of the sheep.
Ques. What was the door?
J.T. That is a figure. It signifies how the Lord came in. He appeared among the Jews, but He did not force His entry.
F.W.K. Does that allude to His answering to the promises which were prophetically stated of Him?
{396}
J.T. I think He would emphasise that He came as pre-destined. No one who serves can forcefully claim a place. He came as marked out beforehand, others came as thieves and robbers. The porter refers to that which was of God there, and it acknowledged the Lord as He drew near.
The door in verse 7 has to do with the way out. When you find the way out of the fold, that is, out of a system which had got into a bad state, you will be saved and you are free to go in and to go out. The Lord is alluding to sonship, I think. There is salvation and then liberty to go out and in and to find pasture. Believers in John are persons who are trustworthy and know liberty, as we see in this man of whom it says, "He will speak concerning himself" (chapter 9:21). He was given, as it were, free rein, because he could be depended upon. And then further on, Lazarus was loosed and let go, without any kind of impediment. So here the sheep are those who go in through the door. Such an one will be saved and go in and out and find pasture.
H.D'A.C. They are trusted with freedom, because they will be sure to go God's way.
J.T. Whither they go is left unspecified. The main thing is they go in through Christ, and then all is well; we come in truth into the realm of liberty.
Ques. Had the Lord not spoken of it in chapter 8:32,36?
J.T. Just so, the truth makes free and then also the Son.
Ques. Is what we have here not referred to in @Galatians 4:4,5, "Come of woman, come under law, that he might redeem those under law, that we might receive sonship"?
J.T. I think sonship is the basis. It is not only that the person concerned may go in and out, but that he will do it. It seems to refer to the liberty which he gets by going in through Christ. The blind
{397}
man, as I take it, is a kind of figure of it. The Lord wanted to give him, as they met and talked with one another, an idea of the liberty in that realm.
H.H. Is the other world to which you have already referred, fully accessible now to the saints? Is eternal life in connection with it?
J.T. The Lord says, "I am come that they might have life, and might have it abundantly", and, "I give them life eternal; and they shall never perish". In this way all hangs upon our coming in our souls into touch with the Son of God. Going in implies that we reach all in the Son of God.
H.D'A.C. In this way we really go in to God and to all that He is.
-- .L. And so we find salvation actually in the christian company; it says "he shall be saved".
J.T. I think the truth here comes to that. All of that takes form in the christian circle, but all hangs on the fact that we come in touch with the Son of God. He brought it all down here; all was present in Him.
H.H. So in christianity all depends on a Person, not on familiarity with the truth, however right or important this may be.
Rem. It is divine liberty.
J.T. Quite so, and then we see in verse 15 the kind of knowledge. There we learn to know the higher kind of knowledge which exists between the Lord and the saints, and in that way, according to John, we come into correspondence not only with Him, but with the Father, and that to all eternity.
A.B. Here we come in a certain sense to that which is the main subject of John's gospel.
J.T. Yes, that is more opened out to us from chapter 13 to chapter 20, where we are formally recognised as the Lord's brethren, and He speaks of His Father and our Father and His God and our God.
{398}
H.D'A.C. There we arrive at something much higher, we leave the ground of the sheep and the shepherd and come to a higher plane.
A.B. Is that not already referred to here in the going in? When you arrive at sonship you go in. Has the going out to do with testimony and the going in with our privilege?
J.T. I think that. In @Revelation 3:12 it says, "He shall go no more at all out". I take it, that refers to the eternal state; but the going in fits us for going out.
H.D'A.C. Now there is no fold.
J.T. Only the flock and it is mobile.
H.D'A.C. But later on we arrive at something still higher, at the relationship of Christ with His brethren, to that between the Father and the Son and that of the brethren with Christ. There we have no sheep.
J.T. The figure of the sheep is to show our helplessness and defencelessness and yet we are at the same time precious to Him who is the Good Shepherd. He wants in that way to impress us with what we are to Him: "The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep". He says that twice, in verse 11 and then in verse 15, where it says, "I lay down my life for the sheep". Then in verse 17 He says, "On this account the Father loves me, because I lay down my life that I may take it again".
H.D'A.C. As long as we are on earth we are sheep which, given to Him of the Father, are under the care of the Shepherd.
J.T. Quite so, and the laying down of His life gives us the assurance of what we are to Him. What He gave has to do with that which He was here as Man in relation to God and His promises. Over and against that He gives Himself for the assembly.
H.D'A.C. I believe "himself" (@Ephesians 5:25) is a still greater thought.
{399}
J.T. Just so, that is why I mentioned it.
H.H. The blind man is one of the sheep. The Lord has done as much as that for each one. The work of God is manifested in every sheep.
A.B. Hearing His voice and following Him sets forth a certain state, does it not?
J.T. Quite so. Then a further thought is that the laying down of His life for the sheep proves His love to them, and is at the same time the ground of the Father's love to Him. What wonderful love we see in all this.
H.H. It has moreover to do, not with the love of divine Persons as such, but with the love of the Father to the Lord Jesus, because He laid down His life and so gave Him an occasion for love.
Ques. Was it a new cause, for there were others?
J.T. It gave Him a fresh cause, and that in view of the sheep.
Ques. Do we see Him in it as the offering?
J.T. No doubt, but what it comes to is that He did this for the sheep, and that gave the Father a fresh motive to love Him.
Rem. How wonderful to be a sheep!
{400}
THE WORK OF GOD (3)
@John 11:1 - 5, 33 - 44; @John 12:1 - 8
J.T. It was remarked yesterday that the Lord went over the Jordan again to the place where John was baptising at the first. It says "he abode there" and "many believed on him there" (@John 10:40,42). The previous part of chapter 10 shows that He was completely rejected by the Jews. In verse 24 the Jews surrounded Him, for the testimony among them had completely ceased. When a similar state of things comes in amongst us, we need not hope that a way will be made for the testimony; we have then to withdraw ourselves and go out. The Lord here shows the way, in that He slipped away over the Jordan to the place where John was baptising at the first. He begins, as it were, anew, but in completely new circumstances, and leads us to a place down here which is prepared for Christ, as we see it in the beginning of the next chapter.
H.D'A.C. John did not come to maintain the existing state of things but to prepare a place for Christ. Is that not so?
J.T. He, as it were, led the Lord into the sheepfold and gave testimony to Him. Here they said, "John did no sign; but all things which John said of this man were true". His testimony among the Jews is now over and what immediately comes before us after this is the family. Bethany represents the centre of the Jewish remnant, but under the figure of a family. Therefore it says on the one hand "Lazarus of Bethany" (chapter 11:1) -- he is here expressly connected with his locality, because this town represents the place of the remnant, of which Lazarus is characteristic -- and on the other hand "the village of Mary and Martha her sister".
J.O.S. Why does John mention here in verse 2 what he does not bring forward until chapter 12?
{401}
J.T. You mean, that Mary anointed the Lord with ointment -- I think, as the end of this path of service, and in Mary we see it reached.
Rem. Therefore it is thus mentioned beforehand.
Ques. Was Mary the woman in @Luke 7?
J.T. No. The name of that woman is not given, there is no connection at all with her. There is no reason to think that this Mary in any way resembled the woman in @Luke 7.
Rem. That is said of Mary of Bethany in chapter 12.
H.H. Is that Mary not mentioned for the first time in @Luke 10?
J.T. Just so. What comes before us here is, I think, the family, the Jewish remnant which clings to Christ, as seen in a brother and two sisters. It has to do with Lazarus of *Bethany* and shows that the town is before us and what should be there for Christ.
H.D'A.C. Bethany lay very close to the metropolis of the religious world, but was separated from it.
F.W.K. Separated by the mount of Olives.
J.T. Anyone who went from Jerusalem to Bethany would be greatly reminded of spiritual realities as he went over the mount of Olives.
G.R.A. What does the name Bethany mean?
F.W.K. 'House of dates' or 'of figs'.
J.T. I should like to know whether we have really understood the end of chapter 10. The surrounding of the Lord by the Jews and the going away of the Lord to the place where John was baptising at the first are very important.
J.O.S. That would be a return to first principles, I suppose?
J.T. Just so. Set free from the religious world which sets itself against the testimony of Christ, we begin anew. We go back to the beginning in order
{402}
to get our principles elsewhere. We all bring with us many of the manners and feelings of the religious world which has become objectionable.
-- .L. This world really answers to the great house? (@2 Timothy 2:20).
J.T. Yes, it answers to that today. Paul had said "our way not entirely shut up" (@2 Corinthians 4:8), and indeed in the second epistle to the Corinthians the enemy had nearly closed up his way. But if Paul were to settle in Rome, London, Paris or Berlin he would find no open door at all in the religious profession. His way would be completely shut up. He would then have to do what we have done, according to the words, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity" (@2 Timothy 2:19).
But when we do separate ourselves we do not merely remain standing there, putting away all that is wrong, but we have to begin again with the first principles. So the Lord went away to where John was baptising at the first and there He abode. It is as if He found in these principles a way out. His remaining there shows that suitable conditions were there; in Jerusalem they were not present. At the end of chapter 7 it says, "Every one went to his home. But Jesus went to the mount of Olives", but here it says "he abode there. And many came to him, and said, John did no sign; but all things which John said of this man were true". They recognised that what John had said of Him was true. So we also begin afresh with those who recognise the truth and these believe on Him *there*.
P.L. So in Philadelphia the Holy and the True becomes the gathering point to first principles.
J.T. Quite so. On this ground we have here an excellent commencement to our path, namely, first principles, then those who recognise the truth and then also those who there, in those circumstances,
{403}
believe on Jesus. These circumstances provide a great advantage.
-- .L. In addition is it really a matter of love to Christ? They came to *Him*.
J.T. Yes, He becomes the attractive centre, and chapter 11 opens that up in the family and that leads us to a place where Christ is received and honoured.
Ques. Does not the ministry of John the evangelist have in it the special thought of bringing us back to the right beginning?
J.T. Quite so, and to bring before us the family circle where such conditions are to be found, into which Christ can come. Lazarus of Bethany is there, the first who is brought before us. He was of the village of Mary and Martha her sister. It is as if each one of them gave character to the place.
F.W.K. Is it not striking that the place is called the village of Mary, not so much that of Martha, whose name is usually mentioned first, and then it says, "It was the Mary"? Does that show that in the Lord's mind a town is characterised by the most spiritual person there?
J.T. That is really an excellent thought and I hope that we shall hold it fast, because the Lord has an assembly before Him according to its highest spiritual characteristics.
F.W.K. These can come into expression in a sister.
J.T. But He does not pass by the least spiritual. When Martha came to meet Him, He remained there where she had met Him (verse 30). Mary also came there and the Jews from her house followed her. Then in Mary's presence the Lord wept, not so much in Martha's, and He shows by that, that He honours those who share the deepest spiritual sensibilities.
{404}
Ques. What kind of sickness had Lazarus? Has it a spiritual meaning?
J.T. The Lord says, "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified by it". These illnesses, that of the man born blind and that of Lazarus, are not regarded as a consequence of the government of God but first and foremost as an opportunity to manifest the works of God and then the glory of God. What kind of sickness it was is not told us, but the Lord says rather that it is not unto death but for the glory of God.
P.L. Might we expect anything like that today, a sickness for the glory of God?
J.T. To judge of that demands spiritual discernment. According to John there is a sin unto death and one which is not to death, each having a result in the government of God. But there are also sicknesses and circumstances about which we can say nothing, we can only say that the glory of God is wrought in them.
P.L. Those are the sicknesses which are most searching to us collectively.
J.T. Quite so. Sickness of that kind greatly helps our localities. But how thoughtfully the Lord moves. When He heard of it He remained two days then in the place where He was.
Ques. Would you tell us what a sin unto death is?
J.T. In each case that can only be spiritually judged. Something can come in that is incurable; the name of the Lord has been dishonoured and if the person concerned took ill, it would be a question if one should pray for him. But we should turn again to what lies at the basis of the Lord's service here, namely, a place to which the Lord comes on account of the conditions which are found there. He can come to a place to bring everything into order again, as He did in the seven assemblies in Revelation.
{405}
But in Bethany there was that which attracted Him and that should be the outflow of the service of chapter 11, a service characterised by remarkable thoughtfulness on the Lord's part -- He remained two days then in the place where He was.
Rem. And that in spite of the fact that He "loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus".
J.T. That was the direct basis of His service; it was a service of love to the family.
H.D'A.C. In so doing there came to light a wonderful power for liberation from the most depressing circumstances.
Ques. Why is Martha's name mentioned first, here in verse 5?
J.T. In that way, as already remarked, it is stressed that He does not overlook the weakest. From @Luke 10 it is evident that Martha was less spiritual than Mary.
F.W.K. Could we say that when it has to do with the Lord's valuing spiritual state, then Mary came first, but when it is a question of love, then the least spiritual is just as much loved as the most spiritual?
J.T. In most places one is inclined to undervalue the less spiritual ones. Many a time you hear that this or that brother is giving a spiritual lead in such and such a place, but this chapter shows that the Lord took everyone there into consideration. So the Lord can bring forward those whom we perhaps overlook by being too much occupied with the spiritual ones.
Rem. We should always consider what is in chapter 1, "as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God".
Ques. Is there not a reference to this in @Leviticus 27? Everyone had his worth according to Moses valuation, and his valuation really answers to the Lord's.
{406}
P.L. Corresponding with that, John refers to little children, young men, and fathers.
J.T. When one is visiting different localities it is very important to be as fair as possible to everyone.
H.H. The last chapter of Leviticus says these are the commandments of Jehovah (verse 34).
J.T. If some of us had gone to Bethany we might perhaps have gone immediately to Mary. There are, naturally, circumstances in which we have to turn to the most spiritual.
H.D'A.C. In certain circumstances one has specially to consider the older ones; Martha was the elder. Younger people are often more spiritual, but we have also to concede to the older ones what is due to them.
J.T. She was the first to serve the Lord; she received Him into her house. As already remarked, there are circumstances when it is advisable to go to the most spiritual. Paul after his release from prison went first to Lydia. It does not say there, 'into her house', but "to Lydia; and having seen the brethren, they exhorted them and went away" (@Acts 16:40). But here it has to do with the whole family and so the Lord, when Martha comes to meet Him, remains in the place where He met her, and now Martha becomes the messenger to Mary. She did not make much ado about it, she went secretly to her, but then Mary had also to come to that place. So Martha had the advantage, in first meeting with the Lord. He remained there where that happened, but Mary shows what the grace of God had made her, and in that way her spiritual superiority immediately comes to light.
H.Pf. According to her activity one might have thought that Martha was more spiritual, but she was not; Mary sat at the Lord's feet.
{407}
H.D'A.C. Mary fell at the Lord's feet; she was the worshipper. She had a far greater consciousness of the greatness of His Person than Martha.
J.T. Quite so.
H.H. Is this chapter an advance on the 9th, in that this one sets forth the work of God in connection with the family and that one, on the other hand, in connection with the individual?
J.T. It clearly goes further, for we have here not only the works of God, but the glory of God, and the glory of the Son of God, and on this account the details are also given of what the Lord did at the grave. In verse 40 He says to Martha, "Did I not say to thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?". Then the stone was taken away and it says, "Jesus lifted up his eyes on high and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me". Now we are on most holy ground, everything that went up to God there shows us the wonderful dependence on the part of the Son of God. One can scarcely find a passage which brings more fully into expression the attitude of Christ as God's Son in dependence upon His Father, as His words in verses 41 and 42. When we understand this, we can see the glory of God and that of the Son of God shining forth in radiancy.
A.M. What do the four days in the grave mean?
J.T. That corruption had already set in; that is the important point. Whether it is four days or four thousand years makes no difference. The Lord Himself lay only three days in the grave. Unbelief is met here in that corruption is no hindrance to the power of God.
Ques. Why did the Lord wait the two days when He heard that Lazarus was sick?
J.T. In order that circumstances should come in, in which He could glorify God.
{408}
H.Pf. People could not then say that he was only in a trance.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. Love for Lazarus would have moved Him to go immediately when He was called, but love to His Father held Him back two days.
J.T. Yesterday afternoon we saw that the bride in @Song of Songs 2:7 note says, 'I charge you, ... that ye stir not up, nor awaken love till it please'. We see that here; all this delay is love. It was true Martha, and later Mary, said, "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died" (verses 21,32), but keeping a man alive is not nearly so great as raising him from the dead, also it is not all God's thought to detain man in present conditions of existence. Throughout the millennium men will be kept alive and preserved from death but that witnesses only to the power of God which can do so. The millennium, however, does not set forth the purpose of God. Before ever sin came into the world, God's thought was life out of death. Love wanted to bring in that life, therefore we should not urge on love, but let it take its way. Mary and Martha would have had the Lord there before but that would have been driving love, stirring it up. Love in Christ would do far more than that for them, for it was not only a matter of bringing about their relief but of the glory of God and the glory of the Son of God. In that way our greatest blessings are bound up with the glory of God.
P.L. Have we not in that the great principle that holy consideration makes way for the activities of love?
J.T. Consideration is important, to give love room to work.
H.D'A.C. The Lord waited two days and spoke of walking by day, in order that one should not stumble in the night (verses 9,10).
{409}
J.T. Yes, the day had twelve hours. The beloved in the Song of Songs charges the daughters of Jerusalem by the gazelles and the hinds of the field and refers in that way to the rapidity of Christ, and that in order that love may be free to act. We may be sure that love will not delay when it is free to act.
-- L. Did the weeping on this occasion make love free to act?
J.T. We see what follows now: the Lord was deeply moved, His deepest sensibilities came into expression.
H.H. On this occasion all the innermost thoughts and feelings of the Lord came to light, not only in His sympathy but in view of His imminent death.
J.T. In verse 33 it says, "Jesus therefore, when he saw her weeping, and the Jews who came with her weeping, was deeply moved in spirit, and was troubled". The Lord here was moving forward against death, which lay upon the family.
Ques. Yesterday afternoon you said that in David and Solomon the heart and soul of the Old Testament came into expression. Do you not think that here the Lord brought into expression the heart of heaven?
J.T. Yes, God in reality now found expression, in that a vessel fitted for it was down here to express His feelings. As was remarked yesterday, divine feelings are expressed on earth today through the Spirit in us, "with groanings which cannot be uttered" (@Romans 8:26).
H.D'A.C. And that goes far beyond what we have in another place where it says, "Now is my soul troubled" (chapter 12:27). Here it is in spirit.
J.T. Yes, it is really a question of Himself, of all that He was. We are therefore in the presence of circumstances which go far beyond the mere powers of comprehension of men in this life. This is the beginning of what is so beautifully portrayed in
{410}
@Psalm 114, where in the presence of the Lord, the sea, the Jordan, and the mountains and hills break forth into movement. These sighs were not sighs of weakness; there was power behind them, but a delegated power, through a Man, the Son of God as Man, therefore it says, "Jesus lifted up his eyes on high ...".
The power of God is exercised in a Man, in the Son who was down here as Man in dependence upon God. He called, "Lazarus, come forth". He cried that with a loud voice, as He whom God had sent. That is, to my mind, what we should lay hold of. He is the Son of God, the sent One down here.
H.H. "That the world may believe that thou hast sent me" (chapter 17:21). It is the glory of the Son of God, to act in unison with the Father. This glory of the Son is something very attractive and important; we view in it the Son in His mediatorial position. That is generally very little understood by us.
J.T. God and man each hold the position which is fitting.
H.D'A.C. God remains God, and man remains man.
H.H. The mediatorial position of Christ means that He remains Man for ever.
J.T. Consequently God is always accessible to the saints.
We shall now look briefly into chapter 12. Earlier Lazarus had been raised and set free, as it says, "Loose him and let him go". Then the Lord comes six days before the passover to Bethany where Lazarus was.
Ques. What do the graveclothes mean?
J.T. They stand related to man in the flesh who has gone into death; there they will be done away.
Ques. Do the saints help in that?
J.T. That is more a spiritual concern; it has a very important application to our day. The Lord
{411}
does what we can *not* do, but what *we* can do, *He* does not do, for He wishes us to do it. It is good to remember that. Many a time we think that everything is at our disposal, but here we are reminded that there is something that we could never do. Nevertheless the Lord leaves us to do what we are able to. He says, for example, "Take away the stone", and then "Loose him and let him go". But then it says in chapter 12:1, in a very noticeable and instructive way, "where was the dead man Lazarus", that is to say, where he *was*. According to God's thoughts he was Lazarus of *Bethany*, but what a Lazarus he is now, what a change had happened to him. He had been dead, but Jesus had raised him from the dead.
Ques. Concerning the stones to be rolled away from the tomb at the raising of Lazarus and the resurrection of the Lord, what was the difference? In the latter case the stone was very great and they could not roll it away.
J.T. They found it rolled away.
H.H. "An angel of the Lord ... came and rolled away the stone and sat upon it" (@Matthew 28:2).
J.T. Here, I think, is stressed what we can do. We see therefore in the raising more its spiritual meaning for us. We have to notice, however, that the occurrence happened where Lazarus was. He was found in the place where God had put him, namely, at Bethany; he was not away on holiday. What do the brethren think of that?
Ques. What do you mean by that?
J.T. If the Lord goes to S -- -, where would you be? Every one of us belongs to a place and the Lord goes to a place in view of us. Therefore it is said here, "where Lazarus was".
H.D'A.C. As one who had died and was now living again, he must have been a wonderful testimony in the place. There they made the Lord a supper.
{412}
J.T. "There therefore they made him a supper". Our thoughts are in that way specially directed to the place. On that account we should not be absent from our place unless there is a competent, godly reason for it. God's thought is to raise up a testimony locally. Lazarus was raised again in view of his locality.
P.L. And when John, who wrote the Revelation, was far from his locality on the island of Patmos, he supports this principle, for he was there "for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus" (@Revelation 1:9).
F.M. Philip will also have had a godly reason. He preached to the Ethiopian eunuch.
Ques. Is the supper here the breaking of bread?
J.T. No, here *they* made Him a supper. The *Lord* prepares the Lord's supper, not we.
Rem. "Lazarus was one of those at table with him".
J.T. We have here the three members of the family, each one in his place. Lazarus represents the dignity, the result of the work of Christ; Martha served and Mary anointed the Lord. It is Christ's circle in the light of the glory of God. This happened in contrast to the fact that the Jews in their enmity surrounded the Lord. He is now surrounded by a circle of lovers, that is what God has in mind at the present time in every place.
P.L. In this vessel He administers in every place the glory of God.
J.T. In verse 9 we see how Lazarus is a testimony and that in association with Christ.
P.L. Our aim in the loosing of our brother and in letting him go free should be to see him in his locality alongside of Christ.
J.T. Just so. Then as the brother is seen in association with Christ the religious world takes counsel
{413}
to kill Lazarus also. Because in his testimony he stood alongside Christ, he must also be killed with Him. That is what is to be expected.
H.D'A.C. And that was what Saul of Tarsus sought to do.
{414}
FEATURES OF THE ASSEMBLY
@1 Corinthians 11:16 - 26; @1 Corinthians 12:11 - 13; @1 Corinthians 14:15 - 20
J.T. The main thought in these passages is subjection, unity and intelligence. It will help us to consider the assembly as characterised by these features. As has already been remarked today, the assembly is subjected to Christ -- that is God's thought for it -- in order that divine thoughts should be developed in it.
Ques. Perhaps you will tell us whether you are speaking of the assembly as Christ's assembly ("my assembly") or as the assembly of God.
J.T. Both, but Corinthians has the assembly of God in mind.
H.D'A.C. It says here, "Do ye despise the assembly of God?"
Ques. What is the difference between the assembly of God and the assembly of Christ?
J.T. As far as I see, the assembly of God has to do with the testimony down here, but when the Lord says "my assembly" He is expressing what it is to Him.
H.H. I was thinking about the first part of the chapter, where the man is the head of the woman, that there we have the thought of subjection.
J.T. It is very significant that here, before we come to the subject of the breaking of bread, God's order in creation is mentioned. In verse 16 it says, "But if anyone think to be contentious, *we* have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God". Contention can only hinder the working out of the thoughts of God in the assembly. One who is subject will wait. We need not hope to understand everything at once; it says, "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things" (@2 Timothy 2:7). That would save us from much strife. If we receive
{415}
the gospel aright, it brings about subjection in the believer, the "obedience of faith" (@Romans 1:5).
Rem. A subject mind is teachable -- one who is learning does not contend. Does not Peter refer to that when the says we are sanctified unto the obedience of Christ?
J.T. "By sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ" (@1 Peter 1:2).
H.D'A.C. The assembly is no place for contention.
J.T. Subjection is therefore a fundamental principle, if we want to make progress in the truth.
H.H. We see that in Christ -- it says "the Christ's head God". We see it in the church, and we shall see it in the coming day in Israel.
J.T. How perfectly the will of God came into expression down here in Christ in subjection!
Rem. According to the first verse the apostle was also subject, for he says, "Be my imitators, even as I also am of Christ".
J.T. That is just what comes before us in Exodus; there we find Moses and Aaron in subjection to God, together in brotherly affection; and such were available to God, those whom He could use. Later we see the tabernacle as a type of the assembly. All the parts of it were brought to Moses, and Moses blessed the people on this account. All was set up under divine direction and then the tabernacle was anointed. Every feature of the tabernacle as set up stood in relation to service. The ark contained the testimony, the loaves were on the table, all the lamps on the candlestick were lighted. Then the altar is mentioned, on which the sacrifices were offered, also the laver, in which Moses and Aaron washed; all stood immediately available to God, and the glory filled the tabernacle. From this we see that, if we are subject and anointed, we are available to God.
{416}
Ques. Are those "the approved", mentioned in verse 19 of this chapter?
J.T. Quite so. The Corinthians, in a general way, God could not use. The Lord had said to Paul He had much people in this city, and He secured them for Himself by the best possible preaching, the best possible service. Although the Son of God had been preached among them by Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus, still God could not use them.
H.D'A.C. Why?
J.T. Firstly, because they had a party spirit.
Rem. They had become contentious.
Rem. They had given up the first principle, that of obedience, with which they began.
J.T. The apostle says to them in @1 Corinthians 1:10, "Now I exhort you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say the same thing, and that there be not among you divisions; but that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion".
H.D'A.C. They gave the first place to the first man, and not to Christ.
F.W.K. They were not standing in that of which @1 Corinthians 1:30 speaks, "But of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption".
J.T. What therefore is necessary among other things is to set forth afresh the principle of subjection; without it we can make no progress in the truth of the assembly. If there is room for contention, then one man's word is as good as another's. With Aaron, on the other hand, we see, as already noticed in Exodus, that he had intended to seek out his brother Moses, which was right in itself, but then in reality he went at the divine command. The principle of subjection is thus proved, not only by the fact that I wish to do something, but that I wish to do it on
{417}
the principle of God's will. If God has brought in in Christ the principle of His will, He will not be diverted from it.
H.H. Moses and Aaron could, so to speak, break bread together, for it says, "When he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart" (@Exodus 4:14).
J.T. In this type we have a perfect combination of light and brotherly love. Moses had light from God; he had seen Him in the bush and had been taught to take his shoes from off his feet, for the place where he stood was holy ground. God had made known His name to him. We have nothing about Aaron's history, all that we are told is, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?" Aaron plainly sets forth that which is secret in the history of a soul, known only to God, so that He can give it a name. He says, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? ... he goeth out to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart". Aaron thus represents the secret history of a soul with God, which He alone knows, for He says, "He will be glad in his heart". And so Aaron goes out by divine appointment to meet Moses, and when he meets him he kisses him. He met him on the mountain of God. Subject and standing in brotherly affection, they set forth the great feature of divine resource. It says, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" (@Genesis 22:14) -- and there they met.
P.L. Here in Corinthians the vessel of light is the called apostle and the vessel of brotherly love Sosthenes the brother.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Is that the meaning of @1 Corinthians 11:11?
J.T. It is a matter there of being "in the Lord". The behaviour of the Corinthians proved that they were not subject, so Paul had to say in verse 17, "But in prescribing to you on this which I now enter on, I do not praise, namely, that ye come together,
{418}
not for the better, but for the worse. For first, when ye come together in assembly, I hear there exist divisions among you, and I partly give credit to it". There were thus divisions among them when they were actually together. Chapter 1 has more to do with their state in general and what characterised them within and without, but here he refers to actual divisions when they came together in assembly and therefore he says, "It is not to eat the Lord's supper". On this account he brings the Lord's supper afresh before them. It had already been delivered to them, but now he says, "For *I* received from the *Lord*, that which I also delivered to you". He stresses the Lord. Now it says, as it were, 'I have received it from the *Lord*', and that stands in agreement with the twelve *apostles* who were at the institution of the Supper.
H.D'A.C. The Lord could not say to the twelve anything different from what He said to Paul.
J.T. Evidently it was His intention fully to confirm the witnesses to the institution of the Lord's supper. That is a very important matter for us, for the combat which has raged round the Lord's supper has been continuous. On this account subjection is so necessary. The twelve, under the Lord, developed this principle of supremacy in love, so that we read that those who were converted continued in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles; (@Acts 2:42). The fact that it was *their teaching* shows that the converts were subject; from the very beginning they had the principle of subjection.
H.D'A.C. It was a strict rule, but a rule of love.
J.T. And in addition, a rule of twelve men whom the Lord had already influenced and used.
H.D'A.C. His prayer for them was heard; they were all *one*.
Rem. So we have in @1 Corinthians 11 no new institution, but that which Paul had received from
{419}
the Lord agreed with what he had brought to them before.
J.T. It is very beautiful to consider that. "*I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you" means that he was not bringing in anything new. So he declares clearly that they had sinned against what they had already received from him.
H.H. The principle of subjection is contained in the words "*I* received from the Lord".
J.T. He added nothing to it. What marks the history of the Lord's supper in the hands of the public profession is additions and human innovations which went so far that it was quite lost to sight. The apostle added nothing to it. He received it from the Lord and what he received he gave to them. The point here is, "*I* received from the Lord". Inasmuch as the Lord's supper has been so degraded today we have here a very peremptory word. This degrading was already setting in at Corinth, therefore these words are so important, "*I* received from the Lord".
A.M. Do you think the Corinthians were in a condition to receive what Paul had from the Lord?
J.T. It was a matter of emphasising the supremacy of the Lord. The second epistle shows that the apostle was not mistaken. The foundation which he had laid in Corinth was still there, so that the epistle had a result. "If the foundations be destroyed, what shall the righteous do?" (@Psalm 11:3). But here the foundations were still there, and so the word was received and the saints humbled themselves.
Ques. Do you not think that in the Supper we can see God's way of bringing the Corinthians into the gain of the anointing?
J.T. The anointing is only to be seen where there is subjection. What is needed is correspondence with Christ. In Him subjection was to be seen in infinite perfection, so that it says here that the head
{420}
of Christ is God. When He was baptised, and praying, He was anointed. He took His place according to the will of God with the repentant remnant and there He was anointed. So chapter 11 of Corinthians leads to the anointing in chapter 12. Chapter 12 does not only speak of one body in Christ as does the epistle to the Romans (chapter 12:5), but of one body through the baptism of the Spirit. That means that through subjection the Spirit has freedom to give us, as it were, to be merged in the body.
Rem. If each takes his own supper there is no principle of subjection.
J.T. So even now in the whole of christendom there prevails an independence of action.
A.M. Does the baptism of the Spirit not involve the setting aside of the flesh?
J.T. "All these things operates the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each in particular according as he pleases" (@1 Corinthians 12:11). We see then that the Spirit is free, it says "as he pleases".
H.D'A.C. He has this right as a divine Person.
J.T. So when we are subject, the Spirit can use us and so the apostle can immediately in verse 12 bring in the figure of the body. "For even as the body is one and has many members, but all the members of the body, being many, are one body, so also is the Christ". That makes up the Christ, the anointed vessel down here. In it we see what God is. That with which God can identify Himself comes to light. Christ means 'anointed', is not that so?
H.D'A.C. That is a very extensive thought; it embraces all saints on earth, and yet all have not part in it, because they are not true to the anointing.
J.T. If there is not subjection, there is room for our own wills and independence.
Rem. The twelve apostles received the Supper from Christ on earth, but Paul from Christ in glory,
{421}
therefore he says, "*I* received it from the Lord" which, of course, is also an allusion to His supremacy.
H.D'A.C. He was the apostle of the nations, which is important, as otherwise the gentiles could have said, if the Supper had only been given to the twelve, 'Our apostle has not given it to us'.
J.T. The importance of it in relation to the assembly lies in this, that it was given to Paul directly from heaven, and that he formally separates it from our meals among our families and places it in the assembly. He says, "Have ye not then houses for eating and drinking?" In chapter 12, therefore, the saints are viewed in subjection, as the vessel in which Christ finds His expression down here. The act of the Spirit is to baptise us into one body; we are all given to drink of one Spirit, so that we are happy to be merged. That is more than fellowship or partnership, which we have in chapter 10, but here we come to the inner side; the saints merge happily in it, as given to drink of one Spirit.
H.D'A.C. That is mutual enjoyment.
J.T. That was my thought, we are happy in it.
F.W.K. In that way we lose our individuality.
J.T. And we are happy to lose it. We should notice that the little word 'for' stands at the beginning of verses 12, 13 and 14; one is the result of the other.
Ques. Is chapter 12 the result of enjoying the Supper in the right way?
J.T. Quite so. Room is made for the Spirit. They had written to the apostle about it (compare chapters 7:1; 8:1, 12:1), and he brings in his answer when he had spoken about the Lord's supper. It is a matter of confirming which spirit is working in the assembly, and so in keeping with this he develops the truth of the body, seen as the vessel in which the Spirit operates.
{422}
Ques. Can we only arrive at this in our experience on the principle of suffering?
J.T. That remark is very apt, I think, because the holy anointing oil of the tabernacle refers much to the sufferings of Christ ("myrrh", @Exodus 30:23), so that "the Christ" down here, the anointed vessel, has to do with that.
Ques. Have we in @Matthew 26, in the woman in Simon the leper's house, how every member is prepared for the assembly?
J.T. She anointed the Vessel and thereby acknowledged that He was the very Vessel to anoint. God had already anointed Him and now she anoints Him.
Ques. In view of what?
J.T. In view of that which had been set forth in His ministry. She anointed Him for His burial.
Ques. Is that in relation to the baptism which is mentioned here?
J.T. This is the act of the Spirit. We have all been baptised by one Spirit into one body, and the apostle brings forward the figure of the human body and says, "So also is the Christ". That is the divine thought and the basis of the assembly down here.
H.D'A.C. At present there are two serious principles at work. There are some who say, 'I am not of thee', and others who say, 'I have not need of thee'.
J.T. That would be independence.
H.H. It would also be wrong to have good men at the head of a party, as at that time when they said, "I am of Paul", and so on.
J.T. The better these were, the more harm they would do.
Rem. But as a matter of fact Paul was not the head of that party.
Ques. Why would they do more harm?
J.T. Because they would have more influence. In chapter 14 all this works out in the service, as the
{423}
saints are together. So it is a matter of being governed by intelligence in what one does. Chapter 13 brings in the more excellent way of love, but according to chapter 14 I should be governed by understanding. In verse 15 it is twice mentioned, "I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray also with the understanding", and then "I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing also with the understanding". It refers to the best that there is, not the Holy Spirit, but one's own spirit. As secured for the assembly I belong entirely to it. One's own spirit is that which one is, in one's innermost being, in reference to God; it is the source of true spiritual sensibilities. Understanding governs the part which I take, but I am inwardly urged to it, so we read that the Lord rejoiced in spirit and after that gave expression to the beautiful words in @Luke 10:21,22.
P.L. Have we not in chapter 12, as it were, descending suffering love for the saints, and then in chapter 14 love in the Spirit rising up to God?
J.T. Love never fails; it is the great reserve. In assembly affairs we are never up against a wall if love is present, and it never fails. It triumphs in all circumstances, so that the apostle makes a comparison and says "the greater of these is love" (@1 Corinthians 13:13).
H.H. The death of Christ is the sublime example of it. His pathway led through the most testing circumstances.
J.T. If any hindrance is put in the way of love -- that happened there, but it did not fail -- love never fails. Gethsemane shows the greatness of the hindrances which were raised up against the love of Christ. Satan brought all his power to bear on the Spirit of the Lord to deter Him from taking this way. The Lord went through in triumph, and so I think the apostle triumphs here too. To write this letter corresponded with love's way. He says, "Yet show I
{424}
unto you a way of more surpassing excellence" (@1 Corinthians 12:31).
H.D'A.C. He wrote it with tears.
Rem. We are now coming to the side of the testimony?
J.T. Quite so. It is a matter of showing the thing and the Lord did that with the utmost perfection.
Rem. Not only that love did not fail but it reached its end.
G.R.A. It is not here a question of the soul?
J.T. In my soul I stand more in relation to men, but the spirit returns to God who gave it, so that it is here a matter of the spirit.
Rem. "He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit" (@1 Corinthians 6:17).
H.D'A.C. When the soul takes prominence in prayer, there is too much of the natural there.
J.T. One is not then so near to God, as when one is praying with his spirit to God. The gospel of Luke begins with an angel on the right side of the altar of incense.
Rem. The Lord says of His soul, "Now is my soul troubled" (@John 12:27).
J.T. The soul is a part of man, who consists of body, soul and spirit.
H.H. Do you not think that to be in one's spirit with God has a great influence on how one is publicly with one's brethren?
J.T. I think that. "Mary said, My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour" (@Luke 1:46,47). I think, in my spirit, I am nearer to God, and have God's things before me in my prayers, so that the angel is seen at the right of the altar of incense. It was the time of prayer and the people were actually praying without, and Zacharias was within, but the angel stood at the right of the altar of incense, as if he wanted to express that this was what was lacking. In truth, the
{425}
condition was marked by unbelief, for Zacharias had prayed for a son and now that he was told he should receive him, he did not believe it.
Gabriel stood before God and in @Revelation 8:2,3 it says, "I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them. And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and much incense was given to him, that he might give efficacy to the prayers of all saints at the golden altar which was before the throne". It refers there to the prayers of the saints to God. In prayer we stand before God, therefore it is a question of faith and what God will do. So unceasing prayer was made to God for Peter, but when He set him free they did not believe it; (@Acts 12:5,15).
Ques. Why do you emphasise so much the right side of the altar?
J.T. We see there the best that God has. He does "far exceedingly above all which we ask or think" (@Ephesians 3:20).
Rem. That is His goodness.
Rem. His love.
J.T. It is according to the power which works in us. The answer to our prayers displays what is in us according to the Spirit. God takes up nothing new; He works according to the power which works in us. I think we see here in chapter 14 the spirit of the saints, that means all that they were now in the assembly according to God. There we can give expression to all our best sensibilities and affections, but along with that we should be guided by intelligence, so that the principle of measure is immediately mentioned, "five words with my understanding".
H.D'A.C. Intelligence is given us by the Spirit.
J.T. That is already taught in chapter 2:16, "*We* have the mind of Christ".
Rem. But we have received no divine inspiration?
{426}
J.T. No; that means that we have the thinking faculty of Christ.
Rem. At the same time we keep within the limits of Scripture.
J.T. We find the principle of measure in both of these epistles. The measuring instruments of the watchmaker must be very exact.
Also at the forming of the universe God employed measure and weight, so it says in the next epistle, "the God of measure" (@2 Corinthians 10:13). That applies also to our service in the assembly, for it is quite clear that the principle of measure must decide.
H.D'A.C. We should not go beyond what the Spirit gives us.
J.T. We should not go beyond what is fitting. If a dozen brothers are taking part, then it is clear that I have to adjust my contribution accordingly and I must divide the available time by twelve.
H.D'A.C. That is praying with five words.
Ques. What is the difference between, "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit" (@Romans 5:5), and "Follow after love" (@1 Corinthians 14:1)?
J.T. Love is spoken of in this epistle as if it were a person. It was perfectly set out in Christ and in a certain measure in the apostle. They had to follow after it; in a word they had to be men in their minds, grown men.
{427}
FEELINGS AND AFFECTIONS
@Song of Songs 1:1 - 11; @Song of Songs 2:1 - 7
It is on my heart to call attention to the fact that what marks David's and Solomon's writings is the bringing into expression of deep feelings and affections. They directly set forth, so to speak, the heart of the Old Testament, or better still, the heart and soul of the Old Testament. They remind us that God wishes His people in their walk to bring into expression the feelings and affections produced by Himself.
Among other things may be remarked that these feelings and affections proceed from two kings, that is, from men who have an immense circle of influence. We might have thought that poetry and authorship were to be left to others, that men like David and Solomon would have had so much to do with military and state affairs, that you could hardly expect them to devote their time to such employment. In this service, however, they reflect what God and Christ are. To make it clear, I would refer to the fact that when God, in the company of two others, came to Abraham, He could wait until Abraham had prepared a meal, and also that our Lord Jesus Christ could devote so much time to going after two dissatisfied disciples on the way to Emmaus. It further moves us to see that the Father and the Son could so stoop, devoting themselves even to an individual who loves the Lord and keeps His word, for the Father and the Son would come and make Their abode with him (@John 14:23). If we take all this into consideration we can understand how David could find time to write psalms and Solomon three thousand proverbs and a thousand and five songs (@1 Kings 4:32). Just think of it, that the great ruler of that day was able to devote himself to such a service!
Now this song is *the* song of all these songs. It is called in verse 1, "The song of songs, which is
{428}
Solomon's". It is a poem by one who is a type of Christ, in which he celebrates the triumph of the love of Christ to a special person. In it the Lord wishes to remind every one of us of His triumph in securing us, in order that we, recognising His love, may love Him. To heaven it is something wonderful that there are in this world those who love Christ. He treasures every one of those who love Him; and every one of them says, He "has loved me and given himself for me" (@Galatians 2:20). The apostle Paul, who probably loved Christ the most, shows in another place that the thought of not loving Christ is entirely abhorrent, for he says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha" (@1 Corinthians 16:22). If any one does not love our Lord Jesus Christ he is incapable of loving.
Now this song shows how this love is brought about, and from the verses read in chapter 1 we see how the lover of Christ comes to ask Him where He feeds His flock and makes it to rest at noon. Whoever loves Christ wishes also to see how He serves the whole of His flock.
That leads us to the service of the Lord to the saints of the assembly; there we see His best service. That is set forth in type in Jacob -- how quickly he rolled the stone from the mouth of the well when he saw Rachel (@Genesis 29:10) -- and so Christ also devotes the best service to the saints who compose the assembly. We can therefore understand the desire of this lover of Christ to see Him serving thus, and on this account the bride says here, "Why should I be as one veiled beside the flocks of thy companions?" One veiled refers to someone whose love is questionable or at any rate is divided. "Why should I be as one veiled beside the flocks of thy companions?" Why should our love to Christ be questioned? If anyone has not come forward and committed himself to the fellowship of the people of
{429}
God, one can doubt his love. Whatever you may say of your love, we cannot be sure of it, for love must reveal itself; it is not shown by mere talk. That comes before us in Ruth (chapter 1:16), where it says, "And Ruth said, Do not intreat me to leave thee". There you see Ruth wanted to be a companion of Naomi; Naomi's people were to be her people and Naomi's God her God; where she died, Ruth wanted also to die and she wanted to be buried there -- that is a full committal. If therefore we do not openly identify ourselves with Christ, who has been cast out of this world, our love can well be called in question. We see that the bride did not want that, for she says, "Why should I be as one veiled?" But her love was genuine, for verse 8 says, "If thou know not, thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock", there you will find the Lord. Pay heed to the footsteps of the flock. Where do they go, where do they lead? You will find the footsteps of the flock lead to where Christ is.
The two already referred to today, who were on their way to Emmaus, were not displaying therein the marks of the flock of Christ. Their love could be called in question, but the Lord, who knew all things, knew that they loved Him. As, however, they had turned their backs on the main object of the love of Christ on earth, who else could have known it? According to Mark they were going into the country, although the Lord had told His disciples to remain in the city. As far as others could judge, they did not therefore love Christ uprightly. Everyone who has Christ's commandments and does not keep them, does not love Him; their footsteps therefore could not serve as guidance. But as soon as the Lord had revealed Himself to them, they rose up and returned to Jerusalem. Where did their footsteps lead now? They found the eleven and those that were gathered
{430}
with them. That is the history of every one of us who is truly gathered.
In verse 9 then it says, "I compare thee, my love, to a steed in Pharaoh's chariots". It is as if the Lord would thus encourage one who has returned to the path of faith, and then He says, "Thy cheeks are comely with bead-rows, thy neck with ornamental chains". Then we have the plural "we", for here, as we may say, the saints also come into the matter, "We will make thee bead-rows of gold with studs of silver". That means, you will be suitably adorned for the new circle, for love in the saints answers to the love of Christ. If *He* wishes to see you adorned, the *saints* do also. We have no pleasure in you in your own natural nakedness and unsightliness.
Having said all that about chapter 1, I should like to add something about chapter 2. There we see that the believer, set forth in a woman, regards himself as a narcissus of Sharon -- a wonderful product. The believer comes here to such intimacy with the Lord and His people that he is conscious of what he is in the Lord's eyes -- "a lily of the valleys", and then the Bridegroom says, "As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters". There we have what one is who loves Christ and that in a scene of contrariety, and now that *He* has made the start, *she* also says, in a figurative way, what she thinks of Him, and in that way there comes into expression the progress which the believer makes, "As the apple-tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons". He is not among thorns but among sons. There *we* wish to see Him; there, among sons, He will be loved eternally, but He will be anointed above them. It is therefore good to have this comparison before us, for in truth we shall know the Lord Jesus in this way in heaven; there He will be known among the sons and among His brethren. The one who loves Him will, however, soon discover
{431}
Him among His brethren. Nothing marks the bride here more than her ability to recognise Christ, to call special attention before others to His infinite excellencies. In this way the Spirit of God here in this world uses one who leaned on the breast of Jesus to set Him forth, to make Him known to us as God. He is a divine Person, but a perfect Servant down here. Love follows His footsteps and sees Him at the end as the ascending One. He says, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God" (@John 20:17).
Now we see in what way she can speak of the service of the Lord. She had come to it to know Him in such wise that she can sit down with rapture in His shadow. "In his shadow have I rapture and sit down". In the presence of such an One she is not excited or restless. When He-came amongst His own in @Luke 24, they were confounded; they did not yet know Him in the way He is set forth here. John leaves that out of his account of that occasion, for, ever true to himself, he sets forth the work of God and regards the believer as such, that is, apart from all that he is by nature. He is raptured in the presence of Christ and sits down in His shadow; there is rest and the palate is free to enjoy His fruit, so that he can say, "He hath brought me to the house of wine, and his banner over me is love". So it is with the believer apart from everything else; but it is not long before we find ourselves down here still in our conditions of flesh and blood, so that the consciousness of weakness very soon comes in. The bride says, "Sustain ye me with raisin-cakes, refresh me with apples". She thus has a need of being sustained and suggests raisin-cakes as a means to it and apples for her refreshing, these fruits bringing Christ into prominence, "for" she says, "I am sick of love". That can only connect with the mixed conditions in which we still are found. In heaven
{432}
there will be no such weakness; there will be no sickness there, not even of love. And then she says further, "His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace me". There we have the support of Christ which our intelligence requires, for how quickly we become conscious, even when participating in spiritual things, of how very much we require support. His left hand under the head sustains the intelligence and the right hand embracing holds the affections, so that the believer through the gracious service of Christ is maintained in His presence in intelligence and love.
As a result of that we see now that the bride charges the daughters of Jerusalem by the gazelles or by the hinds of the field, and in that she is thinking of what she has just experienced of Christ, of His readiness to hasten to us in the hour of our need. You do not then wish to frighten Him away, you leave yourself to Him and wish that love may not be disturbed or wakened up "till he please". Love will do its very best for us, and so we learn from experience that it is best to leave everything to the Lord. Love makes no mistake and thus we can trust the love of Christ. Let it do what it pleases. There is nothing more important than that, beloved brethren. Love in Christ will do its very best for us; whatever our circumstances may be, let love do what it will.
Now I fear I have overstepped the patience of my brethren, but I wished the service of David and Solomon to come before us, helping us to a true impression of feelings and affections, and these proceed from a personal knowledge of Christ and a personal link, personal relations with Him.
{433}
GOD'S HELP IN CONNECTION WITH HIS HOUSE
@Acts 18:9 - 11
I have other scriptures in mind to allude to, but I content myself with this for the moment, as it contains what I have in mind to present, namely, that divine support is available to those who recognise the house of God. From the time of its introduction in the history of the testimony, we find divine help associated with it. I have in mind that we may look together at the facts attendant upon the truth of the house and its continuance as in the Old Testament, and as we look at these facts we shall find evidence of divine help.
But I wish first to call attention to the apostle Paul, who is pre-eminently connected with the house of God. He was concerned that we should all know how to behave ourselves in it, and he himself is the model in that way. He is presented in the scripture as one who particularly had help from God. You recall how in his defence before Agrippa he refers to this: "Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day".
Doubtless there are those who are around us at the present time who are available for help, but the question is -- is it help which is from God? "Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day" (@Acts 26:22), as if to imply that God was his help and without that help continuance was impossible; and in continuing he announced nothing different from what the prophets had announced. He completed the word of God, but his testimony was in keeping with the prophets; it was marked by consistency with all that had preceded him. You will recall how that going to the city of Corinth he lodged with a man and his wife who had come from Rome, and because they were of the same craft he
{434}
lodged with them (@Acts 18:1 - 3). It does not say that it was because they were saints, but because they were of the same craft. In other words, the apostle identifies himself in that city with tentmakers, being one himself. He was known there as a craftsman, and yet he had all the light of God in his soul and he knew it.
One loves to dwell upon Paul, the great apostle to the gentiles, lodging at Corinth as an artisan. He had the full light of God as to what God was building. The structure was in the nature of a tent for the moment, but the building was going on. The apostle being at Corinth the Lord appears to him, saying, "Fear not, but speak and be not silent; because *I* am with thee, and no one shall set upon thee to injure thee; because I have much people in this city". Knowing what opposition there was, He also knew that there was much people there. These people were to be enlightened by Paul. They were to be formed into an assembly; they were to become part of the house of God. And so the Lord said to His servant that He was with him. I want that we should take this in. The work is going on; it may be outwardly small, but in the light of faith it is a great work. It can only be carried on with the help which comes from God. "*I* am with thee" -- and so the apostle continued there one and a half years teaching the word of God among them.
In the next chapter it is the word of *the Lord*, which refers to His*power*. But the word of God brings in *the mind of God*. The mind of God is known in His house. It was taught by the apostle for eighteen months. It was *taught* there. The teaching implies that it is wrought into our minds; we are thus intelligently in the assembly. So in Ephesus we have the word of the Lord, whereas in Corinth we have the word of God. The assembly of God is to be marked by the mind of God. As in His house we are
{435}
privileged to have the mind of God. But teaching the word of God requires patience. In writing to the Corinthians later the apostle mentions the patience that marked his service. Being helped of God he was patient with the saints and his speech and preaching "was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power" (@1 Corinthians 2:4). I wish particularly to call attention to the word of God.
Well, having said so much, I just want to go back to the Old Testament. It says it is "profitable for doctrine ... for instruction in righteousness" ..., (@2 Timothy 3:16,17). You recall how Jacob is presented to us as a household man. I think the households of the Lord's people are intended as schools out of which we graduate into the house of God. Now Jacob, in contrast to Esau, was a "plain man, dwelling in tents" (@Genesis 25:27). He was not a man who would come into favour in the locality in which he lived, as a sportsman, a leader of society or anything of that nature. Esau would doubtless be a leader in his day, like many a young man whose parents are believers today. We are told that Abraham dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob (@Hebrews 11:9). It may be there is a young man here who desires to be successful in the world of sport. Esau was a man of that character, but Jacob lived in tents with Abraham as an heir of the same promise. Jacob could afford to be a plain man; his day was coming. At the end of Genesis he is seen going down, like a clear sunset, in glorious splendour *to rise again*. He would be buried in Canaan, the land of God's purpose. He had the light of the Almighty God in his soul. Esau's day was *present*, and he was making the most of it. What was the inheritance to him? He "for one morsel of meat sold his birthright" (@Hebrews 12:16). Esau despised the inheritance, and maybe you are doing so too.
{436}
In the tent with Abraham, Jacob had the opportunity of learning the life of faith in one who walked before God in view of another world. Later his father and mother sent him out to find a wife. He was obedient to his parents in this respect. His brother had married two Canaanitish women who were a grief to his parents, but Jacob would marry in the family of his mother's people. He sets out and lights on a certain place and tarries there all night; and he took the stones of that place and put them for his pillow and lay down to sleep; and while asleep he saw a vision, as he says later: "God Almighty appeared unto me". He comes to that afterwards, but for the moment he says, "How dreadful is this place!", but then he adds with beautiful intelligence, "This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven". That is the way you find the house of God -- in the presence of God. Some may go back fifty or seventy-five years to find out whether they or we are on the right ground, but it is the presence of God that determines it. The apostle says to the Corinthians that if one that believeth not or unlearned came in among them while one prophesied he would say, "God is in you of a truth" (@1 Corinthians 14:25). The point is, is God there? Jacob found out that God was there. The key to the house of God lies in @Genesis 28. The presence of God with His people implies the house of God. The Lord says to Jacob, "Behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of" (@Genesis 28:15).
Now I pass on to Moses. The Old Testament furnishes us with the details of the house. It is one thing to start in it, another to finish in it. "Whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end" (@Hebrews 3:6). The discipline
{437}
of God helps us in this. Jacob continued on this line. But I pass on to Moses, who is presented as the servant in the house. Those who serve in the house come in for great blessing; Moses did. Moses was faithful in all God's house. The secret of it was that God was with him. At the outset he said to God, "Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh ... ?", but He said, "Certainly I will be with thee". Let us dwell on that. Here is the one who is later designated as faithful in all God's house. For forty years he was in Egypt, forty years in the wilderness alone, and forty years in it with God and His people. God appeared to him in a bush which burned; Moses turned aside to see the bush which was not burnt. It was a bramble -- not of much account outwardly. The bush burned but it was not consumed, and wonderful to say, God was in it. In that way it was typical of the people God would lead through the wilderness. When God saw that Moses turned aside to see, He spoke to him. In other words, when God sees interest in us He gives further disclosures. Moses said, "Who am I ... ?" But God made no mistake in taking up Moses. He said, "Certainly I will be with thee". Let us not go unless God be with us. If God be not with us there is something wrong. I do not know of anything more distressing than that God should be obliged to abandon those He once supported. Moses took the tabernacle and pitched it without the camp. He virtually said the camp is unfit for God; it is unfit today. Then he pleaded with God. "If thy presence do not go, bring us not up hence" (@Exodus 33:15). The true christian will not undertake the path without God. If God be not with us let us look into our hearts and see why He is not with us -- some unjudged sin. Moses said to God, "How shall it be known then that I have found grace in thine eyes -- I and thy people? Is it not by thy going with us? so shall we be distinguished, I
{438}
and thy people, from every people that is on the face of the earth" (@Exodus 33:16).
I pass on to @1 Chronicles 17. I wanted to dwell on David, because he comes in as gathering up all that I have been referring to and more. As a young man David kept his father's sheep, and as he was there the light of the ark came into his soul. He says, "We heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the wood" (@Psalm 132:6). Then he says, "I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord" (verses 4,5). David refers to the position of the ark here: "I dwell in an house of cedars, but the ark of the covenant of the Lord remaineth under curtains". God searches our hearts and He knows what are the promptings of the Spirit. David had the thought of building a house for the Lord. That was the burden of his life. So Nathan says to him, "Do all that is in thine heart; for God is with thee". If you want to give the testimony a better place the Lord will be with you; the ark deserves it. Nathan says, "Do all that is in thine heart"; the remaining chapters of this book show what was in David's heart. He says, "I know also, my God, that thou triest the heart, and hast pleasure in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of mine heart I have willingly offered all these things" (@1 Chronicles 29:17).
David taken with Jacob and Moses sets forth the truth of the house of God in the Old Testament. In this respect David and Solomon go together. Solomon carried out David's desires. So we have in Solomon this beautiful touch, that the building should be by the Son. Moses was faithful in all God's house, but Christ is Son over God's house. He who builds the house is greater than the house, and who is this great One? Some of us were lately dwelling on the inherited name, and this scripture supports the importance of the inherited name. God
{439}
addresses Him as Son. "I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son" (@Hebrews 1:5). The inherited name refers to Christ as He is known amongst the saints. He emerges as the anointed One. He is addressed by God as Son, "*Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight" (@Mark 1:11). The house is built by the Son and governed by the Son. But my thought was to point out that God specially helps those who have His house before them. Through the intercession of Moses God graciously resumed His place in the midst of His people and supported them in the wilderness journey. He dwelt in their midst. Notwithstanding the terrible failure of the public assembly God is now supporting those who have His house before them -- who seek to maintain the order and holiness becoming to it.
May God grant that the youngest as well as the oldest of us may know more of His help, for His name's sake.
