{1}
Pages 1 to 308, 'Prayer as seen in the Acts of the Apostles' and Other Ministry 1942, Readings at London, Ontario, Winnipeg and Council Bluffs (Volume 211).
PRAYER AS SEEN IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES (1)
@Acts 1:14; @Acts 1:23 - 26; @Acts 2:42 - 47
J.T. It has been thought that by looking into this subject we shall see how the dispensation was introduced and maintained in prayer, in the power of prayer. As seeing the relation of prayer to the various turns the testimony took, we shall perhaps learn how to pray in the present time according to all the changing circumstances, and find relief, and learn perhaps how to pray more. We may learn *how* to pray, how to expect answers, and how to prepare ourselves for answers; for answers usually take the form of using those who pray.
The first scripture is characteristic, and is the key to the whole position, for it shows the composition of the company at that time, believers, and what authority there was and ability, and how they abode together; also how women had to do with it, for it is said, "These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren".
The second passage shows how the difficulty occasioned by the defection of Judas was repaired, how the damage was repaired so that there should be the full administrative principle. Then finally we see how, the Holy Spirit having come in, the assembly itself was inaugurated as we have it now, that is, at least in principle; how prayer was a part of the general features in which the assembly functioned, and how it qualified as the instrument or vessel to be used of the Lord. It is thought these scriptures will suffice for us for this reading.
{2}
S.P. Would it be right to say this is the expansion of the Lord Jesus teaching the disciples to pray?
J.T. Just so; it is really the expansion of the gospel of Luke in which the Lord Jesus is seen praying so many times; and in chapter 11:1, one of His disciples seeing Him praying "in a certain place" -- pointing to a local position -- said, "Lord, teach us to pray"(@Luke 11:1), which He did. So that we should begin with that thought: prayer began in the Acts with persons who knew how to pray.
J.W.D. Do you think prayer always refers to something specific, or is it the attitude of heart Godward, the idea of prayer continuing?
J.T. The suggestion in verse 14 is the key position.
The need of prayer is always very great, pressure is always great, and it says, "These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer". Now in chapter 6 you will remember, in view of deacons being appointed, the twelve said it was not meet that they should leave the word of God and serve tables, and then they said they would give themselves up to prayer and the ministry of the word (@Acts 6:4). The ministry of the word is omitted here, it is just prayer: "These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer". As yet there is no mention of the word of God, but prayer is always needed; whether we have persons of gift or not, prayer can always be exercised. So they "gave themselves", meaning a definite giving up to that service, or should I say, that exercise in view of pressure. When those of the remnant were restored in the return from Babylon in Zerubbabel's time, as written in the book of Ezra, they first of all set up the altar on its base; instead of beginning to build the temple, which requires the word of God, they just set up the altar on its base because of the enemies in those countries (@Ezra 3:3). I think that is the position here. The need is great, the position required
{3}
that they give themselves to this feature at the outset.
A.R. Is it because of the fact that on the one hand the Lord had ascended to glory, and on the other hand the Holy Spirit had not yet come?
J.T. Their position was therefore all the more vulnerable. That is what is meant when it speaks of the entire giving of themselves up with one accord to prayer and does not say anything about any other feature of service.
J.S. Do we have the beginning of assembly prayer here in verse 14?
J.T. It is the principle of it, but, of course, the assembly was not yet formed. It is in the second chapter that we have prayer as a formal element in the general assembly position. There, other things are mentioned as well as prayer; here it shows what consciousness of need there was before the Holy Spirit came.
C.A.M. Connecting this in the Acts with the gospel of Luke, would it be right to say all God's operations are in answer to prayer?
J.T. I do not know who prayed for the creation. What do you think about that?
C.A.M. The matter of counsel was prior to everything else, but I mean God's present operations.
J.T. Yes, and even as to eternal life and promise: the idea of promise includes eternal life which involved the expression of need, though very faintly suggested. But as to creation, you cannot say anybody prayed for that; it is a pure matter of sovereignty.
A.N.W. Along with continual prayer, would it appear specific prayers flow from ministry such as Peter's? It opens the way for specific prayer.
J.T. Yes, and specific need which, I suppose, might enter into all our local positions, that the administrative side might be furnished, that there
{4}
might be administrative ability, because that is what the numeral twelve has in mind. Damage had occurred, which is very common and humbling, administrative ability fails or is damaged or wanting in some way. That is a specific matter. There were only eleven apostles whereas there should have been twelve. The Lord had gone on according to Matthew; the eleven met Him on the mountain; He did not stop because of the damage. But when we come to Luke, what is needed must be furnished. It is an important matter in our localities to discern what difficulty there may be, what damage may have occurred, so that the administrative side shall not be impaired and that we may go on in some little way representative of God. It requires the idea of twelve to represent God.
J.S. Is that why they returned to Jerusalem from the mount of Olives?
J.T. We must come in and get refitted; if we are damaged we must become subject to repair, have recourse to the Lord about it so that repairs may take place and there may be a representation of God, whether in any of us or in a local company.
H.G.H. Does the thought of continual prayer imply spiritual understanding to know what to pray for?
J.T. I think it would. Allusion has been made to @Luke 11 where the Lord is seen praying; it is in relation to a locality. He had just been to Martha's house and she was very naughty; it is a very common thing in our localities; she persecuted the Lord and Mary her sister. The Lord is immediately seen praying and what required that prayer was the state of the locality, or rather, of Martha's house, for the locality is not formally mentioned here but John supplies that side. Luke would say, A pretty hopeless case! John would say, It is not so hopeless. John would make full allowance for the smallest
{5}
grain of the work of God in Martha. The Lord felt it very much; and so right on to verse 13 of @Luke 11 He enlarges on the idea of prayer and what may accrue from it; the very greatest thing may accrue, the Spirit comes in answer to prayer. What can meet a state like Martha's, a sister so naughty? It was her own house and she formally extended its hospitality but robbed it of all its pleasure by the way she spoke (@Luke 10:40). The next chapter is the way of meeting it, and it is by following the Lord's move in prayer. "Teach us to pray", one of the disciples says, "teach us"; the whole position is affected and the whole position must be righted.
S.McC. Is it of note that in the first introduction of the idea of twelve in the scripture it seems to be in regard to prayer? God listened to Rachel and God hearkened to Leah, as if in the mixed relations in the mothers in @Genesis 30 the beginnings of the twelve are seen.
J.T. That is a very good allusion. Rachel finally says after Joseph is born, "Jehovah will add to me another son" (@Genesis 30:24). That is the completion of the administrative principle, and it encourages us. The women are praying with them here; the motherly side will find an outlet in our prayer meetings.
A.N.W. Say a little more about the women praying with them before assembly order had been set up by Paul.
J.T. "With several women" does not imply the women prayed audibly here, although we do know that Mary the mother of Jesus had spoken in @Luke 1 and contributed to the service of God. We do know she could do that and do it well. It is what is called in ecclesiastical terms, the Magnificent, it is given such a status in ecclesiastical places: "My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour",(@Luke 1:46) as she went on she covered the ground as Hannah of old. Hannah's composition is called
{6}
a prayer but there is not a word of prayer in it. The spirit of prayer must have been behind it. That is what is in mind here, Mary would thoroughly support any prayer that Peter or any of the apostles would offer; her spirit would be with them, especially in the knowledge she had of the Lord Jesus; no one else had such knowledge as she.
S.P. Would the thought of the support of prayer be seen in @2 Kings 19 in the matter of Sennacherib, where the priest and the prophet and the king all enter into the position?
J.T. That is a good example of what may accrue from prayer. Of course it is a special obligation now because of the war and the testimony; but here what the Lord would help us in is to get into the spirit of the company in the upper room. They had come from the mount of Olives and, as has been remarked, names are given of those who were there. We are told how far it was from the mount of Olives to Jerusalem, "a sabbath-day's journey off. And when they were come into the city, they went up to the upper chamber, where were staying both Peter, and John, and James, and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus, and Simon the zealot, and Jude the brother of James. These gave themselves", that is, the apostles by themselves first, "these gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren". The conjunction putting Mary and the Lord's brethren by themselves is to be borne in mind. They are by themselves at the outset with their knowledge of the Lord, that is, any who have special knowledge are by themselves; it is a question of subjective conditions that are there at the beginning. The apostles are the ones that took the lead in this matter of prayer.
{7}
J.W.D. What is the difference between this kind of prayer and what we get in @Romans 8:26, "For we do not know what we should pray for as is fitting"?
J.T. Romans is an elementary epistle, it does not speak of the formation of the assembly, although it leads to it. It is rather individual formation, so that we readily admit we do not know what we should pray for as we ought. It is suitable to bring that in. It is a good, wholesome thing for each of us just to accept that we are very defective in this matter of prayer. That chapter shows how the Spirit comes in and adds to us so that we should pray as we ought.
S.J.H. Would the getting to the upper chamber help us in knowing what to pray for?
J.T. I think all that preceded this, from Luke's point of view, entered into the upper room. It is a question of what was there on heaven's account, on the Lord's account, and how they acted on instinct; they did the right thing: "These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren". These are by themselves, and this last element joined in adds its immense subjective instinct and power to the position.
A.B. In regard to your reference to the base of the altar in Ezra, the eleven are mentioned here, that they gave themselves "with one accord". They are going on happily together; the spirit of dependence is amongst them and the spirit of confidence in God is there in a position that was outwardly hopeless, the Lord having gone and the Spirit not yet having come.
J.T. They are conscious of exposure, for no matter how advanced you are in the truth you are the object of attack. What can you do in prayer? The passage as to the armour of God in @Ephesians 6
{8}
ends with, "Praying at all seasons, with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching unto this very thing with all perseverance and supplication for all the saints" (@Ephesians 6:18). Because you are in the very front of things the enemy is dead against you.
A.R. I suppose Asaph in @Psalm 73:17 did not know how to pray until he got into the sanctuary and got the right sense of things.
J.T. Quite so, then he understood their end; he knew how to name things. One of the most important things is the armour of light, the armour of God in @Ephesians 6, in order to be able to name things. You know what to say when speaking to God, how to put right names on things.
A.N.W. "Gave themselves" in @Acts 1:14 is a strong term, is it not? James adds the word 'fervent' in connection with prayer, which is important.
J.T. Elijah was an example. The Lord Himself was *the* great Example. That fact enters into the prayer in the upper room; His mother was there to furnish the details so that we might understand Him in prayer. How many times He must have prayed in His mother's house. His father's house! How many times His brethren must have seen Him pray, although not entering into it! No example that He set would fall to the ground. No doubt it would be taken on in time, and His brethren are now nearly right. They had not been so before, but they are now. He dwelt with them, we are told in @John 2:12, with His mother and His brethren for a short time. Now they are brought around to be thoroughly with Him and His apostles.
C.N. So that the exigency here is met. There is a breach, Judas has gone to his own place, but now they are praying and the result that follows in the next verses shows that the need is met in this particular way of prayer.
{9}
J.T. That is the order of the truth here. The general position requires prayer because we are so exposed, just as the remnant was. We are exposed to the enemies. But here they have recourse to prayer; there they had recourse to the altar. The position has been clearly stated in verse 15, "And in those days Peter, standing up in the midst of the brethren, said, (the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty,)" -- there is a principle in that: a brother says something in relation to a specific matter, to repair a breach, and that brings in the second prayer.
C.H.H. Would the exercises of Epaphras in @Colossians 4:12 meet the matter to which the Colossian saints were exposed: "combating earnestly for you in prayers, to the end that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God"?
J.T. That is what is stated, and I think it corresponds with what we have here. It would lead to Paul's writing to them. No doubt the epistle was the outcome of this prayer of Epaphras, his urgent request as to what was needed at Colosse that they might stand "perfect and complete in all the will of God". They were going on fairly well but they were defective, and the, epistle is to repair the breach; so that the second chapter finds the apostle himself in combat for them. So here the prayer is followed by, "In those days Peter, standing up in the midst of the brethren, said, (the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty,) Brethren, it was necessary that the scripture should have been fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before, by the mouth of David, concerning Judas, who became guide to those who took Jesus; for he was numbered amongst us, and had received a part in this service. (This man then indeed got a field with the reward of iniquity, and, having fallen down headlong, burst in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. And it was
{10}
known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that that field was called in their own dialect Aceldama; that is, field of blood.) For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his homestead become desolate, and let there be no dweller in it; and, Let another take his overseership. It is necessary therefore, that of the men who have assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us, one of these should be a witness with us of his resurrection". Now the apostle Peter in his address here is bringing in the Lord. What an example Jesus had set in all the time in which He came in and went out, beginning from the baptism of John! What an example the Lord had set in coming in and going out among them! It would enter into this matter. The brother who was to be chosen was to be one of those who are assembly men because he should have full knowledge of the way the Lord had acted; that is the point in Peter's address. It is a clear setting out of the position, which the word of ministry ought to be. The ministry meeting ought to cover local conditions above all, and to seek to furnish light as to how difficulties are to be met. And so they appointed two men who were in full accord with what had been said.
J.S. Does Luke introduce prayer to repair the breach Satan made in the twelve?
J.T. The Lord is the Model, you know. How often did they see Him pray on these occasions in which He came in and went out among them? How did He deal with specific matters? How did He deal with James and John when their mother came to Him and asked for a place for each of them? How did the Lord deal with them? That is the way of getting at the truth. How are we to deal with local matters as they arise? It is "not mine to give",
{11}
He said to James and John(@Matthew 20:23). He put them right; He just patiently instructed them about the matter. That place was not His to give. It is bringing out the wonderful economy He is inaugurating. It is the Father's matter; we must bear that in mind; these are things that belong to the Father. We must not address our prayers to the Lord if they should be addressed to the Father. We address a far greater percentage of our prayers to the Lord than to the Father. The Lord says to the two, That is the Father's matter. Then the other ten disciples were upset about this; they resented it, and the Lord set them right, too. This is the sort of thing we have to deal with, and the Lord Jesus coming in and going out among them would set the example for them; that is the point, that we may know how to deal with exigencies as they arise.
C.N. So that Peter's word of ministry and the appointment of Matthias are again followed by prayer in this section.
J.T. That is the next thing: "They appointed two, Joseph, who was called Barnabas", evidently a very worthy man, he has a surname; "and Matthias", who has no surname. "And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord, knower of the hearts of all, shew which one of these two thou hast chosen, to receive the lot of this service and apostleship, from which Judas transgressing fell to go to his own place. And they gave lots on them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles". It is a beautiful record in entire keeping with the position, the Holy Spirit having not yet come. The lot is used; it is crude, but it is a crude time; the Holy Spirit has not come yet, but in gracious power they are left to do this themselves. It is what *they* did and the matter is successful. So it is said he was "numbered" with them, as if he fitted in and was recognised generally as the one.
{12}
S.McC. The whole atmosphere seems to breathe a suggestion of unjealous feeling. That is an important thing in this great matter.
J.T. I think it is. James and John brought in jealousy and rivalry. The truth was that it was the Father's matter. Are we putting the Father's matters in the right place? Are we putting the Lord into matters that really belong to the Father?
C.H.H. Would @1 Corinthians 12:5,6, where it speaks of the services connected with the Lord and the operations in connection with God, help at all in prayer?
J.T. It would; 1 Corinthians adjusts this matter of course. "There is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and *we* for him", @1 Corinthians 8:6. Obviously that is the first great thought in the economy. @Ephesians 4:6 enlarges on that, saying, "One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all", which would mean that that Person in the Godhead is over the universe and all matters of government and providential matters. He is over all these things. And then, "one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and *we* by him", @1 Corinthians 8:6. Clearly the Father comes first; the Lord's administration is more limited for the moment, until the Father's time arrives when the world will be judged by Him. "He has set a day in which he is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed", @Acts 17:31.
A.R. Why is it in @1 Corinthians 12:28, that "God has set certain in the assembly: first, apostles", whereas in Ephesians *the Lord* has "led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men"? Is one the assembly sphere and the other more general?
J.T. God is the more prominent idea in Corinthians: "the assembly of God which is in Corinth", although the Lord has a great place too, because of the question of authority; but the order is, "God,
{13}
the Father", and then the Lord Jesus: "God, the Father, of whom all things, and *we* for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things", @1 Corinthians 8:6.
A.N.W. This was a specific prayer addressed to the Lord Jesus, I suppose, having in mind that He had Himself chosen the eleven.
J.T. It is a question whether it is or not; or whether it is a question of the continuance of the Old Testament manner of address. In all probability it would be the latter, whilst they would recognise the Lord Jesus by that title of 'Lord' when the Holy Spirit came down: "God has made him, this Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ", @Acts 2:36. I would think it is the Old Testament position, for the lot is still allowed.
J.T.Jr. The Lord's part in this matter being in the confirmation of His appearing to the twelve?
J.T. Very likely. That is in @1 Corinthians 15, and it runs on to the appearings to Paul and to above five hundred brethren at once; it is a question whether it does not take in this session in Acts as well. He appeared to Cephas and to the twelve and then to above five hundred brethren before the Holy Spirit came. It would confirm the selection of Matthias.
J.W.D. Would you say that as to anything about which you can address the Lord Jesus in prayer, you can, in a greater sense, speak to God as Father about it, whether in spiritual or temporal matters?
J.T. It is hard to say; you cannot be too specific as to what should be addressed to the Father because you find some things addressed to Both. Still, I think the economy is in mind in this book and Paul enlarges on it. It requires that we give more place to the Father, whereas as far as I see
{14}
more place is given to the Lord in our prayers and thanksgivings, and songs too.
J.W.D. I mean the place the Lord Jesus has in the economy is relative and specific. God as such is the supreme idea.
J.T. Quite so: "over all, and through all, and in us all"; that is, the first circle is narrower -- "one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling"; clearly that is the narrower thought. Then "one Lord, one faith, one baptism", another wider circle; then "one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all"(@Ephesians 4:4 - 6), that is the widest and the universal circle and includes everything the Father has to do with.
C.H.H. In @John 16:23 the Lord says, "In that day ye shall demand nothing of me: verily, verily, I say to you. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give you". How far does that go?
J.T. It has to be modified by other things: "And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, this will I do", @John 14:13. It is a question of context and the state the saints are in, whether they address the Father or the Lord.
T.W. Is it right to say that only as the Father is addressed are all three of the divine Persons involved in relation to prayer? In speaking to the Lord Jesus the Father is not involved. Is that right?
J.T. I should not say that the Lord Jesus is involved when we are praying to the Father, because the Father is that Person and does not include more than one Person in the Deity. 'God' either includes all three Persons, or is the one Person in the Deity who is in the place of God in the economy.
T.W. I was only thinking of the Spirit's support here and the Lord Jesus¬ intercession on high in
{15}
speaking to the Father, as seen in the type of the golden altar. Perhaps you can help us more. I was thinking of the meeting for prayer on Monday evening. I had the feeling that the Lord Jesus is supporting our interests there and the Holy Spirit here as we speak to the Father.
J.T. That is true; we have access through Him by the one Spirit to the Father, but then we may speak to the Lord directly too, and in doing that we are speaking to one Person, and that one Person takes the second place in the economy.
C.A.M. In speaking to the Father, is it an important fact that the Father commits all judgment to the Son? Is that to be taken into account in connection with various matters that have to do with judgment?
J.T. That one Person, the Father, does not judge any one. If it is a question of judgment He has committed all judgment to the Son, because He is the Son of man. That would mean that it is God's judgment; throughout the Scriptures God judges, but it is not *as Father*. He judges, but it is as God. That may imply that He uses the Son in a mediatorial sense in judging. The bearing of that would be more future than present, when all judgment will be in the hands of the Son; even the lake of fire will be in His hands. This is the way judgment will be administered then. It is a question of the Father and the Son there, it is not God and the Son, it is the Father. If you bring in God, that *may* include the other Persons.
C.A.M. I was wondering whether these matters that have to do with administration, and various things that we instinctively connect with the lordship of Christ would be a guide.
J.T. If we keep before us the economy as presented in @Matthew 28:19, the Lord's own words are, "Baptising them to the name of the Father,
{16}
and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". If we keep that before us we shall be steadied in what we say as to divine Persons. This matter is carried forward into the epistles and especially into Paul's epistles where the thought of the Father is distinctively brought out. There He is formally and officially in the place of Deity, in the place of Godhead, "one God, the Father"; the leading thought is God, but in the Father. Secondly it is "one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and *we* by him". Now in the second Person, so to speak, it is a mediatorial matter and that involves God in many instances, as in the statement, "by whom also he made the worlds" (@Hebrews 1:2). God made the worlds, that involves God, although the Lord Jesus even in the Deity had a mediatorial service there. Mediatorial service does not necessarily require incarnation; "by whom also he made the worlds" was before incarnation. It was God that made the worlds, that is said constantly; still, the actual Person of the Deity that did it was the Son before He came into Manhood, before He became Son.
A.N.W. While God the Father is not said to judge, God will judge this world in righteousness by that Man(@Acts 17:31).
J.T. The judgment will all be carried out by the Son, but still it is God's doing.
S.McC. In verse 24 of chapter 1 they prayed and said, "Thou Lord"; what Person do you understand that to refer to?
J.T. It is the Old Testament setting, it is Jehovah that is in mind. Yet you cannot be too specific because they knew the Lord had gone up, but how much did they apprehend of His intercession on high, because the Holy Spirit had not yet come down to tell them? The Holy Spirit comes out from with the Father and He will testify. Their knowledge of heaven was very limited, yet Peter says,
{17}
"God has made him, this Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ" (@Acts 2:36). But that was after the Spirit came. If you had asked Peter what he had in mind, what could he have said? Was he speaking to Jehovah? He might have used that name. Luke gives it to us as God would have us read it, so that I would not like to say the Lord Jesus was not in his mind, but I would be disposed to think it was an Old Testament setting.
C.H.H. In @Acts 4:26 there is another reference to Jehovah, where they quoted @Psalm 2. I suppose they used the word 'Lord' there in relation to Jehovah.
A.N.W. And in @Acts 2:20, 21, "Before the great and gloriously appearing day of the Lord come. And it shall be that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved"; there it is Jehovah.
J.T. In chapter 4 it is 'master', 'despot', alluding to Jehovah. We have to remember that they were just emerging from Old Testament times. We are in a New Testament setting, and we forget that they were emerging out of the old position into the position of Christianity.
J.T.Jr. In chapter 4 they allude to "thy holy servant Jesus"(@Acts 4:27); that confirms what you say, that God was the object of the prayer.
J.T. Jesus is called a 'servant' there, just so.
H.B. It does say, "Lord Jesus" in @Acts 1:21. Do you think they had some light as to the position? "All the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us".
J.T. Quite so, they knew He was the Lord, they constantly referred to Him as the Lord.
A.R. Perhaps the idea of the economy as referred to in baptising to the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit is extended. The Lord says much to the Father in Matthew, and
{18}
tells them to enter into their chamber and speak to their Father (@Matthew 6:6). He would give them an idea of what was in His mind in regard to the economy.
J.T. No doubt Matthew keeps that much to the fore; they were the sons of their Father. But now they are acting of themselves as Jews, or Israelites, yet still as taught of Christ. How far they would speak to Him as ascended is the question. I would say that they still carried on the thought of God in Jehovah or in the name by which the Lord spoke to Him as the Father: "Our Father who art in the heavens". That is how their minds would be set until the Holy Spirit came down. Now we must remember that tidings from heaven for Christians are by the Holy Spirit come down, sent down, too. That shows that He is, so to speak, a Servant of heaven to make known what is in heaven, and one of the prominent things there is what Peter says, that "God has made him, this Jesus ... both Lord and Christ"(@Acts 2:36). Before that, in verse 33, he said that "He has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear".
Now we have seen how the local position is repaired, and this is a very important matter, to see how local damage is repaired. How are we to carry on if something has happened that impairs the position? What is to be done? Are we to let it go at that? We must seek the Lord to bring in what is missing, so that we can go on locally as representative of what is in heaven, because the number twelve has administration in mind as a representation of what is in heaven.
Ques. I was wondering if the Lord Jesus is brought in personally in this way(@Acts 1:21) because He had made a personal selection of twelve men. This is His matter in that sense. Satan had made an attack and carried away one.
{19}
J.T. It is His matter, but still, as Paul says, "God has set certain in the assembly", @1 Corinthians 12:28.
F.N.W. Before He chose them He gave Himself to prayer.
J.T. Yes, the Lord gave Himself to prayer for a whole night before He selected them. The apostles are not deciding the matter here but are putting it before God. It is on the principle of lot, which is an Old Testament matter. The Holy Spirit has not come down yet, so that the position is pretty much what is was in Old Testament times. This is in a locality where the position has been damaged but where it has been repaired so that we can go on to normal assembly lines; that is what chapter 2 brings out. With the "added" persons it is said that they "persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers". And then we get a general description of the company. There is something there now for a breach has been repaired. There is something that God can recognise and to which He can add. Prayer has a great place in this, not simply specific prayers but the prayer meeting as part of the position.
J.T.Jr. Does a locality need to recognise a failure and repair it before they can go on?
J.T. That is how it stands. If we are to be representative of God there must be this principle of twelve. Unity is stressed; it is "with one accord" in chapter 1:14, so that there might be a representation of God, one of the greatest things.
J.S. Is this in order to establish the assembly on an immutable foundation?
J.T. That is assumed. This second chapter stresses the point, the Spirit come down from heaven would be there so that the assembly down here should respond to the light and grace of heaven. The point in these verses is to show how
{20}
the "added" ones fall in with what was there; the whole company is now described, that "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers. And fear was upon every soul, and many wonders and signs took place through the apostles¬ means. And all that believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions and substance, and distributed them to all, according as any one might have need. And every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord, and breaking bread in the house, they received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the people; and the Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved", @Acts 2:42 - 47. That is the assembly position as it is from Pentecost to the present time. Paul's ministry has added to that, but this is the great general position. One of the features is the department of prayer; it is a regular fixture, a regular institution attached to this position -- prayer.
R.W.S. Has a point of need been reached in the testimony requiring intensification of our week-ends, Saturday meetings and the Lord's day, and then the prayer meeting on Monday and the ministry meeting on Tuesday?
J.T. I think that is the outline. We were noticing recently that while we are in the end of broken times there is something discernible of the original structure. I think we saw that in Ezra the old men were concerned about the original structure of Solomon's house; they were weeping about it because it had gone. The others were rejoicing in the foundations of the new structure. The new would be smaller perhaps, although it has peculiar dimensions, but it is not just what Solomon's structure was. I think that is the thing to keep in mind, the weeping and rejoicing mingled(@Ezra 3:12,13). They are not contradictory of
{21}
each other, each has its place. The new structure would carry some clear idea of the old structure and that is what Philadelphia means; you can see the outline of the old structure in what the Lord says of Philadelphia.
A.R. I think I can see more clearly the value of what was done in the days of Ezra, the twelve men that were selected to go up to Jerusalem to build the house. Before you have the building you must have the repairing of the administrative idea.
J.T. Yes; I think the Spirit of God keeps a clear outline of what there had been. Ezra does not give you the twelve names, but in Nehemiah you get the twelve names of those with whom the others came up. The idea of twelve is carried through, we ought to look for that in a locality. It is not a literal matter, not twelve men in any locality, but the principle of unity in love; thus the Lord is free to use whom He will and we shall not be in each other's way; therefore there is a representation of God.
C.H.H. Would that be seen in @Acts 13:3? Would that be anticipating this or is it the extension of this, selecting those to serve? They prayed and laid their hands on certain ones who should serve.
J.T. That is right. We shall see an instance of it later in the choosing of the deacons, and in the form in which Paul and Barnabas set out the general thought. The administrative principle is carried through.
A.R. The last scripture you read is the idea of continuing what has been organised.
J.T. That is what it is, an organisation in a holy sense. You cannot have an organism according to God without love, not only love in each of us, but love amongst us. Love has authority. Love prohibits certain things, if in us, and amongst us; it is not only in one brother but love is amongst us; so the sisters,
{22}
too, will say about any decision, That is right. Love never fails. The idea of twelve is the manipulation of love; love operates easily through that number. The sisters come into it, too; they make inquiry and support what is right if love is amongst us, not only in the brothers but in the sisters too, love in the meeting. It is "love amongst yourselves",(@John 13:35), the thing is there.
C.N. Would it be right to say the repairing of the breach in the light of the whole assembly would correspond to the idea of the twelve?
J.T. That is the thought. You never lose sight of the idea of twelve running through this book: the laying on of hands in prayer, Jerusalem sending down the apostles to Samaria and Barnabas to Antioch are all on this basis. The Lord is said to have appeared to the twelve and then to all the apostles, the twelve being the manipulative side of the matter, the manipulation of love, and the apostles being authoritative individually. The Lord would confirm us in both these features.
A.N.W. Persevering in prayers in chapter 2 would be somewhat different from chapter 1, continuing in prayer?
J.T. I think so; they persevered in the breaking of bread and prayers, meaning there would be opposition. These men were interfering with the seat of Moses, threatening to upset the whole matter. The devil is right against that, so the word 'persevered' is there.
A.N.W. The idea of prayer is in the plural in chapter 2; each prayer is distinctive, specific, separate.
J.T. It is a question of what is set up publicly; instead of Jerusalem, instead of the temple, a state of things is set up which suitably preceded the teaching of the apostles. Those added committed themselves
{23}
to the breaking of bread and prayers; that is the public position of Christianity as over against Judaism.
S.McC. So that the teaching and fellowship of the apostles are like banks and channels in which the prayers move. Our prayers are governed by the light that is in the teaching and what is connected with the authority of the apostles.
J.T. Yes, like the banks of a river; all the brethren are going on within certain bounds. The teaching of the apostles is over against the teaching of the high priests; that is really what is here; it is the complete setting aside of the whole system. In the meantime the brethren are going on patiently and going to the temple; a new system has been introduced and one of the outstanding features is prayer, and the temple was where prayer was wont to be made. But the next chapter is the 'hour' of it, when "Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, which is the ninth hour".
C.H.H. Would the principle of repair be seen in @1 Kings 18:30? It says Elijah "repaired the altar of Jehovah which was broken down. And Elijah took twelve stones" and prayed and got an answer.
J.T. Very good.
C.T. Would 'teaching' coming first suggest that we should be intelligent in our prayers?
J.T. Yes, you should get the doctrine first. Doctrine is like the banks of a river within which love operates.
A.R. The Lord says "Hades¬ gates shall not prevail against"(@Matthew 16:18) the assembly, showing the impregnability of it; and the feature of prayer is preservative of it. They prayed for the deliverance of Peter.
J.T. We shall see how this matter of prayer opens up. They were unbelieving prayers when Peter was in prison; the brethren did not quite believe they would be answered, but still they carried on. What
{24}
comes into this position is patience in their going still to the temple, because God was very patient with the Jews. We ought to be patient now with the profession, not to be too radical, but hold to the truth patiently, considerately, not cause people to turn away from it unnecessarily. The disciples went to the temple because God was still going on with it, still bearing with Israel, and spared ones were being taken care of in this new system, as much as to say to the Jews, This is better than what you now have. What care was extended to believers (many christians, not yet called Christians) amongst the disciples! In the assembly the care was much greater than that extended through the Jewish system. Three thousand people were converted at once and added to something very profitable; the Jewish system never afforded such care to individuals. So that it says, "Fear was upon every soul, and many wonders and signs took place through the apostles¬ means. And all that believed were together, and had all things common". There was great liberality and great love amongst them. The temple did not afford anything like this! For instance, the Lord had said, "This poor widow has cast in more than all", @Mark 12:43. This fact is stated in the gospels; the Lord stood over against the treasury and saw this widow. Presently the temple was to be thrown down; that system was not great enough for her offering, but this system is great enough, so it says that "all that believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions and substance, and distributed them to all, according as anyone might have need". There had never been a system like this before nor ever will be again, the system introduced in Christianity marked by the sacrifice that love would make for its objects. The temple could not afford anything like this! That is how God is moving on to bring out something that is greater than anything
{25}
around us. "And every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord, and breaking bread in the house, they received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the people". We should note their discrimination as to the breaking of bread in the house, because it expressly belongs to the new system. "And the Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved". The Jewish system did not afford anything like this.
S.P. Is the breaking of bread necessary for the nourishment of their affections in this new system?
J.T. That is the idea. They do not break bread in the court of the temple or in Solomon's porch, it is in their houses, showing they had discriminating knowledge as to what should be done. Going into the temple shows the longsuffering of God, but the peculiar thing that belongs to Christianity must be treasured in its own place.
J.S. Would you say their houses would be clean places to break bread?
J.T. Well, their houses would be houses of converted people.
S.McC. That word of yours as to patience is much needed today because God seems to be in a peculiar way putting us in touch with His work which has perhaps been hindered in development through wrong teaching and other things. You feel that we need that specially today.
J.T. It is an important thing to get that side in mind, not to be too drastic with people. You want to deliver such as should be saved. There are many of the Lord's people and you must not be too drastic with them.
J.S. Do you regard chapters 1 and 2 as transitional?
J.T. Yes, Judaism was still there.
{26}
PRAYER AS SEEN IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES (2)
@Acts 3:1 - 11; @Acts 4:23 - 27
J.T. In general, what characterises this section is persecution. Chapter 4 shows how persecution was met in the assembly. Persecution would have the effect of dislocation; prayer restores the position, puts it in balance, and there is evidence of progress in the knowledge of the truth, and money is laid at the apostles¬ feet.
Now as if the need of authority, administrative authority, is evident in regard of money matters, it seems in reverting to chapter 2 as if the Lord would help us to see more clearly the position of the assembly as set up as the house of prayer. We spoke of the temple being a house of prayer for all nations, and perhaps we need to see a little more clearly this feature which marked the saints at the beginning, as a public institution.
The end of chapter 2 shows what was set up publicly, prayer being the leading thought, and the truth there should enter into and govern our stated meetings for prayer. Chapter 16 notes specifically, "And on the sabbath day we went outside the gate by the river, where it was the custom for prayer to be"(@Acts 16:13). It enters into our week-ends, what comes in on the first day of the week and then runs on to the end of Monday, where we may say the anointed vessel, the assembly, stands as marked by prayer.
The first day of the week involves the assembly in its fulness of dignity and ornamentation seen as saints assembled, as Luke says in @Acts 20:7, "We being assembled to break bread". The position is that of the saints as assembled, and the Lord comes
{27}
to us. He does not come *with* us as at some meetings: at a meeting like this He comes with us and leaves with us. According to Ezekiel the assembly is viewed as an ornament, anointed, "so also is the Christ", @1 Corinthians 12:12. As the assembly is seen on the first day of the week, "we being assembled to break bread", the Lord comes to that and leaves according to His pleasure; but on Monday He brings in the feature of prayer, which stands in relation to the whole system. There are many who deliberately neglect the meeting for prayer, as if it were secondary, especially sisters because they are perhaps tired on Monday; but it is striking, as we had this morning, that there were several women and Mary the mother of Jesus who "gave themselves ... to continual prayer" (@Acts 1:14); their prayers went on. At Philippi, too, the prayers were going on amongst sisters, at least amongst women. So that it would seem as if the Lord might help us to see the full dignity of the anointed vessel that God has set up here for a testimony, in which there are departments all standing as one, a great system which, as we said, can be alluded to: "So also is the Christ". Also the promise as to the house of prayer is to be valued, "Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer ... for my house shall be called a house of prayer for all the peoples", @Isaiah 56:7.
S.McC. As to the dignity of the anointed vessel, we often think of it in contrast to what is around, in relation, for instance, to the meeting for ministry or the reading of the Scriptures or the preaching; but the dignity of the anointed vessel is seen as well in our approach to God in the prayer meeting, over against what obtains around us. The difference in the manner of approach is obvious.
J.T. "Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of
{28}
Jesus, the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh, and having a great priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience and washed as to our body with pure water", @Hebrews 10:19 - 22. We are to draw near in the house and that involves prayer. I think perhaps we ought to learn a little more about the dignity of the position as seen at the end of chapter 2, "And they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers"(@Acts 2:42).
C.H.H. Would that system which you speak of as being set up have a great influence with heaven? For instance, it says in @Revelation 8:1 - 5, "And when it opened the seventh seal, there was silence in the heaven about half an hour. And I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them. And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and much incense was given to him, that he might give efficacy to the prayers of all saints at the golden altar which was before the throne. And the smoke of the incense went up with the prayers of the saints, out of the hand of the angel before God. And the angel took the censer, and filled it from the fire of the altar, and cast it on the earth: and there were voices, and thunders and lightnings, and an earthquake".
J.T. There it is clearly the case of the vengeance of God as the answer to the prayers of all saints made efficacious at the golden altar.
-- .W. Would you enlarge on the reference to the prince coming in and going out by himself in Ezekiel?
J.T. The prince has access at certain times by himself to worship, but then at other times, as illustrated in @Ezekiel 46:10, the prince comes in with the people and goes out with the people. It is clear
{29}
the Lord comes in by Himself at certain times, as it says, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him", @John 14:21. Having said, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you", (verse 18). He then proceeds to speak about His own coming and the Father's coming. He does not there allude to coming in with us and going out with us, but coming after we are together and possibly going out before we go out. Peter says, "All the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us". @Acts 1:21. Well, that might have been when they were already gathered or when they came in. Anyway, He comes into the assembly on the first day of the week after we have come together: "we being assembled to break bread" (@Acts 20:7) opens the way for Him to come. "I am coming to you", He says. At other meetings, such as a meeting for prayer, I would think He comes when we come and leaves when we leave. In meetings like this the same is true; we count on the Lord being with us. It is not just a question of what we are doing, it is what He supports us in; and so He comes with us as we come in.
A.N.W. "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". @Matthew 18:20. Is that primarily for prayer or care or administration?
J.T. It might be all. Matthew does not speak of the Lord's ascension, the last word in Matthew is, "And behold, *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age" (chapter 28:20); so that in that sense He comes with us.
A.N.W. It would not be the Supper.
J.T. Not necessarily; it certainly could not be the supper in the ordinary sense of the word because He comes to us then as assembled.
{30}
C.T. You said in coming to the reading meeting He comes with us and meets with us, taking His place with us?
J.T. He does, to support us. I suppose we should expect Him at a meeting like this, out of sight but supporting us. He may be here, not visibly but spiritually, I mean. Luke could say He was there in some mysterious way, because he says, "He himself stood in their midst" (@Luke 24:36), without saying He came. John says, "Jesus came and stood in the midst", @John 20:19. John is more formal and contemplates that we are already together before He comes; He comes to us as together.
A.R. Do you think there has been a tendency with us to lower the standard of the prayer meeting? One has felt affected in soul almost as much at the end of the prayer meeting as after the Supper or morning meeting.
J.T. I think it is because God has promised to make us happy in His house of prayer (@Isaiah 56:7), not because I am praying, but that the Lord specially gives us to realise it is a gain to come; there is real gain attached to it.
A.R. If we realised that, there would be fewer absentees on Monday night.
J.T. I think there would be; it is belittled in that way, some deliberately staying away that could come.
J.S. Does Matthew contemplate more the assembly's public position?
J.T. I think so. The assembly was to take the place of the temple gradually, as we had this morning, because for a time they continued to go to the temple; but ultimately it came to pass that the assembly took the place of the temple. It is a great thing to have it in our minds even though we might not see the outcome. What we get in the early chapters of the Acts helps us to see how it would work
{31}
out now; we can find that the various meetings were held in these chapters if we look at them carefully: the meeting for the reading of the Scriptures, the meeting for the breaking of bread, meetings for prayer and meetings for gospel services. It is to bring out the greatness of the anointed vessel and the features attaching to it, among them prayer.
S.J.H. Why is the ninth hour called the hour of prayer?
J.T. That is a very important enquiry. Why should it be mentioned if it is not that these two men are moving in the spirit and atmosphere of prayer? As a matter of fact, a few weeks earlier the Lord Jesus had been on the cross at that time, the ninth hour. Now Peter and John are evidently in the atmosphere and power of prayer, hence the greatness and the quality of their service; but not only the quality of the service but also the quality of the servants. They could say, "Look on us", and that entered into the atmosphere of prayer. So I think our preachings have been somewhat augmented by prayer in the houses of the saints preceding the preaching on Sunday evenings. Preachers go forth in an atmosphere of prayer; there is something to look at, something to hear, prayer governing it.
H.G.H. Is the suggestion here that we come to the prayer meeting with the sense of the dignity of the position in which we are? The apostle could say, "Silver and gold I have not; but what I have, this give I to thee: In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean rise up and walk", @Acts 3:6.
J.T. That is what I thought we might see. The hour of prayer, that particular hour, is mentioned; would not Peter and John be sensible that it was a time of prayer? Is it accidental or is it of God that these two men moved together? "And Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, which is the ninth hour", @Acts 3:1. The
{32}
word 'together' is the central thought here as linked up with the assembly; that governs their movements. The footnote says, "Some omit 'to the assembly', in chapter 2:47, and link 'together' with the end of chapter 2. Probably we should read 'the Lord added together daily such as should be saved. And Peter (or Now Peter) and John went up into the temple'". The word 'together' might thus be used in connection with the assembly; that is the position, and prayer enters into that position. Are Peter and John as on the way up involved in that prayer, or is the word 'together' to show they are thoroughly of one mind, also carrying with it the thought of the hour of prayer? For it is that hour, the hour governs the prayer. Here the prayer also is developing, the prayer in the temple. The point here is the connection between the quality of the persons and their movements, the quality of the service rendered and its results -- all the effects of prayer. In our service and in our public position there is to be quality, quality that can be seen as of God.
C.A.M. When you refer to the death of the Lord Jesus on the cross, the ninth hour was when the darkness was over all, was it not? The hours are especially recorded in Luke's gospel. That really gives a sort of spiritual timepiece.
J.T. The ninth hour is surely not mentioned for nothing by Luke here. John mentions things in days and hours too. Here it is Luke and he is occupied with the public position, the ornament of the earth, the anointed vessel, and what these two men were as a public testimony going up together at that hour.
H.B. Is the representation of the thought of a gate with them, do you think?
J.T. There might be: they would represent the gates of Zion as over against the Beautiful gate of the temple. The temple was about to be superseded; what was there was being superseded, not arbitrarily
{33}
but by quality. Quality came, taking its own place; it cannot be denied; if quality is there it is there, and that is what comes out.
C.N. What would you say about this man being carried at the same hour?
J.T. "And Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, which is the ninth hour; and a certain man who was lame from his mother's womb was being carried, whom they placed every day at the gate of the temple called Beautiful, to ask alms of those who were going into the temple; who, seeing Peter and John about to enter into the temple, asked to receive alms. And Peter, looking steadfastly upon him with John, said, Look on us", @Acts 3:1 - 4. The position is very clearly defined, carrying is mentioned just then because that makes his condition more evident.
S.P. Has this man a local aspect?
J.T. I think it is rather that he stands in relation to the old system, and Peter and John stand in relation to the new; whilst the old system is not arbitrarily set aside, the quality in the two men itself supersedes the old system. We have already alluded to what the Lord said of the woman in @Luke 21: "He saw also a certain poor widow casting therein two mites. And he said. Verily I say unto you, that this poor widow has cast in more than all" (verses 2, 3). That referred to the quality of the giving, what was behind it, how heaven regarded it. What was behind these two men is what they were, that is the point, "Look on us". The Lord was inviting people to look at that widow, and immediately He spoke of the temple being displaced: "And as some spoke of the temple, that it was adorned with goodly stones and consecrated offerings, he said, As to these things which ye are beholding, days are coming in which there shall not be left stone upon stone which shall not be thrown down", @Luke 21:5, 6. The
{34}
woman is too great for that building, she needs a greater structure and we see that here. If we could only see the greatness of what we are connected with! It is an anointed vessel that God has set up here and prayer is a part of it.
J.S. Does He regard the widow as a counterpart of Himself in self-sacrificing love?
J.T. Quite so.
-- .W. In @Acts 10:3 it refers to the ninth hour again, Cornelius sees an angel coming to him at that hour.
J.T. There is a link there, I am sure. It is well to keep the idea of an hour in our minds. We have an hour for prayer, and there is going to be something for us if we just take up our position in relation to the vessel, the institution that has superseded the temple.
R.W.S. What is the right attitude in which to come to the prayer meeting? Is it as burdened, or with exercises that come as in the meeting for prayer?
J.T. We have exercises, of course, burdens, but we come in the light of promise.
C.T. Do we also come together as really together? Peter and John were of one mind.
J.T. The word 'together' governs their movements, having the light of promise, the great element of promise. We have the first commandment with a promise attached to it in regard to young people, which I am afraid they little value: "Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is just. Honour thy father and thy mother, which is the first commandment with a promise, that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest be long-lived on the earth", @Ephesians 6:1 - 3. Now we have a promise attached to the house of prayer, and God honours His promises. So while the burdens are there we give expression to them; we place them before the
{35}
golden altar, and there is a promise that we shall be made glad. How much we need it on the Monday! After the blessing of the first day of the week Monday is likely to bring in depression and so the promise at the prayer meeting ought to be valued.
R.W.S. Some fresh feature comes in; is that to be expected?
J.T. The position is so great, it is a reflex of what is in heaven. Think of all the wonderful things that were going on in heaven all the time on the apostolic level! There were things coming out all the time at these meetings in the Acts, especially apostolic power. You notice the increase of apostolic power in the prayers at the end of chapters 2 and 4. God would have down here all that is in heaven.
S.McC. In @Isaiah 56:6, 7 it reads, "Also the sons of the alien, that join themselves to Jehovah, to minister unto him and to love the name of Jehovah, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, and holdeth fast to my covenant; even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer; their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar: for my house shall be called a house of prayer for all the peoples". The thought of joyfulness entering into this matter is important over against what you were referring to as perhaps depressing.
J.T. That is what I was thinking, the promise surely is worth something; God honours it if we look for it. What I observe is the frequency of these three-day meetings such as we are having now, and some shorter. They are increasing and they do not seem to be decreasing in power. The fact is they are increasing in power. It is a day of small things, very small, of course, but the frequency of the meetings does not decrease the power. The power increases as we are ready for it, there is plenty of it;
{36}
that is what you get here in these chapters, the great development of power in the meetings as the brethren came together, especially apostolic power.
A.N.W. Does the *persevering* in the teaching and fellowship apply equally to prayer? "And they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers", @Acts 2:42. Some of us seem to be definitely deficient in the last.
J.T. That is what is in mind. The brethren might have weakened; they have weakened to a certain extent as to ministry meetings and the like, and a little encouragement ought to incite more of us to give God opportunity, because He is ready to meet us if we afford Him opportunity.
W.L. Peter and John do not wait until they are at extremity before they go to the prayer meeting.
J.T. No, they go up in liberty and power, as if that is what is suitable at that moment.
W.L. They go as having something.
J.T. Clearly this stands in relation to the position at the end of chapter 2, so it is what you might call heaven's best. It is a matter of heaven as over against what there is at the Beautiful gate of the temple. "Look on us", they say; they are displacing the gate of the temple.
A.B. In principle are Peter and John the pillars, the antitype really?
J.T. You mean Jachin and Boaz, that is the idea. "And he set up the pillars for the porch of the temple; and he set up the right pillar, and called its name Jachin; and he set up the left pillar, and called its name Boaz", @1 Kings 7:21.
A.B. Meaning 'He will establish', and 'in Him is strength'.
J.T. Quite so.
A.R. When the queen of Sheba came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon
{37}
she was impressed with the dignity of the men that stood before him and she said. They are happy. I was wondering if Matthew brings forward Christ and the Acts bring forward His men.
J.T. That is what is here. God is setting out what has been brought in at Jerusalem; not arbitrarily setting aside the temple, but the Lord had said, after the widow cast in her mite, "Days are coming in which there shall not be left stone upon stone which shall not be thrown down", @Luke 21:6. Well, now we see it here; this is the beginning of the thing. The end of chapter 2 shows what a vessel the assembly was, what was going on there. Now these two men move out to the temple; not a word is said as to whether they were directed to do so or whether the brethren were in it; it is just to bring out what they were. One man says nothing; Peter is first; that is the divine thought, that Peter is first, and John is second. He does not say anything but he is there and Peter says, "Look on us", the *two*.
Ques. Could you link on @Matthew 18:19 with it? "Again I say to you, that if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens". There is the idea of two agreeing and the result.
J.T. That would be the idea, "two of you", that is, two of the assembly. These are two of the assembly *par excellence*, they are the outstanding two. The man that is healed is healed completely and he is seen right through these two chapters, 3 and 4. He is completely well: "And, by faith in his name, his name has made this man strong whom ye behold and know; and the faith which is by him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all", Peter says (@Acts 3:16).
J.R.H. Does this walking and leaping and praising God show the joyful spirit you refer to?
{38}
J.T. Quite so, he is brought into the current of things. Peter says of him, "And, by faith in his name, his name has made this man strong whom ye behold and know; and the faith which is by him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all". "By faith in his name", that is the name of Jesus. Now you notice the word 'faith' in that verse: I think we shall see it is a question of the dispensation of faith, that dispensation had begun. Peter stresses that it is "by faith"; 'by' -- the preposition is rather 'on': "And, by faith in his name, his name has made this man strong whom ye behold and know". But notice it is "by faith". Where is the faith? In those two men! It is the dispensation of faith that is in mind; Peter is explaining it. "And by faith in his name, his name has made this man strong whom ye behold and know; and the faith which is by him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all". That is the dispensation of faith, it is a public matter.
The Lord had said about the man in @John 9:3, "Neither has this man sinned nor his parents, but that the works of God should be manifested in him". It is what is public. The dispensation of faith is public, it is "in faith". This man is an outstanding testimony to His power: "By faith in his name", it is the Name that has done the work. That is, Christ is brought in: He is the Inaugurator of faith; it is by Him. He inaugurated the dispensation of faith; it is what the dispensation is, and the persecution would set that aside. Hence the prayer we have in chapter 4 establishes the matter and it is even augmented by prayer.
J.S. Do Peter and John exceed the temple here? God has moved out from the house and power now is in the new system.
{39}
J.T. I think that is the idea. The Beautiful gate would mean something very attractive to the natural eye, but Peter and John are displacing that. The man would never refer to that again; the Beautiful gate of the temple meant nothing now to him: he held Peter and John; he is now part of the new system. He has not only benefited by it but as brought into it he is made completely well; there is completeness in the cure.
S.J.H. Does the thought of definiteness come in, that we should be more definite in our prayers? "And Peter, looking stedfastly upon him with John, said, Look on us", as if taking in the whole position.
J.T. Quite so; the man is completely absorbed now with these two men: he is holding them. The dispensation is there; it increases. He is agile so the opposers could do nothing against the matter. Here is the man healed so in chapter 4 they let the apostles go.
W.L. Would this matter of faith be an exercise to us as being at the prayer meeting?
J.T. Surely; there is the prayer of faith, that is another matter. We pray, but God does the work; but the Spirit of God says sometimes the *prayer* does the work: "The prayer of faith shall heal the sick", @James 5:15. You say, God healed, but the prayer of faith healed. Who was praying for the universe when God was making it? There is no evidence that anyone was, it was God's creative power that brought it into being. But here it is something that God is stressing, the prayer of faith can do it. God can do it and does do it, but it is the prayer of faith that is stressed. Peter says, "The faith which is by him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all". It is the faith that is by Him. By whom? By Christ, He is the Inaugurator of faith, the Author and Completer of faith. He has brought
{40}
this thing in and He wants to see it working every day. It is operating in this universe, it does things, it made this man well.
C.H.H. Does this imply that the man himself had faith?
J.T. It would, as Paul says, "on the principle of faith, to faith" (@Romans 1:17); faith in Peter and John and faith in the man.
C.H.H. The apostle saw that the impotent man in Lystra had faith to be healed (@Acts 14:9).
J.T. Quite so, that is a continuation of this subject.
A.R. The Inaugurator of the system is not present; the only thing this man can look at is two men.
J.T. The Inaugurator of faith is Christ, the Leader and Completer of faith. Well, this faith is operating now in Peter and John, but it is this faith which is by Christ. Where did it come from? It came from Christ; faith is the gift of God. The Lord brought the thing in Himself. He has used it in the moral universe and it is going to be continued; we want to have it, it does things.
A.R. I was wondering regarding the Lord's mediatorial service; these men are really carrying on the same idea, a mediatorial work.
J.T. They are; it is a mediatorial system. Peter is saying. It is not faith in us. The faith is really working by them, but it is faith in Jesus that does it.
C.H.H. It says in @Romans 10:17, "So faith then is by a report, but the report by God's word". Does it mean as Peter speaks that God would give the man faith to be healed?
J.T. That is likely. It does not imply there was anything in him until Peter speaks to him: "And Peter, looking stedfastly upon him with John, said, Look on us. And he gave heed to them, expecting to receive something from them. But Peter said, Silver and gold I have not; but what I have, this give I to thee: In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean
{41}
rise up and walk. And having taken hold of him by the right hand he raised him up, and immediately his feet and ankle bones were made strong". @Acts 3:4 - 7. It is clear that faith, like a current, entered into the man. "So faith then is by a report, but the report by God's word". Peter had spoken something that had the character of God's word. It is "On the principle of faith, to faith", Peter had faith here but Christ brought it in. Christ inaugurated it; now it is operating in these two men. Peter spoke to him and took his right hand, assisting him in the action. Faith is operating in the system, it is operating in this moral system that he came into.
J. How do we take people by the right hand today?
J.T. Give them every opportunity to come into the truth. Use great care in the way you speak to people.
J.P. How does the book of James fit into the matter of faith and prayer? "Is any sick among you? let him call to him the elders of the assembly, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith shall heal the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up" (@James 5:14,15).
J.T. That is a good passage for showing how the system is operating. "Let him call to him the elders of the assembly, and let them pray over him". Let him do it, meaning that he is interested in this matter. If he says. There is such a thing as faith, and calls for the elders of the assembly, it would bring out what the assembly is and what is seen in it. It is the prayer of faith that does it. You say, It is God that does it, but the Spirit says the prayer of faith does it. Then they anoint with oil; it is what is going on in the system. The question is whether we are able to take up that position and see what is operating.
{42}
C.N. So in @Luke 17:6 we see, "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye had said to this sycamine tree, Be thou rooted up, and be thou planted in the sea, and it would have obeyed you".
J.T. These are illustrations. We are now in an extraordinary situation in this world. What bearing has our position here below on this matter? Can faith do anything? Is not this system that God has brought in and set up here going to have influence? Is it a mere negative? Well, I think what we are speaking of ought to stir us up in this matter of prayer, and prayer in relation to the system that God has set up.
F.N.W. In connection with James, if there is a difficulty within a household, is it more suitable for those in the house to ask the brethren to come and pray, or should the brethren in the locality take the initiative and go and pray in the household?
J.T. That passage clearly puts the initiative on the man; *he* calls the elders of the assembly.
J.W.D. You were speaking about the system of faith. We have a certain measure of light as to God's ways of government in controlling things in the interests of the assembly, and we are to pray intelligently in that setting as well as other settings.
J.T. I think that is the way it works out. Our prayer meetings are helpful, therefore, from a divine standpoint; they ought to have great influence at the present time in connection with what is going on. We are able to give reasons to God. I think God is waiting for adequate reasons as to our demands in prayer; we are to become intelligent, to have on the armour of light and name things and bring our conclusions to God. He will listen to our reasons.
J.W.D. As to the present situation, the war and things like that, do you think we should introduce matters of that kind into our prayer meetings?
{43}
J.T. We ought to bring our reasons to God as we see in various prayers that we have recorded. Take this one in chapter 4: "And having been let go, they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said to them" (verse 23). That is a public matter, what the chief priests and elders said was public; they report that. "And they, having heard it, lifted up their voice with one accord to God, and said. Lord, thou art the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them" (verse 24). We have been speaking of how far on they were. I think as we proceed in this book we shall see they are getting more and more away from the Jewish setting, but still it is in view here, and they quote the words of David: "Who hast said by the mouth of thy servant David, Why have the nations raged haughtily and the peoples meditated vain things? The kings of the earth were there, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ. For in truth against thy holy servant Jesus, whom thou hadst anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the nations, and peoples of Israel, have been gathered together in this city to do whatever thy hand and thy counsel had determined before should come to pass" (verses 25 - 28). Peter and John bring in the report to the company as to what had been said to them. It is quite true that the movement of persecution was directly against the Christians, the disciples, but that does not alter what we are saying as to what is applicable. What is going on now is not directly against the saints of God, but it is indirectly against them, as we know. Why not have the facts in our souls as they bear on the testimony and advance our cause before God! He will listen. He is waiting for these very things. So here He deals with the nations, with the public authorities, and it goes on
{44}
to say, "And now, Lord, look upon their threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word, in that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders take place through the name of thy holy servant Jesus" (verses 29, 30). It seems to me that this is the crucial part of the prayer: it is what they actually want from -God. They do not want any retribution, they are concerned about the dispensation, that it should not be marred by what is happening or by what has happened but that it should stand; and that is of prime importance, I believe. Our attitude, walk and ways should not in any way detract from the dispensation; let it stand. In spite of the storm that is raging let us maintain the dispensation. Do good to help people, not taking men's lives.
H.B. We are not to ask the Lord, as Elijah did, for fire to come down from heaven.
J.T. "And now. Lord, look upon their threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word, in that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders take place through the name of thy holy servant Jesus". That is the maintenance of the dispensation. We say to the authorities that we cannot take life because the Lord Jesus did not take life; He came not to destroy men's lives but to save them. The taking of life physically will come in later when the Lord comes out of heaven as a warrior. The point now is to follow Him. Our dispensation is outside of these things. The Lord said, "My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were of this world, my servants had fought that I might not be delivered up to the Jews; but now my kingdom is not from hence", @John 18:36.
S.P. It is the principle of the dispensation of healing.
{45}
J.T. That is the principle, we are seeking to help people.
A.R. You said last night in prayer referring to the warring nations, that we do not ask for the millennium, we ask for peace.
J.T. Quite so, that is the thing. If it be according to the will of God may He do it. He is ready to listen to our reasons for these things; they give good reasons here. Then they ask God to help them to heal people, to maintain the dispensation.
Ques. Should not our reasons always have the glory of God in mind?
J.T. Quite so. He is ready to listen to them at the prayer meeting.
C.H.H. Would it be right to come to a judgment about things and then refer it to God? It is not that you would ask for retribution, but you have a proper basis for prayer; you come to a judgment. In @Revelation 18:20, it says, "God has judged your judgment upon her".
J.T. Yes, we have a judgment and God will judge it in time. But as regards authority, the nations, politics and leaders, we are concerned knowing that God can use any of them to bring this thing to an end. Give God your reasons. So Paul on the ship, when the storm was lying heavily on them, says, referring to the sailors, "Unless these abide in the ship *ye* cannot be saved". @Acts 27:31. Where are the sailors today? I want to know who the sailors are because God can use them to save me; I want to pray for them that they may be available for the Lord to use.
J.R.H. All this would show the importance of the knowledge of the will of God as operating in any matter we may pray for.
J.T. "Let us put on the armour of light" (@Romans 13:12); then you can name things.
{46}
A.N.W. "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men; for kings and all that are in dignity, that we may lead a quiet and tranquil life in all piety and gravity", @1 Timothy 2:1,2. Does that cover all your requests for things?
J.T. We are to pray for kings and all in authority, so that we are wide in our outlook; but especially we pray for peace, that the Lord's people might have peace.
A.H.P. The moral virtue of the ninth hour is carried through in the dispensation, as seen in this man praising and in the service of the apostles.
J.T. The man here is outstanding and they want other men to be outstanding. "In that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders take place through the name of thy holy servant Jesus": that is the character of the dispensation.
F.N.W. Daniel in his prayer in chapter 9 indicates this line (@Daniel 9) He has light as to the position, the seventy years, then he feels the failure of himself and the people, and then he asks God to come in for the Lord's sake. He does not seek retribution or the punitive governmental dealings of God.
J.T. That is a good scripture to bring in because in his prayer Daniel gives good reasons. Before he began to pray he knew the prophetic word. Those of us who have followed up the truth in any little way know more than the leaders of the nations. The prophetic word indicates what is about to come, and if we are aware of anything in the prophetic word that bears on the moment, let us tell it to God. He likes to hear it; He is waiting to hear about it. So that the answer to Daniel is, "Seventy weeks are apportioned out upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to close the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make expiation for iniquity, and to bring in the righteousness of the ages, and to seal
{47}
the vision and prophet, and to anoint the holy of holies" (verse 24). God is thinking about our matters.
R.W.S. If external circumstances seem to indicate that it is not God's will to change things, and the saints pray, do I understand God may repent in answer to the prayer?
J.T. Yes, the prayer of faith. Daniel's prayer was answered. Of course it synchronised with divine counsels, but then God can change His mind. We have many examples of God changing His mind, in that sense, because of prayer.
H.B. Does Amos give an illustration of that? "Then said I, O Lord Jehovah, cease, I beseech thee! How shall Jacob arise? for he is small. Jehovah repented for this: This also shall not be, said the Lord Jehovah", @Amos 7:5, 6.
J.T. Very good. It is our matter; God says to Daniel, It is your matter and you are a man greatly beloved. It is a question of what God thinks of us, whether we are making ourselves interesting to God, whether we are entitled to ask Him to do things for us. If we are, He will do them.
Ques. Does Hezekiah's prayer fit in here, spreading out the whole matter in detail? "And now, Jehovah our God, I beseech thee, save us out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou, Jehovah, art God, thou only", @2 Kings 19:19.
J.T. The Assyrians were turned back. The Scriptures are full of this matter, full of evidence of God answering the prayers of His people.
A.N.W. He gives way to importunity. The poor widow in @Luke 18 was importunate. "And shall not God at all avenge his elect, who cry to him day and night, and he bears long as to them?"
A.R. In the sixth chapter of Revelation it says, "Do not injure the oil and the wine" (@Revelation 6:6). In chapter 7 John says, "And after this I saw four
{48}
angels standing upon the four corners of the earth, holding fast the four winds of the earth, that no wind might blow upon the earth, nor upon the sea, nor upon any tree. And I saw another angel ascending from the sunrising, having the seal of the living God; and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it had been given to hurt the earth and the sea, saying. Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, until we shall have sealed the bondmen of our God upon their foreheads" (@Revelation 7:1 - 3). Would that be like holding up His government?
J.T. Just so; and the souls under the altar say, "How long, O sovereign Ruler, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell upon the earth?" @Revelation 6:10. They are heard; God listened to them. White robes are given to them and they are asked to wait a little, showing that God is able to meet your desires. These are persons held in high regard; they had suffered, they are under the altar.
So here it says, "And when they had prayed, the place in which they were assembled shook, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and spoke the word of God with boldness", @Acts 4:31. That shows that their meeting room was interesting to heaven, the place was shaken, showing how God takes account of the meeting rooms where we assemble. It brings out what is interesting to God. He regards us as He says to Daniel, "O Daniel, man greatly beloved", @Daniel 10:11. A man like that would get things.
J.T.Jr. Would you say there is a general order in connection with a prayer meeting? "And having been let go, they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said to them. And they, having heard it, lifted up their voice with one accord to God". We have let go the affairs of business, and then as together we
{49}
give out any information of interest so that we are enlightened and able to lift up one voice to God.
J.T. So reading letters from brethren who are evidently helped of God is helpful in a prayer meeting. Peter and John, having been let go, report what happened. Then the prayers, and even the meeting room, are interesting. I think God is concerned and interested as to suitable meeting rooms for His people where we can assemble suitably. Here the place was affected. So later on in chapter 16, we have, "And on the sabbath day we went outside the gate by the river, where it was the custom for prayer to be" (@Acts 16:13). A very striking thing to me in this passage, as evidence of God's interest, is the movement of the building. There is no likelihood of its falling, it is just a loving shake, but God says, I am interested in what you are saying. Then it says, "They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and spoke the word of God with boldness" (verse 31). That is what they had wanted and asked for.
C.M. What would be the difference between being filled with the Holy Spirit in this verse, and the incident in the second chapter, verse 4, where they were filled with the Holy Spirit and there was no prayer in connection with it? In this verse here they are praying.
J.T. I think what is stated of them at the incoming of the Spirit meant they were suitable vessels for the Spirit to come to. Being filled would indicate there was room for Him in them. In the fourth chapter I think it was to readjust the position after persecution, because of its severity. Take what has happened in the British Isles, the deranging of positions and circumstances, the destruction of meeting rooms and the like: a chapter like this brings out how God readjusts matters so that the situation goes on as it had done before. So here "they were all filled with the Holy Spirit", and then they spoke -- one mark
{50}
of His presence; "And the heart and soul of the multitude of those that had believed were one", another mark, which is also mentioned in chapter 2; "and not one said that anything of what he possessed was his own, but all things were common to them" (@Acts 4:31,32). That is, the whole matter was reinstated, only with this advance, that the apostles come into greater power. The money is brought to them and laid at their feet, which is not mentioned in chapter 2. There was evidently progress in that respect because money matters are always difficult, and the apostles were able to shelter the position in that respect.
C.A.M. So that which could not be shaken remained.
J.T. Quite so, they remain, the saints were not shaken; they were readjusted and set up again in increased power.
S.P. This all comes under definite supervision.
J.T. That is what I thought. The outcome of opposition and persecution is this prayer in chapter 4.
S.P. Solomon, at the end of his prayer in @2 Chronicles 6:40, speaks of Jehovah having His eyes open and His ears attentive, looking on as well as hearing what was going on among the saints.
H.B. Peter says, "For in truth against thy holy servant Jesus, whom thou hadst anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the nations, and peoples of Israel, have been gathered together in this city to do whatever thy hand and thy counsel had determined before should come to pass", @Acts 4:27, 28. Why should that be mentioned, do you think?
J.T. That would enter into any of our localities; "gathered together in this city", that was Jerusalem, of course, that was where they were praying. It is imperative in any locality that we pray about what happens in the city. We mention the things that happen and God might help us in relation to them.
{51}
A.R. If God shakes something and it does not fall, we may be sure it will never fall. I was thinking of what has happened in the British Isles.
J.T. I think it has brought out what is there of God, so that we are encouraged to go on. Another thing that comes out here besides this matter of money is how a man acted who had property. He was a Levite but he was not governed by the levitical law; he was living in the country. His property should have been in the city, but he was adjusted too; the whole dispensation was brought around. He is a true Levite now, one who had not been true. This is a general adjustment that comes out here.
J.S. Do you regard Barnabas as being recovered on moral lines?
J.T. He had already been surnamed; he is ennobled, surnamed by the apostles. Now his name is being mentioned for the first time in connection with this matter of money.
C.H.H. Is the thought of *giving* a great feature of the assembly as Paul presents it?
J.T. I would say that it is remarkable the place it has in the two epistles to Corinth. But here we have a remarkable man, that is Barnabas, and he comes in in connection with this matter of money. It is a matter God is helping us in, perhaps increasing the liberality of the brethren, but it must come under apostolic authority now; it is not left loosely. Money is an important matter because it is likely to give the devil an opportunity in promoting selfishness. So I think that is why the apostles¬ feet are mentioned here, not in chapter 2, but here. There the matter is left open: "And all that believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions and substance, and distributed them to all, according as any one might have need", @Acts 2:44,45. But now it is put at the apostles¬ feet, that is, it is regulated by apostolic authority.
{52}
C.T. Is the thought of doing good in mind in giving this money?
J.T. That is the point, but let it be properly regulated.
S.P. How are you looking at apostolic authority today?
J.T. It is a question of what it is in relation to. We have apostolic teaching and apostolic authority now; hence @1 Corinthians 14:37 says, "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment". What Paul wrote was the Lord's commandment, that is where it comes in. Money should be regulated as it comes in amongst us, that the devil may not tempt us as he did Ananias and Sapphira in chapter 5. How the devil gets in and brings in pride in relation to it!
C.A.M. In Corinthians Paul spoke about it relative to his movements and the movements of the saints.
J.T. Yes, he said he would not carry it himself; he would have others sent by the assembly to carry it (@1 Corinthians 16:3).
J.T.Jr. We have a contrast with the beginning of the chapter, where you have a beggar asking for money; at the end you have the apostles¬ feet and plenty of money.
J.T. What a beggarly thing it was to be sitting there asking for money! These great men, heaven's best, come into view and this man thinks nothing more of them than what they may give him in the way of money. Peter says, "Silver and gold I have not; but what I have, this give I to thee"; the chapter brings out what is of heaven. But the end of chapter 4 shows that money has its place, even amongst the brethren; though it must be under apostolic authority, otherwise the enemy would take advantage of it. The end of the next chapter and
{53}
beginning of chapter 5 show how apostolic authority met the money situation and exposed Ananias and Sapphira in their selfishness.
C.H.H. Would you say apostolic teaching corresponds with the apostles¬ feet?
J.T. That is the idea, the teaching of the apostles still carries authority now.
{54}
PRAYER AS SEEN IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES (3)
@Acts 6:1 - 8; @Acts 7:54 - 60; @Acts 8:14 - 17
J.T. It was pointed out yesterday in relation to prayer in chapter 4 that the apostles were increasing in power; instead of their power diminishing, it was increasing. They had asked for this, and it says, "And when they had prayed, the place in which they were assembled shook, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and spoke the word of God with boldness" (verse 31). Then we are told, "With great power did the apostles give witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all" (verse 33). Following on this we have an allusion to apostolic administrative authority extending to many: "as many as were owners of lands or houses, selling them, brought the price of what was sold and laid it at the feet of the apostles; and distribution was made to each according as any one might have need" (verses 34, 35). This would be evidently a development by experience; it was better that there should be direct specific administrative authority for it than that it should be left open in the sense of having all things in common. Following on this we have Barnabas laying money at the apostles¬ feet, as one who had represented a great accession to the position; it is said that he "being possessed of land, having sold it, brought the money and laid it at the feet of the apostles" (verse 37)(@Acts 4:31,37). He had been surnamed Barnabas by the apostles, showing there was steady development and increase.
Chapter 5 enlarges on this feature, after the death of Ananias and Sapphira, in connection with this matter of money. It is said, "And great fear came
{55}
upon all the assembly, and upon all who heard these things. And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders done among the people; (and they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch, but of the rest durst no man join them, but the people magnified them; and believers were more than ever added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women); so that they brought out the sick into the streets and put them on beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter, when he came, might overshadow some one of them. And the multitude also of the cities round about came together to Jerusalem, bringing sick persons and persons beset by unclean spirits, who were all healed" (@Acts 5:11,16). This is the acme of the apostles¬ increased power in the book. It stands related to prayer, the prayer mentioned in chapter 4, so that what God had instituted, the power of the anointing, made great headway and afforded great representations of divine power. God's witness to Christianity. It seems to me that this is a matter that should be kept in our minds; however small things may be, let us have the idea of the ornament, the anointed vessel, in connection with which God is operating, and how it is developed in power in connection with prayer.
Now in chapter 6 we have a breakdown. "But in those days, the disciples multiplying in number, there arose a murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews because their widows were overlooked in the daily ministration" (verse 1). It would look as if the administration of money was failing, but in any case there was the spirit of complaint which is a bad sign; it is met by prayer and then by the appointment of the seven deacons. Following on this there is the provisional position in relation to the Jews, in relation to Jerusalem, gradually ebbing and ceasing as we shall see in the next section, chapters 9, 10 and 11.
{56}
J.S. What would be the great spiritual import in the recovery of the Levite seen in Barnabas?
J.T. It shows that true levitical service was taking form. Barnabas is an outstanding, true levite, not any more a typical levite, but a true levite, a true servant of God. Following upon him is Stephen, and then Philip who also represents the levitical order in Christianity in addition to the twelve. In connection with prayer these three men come in.
C.H.H. Would it be an evidence of the grace of the anointing that five of these men selected in chapter 6 have Greek names?
J.T. Yes, it would be; I think grace entered into it because the Grecians, the Hellenists, were the complainers; that is the indication of grace operative in an emergency, that you consider the persons who are involved. If they are complainers, why are they complaining? Is there sectional feeling arising? Well, if there is, meet it, so that it will be overcome. Apparently it was overcome; it looks as if it was a sectional matter.
J.R.H. You have stressed the importance of apostolic authority. Would the attitude of these levites you have mentioned in regard of apostolic authority be applicable today?
J.T. It links on with the apostles having to do with these three men; of course, with the seven deacons, but particularly with these three who develop into great servants, not in serving tables but in spiritual service. Barnabas is knighted, so to speak, by the twelve, and surnamed "Son of consolation"(@Acts 4:36); Stephen and Philip each purchased to himself a good degree; that is, they did not need to be knighted, they are great enough without that; they purchased to themselves a good degree. Sometimes you see men avoiding titles; they are greater than the title, greater than any title would make them.
{57}
That is what comes out here; development is on these lines. A man is what he is, a title does not add to him.
J.S. Do you have recovery of what is priestly, of the priesthood in principle, in Stephen?
J.T. Well, he purchased to himself a good degree and great boldness in the faith (@1 Timothy 3:13). He does serve as a priest in praying, that is the point we are making in regard of him; his face was seen "as the face of an angel". That is, he is beginning to reflect the heavenly which is now breaking forth on the scene.
H.G.H. What is the thought behind the division of service? In the first scripture we read, do we not all have part in this service of prayer? But in chapter 6 there are those set aside for the administering of the money, so that the apostles could give themselves to prayer. Do we not all have part in the service of prayer?
J.T. We do, but I think there are details here that have to be observed. The money was being laid at the apostles¬ feet. Rome has made a great point of acquiring money and making a public show with it. Now the twelve speak, and "having called the multitude of the disciples to them, said, It is not right that we, leaving the word of God, should serve tables" (verse 2). That is, the money no doubt would have increased and would have occupied the time of the apostles, of the twelve, to the detriment of the spiritual service that was committed to them. They were not called to be deacons; they were gifted men, every one of them, although Paul who had more gift than any of them did serve as a deacon, meaning he would do anything; he never implied that he had too much to do, he never did, and yet he served "more than they all". There is a certain amount of wisdom here: they say, so to speak, We see that this money matter which has come to our feet is
{58}
causing complaint in regard of the distribution to the needy ones, and it is giving occasion to sectional feeling. The devil was in that, the door was being opened to the devil; wherever you get a party spirit or sectional feeling, the devil is in it. The twelve closed that breach; so far so good. The twelve called the multitude of the disciples to them and said, "It is not right that we, leaving the word of God, should serve tables". They probably thought it would result that they would have more to do with tables than with the administration of the heavenly things which were committed to them; hence this additional department was opened up which proved a great success, because not only was the attack nullified, but these three men became outstanding spiritual servants, almost linking on with the apostles. It was a development out of themselves, not by appointment, but a question of what one may be as the work of God operates in him, purchasing to himself a good degree and great boldness in the faith.
J.R.H. The relation of these three men with the apostles is very interesting. Should it not help in all those who seek to serve the saints to be subject to authority as to it?
J.T. We cannot get along without the apostles; apostolic authority is the outstanding initial feature of the position, meaning the representation of Christ in authority, so that all that comes out in this section is subject to them.
A.N.W. The reciprocation here is good: the apostles ask the brethren to choose, and the brethren make the choice and place the men before the apostles.
J.T. The multitude is brought into it, too. It is not a democratic affair, but it is wise, because the saints were being divided. Well, let the saints have a voice, let them speak. So the word was, "Look
{59}
out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we will establish over this business". That is to say, it is still an apostolic matter, only the brethren are brought into it, which is sometimes necessary; it is sometimes well to give the brethren a voice, to let them speak, especially when there is cleavage and sectional feeling.
J.S. What do you understand by "leaving the word of God"? What is involved?
J.T. It is negatively mentioned here; they are not going to do it. It would never do to give up a commission from the Lord to preach and teach in order to serve tables. This arrangement places the money in its right setting in the hands of seven deacons. It is still right to keep the idea before us.
C.A.M. You made reference in connection with purchasing a good degree to the fact that these men were subject to the light of heaven. Would you think that in this part of the book the light of heaven is coming into such men as these, so as to bring about a greater correspondence with heaven?
J.T. That is, the seed sown by the twelve is working well. It is bearing fruit outside of their own number, because they have nothing more to say to Stephen or Philip. Barnabas they have to say to, because he was a Jerusalem man and they sent him to Antioch. These two men, Stephen and Philip, are a new point of departure; the heavenly view comes into evidence in Stephen's face. God is going to make room for Paul, make room for the ministry. We shall soon have Paul in the picture; he is already here as an antagonist, a young man who held the clothes of the persecutors of Stephen.
C.A. That is a very remarkable thing; it seems to be making room for the light above the brightness of the sun that is going to come in.
{60}
J.T. That is right, we are going to get heavenly light.
A.N.W. The link between Stephen and Paul is very striking.
C.H.H. Is there a similarity between this extension and the additional seventy which are added to the system in Moses¬ day?
J.T. That is the sort of thing. Then, too, the seventy palm trees were symbolic. These numerals help us; the seventy palm trees and the twelve springs of water would point to this position in which God is operating. Now although the apostles had to do with the seven deacons and laid their hands on them, yet they developed beyond the immediate control of the apostles, like the seventy in @Luke 10:1 "Now after these things the Lord appointed seventy others also". There are twelve in @Luke 9 and seventy in @Luke 10; that means a great enlargement. It is the same thing here with the seven deacons; the principle is here only; it is a division of seventy, but it is the same idea as in Luke; they go forward beyond the apostles, that is, God is going to spread out, making room for Paul. Peter comes hi again, to open the door to the gentiles so that the heavenly matter may be developed: "God would make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations, which is Christ in you the hope of glory", @Colossians 1:27.
C.H.H. Would it help us locally to have this extension in mind? The apostles laid their hands on them, they committed themselves to the seven.
J.T. Yes. In the young brothers coming on the spirit of rivalry is apt to come up. It is a selfish thing which will come up unless we are cautious. The apostles here act very wisely: "Look out, therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we will establish over this business: but we
{61}
will give ourselves up to prayer and the ministry of the word. And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas, a proselyte of Antioch, whom they set before the apostles; and, having prayed, they laid their hands on them". These young men can never say, We are outgrowing the apostles, for Peter and the others can say, We prayed for you and laid our hands on you. There is not a young man whom the Lord is using today who has not been prayed for before he is able to walk in the path of service. If a young man is taken up, he cannot say, I am getting on by myself; he has his roots in the elder brethren. If things are normal that is where his roots are. Here they prayed for them and laid their hands on them. What impressions would be received by the laying on of the apostles¬ hands! Paul speaks to Timotheus of "the gift of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands", @2 Timothy 1:6. In one sense none of these men could be equal to the twelve; even Paul in a certain sense was not equal to them. He made himself more useful to heaven, but as to his official position he is not in the foundation of the heavenly city. God, of course, stabilises everything; what He has inaugurated stands, like the earth that is standing for ever.
A.N.W. We want to understand the idea of the twelve better. Paul may be wonderful, but he is not one of the twelve.
J.T. That is how it stands in @1 Corinthians 15:5: "that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. Then he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once". Cephas is first; Peter failed and the Lord appeared first to him in grace. The next item is the twelve, viewed in their love capacity. The word 'twelve' denotes the love capacity. Later He appeared
{62}
to all of the apostles, it does not say the twelve; it is all of them, that is authority, but in love's capacity they come in after Cephas. The Lord has much more pleasure in appearing to us in love's capacity than in authority.
J.R.H. There are many services carried on among us in a local way, such as announcements, and care of various matters arranged among the brethren. Would these qualifications required here apply to such?
J.T. I think the facts as to these seven men are recorded as they are to help us in diaconal work. It is not just any one who can serve; it is to be a person full of the Holy Spirit. And then the outstanding one gets a paragraph by himself: "And Stephen, full of grace and power, wrought wonders and great signs among the people". So these are not just ordinary men, not ordinary believers: they are full of the Holy Spirit.
J.T.Jr. There is the idea of manhood, men, seven men; and then you have Stephen, a man full of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Yes, seven men, although women might serve as deaconesses too; Paul enlarges on that thought elsewhere. They may serve in the same capacity, but here it is seven men.
A.N.W. It is very striking the word the Lord used when He said, "The Son of man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many", @Matthew 20:28. Is that diaconal service?
J.T. Quite so.
J.R.H. This matter of being well reported of would cover the moral side.
J.T. People taking on these services -- you may call them offices in a certain way -- ought to be qualified in some sense according to the state of these men.
{63}
S.P. Does this divine arrangement completely cover this sectional disturbance amongst these brethren and hold it under control so that it does not raise its head again?
J.T. I think it is important to have our eyes open for any breach like that, so that the enemy should not have access to us. The wisdom of the apostles is to be noted here, "Look out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men". The greater number are Hellenists, Stephen is one of them. When they looked into the matter a lot of people would come into their minds. It would look as if the Lord helped them in general, as if the multitude got help from the Lord to make a choice; they did not allow personal feeling to come in, the greater number of the local brethren chose Hellenists.
S.P. It was not men naturally capable of handling money who were chosen, not men who were good accountants.
J.T. No, "full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom".
W.L. Would that suggest that the spiritual must dominate the material?
J.T. That is the idea. I think the spiritual predominated anyway, in spite of the feeling that had arisen among the Greeks, because the choice they made was spiritual.
R.W.S. Casting lots is out of place now, is it not?
J.T. You do not get that here. The apostles evidently accepted the choice of the multitude. The matter is settled, not only by the twelve, but by the multitude with the twelve. The twelve accepted the choice of the multitude.
A.R. The apostles had a right to decide for themselves who was to do the work, but bringing in the brethren helps in unity.
J.T. I think they did that in effect, laying their hands on those chosen and praying for them.
{64}
C.H.H. There seem to be great results from that, "A great crowd of the priests obeyed the faith" (verse 7). Would that be the effect of breaking down the religious system around us?
J.T. Just so, "A great crowd of the priests obeyed the faith". The work of God is going on, that is the point, but going on in connection with prayer, because it is said of the apostles that "having prayed, they laid their hands on them". We are not told what they prayed as in chapter 4. They may have prayed at length; all may have prayed, we do not know; but the point is that they prayed, and that is to show the place prayer has in all this.
J.S. Is verse 8 confirmatory of their actions?
J.T. It shows that Stephen is outstanding. We get no more of this matter in detail, but what we do get is chapter 7, one of the most wonderful chapters, that a man taken up in this lowly service should serve so wonderfully.
C.T. It seems here that after prayer increase takes place: "They laid their hands on them. And the word of God increased". Is that the outcome of prayer?
J.T. That is the setting; it is to bring out the place prayer has in the dispensation. We are not told what they prayed in their prayer, but the point is they prayed. Who knows how much they prayed? It is an important matter; every one of the apostles may have prayed at a particular time. Then you get increase of the word of God: "And the word of God increased; and the number of the disciples in Jerusalem was very greatly multiplied, and a great crowd of the priests obeyed the faith". The Spirit of God has put these things together to remind us of the importance of prayer, and the prayer meeting should not be neglected. There are things that follow on it; we always expect things to happen on the Tuesday and Wednesday, and right through the
{65}
week. This is the order of things that where prayer is made there is increase. The Lord spent a whole night in prayer before He selected the twelve. These twelve are praying before this selection of seven is confirmed. This results in increase of the word of God, then increase in praise, and then the priests, the most difficult soil, yield. That is all in connection with prayer.
J.R.H. Would it be right to connect this prayer in verse 6 with the note in verse 2, 'pleasing to God'? It was not merely a matter of pleasing the apostles, though they may have been pleased with the choice of the multitude, but their prayer would bring in pleasure to God.
J.T. Yes, it brings in God, that is the idea. God is affected by prayer. Why does He not carry on without prayer? These are the facts we have to learn, what prayer is in the system.
J.W.D. The hour of prayer should be the summing up of what we pray for every day in connection with the divine system operating.
J.T. I always feel that in the morning when the brethren are going forth to business the family reading and prayer afford great power in the soul. The question is how much of that there is in the mornings. We have the morning and evening lamb in the types, they balance each other; the day is filled out with the morning reading and with what comes in in the evening. The whole day is filled out without loss if the morning and evening lamb are of equal value. The dispensation is maintained throughout the day.
S.J.H. Is there anything today corresponding with this action, "whom they set before the apostles"? In a care meeting we seek wisdom to select someone for a service and make some decision as far as we can. Is there anything beyond that? Is being "set before the apostles" confirmation and power?
{66}
J.T. The elder brethren's experience has a certain weight in the assembly, experience with God; "In the multitude of counsellors there is safety", @Proverbs 11:14. But authority properly is vested in the assembly. Care meetings can make no definite decisions; they may perhaps arrive at certain things but the authority is vested in the assembly, and that involves the twelve, the authority of the apostles¬ teaching.
S.J.H. So anything we arrive at in the care meeting should be set before the assembly?
J.T. The Lord is there in the care meeting. We do not have to bring everything before the assembly, or else there would be too much to attend to. We have a suggestion here, "It is not right that we, leaving the word of God, should serve tables". There are details of things that could be served by others; many things can be done that we do not need to bring before the assembly. Still, we have a divine institution in our minds all the time.
C.H.H. I suppose we can always count on results from prayer. You were remarking that the murmuring in @Luke 10 was met by the Lord praying in @Luke 11, and you see the sequel in @John 12. In time you see results.
J.T. Just so. Here the murmuring is met really by prayer, because that is what they did. If we were told what they said in their prayer we would know whether it went beyond this matter, but the point is it was there. What did they pray about? The selection was made by the multitude and the apostles accepted that selection. Then what did they pray about? They prayed for Stephen, perhaps especially, and for all the others. Did they ask the Lord to increase His work in these men and make them greater servants? We do not know; we are left to judge between the lines. The twelve apostles would have a wide outlook and this is no
{67}
small matter, for these seven men are full of the Holy Spirit and well reported of. We have concrete additions in our services. These men may be more than deacons, who knows? But they become what the apostles prayed they should be; prayer entered into what they became afterwards.
S.P. We can see the effect of these prayers: in verse 3 they are to choose "seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom"; in verse 5 "they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit", and in verse 8 "Stephen, full of grace and power, wrought wonders". Is that the widening out of the result of prayer, further than what they ask?
J.T. That seems to be the point for us just now, as to what our outlook may be in this matter of prayer. Sometimes in prayer meetings the ground covered does not extend five miles from the room. It ought to extend all over the whole field! If we are truly with God it will extend over the whole field. I believe when the twelve prayed about this matter their outlook was wide, and the results in these two, Stephen and Philip, are probably the outcome of this prayer. That ought to encourage us to keep on praying. Paul says in the greatest epistle, "Praying at all seasons, with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit", @Ephesians 6:18.
W.L. Would verse 4 really give us the outlook of the apostles in view of this deacon service?
J.T. "But *we* will give ourselves up to prayer and the ministry of the word"; they had that in their minds. They would cover the field all the time in this matter of prayer.
A.B. In chapter 4 it says, "The heart and soul of the multitude of those that had believed were one" (@Acts 4:32). In that section spiritual ministry in the power of the Spirit seems to take precedence and
{68}
everything is subservient to it. Now the money matter has come in and caused dissension and the principle of oneness in the assembly seems to have broken down, but prayer and spiritual ministry would bring in recovery and spiritual prosperity.
J.T. There is healing; the breach is closed, and then we have Stephen. The Spirit of God seems to reserve great space for Stephen from the time his face shone like an angel. Let us read what it says, "And all who sat in the council, looking fixedly on him, saw his face as the face of an angel" (@Acts 6:15). We should not use the word 'shone'; it says "as the face of an angel". That is taken on anticipatively, because our passage says of Stephen "Being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and said, Lo, I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God" (@Acts 7:55,56). Well, Stephen now is in his own realm, because he is a link between the provisional state of things in which the temple is recognised and the state of things in which the temple is not recognised. "Not a stone shall be left here upon a stone which shall not be thrown down", the Lord says in @Matthew 24:2. So that now Stephen is in his own realm in looking into heaven. The epistle to the Hebrews has been called 'the book of the opened heavens', and Stephen is preliminary to it: he is looking into heaven and reflects what is in heaven. He has already done it anticipatively.
J.S. Do you think the assembly is taking on the heavenly character as seen in Stephen?
J.T. That is the thing. We are looking on to Paul, we are looking on to light from heaven, a vessel coming down from heaven, the sheet coming down from heaven; we are leading on to that. The Spirit of God takes account of things and He has
{69}
reserved a great place for Stephen. God has taken up a man and God will reserve a place for him, he will not be shut up; not that he preached the gospel, but it is in this great testimony that he indicts Israel. Now we get in the fullest way heaven opened up to him, as much as to say, You have done well. Heaven previously opened on Jesus; now it is opening on Stephen. All this comes in as the result of the apostles¬ prayer; Stephen himself, with stones falling on him, kneeled down and prayed.
A.N.W. Do you connect this with @Joshua 10? God is listening to the voice of a man and the day is extended; Stephen was going to be martyred, but God was going to extend that day.
J.T. You mean the sun stood still, the day is lengthened out.
A.R. Why was Stephen allowed to do this? Why was it not Peter rather than a servant like this?
J.T. That is just the point: we get an emergency, and a man fit to meet it. It is no accident. God has all this arranged. God has got a space for Stephen to fill out.
J.T.Jr. Stephen represents a great product of the ministry of the twelve.
J.T. That is what I thought we should see. He is an outstanding development from the appointment of these seven men. Did not the prayer of the twelve enter into this great service he rendered? Supposing Peter was there outside the door when he was bearing witness; suppose Peter looked through the door and saw Stephen's face, what would he see? Suppose Bartholomew was standing there: they would look at each other and say. Our prayer is answered. Prayer as mentioned in chapter 6 has a great place. We are not told what the prayer was; we must leave it as to what extent it covered.
J.S. Is it not remarkable that he does not appear to have died in weakness as most men do?
{70}
J.T. No, he died like the Lord.
A.L. You said that Stephen was not an abnormal case, he was a normal case developed from prayer. In our local assemblies today where young men are not developing rightly, would that result from wrong administration?
J.T. Very often it is the breaking down of administration where the weakness lies. We had yesterday morning the appointment of Matthias to close the breach; the full administrative number was there; it runs through. The Lord appeared to the twelve, He recognised Matthias as of the apostles; He recognised all of them in authority. So that if administration is broken down we may get malformation in younger men, but we get no malformation here. If Peter and Bartholomew were looking in and seeing Stephen's face, how rejoiced they would be! There would be no jealousy with them; Peter would say, My face never shone like that!
A.N.W. Do you mean the gap in the twelve means defective administration, that eleven means defective administration? I mean nowadays.
J.T. Certainly; it is constantly happening; the elder brethren break down and the young men may come in and do the thing, but they are very likely not supposed to do it. A great responsibility rests on the elder brethren, that the young men may carry on in power.
C.H.H. Chapter 10 shows the apostles are not to be left out.
J.T. Peter is seen in chapters 9, 10 and 11 acting very wisely, but the product of this prayer is what is now engaging us. They say, "It is not right that we leaving the word of God, should serve tables". So they prayed as to this matter of the seven, and there must be results. What did they say? We do not know, but we do know the results.
{71}
N.W. Are you suggesting that it is happy if a brother is serving well in a locality to pray that the Lord may use him in a wider way?
J.T. It is a question of how wide our prayers are. We come together with a specific thing before us but in the presence of God we become enlarged. I do not know whether Solomon had mapped out his prayer, but he went the whole length, further than you might expect. Look at the territory he covered, look at the time he covered! He came right down through the whole of Israel's history!
A.N.W. There must be something very significant in the fact that the Lord spent a whole night in prayer before selecting the twelve.
J.T. I suppose it was twelve hours. The Lord would not waste a minute of it. Think of the territory He covered! He would look beyond Israel, look down the dispensation, because all these twelve men had gift and they were to influence the whole dispensation. The Lord's prayer would extend right down, I am certain.
Ques. Is it necessary for the word of God to increase? In cases of breakdown such as this, it is an important thing that there should be increase.
J.T. It comes in after the prayer, increase of the word of God, increase of numbers. Even if numbers do not come, there is increase of the word of God. In @John 9 there were no converts apparent, not even the man's parents, but as with Noah, the word of God was there. Noah preached for a hundred and twenty years without a convert, but the word of God was there.
S.McC. In @Ezekiel 1:27 it speaks of the man at the end of the chapter, "From the appearance of his loins and upward, and from the appearance of his loins and downward". He had a certain appearance. I was wondering if that is not seen in Stephen, the
{72}
power in what he was upward, as well as in what he was downward and outward in his testimony.
J.T. I think that is very good. In Ezekiel it is a question of the man's loins, of his affections, and Stephen I think would correspond with that.
F.K.C. In Stephen's indictment every salient point of Israel's history is covered in great detail, coming down to the seventy-five souls in regard of Jacob. Would you not say he was intimately acquainted with Israel's history?
J.T. He had read his Bible, read it no doubt from his youth, so that it stood him in good stead when the time came for him to serve.
A.R. Would it be right to pray like this in a prayer meeting on the Monday night, in view of Tuesday night in the ministry meeting? Some young brother may excel.
J.T. That is the way to look at it. The thing is very practical and very simple. The Lord has not told us to pray on Monday night exactly, but the Lord is with us, although the sisters may be tired and some of them do not come; but the Lord is with us. The prayers uttered usually require the saints for the answers. When Zacharias, John the baptist's father, prayed for John, of course he himself would be required for the answer. But he did not believe, and that is where the difficulty lies; we do not reckon that we are needed for the answers. Persons who pray on Monday night are at the ministry meeting on Tuesday night and the reading meeting on Thursday night, and they ought to be available to the Lord for the answers.
C.T. Is that why we should have the ministry meeting so near the prayer meeting, so that we may get the answers immediately?
J.T. That is a good time to have it.
J.W.D. Do you mean that in the prayer meeting the brethren pray for distinctive ministry and help,
{73}
and in the meeting for ministry I should be exercised to be the living answer to that prayer?
J.T. You are available for the answer to the prayer. Heaven is attentive to us and takes account of who is in a locality according to the prayers that are uttered; so the next thing is, are those in the locality available to make the answers effective? For instance, it is said in @Revelation 8:6 that the angels "prepared themselves that they might sound" after the angel at the golden altar makes the prayers of the saints efficacious by the incense. The angels "prepared themselves" before they sound; they are available for the answers.
A.N.W. I was thinking about the young sister Rhoda, she saved the situation in connection with Peter. She made effective the answer to prayer that the others apparently did not.
J.T. She stood by it, too, the only one available there, although they all had been praying; she was the only one available to help Peter.
A.H.P. The thought of prayer reminds us of the healing of the breaches; it is in view of the work of God going forward. I wondered if Stephen's prayer at the close of chapter 7, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge"(@Acts 7:60), would pave the way for the coming in of Paul's ministry, the furthering of the ministry.
J.T. I do not think so. The Lord had said similarly, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do", @Luke 23:34. That was answered. They were treated as manslayers and the city of refuge was opened up to them, but it was not so here; Stephen did not ask about any sin but the one against himself, he did not take the ground the Lord took in asking the Father to forgive them. All Stephen asked about was this sin, the one perpetrated on him, but even if that one was not laid to their charge, there were others enough to terminate
{74}
the system without it, so that the judgment of God, the judicial dealings of God went forward immediately.
J.R.H. I suppose personally he showed the spirit of the dispensation in his prayer.
J.T. He maintained it in regard to the sin against himself. He did not pray in the general dispensational way that the Lord did, because the time had come for the abnegation of the system. He himself was used to go forward in view of that. Philip in the next chapter is used to go out to the Samaritans and further on we get Paul.
A.H.P. In that way the indictment in chapter 7 is final.
J.T. The court is set, so to speak, Stephen's indictment is accepted, the Jews answer it by gnashing of teeth against it; they settled the matter themselves. I do not think that Stephen intended to alter that at all but he was in keeping with the dispensation in asking for the forgiveness of the sin against himself.
C.A.M. Would you say his prayer was answered in the Lord's singling out Saul of Tarsus, an individual rather than the national idea?
J.T. I think the selection of Saul of Tarsus was an abortion; it refers to the future; that is, he was taken up before the time. But the present situation is going through; the judgment of God is going through. I would not connect him with the general position, the Spirit of God did not want to change the position. Nor did Stephen want to change the general position; it was standing and Paul was still in it, still amenable to the judgment of God. Why did it not fall on him personally? Because, I think, God was beginning to look forward to the Jews coming back in the last days. "For I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, of this mystery, that ye may not be wise in your own conceits, that blindness
{75}
in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the nations be come in; and so all Israel shall be saved", @Romans 11:25. Paul comes into Christianity as an abortion, not referring to what was happening then, but to the future; he was before the time.
J.T.Jr. This judaising principle that was working against Stephen should not have part in our meetings.
J.T. You see what Judaism was. It was exposing itself. Here is a most perfect setting out of the truth in the indictment. "And hearing these things they were cut to the heart". Well, if they had been convicted in their hearts, they would have fallen down and acknowledged their guilt; they would have been saved. There is not the slightest evidence of this; they gnashed their teeth at him. "But being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God". So that the Jews¬ position was sealed; the matter was finished, and anything that Stephen gave expression to would be as regards himself, that he was in keeping with the Christian dispensation. He was not calling for judgment against them, the indictment did that.
C.H.H. Would it be similar to @John 8, those who were accusing the woman going out while the Lord was writing on the ground, the exposure of the judaising position?
J.T. I think Stephen exposes them in the indictment. Stephen was a thorough Christian; he was in keeping with our dispensation. He would say, I am not casting a stone upon them, they are casting them on me. The one without sin, let him cast a stone, the Lord said in @John 8:7; but Stephen is not doing that, he is going out in the spirit of Christ, the spirit of forgiveness.
R.A. So it says, "Having fixed his eyes on heaven"(@Acts 7:55), like the Lord Himself before His going out:
{76}
He "lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, Father", @John 17:1.
J.T. It is all very beautiful, it is the continuance of Christ in the martyr. Paul characteristically says later, "Thy martyr"; that is the position, that is what a martyr is. It is a good thing to look at a martyr, to be, as it were, an advocate. To set out the guilt of a man is one thing, Stephen has done that; but as to what he was personally, he was like Jesus as far as he could go. 'Do not lay this sin from which I am suffering to their charge'; that is the position, so that he represents Christianity. It says, "They stoned him", and what was he doing? He was praying. There is a long note on this word "praying" here: ''invoking'',calling on'... . No one can be called upon really but God, so that the word has great force as used here'. He was invoking, invoking the whole Deity, that is the idea; there is no other object in invocation but God in His infinitude. Stephen is doing that; he has ceased indicting and is now invoking; "And kneeling down, he cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And having said this, he fell asleep". What a sight for heaven that was! What intelligence as to the whole position: the state of the Jews and what he was himself as a Christian, a follower of Jesus; how he maintained that in the fullest measure!
A.R. What a sight for this young man Saul! What a sight for heaven! What a sight for him after he was converted!
J.T. That is another thing; he "was consenting to his being killed"(@Acts 8:1).
I turn now to this next point that comes before us in chapter 8. Stephen is buried, and now we have this prayer, the service of Peter and John in regard to the Samaritans. That is the next point filling out this section in the progress of the testimony.
{77}
E.F. You were speaking of 'invoking', 'calling on' God in His infinitude. Yesterday you were speaking of addressing divine Persons. Do we ever speak to God as such, involving the whole Godhead?
J.T. The Godhead? Yes, certainly. That is what he is doing here. We do not invoke anyone else but God.
E.F. I understand there is one God, the Father, Deity expressed in Him. Do you have in mind in saying 'God', that you are calling upon the Godhead in that sense?
J.T. Yes, when it is invocation; when no name of a divine Person is given it is general. That is the position. It has a peculiar form here.
S.McC. Do you think now in chapter 8 Philip would be humbly reminded that he is certainly not out-distancing the twelve? He is like those of us who may serve in a small way now: we have to learn and be adjusted in relation to others in serving; in that way we are dependent upon the twelve.
J.T. That is good. It is really a sectional matter, chapter 6 is a sectional matter, Samaria entering into it, Samaria being a rival of Jerusalem. The Lord Himself had set it out in speaking-to the Samaritan woman, "For salvation is of the Jews", @John 4:22. The salvation of the Jews had not been fully set aside yet; the sending down of Peter and John from Jerusalem is to settle this sectional matter of Samaria. Samaria never got any good out of sectional feelings; they must be given up; that is what is meant. "And the apostles who were in Jerusalem, having heard that Samaria had received the word of God, sent to them Peter and John; who, having come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit", @Acts 8:14, 15. The pretension of Samaria is wiped out, I mean truly; every truly converted Samaritan would be thankful it is wiped out, for after all, they would say, 'we are only mongrels;
{78}
we were never anything but mongrels, but we are converted to God through Christ'.
J.R.H. Do you mean in this action of the apostles that the unity of the work in Samaria with that in Judaea was fully shown out?
J.T. The pretensions of the Samaritans are dissipated. We are apt to have national pretensions and assumptions.
J.R.H. It may be a different place, but one work.
J.T. Yes, but there is more in it than that, the pretensions of Samaria have to be dissipated. They never had any value, they always lived in the idea that Jacob was their father and he was not at all. The Lord sets their pretensions aside in conversation with the Samaritan woman; He says, "Ye worship ye know not what; we worship what we know, for salvation is of the Jews", @John 4:22. That was the position that the Lord asserted. What happened here is the filling out of it, so that the Samaritan matter is settled, that is what is meant. Jerusalem would own the apostles, hence Jerusalem sent out Peter and John; two apostles from Jerusalem have to pray that the Samaritans shall get the Holy Spirit in spite of all their pretensions. They were sent down solely for that purpose, to set aside the pretensions. Any one who has pretensions must have them dissipated if he is to get on.
C.A.M. All that is worked out in the assembly. This matter of @John 4 is all to see a reflex in the assembly.
J.T. Any pretensions that any of us may have must be dissipated, because we shall never get on if we hold on to prejudices. What about Philip? He would probably have to get to God about this: 'Why did they not get the Holy Spirit through me?' You hear people say, 'I got the Holy Spirit as soon as I believed'. You cannot be sure of what you are saying; you might say what is contrary to Scripture.
{79}
The Samaritans did not get Him at once. Perhaps you are like them; perhaps you have some prejudices in your mind that have to be dissipated through the truth.
J.S. Was it necessary that this department in regard of money should be established by the apostles before the testimony could move on?
J.T. You mean the matter of Simon Magus?
J.S. I was thinking of the setting up of seven deacons to take care of the money matter.
J.T. One of the apostles said to Simon Magus, "Thy money go with thee to destruction"(@Acts 8:20); that is how a deacon looks on money in the hands of an unconverted man. But what is it in the hands of deacons? There it *is* something, because love is behind it.
J.S. Do you regard Simon Magus as a mongrel?
J.T. Quite so, he is a bad man. Peter discerned him, but Philip did not discern him; that is another thing to notice. A great servant may fail in a point and another great servant puts it right.
R.W.S. This unadjusted matter had gone on for centuries.
J.T. It had indeed.
A.H.P. Why is the prayer specific here that they might receive the Holy Spirit? Is that to help the saints in the understanding of the importance of receiving the Holy Spirit?
J.T. There is more in it than that, it brings out a principle. What we said about the Samaritan claims is involved in it. We cannot assume to get the Holy Spirit just as we are converted, just as we believe. This shows that certain people did not get Him, although they were baptised. Peter and John have to come down and pray.
A.N.W. And lay their hands on them.
J.T. First it says, "Peter and John; who, having come down, prayed for them that they might receive
{80}
the Holy Spirit; for he was not yet fallen upon any of them, only they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus. Then they laid their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Spirit". It is a very precise transaction and it settles it once for all; but no one can say he receives the Holy Spirit automatically as he believes. Further, the time that intervenes may be indefinite.
J.S. Was Peter unlocking the door for the Samaritans? He had the key.
J.T. In a way, but it was Peter and John here; John is in it too. When you come to the use of the key Peter did it alone, John was not in it; that is in chapter 10.
A.R. Therefore when we speak to the young applying for fellowship, it is not enough to ask if they have the forgiveness of sins, but have they the Holy Spirit? That side is sometimes overlooked.
J.T. That is the line Paul followed at Ephesus: "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" @Acts 19:2.
S.McC. "And Simon also himself believed; and, having been baptised, continued constantly with Philip", @Acts 8:13. It must have been a very humbling matter for Philip to think that this man was so near to him that he "continued constantly with Philip", and yet he was exposed by the service and ministry of others. We have much to learn in that regard.
J.T. The whole position was ordered of God to rebuke this Samaritan assumption. But still Philip came into it. What excuse would he have when he saw the exposure of Simon? 'Why did not I see that'? I am sure he felt that, because he is honoured afterwards.
C.T. How do you connect the laying on of hands and receiving the Holy Spirit today?
{81}
J.T. The laying on of hands is just identification. We do not use that form, but we identify ourselves with the brethren when we announce that a certain person is going to break bread that day. We are identifying ourselves with him.
C.S. Would submitting to the word and seeking to do the will of God prove that we had received the Holy Spirit? We are obedient to the truth as laid down by the apostles.
J.T. Chapter 5 says, "And *we* are his witnesses of these things, and the Holy Spirit also, which God has given to those that obey him" (@Acts 5:32). They obeyed before He was given, the evidence of obedience must be there before we get the Holy Spirit. If you are not clear, that may prevent you from getting the Holy Spirit. Bad teaching abroad today hinders people from getting the Holy Spirit, as with the twelve men at Ephesus. They had not even heard of Him. If they had been attentive to what John the baptist taught them, they would have known that there was One coming; they had not really learned all that John taught. That is what is going on today, there is so much bad teaching, and there are so many careless people listening to it. They do not get the Spirit because there is so much bad teaching.
J.W.D. Here it supposes they heard the word of God. Would that not involve some comprehensive idea of divine outshining? "The apostles who were in Jerusalem, having heard that Samaria had received the word of God, sent to them Peter and John" (chapter 8:14). They would have had considerable light imparted to them in the preaching.
J.T. Yes, they had light and yet not the Spirit.
J.W.D. The Holy Spirit could not be received where there is defective understanding of the truth.
J.T. Yes, I would say that. Peter says that God gives the Holy Spirit to those that obey Him. Before
{82}
they get the Holy Spirit they have the feature of obedience through the earlier work of God.
C.S. There are sometimes questions asked of those seeking fellowship that are difficult for them to answer. Is that a proof that they have not the Holy Spirit?
J.T. The *fruit* of the Holy Spirit would be the *evidence of the presence* of the Holy Spirit; that would help us in seeking to determine whether a person has It or not. "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, self-control", @Galatians 5:22. Look carefully into his history and see if he has these fruits.
C.T. Ananias¬ service was that Paul might see.
J.T. He was already converted, fallen down, yet he did not have the Spirit.
C.S. Would that be a ground for refusal of fellowship?
J.T. Certainly; any one who has not the Spirit would not be in the assembly.
J.Ht.Jr. Would what is said of Cornelius, "pious, and fearing God", have an influence? "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word" (@Acts 10:44).
J.T. Of course he had not received the truth of the gospel. "While Peter was yet speaking"; I suppose Peter preached enough of the gospel and they received it before the Holy Spirit fell upon them. Peter was still preaching when the Holy Spirit came upon them.
C.H.H. If there are pretensions and sectional feelings as in Corinth, would you say they had not the Spirit *characteristically*, which might happen anywhere?
J.T. I think the Corinthians had the Spirit characteristically.
{83}
C.H.H. They were spoken of as being carnal, that is what I mean.
J.T. I think the way the apostle speaks of the Spirit in chapter 2 would prove that they had the Spirit, and then in chapter 3 he says to them, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?"(@1 Corinthians 3:16). That would prove it.
C.H.H. I mean 'characteristically'. They had It abstractly, but was it in a concrete way expressed?
J.T. The expression of it would be greatly marred by their conduct, but as called the assembly of God, they had the Spirit undoubtedly; it is stated here, "the Spirit of God dwells in you".
J.R.H. What was your thought as to the Holy Spirit, that He "was not yet fallen upon any of them" (chapter 8:16)? This matter of 'falling' we have in the case of Cornelius and his household too.
J.T. It alludes to the manner of receiving. The Lord Jesus speaks about It as being 'received', "But this he said concerning the Spirit, which they that believed on him were about to receive", @John 7:39. So Paul says to the Ephesians, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" @Acts 19:2. 'Falling on' is not simply the action of gravity; it is an energetic action of the Spirit. Peter says it was the same thing that happened at Pentecost; he likens it to that. It seems to be God's way of dealing with persons collectively; several of them received the Holy Spirit at once.
Ques. Would verse 24 show that Simon was unable to pray, not having the Spirit? He asked Peter to pray for him.
J.T. "Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and supplicate the Lord, if indeed the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee"(@Acts 8:22,24). You mean he could not pray before he had the Spirit?
{84}
Rem. Peter has to pray for him, he is apparently unable to pray.
J.T. Peter told him to supplicate the Lord himself. We do not know whether he did or not. However, it indicates that you may supplicate the Lord like Cornelius before you have the Spirit.
P.W. What about @Acts 1:8: "But ye will receive power, the Holy Spirit having come upon you, and ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea and Samaria"? How do you understand the Lord's speaking there?
J.T. That is what we are talking about, it is the way the Spirit comes in collectively; It came upon them collectively. So It did in Caesarea, in Cornelius¬ house; It came upon them collectively, but each one received the Holy Spirit.
{85}
PRAYER AS SEEN IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES (4)
@Acts 9:10 - 17; @Acts 9:39 - 42; @Acts 10:1 - 17, @Acts 10:28 - 33
J.T. This section refers to the administrative authority of Peter, committed to him by the Lord under the term, "the keys of the kingdom of the heavens"(@Matthew 16:19). It was thought well to read the passages referring to Saul's conversion, as he was being prepared, as it were, for this great event, then to consider Peter's service at Joppa as bearing on local assemblies in view of their incoming under Paul's ministry, and finally the prayer of Cornelius at the ninth hour, in which he had a vision, and Peter's prayer on the housetop. So that the great event of the incoming of the gentiles into the kingdom of the heavens is marked by prayer. The further we proceed in the subject, I think we would all admit, the more the importance of it increases in our minds, and it ought to influence us greatly as to this matter of prayer in the prayer meeting. We finished this morning with Philip's service and the apostles at Jerusalem sending down Peter and John to Samaria that those there might receive the Holy Spirit. The matter of Samaria's rivalry with Jerusalem was adjusted in that event and was never to revive, for rivalry is shut out by the gift of the Spirit; but the fact of the Spirit coming in in connection with the assembly at Jerusalem, and that the apostles were at Jerusalem, before that city was set aside, shows that its full place is owned insomuch as Samaria's claim is concerned.
H.G.H. Is the thought of submission set before us here in the expression, "Behold, he is praying"? We get Saul's conversion, as we speak of it, and we now see him praying in connection with it.
{86}
J.T. I would say that. Before, he was an insolent overbearing man, and he had come from Jerusalem armed with letters from the high priest allowing him to do acts of violence in Damascus, but now he is looking to heaven for help, a dependent man. The Lord introduces him to Ananias as a man who is praying. What he prayed would be very interesting to know; but anyway it says he saw in a vision Ananias coming in; as the Lord says, "For, behold he is praying, and has seen in a vision a man by name Ananias coming in and putting his hand on him, so that he should see". How did the vision convey Ananias¬ name?
A.N.W. Do you think he was praying before he had the Spirit?
J.T. Manifestly. It is said here by Ananias, "that thou mightest see, and be filled with the Holy Spirit" (verse 17). He would hardly have received the Holy Spirit until he was baptised, because of the position he held in Judaism; until he formally broke links with it publicly he would not be fit for the reception of the Spirit.
C.T. Is that why the word 'see' is so prominent? We get it in verse 12 and also in verse 17 as from Ananias¬ side.
J.T. Yes, "that thou mightest see"; so that he should see and then "be filled with the Holy Spirit". Seeing comes before the reception of the Spirit.
A.N.W. Praying would be the evidence that he was born again.
J.T. Well, that is the point; just as we see in Cornelius and others, dependence and subjection in prayer are features of new birth.
C.N. Would it be right to say that his praying is not so much in connection with his own conversion as in relation to the range of things ahead of him?
J.T. It is hard to say how-much his own state entered into his prayer, I would say that would be
{87}
the immediate burden. The immediate burden would be his dead state and deliverance from it.
Ques. Does his state have a great deal to do with the immediate response? It says, "Behold, he is praying", as though these visions and the movements from the divine side come in immediate response. I was wondering if that was a prompt answer to the state that was with him.
J.T. I think that is so. There is no indication that he was praying before the Lord appeared to him. This is the reaction and the Lord awaited the reaction. As the Lord appeared to him it says, "Suddenly there shone round about him a light out of heaven, and falling on the earth he heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?"(@Acts 9:4). Well, there is no evidence that he was praying before that. I think he was fully confident of being able to cope with the conditions in Damascus; he was commissioned to deal with them and he was not relying on God then. He was an insolent overbearing man, but now that light has shone into his soul his attitude is that of prayer.
A.R. The last time we heard of him he had seen a man's face shining as an angel's. The next time we hear of him he has a light from heaven shining around him, and "he heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me? ... *I* am Jesus, whom *thou* persecutest!". I was wondering if he would not link them both together in his prayer.
J.T. That is good. As suggested a little while ago, he was dependent and submissive. He says, "Who art thou. Lord?". Elsewhere we are told that he said, "What shall I do, Lord?"(@Acts 22:10). His attitude was one of subjection and dependence, clearly in effect it was the work of God that is called new birth, a sovereign action of the Spirit; but here it is accompanied by much more than accompanies it with most believers.
{88}
C.H.H. Would he correspond in any way in the commencement of his public history with the Lord in Luke? He was praying and the Spirit came on Him.
J.T. Yes, there is clearly a link there. As the Lord was praying the Spirit came upon Him, and of course Acts is a counterpart of Luke's gospel. In the Lord's own case, as we had it already, how much He was in prayer! So that the work of the Spirit in us, that is in men, leads to correspondence with Christ from the outset.
S.J.H. Would not the three days without seeing convey something as to his state and what he was passing through?
J.T. I suppose it would. If anything of @Romans 7 entered into it what a time he must have had! The Lord evidently gave him scope, before he got the Holy Spirit, to search himself inwardly. He was not looking at external things, he was blind.
A.N.W. Would these prayers before receiving the Spirit, and in the case of Cornelius before he was saved, have the nature of what the Lord said to the woman in @John 4, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee. Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water"(@John 4:10)?
J.T. Just so, there it is: "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him". The Lord implies considerable knowledge in her soul for that: "Thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". It is the same sort of exercise with Saul here, the desire for someone to deliver him. "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord", he says in @Romans 7:25, after "Who shall deliver me?". There is that sort of feeling and desire in his heart, and the Lord was waiting for that. He was waiting for the reaction to the first
{89}
impact. What would happen? The Lord was watching for that and could tell Ananias about it so that Ananias should know that he was to be in that matter, he was to have part in this great work. I suppose it was Ananias¬ greatest work, and the Lord told him this so that he might be in it intelligently and in liberty.
S.P. Is that why the Lord passes this great vessel through the hand of a certain disciple in a certain locality? "It shall be told thee what thou must do".
J.T. It must have been a humbling word to him, "What thou must do"; it was not optional. That is a good point because many at this stage are very loose and independent. The word 'must' is important.
C.H.H. Would there be an indication that as Saul passed through the exercise of @Romans 7 that exercise would be met by ministry?
J.T. It would. If any part of it entered into these dark hours evidently he worked it out in his own soul according to that passage. External ministry is not contemplated in @Romans 7; it is an inward process that each has to go through, and he says it is "when we were in the flesh"(@Romans 7:5), so that it is difficult to see how it would have fitted in after he got the Spirit and was preaching. It would look as if in some sense it was worked out at this time. Perhaps he was working it out before secretly, you may say unconsciously, after he witnessed Stephen's death, for the Lord says, "It is hard for thee to kick against goads", @Acts 26:14. There must have been something definitely going on in his soul, but now the matter is taken on by the Lord and Ananias is brought into it. He is introduced into it by the suggestion of prayer; this man is praying.
W.L. Would Ananias be impressed by this? It was not merely a matter of information to him.
{90}
J.T. I am sure it was not. I am sure he retold these incidents many a time in Damascus and I have no doubt that the apostle Paul himself told the disciples in different parts something about it.
H.B. Is there something to learn in that there are many names of places and many names of persons given?
J.T. The idea of place must have a great part in this dispensation, because the whole world is in mind; certainly now in this chapter places are in mind, and persons too.
H.B. Would it help us to be more specific in our prayer meetings?
J.T. That is what we were saying already. Sometimes prayer meetings do not go very far beyond the meeting room in their scope, but the dispensation is a very long one and prayer should cover the field. The Lord bought the field in view of what was in it; now we are coming into the field of the gentiles, and persons and places surely have a great place in the record. In the opening of the letter to Corinth it is said, "To the assembly of God which is in Corinth ... with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours"(@1 Corinthians 1:2). So the pearl of great price is involved now, we are coming on to the ground of it. It alludes to Paul's ministry of the assembly, and great scope of territory and time are in mind, and also persons.
A.R. This vision must have brought with it some sense in Paul's soul of the mystery which later he had so much in his mind, and his prayer might embody something about the mystery; "Why dost thou persecute me?" and "Rise up and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do", would be suggestive of the mystery.
J.T. It certainly was preliminary work in his soul when a man like this was told he must do certain things, obey orders from certain persons. He
{91}
might say, Lord, you give me all the instruction, but the Lord did not give him all the instruction. He said, "Enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do". It is a most important part of the believer's experience, most important, initially, because he has to learn to take orders from others and from persons whom earlier he might have looked down upon.
C.T. Would you connect the city with the assembly today?
J.T. The idea of the cities, as we have been speaking of places, has a great place in this dispensation. The Lord says to Paul, "I have much people in this city", @Acts 18:10. The work is chiefly in cities, but, of course, it is in countrysides too. It is a question of concentration of evil and how God meets it, because the concentrations of evil have to be overcome.
C.A.M. Would you say in that connection that all the conditions surrounding Paul's conversion were the design of God in view of the city? While those in Damascus were going on in discipleship they must have been in great fear of this powerful enemy, and he was very near to Damascus too; it says, "It came to pass that he drew near to Damascus", @Acts 9:3. The Lord had timed the deliverance in a very wonderful way.
J.T. Damascus was the habitual enemy of Israel and Saul would know that well. He would go there to execute judgment from the high priest. So he is allowed to get near the city. How much he knew of Naaman I do not know; he ought to have known about Naaman the Syrian, the rivers of Damascus and so forth. It would be well-known territory to him objectively, as it was opposed to Israel: "For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin", it was said in Isaiah's day (@Isaiah 7:8). Hardly any country had more to do with
{92}
Israel than Syria and Damascus. In his natural state Saul would certainly be aware of all this and have it in mind in approaching the city. Now he has to go in and get his orders; a great revelation must take place in his soul, and that runs down in the history of all souls. We have to learn to take orders from others, not only from the Lord but from the brethren. One will never be an assembly man unless he learns to take orders from the brethren.
W.L. I was wondering if dependence and obedience go together.
J.T. They do. That is just what you find in his soul. What good are the letters of the high priest now? What will they obtain for him in Damascus? He certainly cannot carry out their orders; he might as well burn them. He had taken orders from the high priest, but now he has to take orders from others, and the Lord has already told him that he must do so in the city of Damascus. His natural instincts would revolt against it, and that is what happens, we have to give up our natural instincts and learn to be subject and dependent instead of insubject and independent, otherwise we shall never be in the assembly according to God, nor shall we find the pearl of great price in it.
S.P. So the "must do" and the "must suffer" go together.
J.T. Quite so. He has to learn something about these "musts".
A.B. Would the three days involve no seeing, eating or drinking?
J.T. A great gospel subject! Tell us more.
A.B. I was thinking of it as really the end of that order and the bringing in of another according to God.
J.T. I am sure he is set out here as a model. He tells us himself that in him was set forth a delineation of those who shall hereafter believe unto eternal
{93}
life. We have to keep our eye on Paul for our part in the assembly, our part in the dispensation and the assembly as he brought it in.
J.W.D. It says in the end of @Romans 7, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord"(@Romans 7:25). Do you think the idea of "our Lord" and the deliverance connected with that are connected with Ananias and city exercises?
J.T. Just so. Of course when he wrote the epistle to the Romans he had come into contact with a great many more Ananiases.
J.W.D. I was thinking that souls in the throes of @Romans 7 get emancipation through the idea of obedience to what is set up locally.
J.T. Quite so.
C.N. Does Ananias show, over against all this concentration of evil in Damascus, what one man might be in a city and that God can, as it were, turn the city upside down through that one man? I am thinking of Ananias being in prayer.
J.T. Paul gives him a good recommendation. He does not seem to have been a very wonderful brother; he thinks he knows better than the Lord at the outset. He says, "I have heard from many concerning this man" (verse 13), as much as to say the Lord did not know him. Many are like that; they know better than the Lord; they know better than the Scriptures. But he is amenable to the Lord; the Lord says, I must have it this way, you may as well bow; Saul had to bow. Thus Ananias was brought into the system; he was hardly fit for it but I think we learn here how quickly the Lord can bring us into line and make us suitable for His service.
J.S. Do you think the Lord has taken His seat on the throne of grace between chapters 7 and 9? In chapter 7 Stephen sees Him standing; now apparently He has taken His seat and is exercising grace in that way.
{94}
J.T. Well, if you listen to Mark he says He sat down as soon as He went up there. Of course what Stephen saw was just symbolical of the Lord's readiness to come back and save Israel, but sitting is the permanence of the reign of grace.
R.W.S. Did He come down, appearing in the way, to secure Saul in view of the importance of the local assembly?
J.T. It is a question of where the thing happened. We have entered on the idea of local companies and the end of this chapter shows that Peter had entered into the current; he went through all quarters, it is said. The current of the economy had already begun, involving administration in the assembly, involving local assemblies. Peter is going to Joppa and the other places at the end of the chapter, showing that he was dealing with localities. Aeneas was told to make his bed; "rise up, and make thy couch for thyself"(@Acts 9:34), that is what Peter said. Then at Joppa, Tabitha is a local sister, or at least a local person, and he raises her up and delivers her to the local people, "having called the saints and the widows, presented her living" (verse 41). "Presented her living", that is to say, she is presented to a local setting and the local people. Aeneas is making his bed for himself in his place, and now Paul is converted at a certain place, Damascus, and he must begin to receive orders there. I think all this is in order to bring out the new thing involving local assemblies.
J.H. Would Damascus be Paul's local company?
J.T. Well, for a while he would be there with the disciples. It says "he was with the disciples who were in Damascus certain days". That would be enough to give him the experience of a local company. I suppose he would refer to Ananias in any matter in the meeting. He would have respect for
{95}
Ananias because he would always remember that he was the vessel that the Lord had chosen, for his inward deliverance.
J.Ht.Jr. Would you say that to be of immediate value in the local meeting you need to be in the spirit of the dispensation? Ananias had heard other things about Saul and tended to set aside the way the Lord can transform in a short time.
J.T. I suppose that would be a part of the lesson to be learned out of these circumstances. How quickly the Lord can change a brother and make him fit to help another brother, one of whom he had no good opinion! So if we are at all subject the Lord would make us useful to one another. Young converts have to learn to take orders from others.
Rem. As soon as he received orders he went; he moved immediately.
J.T. He did.
J.R.H. Would this help us to make every allowance for the work of God showing itself in others?
J.T. Yes, I think so. And visiting the saints is a matter of real importance. The Lord directs him to a certain street and a certain number; giving a man's name and address lays a basis for visiting the brethren.
A.R. If we were to go to heaven and sit beside the Lord we would find the work of God is one theme on earth. I was wondering if that was what the Lord wanted to bring Ananias into here and set them both as one piece.
J.T. Quite so. The history of Saul afterwards would bring out a great deal which we cannot go into now, but enough is said in these few verses to indicate how the work of God proceeds, how quickly the Lord can adjust matters so that brothers can serve one another. We are to serve one another in love. Saul gets his first lesson here in the way
{96}
Ananias served him; he lays aside all his prejudice, comes into the house, lays his hands on Saul and says, "Saul, brother"; he calls him 'Brother'.
C.H.H. Would the experience that Ananias had in being corrected help him to correct Saul? It is as though he would stimulate Saul by saying, "And now why lingerest thou?"(@Acts 22:16); so the stimulation he had from the Lord is carried on.
J.T. Yes, quite. When Saul tells the Jews at Jerusalem about this incident later he intimates that he was rather slow in being baptised. He confesses that to the Jews, as much as to say he was not in a hurry to leave Judaism when he was converted, and Ananias wanted to know what was hindering him: Why are you delaying being baptised? Paul tells the Jews that, as much as to say, I was not in a hurry to leave Judaism, but Ananias was in a hurry about it. So it says, "Arise and get baptised" (chapter 22:16), and he was to get the Holy Spirit, "that thou mightest see, and be filled with the Holy Spirit" (chapter 9:17). I think all the facts of the three accounts we have are intended to help us as to early experience after our conversion. First, to learn to take orders from others, persons we might look down on otherwise, and then not to delay in the thing that should be done. "Why lingerest thou? Arise and get baptised, and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name" (chapter 22:16); that is what he tells the Jews. He meant to convey to the Jews that he was not in too great a hurry to leave Judaism but Ananias was in a hurry for him to leave it.
J.S. Is Ananias set over against the Sanhedrim, and Damascus over against Judaism?
J.T. He represents Christianity, as we have said already, but the Lord had to prepare him. He was not right and the Lord set him right. He was not equal to the work, the Lord had to prepare him for
{97}
it. That is another thing, in seeking to serve we must be amenable to the Lord's adjustment if we are to serve aright. Clearly Ananias served very well as Paul's comments on him later show, "a pious man according to the law, borne witness to by all the Jews who dwelt there"(@Acts 22:12).
J.S. Would it be like the Lord saying to Zacchaeus, "Make haste and come down", @Luke 19:5?
J.T. Quite so.
C.T. The apostle says at the close of his day, "The time of my release is come"(@2 Timothy 4:6). Is that a man who has been under orders?
J.T. That is right. The Lord is about to release him through martyrdom.
C.H.H. The Lord said to Peter, "And *thou*, when once thou hast been restored, confirm thy brethren", @Luke 22:32. Adjustment must take place with Peter first.
S.P. Would you expect these geographical locations that you mention, Damascus, Lydda and Joppa, to enter into the spiritual import of these brethren's prayer meetings from now on?
J.T. Undoubtedly these are the beginnings. Historical Christianity is important, but current Christianity is also important, as we had last night; the blind man in @John 9 brought in the historical side first to the neighbours and then current conditions to the Pharisees. These incidents in Peter's service at Joppa and Lydda were, you may be sure, often related by the people who were the subjects of them. There is Dorcas, a woman who undoubtedly had a place in the society of the town, but now she is a changed woman. We have finished with Saul: he is set on his way by taking orders at Damascus where there is a meeting and a brother who tells him what to do, and he does it. He gets the Holy Spirit and preaches Jesus as Son of God;
{98}
he is thoroughly on his way. And now, later in the chapter, we have Peter moving, as though he were sensing the change in affairs and as he goes into all quarters (these are special quarters, Lydda and Joppa, and what he does there is historical) he is enlarging, we might say simply, laying the width of the rails, because the train has to go out into the world among the nations. We have to have wider gauge, so that is what he is doing. Then when we come to chapter 10 we find Peter still in Joppa; he spent a good while there with Simon the tanner. Joppa was at the end of the Mediterranean; the Mediterranean refers to the gentile nations and that would be the outlook as he went up to the housetop to pray. In the meantime there was another man, in Caesarea, who was praying, too, Peter at the sixth hour and Cornelius at the ninth hour. It is remarkable; these prayers are going on. This is the secret history of the work of God and we are going to have great results.
E.F. We get a great deal of synchronising in this section, the prayers of His people with His work.
J.T. Yes, showing that even the use of Peter's keys is preceded by Cornelius¬ prayer. It is a remarkable thing! Mr. M. brought the matter up yesterday of everything being the outcome of prayer. Certainly the use of Peter's keys is preceded by Cornelius¬ prayer. He is a remarkable man; he is not an ordinary man, he is a military man, a titled man too, a centurion, and he has a soldier as his servant who is called pious. So we must not be too hard on military men because they are needed, according to their names and their ranks. One of them is said to be pious but Cornelius is more than that. He was a centurion of the band called Italic, meaning he was a thorough Roman, nevertheless "pious, and fearing God with all his house, both giving much alms to the people, and supplicating God continually" (chap.
{99}
10:2). This is the man who is going to be the beginning of the gentile work.
Rem. Peter was a praying man in dealing with what was sectional at Joppa. The widows were all standing by him, but he puts them out and kneels down, and then deals with that by presenting Dorcas alive to the saints and widows.
J.T. Quite so, it does not say to the weeping ones. There is nothing said about the saints before he went there; they seemed to be all Dorcas-people before he went there and as he went they were weeping, we are told, showing him the garments, "And all the widows stood by him weeping and shewing him the body-coats and garments which Dorcas had made while she was with them. But Peter, putting them all out, and kneeling down, prayed". That is, he discriminates against those weeping and occupied with the garments, but now we are told there are saints and widows there. He does not hand her back to the recipients of the garments: he presents her to the saints and widows and that is important as to local matters. It shows that the local position must be purified. He put them all out; that is very arbitrary, but you will have no assembly if you let these people stay, wailing about garments.
J.R.H. Peter kneeled down and prayed, showing the position in Joppa was more serious than in Lydda.
J.T. He knew well enough what that wailing and body-coat making meant; it meant social affairs.
A.N.W. The condition is too negative at Lydda and too active at Joppa.
J.T. Just so. The paralysed man could not do much, but this matter of the wailing and the garments is to be watched, because we shall never reach the local assembly according to God on these lines. Peter is very drastic, he puts them all out and turns to God and prays.
{100}
C.A.M. It is very remarkable about this matter of piety. There is a great deal made of it in these different characters. Would you not say that there may be a danger of resting in so-called piety? We should pray with expectancy for some intervention of God, some heavenly intervention. I was really thinking of the whole matter, because Ananias and Cornelius, indeed all these men, were pious.
J.T. Are you making little of that?
C.A.M. It seems to be indispensable, but is there a danger of resting in it? A home needs to be marked by piety, but really to be in assembly light it seems to need some additional heavenly touch to it.
J.T. Well, that is what we get now in chapter 10. Peter had laid the basis in Lydda and Joppa for the local companies, and now with Cornelius we come to another territory in Caesarea, and it involves a military man with a title and a servant who is a soldier; but Cornelius is described, as we just noted, as "pious, and fearing God with all his house". I would say that he had some light because he was fearing God and had his house with him in it. That is a very important thing in view of what we are coming to, because "thou and thy house" is so strong a feature in Paul's ministry. Paul has nothing to do with this case but instinctively this man says, I must have my house apart from the social affairs of Caesarea. Agrippa came there later, and if Cornelius were there undoubtedly he would be recognised, but his house was out of the world already. It is *with* his house, not *and* his house, as in the case of the nobleman at Capernaum in @John 4:53 who "believed ... and his ... house". There the house believed by itself, but here Cornelius believed with his house, as far as he had got, "fearing God with all his house, both giving much alms to the people, and supplicating God continually". He is a remarkable man, and he is taken up to represent the introduction
{101}
of the gentiles. He is going to come in formally by the keys of Peter. So we must look at this in a formal way to see how the keys were employed. He is outside of Christianity, yet he has traits of Christianity with him.
A.B. Is he different from the man in chapter 3, who was carried and laid at the gate asking alms? Here is one actually outside the system bearing the character of what is within, praying, giving, and marked by piety.
J.T. Yes, yet he is still a gentile commander of the Italic band; but he is like the man in @John 9: he is ready for this matter. When God is doing great things. He prepares for great things.
J.S. Is he like the centurion who is set under authority and beseeches the Lord to come and heal his son?
J.T. That is right. There are several centurions in the New Testament. It is remarkable how the work of God carries them further than their external position. The one at the cross was simply in charge of the crucifixion of the Lord Jesus, but he says, "Truly this man was Son of God", @Mark 15:39. He got beyond his external position; that is a great thing, to get light beyond the light you have.
C.T. Is this on the line of Joshua, "But as for me and my house, we will serve Jehovah", @Joshua 24:15?
J.T. Yes, this man is ready for Paul. Peter does not make much of the believer's house, Paul makes a good deal of it, especially to the jailor as we have often said. Here this man is anticipating all that, his instincts are right, they are sure, they are accurate. Before he hears the gospel he has the instincts of the work of God. He is a prepared man for this purpose. We hear nothing of him afterwards, but he is prepared for this purpose.
{102}
C.A.M. This all enters into the city life, dwelling in a walled city. He would come into the blessing of that dwelling established for ever.
J.T. Well, quite so. He is certainly remarkable as representing divine preparation. You get people converted on the spot, thoroughly in the darkness before like the man at the gate of the temple; but here is a man like the man in @John 9, prepared for a purpose. The Lord said of that man, "Neither has this man sinned nor his parents"(@John 9:3). Well, what was he there for? "That the works of God should be manifested in him". What about Cornelius? He is to be introduced into the kingdom of God by Peter. He is a prepared man, so all that follows is in keeping with this. He is praying at the ninth hour and he gets a vision; Peter prays at the sixth hour, and he gets a vision. The work of God is going on according to these records and the result is seen at the end of the chapter. But in the meantime Peter's experience is that he is waiting for his lunch, speaking simply. He goes up to the top of the house to pray, that is, we are reminded not to waste our time. He has a little time while awaiting dinner and he is going to use it in prayer. It turns out that in this matter of prayer (whatever he said we do not know) he is on the Mediterranean and he is looking out from the housetop. What is he praying about? Is he beginning to think of the wide domain that the Lord is operating in? In any case that is what happened; he was praying, spending his time profitably. We are reminded that we should not waste our time. If we cannot do anything else we can pray. There is plenty to pray about and there is great result in the house of God. The vision comes down, and he tells us just what it was: there was a vessel like a great sheet; God goes to all that trouble to enlighten Peter. He has already prepared Cornelius, now Peter must be prepared; that is to say, the man who
{103}
is to be helped has to be prepared and the man who is to help has to be prepared. So the whole matter is preparation. The work of God should not be carried on in any casual way, but carefully; not slothfully; you lose no time. If you have a little time before the preaching use it in reference to the preaching.
C.A.M. To create expectancy?
J.T. Quite so.
A.B. Is Rahab another example of this preparatory work of which you speak?
J.T. I think so. She had flax in her house preliminary to the state she came into and in view of what she had been.
A.T. Is there a suggestion that Dorcas had too much to do in making garments and no time to pray? She had only an upper room, part of a house, whereas Cornelius had a house.
J.T. She was occupied with things that do not enter into the assembly at all, but they were considered very praiseworthy. Cornelius had a house and servants attending, and he used his time well.
H.B. Why does God use an angel to speak to Cornelius, the Lord to speak to Ananias and the Spirit to speak to Peter?
J.T. An angel represents what is providential and distant in a comparative sense. That described Cornelius¬ position at the moment: he was really afar off and without God and without hope in the world. Externally that is what he was, having no part in the covenants of promise.
J.R.H. Would it be right to say that Cornelius and his house was a good example of what God was going to effect?
J.T. It is the kind of material God can use; that is a great matter. When God made the universe, where did He get the material? He created it out of
{104}
nothing and yet there are great features of material in the universe. Now He is creating another universe and here is part of the material; it is ready for the great event; but Peter has to be made ready, that is the other side.
J.T.Jr. At the end of the prayer we should be different from when we started.
J.T. We ought to be. The point is to use the time and to use it right up to the moment of your taking part in service, because the devil is watching and if he can bring in some little bit of frivolity he will spoil your address. Angels prepare themselves to sound. Prepare yourself. We have to watch otherwise the devil may get in before we begin to speak.
Ques. Would the idea of prayer and fasting come in?
J.T. Quite so, that is another thing.
S.McC. Would you link this up with @Romans 2:7 "to them who, in patient continuance of good works, seek for glory and honour and incorruptibility"?
J.T. Yes, that is the sort of thing. Cornelius is one of those.
H.B. Would you say why this is the Spirit's matter and the matter of Saul is the Lord's matter? Is there something to learn from that?
J.T. I am glad you brought it up. This matter of Cornelius is a distant matter: he is still outwardly in a place of distance though inwardly possibly nearer than others perhaps in a place of nearness. It is the secret side of the matter, how God operated secretly before the public result.
S.McC. In verse 27 it says, "And he went in, talking with him". It is not 'talking *to* him' but *with* him; would that show the result of the preparation both in Peter and Cornelius?
{105}
J.T. Just so. It is very beautiful and moreover he said, "*I* myself also am a man", not a Jew, it is a question now of man.
J.S. Would his prayer in that light be an expression of man's weakness?
J.T. Well, it is that, no doubt, but it is a question of man's dependence, which is a more beautiful thought than weakness.
S.McC. As the chapter proceeds, it seems the idea of distance recedes. Cornelius does not say he saw an angel standing, he says, "And lo, a man stood before me", as if that is really bringing the matter a little nearer, in relation to Peter's service in coming near.
J.T. That would be how the angel appeared, so that man is now finding a place; Judaism is receding and it is man that is in mind. We have not time to go into the matter of the sheet but the incident was thrice repeated to impress Peter with the fixity of it. What is represented in the sheet is a fixed matter; it happened three times, then the sheet was drawn up into heaven. That is, the whole thing is going up; it is a heavenly matter hereafter; it is not a question of the Jews but of the assembly, and of the assembly being heavenly, coming out of heaven, coming down here in a threefold sense in testimony and going up again into heaven into its own place. That is really what is to be learned in the sheet. Then Peter says, You sent for me, and, as it were, I was in no hurry: "Wherefore also, having been sent for, I came without saying anything against it" (verse 29). What a remarkable thing! He is in no hurry to leave the Jewish setting but still he is doing it. He is slow but steady, and now he is with Cornelius and his house, and he says, T am a man like yourself. Cornelius says, 'I saw a man', so that we are on the ground of men now. Stephen had seen the Son of man in heaven. We are spreading out now to the domain of
{106}
man. The Lord Jesus is alluding to man. He has rights among men. He has bought the earth so that He can move out and secure the treasure and the pearl. Now we get this incident of how Peter got on with Cornelius. What a nice company there must have been at home in his drawing-room, as we might say! He brought in his friends; they were all his friends, he was not going out to the highways and hedges. Peter says, 'I was not in a hurry, but still I am here'. I do not say anything against it. But why should he not be in a hurry? It shows how difficult it is to get a Jew out of his setting; but he is out of it now. Peter is now in a gentile house, in a soldier's house with his family and friends, and Cornelius says, "Four days ago I had been fasting unto this hour, and the ninth I was praying in my house, and lo, a man stood before me in bright clothing, and said, Cornelius, thy prayer has been heard, and thy alms have come in remembrance before God". Now this is remarkable, he is known in heaven. He is a priest; like Job, he is beyond his dispensation.
C.A.M. He seems to be always looking right on to the fact that the sheet will go up.
J.T. You can see he is ready for it. He is not hankering for the earth, nor his title, nor his associations in Caesarea. The idea is that this man belongs to heaven; his very name is known up there. When he goes up he will be received.
J.T.Jr. The heavenly side of it will deliver us from personal feelings, when we are akin with God. God is no respecter of persons.
J.T. I think it would help us as to these friends he had in to listen, because there would be a social side to the matter, and Peter opens his mouth and preaches to them. Then as we come down the chapter, "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the
{107}
word"(@Acts 10:44). I think heaven is pleased with this company. It represents secret work and heaven knows perfectly what is underneath this matter. It is not simply Peter's preaching that heaven is thinking of but what is underneath the matter. Peter's preaching is the official side, it must have its place, but God is not waiting until Peter finishes; He takes charge of this company, embraces them, like the Father falling on the prodigal's neck, an energetic action of the Father's to take them on. It is the same word as is used in @Luke 15:20.
C.N. "But that the works of God should be manifested in him", @John 9:3.
J.T. Just so.
A.B. Is that why it is emphasised in this chapter, "Simon, who is surnamed Peter"? It is mentioned three times.
J.T. Very good, he was surnamed.
C.H.H. Is there a similarity between this and @John 9:37 in the Lord getting near the blind man? It says there, "He that speaks with thee is he", whereas to the woman in @John 4:26 it is, "I who speak to thee am he". *With* thee would be nearer.
J.T. Peter is speaking *with* him here. I think this embrace of heaven is very wonderful. It involves the preciousness of the pearl that the Lord had in His mind. How pleased heaven was with this company, shown in the action of the Spirit falling on them!
C.A.M. Would you think it would go as far as what is suggested in Ephesians, "He has taken us into favour in the Beloved"(@Ephesians 1:6)?
J.T. God has it in mind. It is a love matter and heaven is saying. Well, Peter, you must go the whole way; you have the keys, you have the official place. But heaven is going beyond him and running faster than Peter. It is a question of the envelopment of
{108}
the objects of affection by heaven, the Spirit taking charge of them.
C.A.M. Peter knew that Cornelius was one "having no hope, and without God in the world", @Ephesians 2:12. What a wonderful range the whole thing covers!
J.T. That is the idea. Peter says, Who indeed was I to be able to forbid God? It was God's matter, so that he commanded them to be baptised at this time.
J.R.H. You were speaking about the gift of the Spirit. This is the only incident we have in this book about the Spirit being received without the exercise of faith.
J.T. Without any *confession* of faith. It is a question of God knowing what is there, because the gift of the Spirit is God's matter, not Peter's. Peter did not have to pray for them to get the Spirit as in Samaria. It is God's matter, really the Father's matter. He is falling on the prodigal's neck and kissing him.
J.W. Is the Holy Spirit falling on this company different from being filled with the Spirit in chapter 9:17?
J.T. I think it is. As we said this morning, it is a collective allusion. In @Acts 2 it is the Pentecostal matter; it is what happened then, but I think here it is God honouring the gentiles when the Spirit takes hold of them as It did the Jews. As Paul says later, putting the gentiles on the same level as the Jews, "So then ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God, being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone, in whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord; in whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit", @Ephesians 2:19,22.
{109}
The 'ye' is the gentiles. I think that Peter alluding to what happened at Pentecost in his account of the matter would indicate that the gentiles are in the same position, on the same level, as the Jews in the house of God.
C.A.M. It is wonderful to think of Peter getting on as far as Ephesians.
J.T. Yes, that is it. It is God's matter; that is the ground on which Ephesians stands. "God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love wherewith he loved us, (we too being dead in offences), has quickened us with the Christ, (ye are saved by grace), and has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2:4 - 6.
C.H.H. Is there an indication that these features seen in the different households such as those of Lydia, the Philippian jailor and Cornelius, involving the introduction of Christ among the gentiles, are re-appearing at the end of the age?
J.T. Yes; it looks as though God is reviving things among us, but in a very small way, and some are very reluctant to go into them. It is not a question of an individual believer receiving the Holy Spirit, but it is God receiving the gentiles, just as the Father received the prodigal. The word is the same, "Fell upon his neck", @Luke 15:20.
W.L. Is that why Peter does not stand on his dignity in regard of this matter? It speaks of him as being told to go down and he does not take a high attitude in any way; he goes down.
J.T. We ought to read chapter 11 but we have not time to get Peter's own account of it.
A.N.W. He might have sought to forbid God. "If then God has given them the same gift as also to us when we had believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, who indeed was *I* to be able to forbid God?"
{110}
@Acts 11:17. He dare not do that. It goes with what you say about the willingness of God to receive the gentiles.
J.T. He just saved himself from impairing the scene, as much as to say, I did not say anything to God against it. He should not impair the scene at all, but he should be out and out in it; chapter 11 gives us a better view of him in this regard.
{111}
PRAYER AS SEEN IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES (5)
@Acts 13:1 - 4; @Acts 14:23; @Acts 16:13 - 31; @Acts 20:36 - 38
J.T. Having pursued our subject to the opening of the door to the gentiles through Peter's administration, it is thought that we should now look at the work among the gentiles in the hand of the great servant who is especially the apostle to the nations, Barnabas being associated with him at first. Antioch, being the starting point of this great work which continues up to the present day, ought to be specially considered. We see how certain ones are mentioned as given up to the service of God, ministering to the Lord as it says, and fasting; they are occupied in the service of God directly. The Spirit had liberty in this setting to call for these two servants, Barnabas and Paul, and we are told that "having fasted and prayed, and having laid their hands on them, they let them go. They therefore, having been sent forth by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia, and thence sailed away to Cyprus", @Acts 13:3, 4. That is, the position is clearly stated, the assembly features developed under the ministry of Paul and Barnabas are marked by the direct service of God, and the Holy Spirit has liberty in which to widen the work, standing as it has for all these centuries throughout the whole world up to this very moment.
It is meet that we should specially notice the beginning of the work, what marked it, the place prayer had, and then what marked the two servants in their service, and then the great work in Philippi. That is, the work in Europe has begun and it is especially marked by prayer. They found prayer was wont to be made there, even before the apostles arrived. Then finally, we see in chapter 20 what a
{112}
place the apostle had in the affections of the brethren, chapter 20 being a chapter of mutual, reciprocated affections, that is, affection in the servant and in those served. They were mutual, which would be a great matter for us too.
J.S. We had Damascus yesterday and we have Antioch today. What are the special features marking these cities?
J.T. What marks Antioch is the work developing from the labours of the scattered saints, not directly from the apostles although they had fellowship in it, having sent down Barnabas, who was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit. He sought out Paul and brought him there and they laboured a whole year, teaching in the assembly, we are told; too Antioch is signalised by one thing: the disciples were called Christians there first; then the service of God appears there, this direct service Godward which we do not get in such a formal way earlier.
H.G.H. Is the suggestion here that prayer is necessary in order that that service might be rightly carried out? We get the Holy Spirit initially moving in relation to it and that is followed by prayer so that the service might be rightly fulfilled.
J.T. That is what I thought we might see at the beginning, for it is the point of departure for service among the nations and prayer has certainly a marked place in it. The direct service to God is another thing to be noticed; it is not mentioned in this formal way earlier.
A.N.W. What do you regard as the direct service to God? What is it?
J.T. "Ministering to the Lord and fasting". There is direct ministry to the Lord.
W.L. Have you any thought as to the diverse persons who are found here?
J.T. Persons that are mentioned, I think, are to bring out the idea of personality in the service. It
{113}
must have been a large assembly, but these are especially mentioned, "prophets and teachers: Barnabas, and Simeon who was called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaen, foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul". We have here personality, which is a great feature with God. It will be a feature eternally, for personality will be there according to stature, the work of God seen in that sense.
J.T.Jr. Barnabas and Saul are already known to us before this chapter. These others, I suppose, are like additional features of the work of God, bringing others to light.
J.T. Yes; one is called Niger, another the Cyrenian, another what you might call a nobleman, foster-brother of Herod. There is variety as to their original status and there is variety in the persons.
H.G.H. That would give us variety in prayer, thinking of each one as they laid hands on them and let them go. Would that help us on these lines in relation to the various servants serving in their own particular sphere?
J.T. Quite so; I think that it has been so from the outset in the service of God, in the testimony of God, personality has put its stamp on it; even in Genesis and Exodus, and then throughout the historical books, the prophets, and so in the gospels and epistles we have the idea of personality. It will run on to the millennial day, because the Messiah is called a Prince; when He is spoken of as representative He is called a Prince instead of King. It is generally Prince, alluding to personality.
W.L. Would you say that they are not asserting their personality here? They seem to be on common ground.
J.T. The Holy Spirit is asserting it, which is more important. If a man is beginning to assert his personality the Holy Spirit will forget him, He will
{114}
not mention him. It is men that have personality in the sense of princely qualities that interest the Spirit; those men do not assert their personality; they leave it to others, nor are they concerned about it. It is a question of God and the adornment of His system of things. On the other hand in @Revelation 11:13 the world is adorned by seven thousand names, "And in that hour there was a great earthquake, and the tenth of the city fell, and seven thousand names of men were slain in the earthquake", showing that that line does not continue; it does not survive the catastrophe, whereas the persons whom God would honour are seen above.
A.R. I suppose what has to be observed in persons who are spiritual is that they are not unduly occupied with their service. It says they were prophets and teachers, gifted men. What was in their minds was the service of God.
J.T. Instead of exercising their gift, they were exercising priestly qualities; they were serving God in a priestly sense.
S.P. Is there any significance in the prophet preceding the teacher in importance?
J.T. There is; the gift of prophecy is greater than the gift of teaching. The order of the gifts is apostles, prophets, evangelists, and then shepherds and teachers (both gifts in one person), so that the teacher is not equal to the prophet. I think God would start out with the principle of adornment in His service as it comes among the nations, so these are not ordinary persons but extraordinary persons.
A.N.W. You say a teacher is not equal to a prophet. You cannot tell which is which of these names.
J.T. Quite so, but the order is 'prophets and teachers'.
R.W.S. Is there a suggestion that the gentiles are responding now to the Father's embrace when
{115}
the Spirit fell on them? They are taking advantage of the open door.
J.T. Yes, it is a question of love, the gentiles approached with this expression of affection. It is really like the Father's affectionate embrace of the prodigal; the Spirit fell on them and the word 'fell' is the same idea. This is the excellent start they got in Cornelius¬ house. Peter's account of it afterwards makes it a very beautiful incident, a great incident in the testimony. Then there is the work done by the scattered ones, persons with no distinction. Philip is used, of course, and mentioned, but the scattered ones went to Antioch. He did not go there, so that the course of the testimony was through the scattered ones rather than through him. He was found at Azotus, and later is said to have four daughters who prophesied, but the course of the testimony is through Antioch by the scattered ones who are recognised by Jerusalem. The church still has ears attentive to what God was doing and they send Barnabas, so the stream of the testimony was northward and westward; that is how the matter stands.
S.R.McC. As Job says, "From the north cometh gold", @Job 37:22. Would this be some of the gold?
J.T. That is, it would be gold in the sense of discipline, not like the gold of the land spoken of in @Genesis 2, which does not suggest discipline but rather the encirclement of the river. Job's allusion would be to the northern lights, but it would be in the sense of discipline; gold comes in that way.
C.H.H. Is there a progressive and constructive line to these prayers in the Acts, culminating in chapter 21, where they embrace one another?
J.T. Following and inclusive of chapter 20 it is a question of love that prevailed, especially as between the servant and those served, particularly when he is journeying to Jerusalem. Now that he is
{116}
on his journeys the different evidences of affection are shown, especially in chapters 20 and 21.
R.A. The feature of Jabez would mark them here. "Oh that thou wouldest richly bless me, and enlarge my border!" @1 Chronicles 4:10. Hence the Spirit's voice comes in in relation to Paul and Barnabas.
J.T. I think Paul's prayer, "Behold, he is praying", as we commented on it yesterday, and Peter's on the housetop, would both have in mind enlargement. It is the Japheth side of the race; his name means enlargement. It is enlargement of a good kind, not colonial enlargement such as we have in modern times, the overflowing of European populations. It is enlargement spiritually and this is the start of it, what there was at Antioch.
A.R. It was said of them, as nowhere else in the Acts, "The disciples were first called Christians in Antioch" (@Acts 11:26). I suppose it would enhance the personality of the saints.
J.T. It would. The word 'called' is an oracular idea. God would have it so. That is to be observed in regard to Antioch; it gives Antioch distinction.
W.B. What is the value of this word, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them"? They seemed to have been already ministering.
J.T. The time had come for this great matter but the Spirit waited until certain local conditions existed before He proposed it. Our attention is called, especially from chapter 9 on, to local conditions, what conditions are needed for divine operations. God can act in spite of conditions, of course, but He can act in favourable conditions and these are what He looks for in all matters.
S.McC. Would this be a twofold aspect of the way that the servant comes into the service? There
{117}
is the Lord's own commission to him definitely marking him out as in chapter 9, and then the Spirit operating through the brethren.
J.T. I think the time had come to mention the Holy Spirit as acting sovereignly; all that we have had ever since and what we are having now is in mind. The point is to get a good start. There is the way heaven regards the servants and then the action of the Spirit Himself here below, not the Lord directing things from above but the Holy Spirit actually in the locality and knowing the local conditions; it involves first-hand knowledge. Of course heaven has first-hand knowledge, but the actual presence of the Spirit here below in a locality implies He has first-hand knowledge of the conditions that are needed for divine operations.
S.McC. So that while Saul had a definite sense in his soul of a commission from the Lord directly from heaven, he did not arbitrarily lay it upon the brethren. We would have this kind of thing. Although they must have recognised it at that time yet there comes this period; he is waiting, working and doing things and now comes this moment when he is officially designated by the Spirit for the work.
J.T. Yes, and local conditions are especially in mind, because even as to himself he is the last mentioned on the list, showing that he has not put himself forward at all. Of course, we would expect Barnabas first without question because he had influence at Jerusalem; that is what some would say. Saul is not trusting that at all, he is not saying that; he is the last mentioned. The general local conditions had ripened, time had afforded the opportunity for this movement of the Spirit. If the Spirit is hampered locally the operations must be hampered.
A.N.W. "The work to which I have called them" would be a matter between the Spirit and these two men.
{118}
J.T. It would be. It goes on to say, "They therefore, having been sent forth by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia, and thence sailed away to Cyprus", @Acts 13:4. It was His action to send them forth, but the action of the others is most beautiful, for the Spirit says, "And as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said. Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". "Separate me now", alludes to time. "Then, having fasted and prayed, and having laid their hands on them, they let them go" (verses 2, 3). That is, they would gladly keep them but they are with the Spirit and there is not the slightest thought of relief locally, that these two would no longer be amongst them, and there would be more scope for the younger men. They "let them go"! It was the Spirit's demand they were adhering to.
A.N.W. Barnabas and Saul themselves would each know the Spirit had called them, would they not?
J.T. Perhaps so. You mean that call may have been just purpose in the mind of the Spirit. They may have known, but the Spirit is asserting His will in the matter that they were the subjects of call.
J.W.D. Then you do not think the scripture that says, "A prophet is not without honour, unless in his country and in his house" (@Matthew 13:57), is consonant with the spirit of Christianity? Christianity removes that and the prophet should be honoured in his own country.
J.T. Quite so, it would be a question of the state of his own national connections. The Lord, of course, is alluding to His own position among the Jews; it was their state that was in mind. In a local meeting today a brother who definitely has a gift ought to be loved. If he is not loved in his local
{119}
meeting it may be a question of the state of the meeting, but at the same time those who are prominent have to bear in mind that they must be lovable if they expect to be loved.
W.L. I was wondering if that is why the Holy Spirit links on with the state of the meeting at Antioch rather than with the gift that was there. It is "as they were ministering and fasting", not on account of there being prophets and teachers present.
J.T. It was the state of the meeting, but at the same time the gift was in mind because these two were gifted men; their ability was in mind. But I was wondering about Mr. D.¬s remark and whether he has anything further to say about this matter of a prophet being without honour in his own country.
J.W.D. It has often been quoted as a normal feature necessary for the discipline of the servant, because in most cases the servant is much more in honour outside of his own locality, but I have always thought it was abnormal.
J.T. It is abnormal. If a man is lovable, as John the apostle was, "the disciple whom Jesus loved", and his local brethren do not love him, you may be sure the local state is wrong.
P.W. Could you help us as to the phrase, "The Holy Spirit said"?
J.T. I would say He would speak through some brother. He would use some vessel, but whom He used is not mentioned. Paul says later, "The Holy Spirit testifies to me in every city, saying that bonds and tribulations await me". @Acts 20:23. I would say that He spoke through the saints; we know anyway that in Caesarea, in the house of Philip, Agabus spoke and urged him not to go to Jerusalem. The Spirit is not incarnate; He uses men and women to speak through.
{120}
A.R. Normally speaking, you would commence your service in the full recognition of your brethren locally recognising the gift you have.
J.T. I think a brother ought to have the confidence of his brethren, but it will not do to say he must wait for that, because the lack of confidence might not be his fault. I mean to say, if the assembly assumes that a servant should not minister without having its confidence, that is out of place. The Lord has not committed that matter to it. All that is said here is that "the Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". It is a question of whether the Spirit has called a man. The Spirit honours the assembly but the assembly is not sending the servant nor is his service dependent on the confidence of his local company; it is a question of what the Spirit has ordained. If the man has a gift, and the Spirit plainly indicates that He wants to use that man, and the saints are not with him, then the saints are wrong.
C.T. In other words, is this a command? There can be no hindrance.
J.T. There could be no hindrance; it was the Spirit's direct command, "Separate me now". That is all they had to do.
J.S. Would you say the assembly in Antioch was in full sympathy with this movement?
J.T. The assembly is honoured by the Spirit of God asking it to separate these two brothers.
J.S. The brothers would be lovable.
S.P. In chapter 15 they are "set on their way" by the assembly.
J.T. That is the assembly at Antioch and that is quite right, but the assembly was not asked to do it. They were chosen by the assembly to go up to Jerusalem about that matter; it was a doctrinal matter and controversial; but this is a matter of
{121}
public service in the gospel, and the assembly does not send them; it is the Spirit that sends them.
S.P. I was only wondering as to chapter 15, whether confidence did not enter into the position.
J.T. It was important, showing that these men had the confidence of the assembly. It related to a controversial matter; it says, "A commotion therefore having taken place, and no small discussion on the part of Paul and Barnabas against them, they arranged that Paul and Barnabas, and certain others from amongst them, should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about this question", @Acts 15:2. That was simply as a brother might be asked at a care meeting to do so-and-so, but this refers more to the assembly. The work among the nations is a matter of the sovereign action of the Spirit of God into which the assembly is called as a sort of centre of divine operations; but common missionary practice is not scriptural at all because the truth involves the Spirit sending people out.
S.McC. How would this work out today? You would not look for it in the same formal way in the conditions of brokenness we have today.
J.T. It is a question of having the thing in our minds. A brother wishes to be free in the service, to take up any specific service, and he would like to have the confidence of the brethren; but in no sense do they send him. It is simply that he desires their confidence or fellowship, that is all there is to it.
J.W.D. I understand that in New York you are free to support your local brethren in connection with their levitical service outside the city by giving them money.
J.T. We do not do it very much. We almost avoid supporting our local brethren; we send it to you and the like!
J.W.D. I have heard of brethren in your locality that you have laid your hands on in that relation.
{122}
J.T. As a matter of fact we do not do that to any great extent, nor is it put on us. Of course we have fellowship with the brethren who are serving and show they are being used, but you cannot say very much about that.
J.W.D. I was wondering whether that would be an acceptable form in which the local brethren would show their laying on of hands.
J.T. We pray for them, but there are so many that we could not send much far away if we kept giving to them; the number around New York is large.
J.W.D. I am referring to the principle of the thing.
J.T. Quite so, the principle of support, and especially in our prayers.
A.N.W. Should a brother, otherwise free, be restricted if he has not the confidence of the brethren?
J.T. Each case has to be dealt with by itself. If some governmental limitation is attached to him, that would apply. The clear position here is that the assembly is brought into the service of God in the sense of a basis or sphere of operation. It represents heaven here below to that extent, but not to the extent of commissioning men to go forth. They would have done so in the past, as in the case of Barnabas whom they sent down to Antioch; and Peter and John were sent to Samaria. But these are all dispensational matters and Jerusalem had a peculiar authority; it is never seen in a gentile meeting.
C.H.H. I was wondering about the case in which the apostle Paul speaks of laying his hands on Timothy and the laying on of hands by the presbytery. What bearing would that have?
J.T. That would be special to whatever presbytery it was. That would be just the elders, whereas Paul, as an apostle, had special authority; but that
{123}
would be only in the case of a man like Timothy who was an auxiliary of the apostle, an apostolic delegate. All that sort of thing does not exist today.
J.S. Would Antioch be regarded as a sort of centre for these men?
J.T. They came back to it to bring out the principle of the local setting; they regarded Antioch as their local meeting. They stayed there for a considerable time; then they went up to Jerusalem in regard to doctrine. But the general principle of missionary work is stated in these verses in chapter 13; it is the Spirit of God who sends forth and not the assembly.
J.Ht.Jr. Would there be a link between this and the end of chapter 11 which speaks of their teaching a whole year and the disciples being first called Christians in Antioch?(@Acts 11:26) That is, they manifested that they were able to help the brethren.
J.T. They laboured in the assembly: "They were gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd". That is one of the most remarkable statements you can get. The crowd would gradually merge into the idea of the assembly and vanish, because the idea of a crowd does not fit the assembly. The idea of a crowd must vanish, merge, as taught by apostolic ministers, so the assembly absorbs the crowd, so to speak. That is what you get in chapter 11 and it is all creditable to the remarkable ministry of these two brothers. They laboured for a whole year to bring it about.
J.S. Why a whole year?
J.T. The four seasons bring out the conditions that cause exercise from every angle of the year. The education will be seen, so you have results stated in chapter 11 and they are named Christians oracularly, the name 'Christian' is stamped on the work. So the mission to the nations has an excellent start.
{124}
C.H.H. When we sit in a care meeting and the question comes up as to inviting someone for special ministry, is that a correct procedure or should there be some other way?
J.T. I think the word 'inviting' only means opening the door to them. I do not think there is anything out of the way in it. I am sure the Lord is in that. It is just giving a servant liberty; if he proposed to come he could do that, too. It is a question whether you are able to receive him.
C.H.H. If things are normal the one invited should have the confidence of his local brethren as well as that of the brethren who invite him.
J.T. A brother might be tied up with that 'should' if you make too much of it; rivalry and envy are so subtle. Someone would say, I am not happy; that word 'happy' might not mean anything. There must be a manifest reason for anything of that kind; your saying you are not happy will not do.
S.McC. Sometimes some have sought to assert rights over those who serve, restricting them, taking the place of the Spirit's having the right to mark out certain ones.
J.T. I think that should be carefully watched. There should be a very good reason for limiting a brother in his service, that is, if he has ability to serve and his service is acceptable, efficient.
S.J.H. Is the establishment of elders in chapter 14 to maintain these local conditions so that things might work out happily? "And having chosen them elders in each assembly, having prayed with fastings, they committed them to the Lord, on whom they had believed" (verse 23).
J.T. You are coming to the second section we read. I thought we might come to that now as showing how concerned the apostles were about local conditions, as if they said, We have left good
{125}
local conditions and we should like to see these conditions prevail in all the assemblies that are formed. The apostles were concerned about the stability of the assemblies that had been formed through their ministry; therefore they selected, or chose, elders, and prayed, that the stability of the assembly should be there. That is why I suggested that verse be read, because prayer is mentioned in the selection of these elders. "And having chosen them elders in each assembly, having prayed with fastings, they committed them", that is, the assembly, "to the Lord, on whom they had believed". The idea is now they are set going and the elders would stabilise things; there would be rule locally to maintain good local conditions. If there is not rule in a locality you cannot have good local conditions; rule depends on moral power. If God has given a man moral power and the brethren refuse to listen to him, then they are against the authority of God.
J.T.Jr. In @Song of Songs 1:6 it says, "Mine own vineyard have I not kept". I suppose the apostles here really kept their own vineyards; there were right conditions at Antioch before they left.
J.T. Just so. No doubt the new assemblies that were formed were formed very freely; God worked mightily every day as is mentioned in chapter 16. You may be sure the local brethren would say, How about Antioch where you have just come from? And they would tell them, no doubt, how they got on at Antioch.
A.R. I have heard the brethren ask you that; it is a good way to look at things. They say, How do the brethren do things where you are?
C.A.M. Do you think that God, in making a new move, gives in that way some kind of a model, as in @Acts 13, in view of all this expansion westward?
J.T. Yes, it is God's way to set up a model. The garden of Eden was a remarkable place: no doubt it
{126}
was to be taken account of in later days; but then sin came in. Adam was put there to dress it and keep it, but he did not keep Satan out. That is the principle, the persons in charge, the elders, are intended to keep Satan out. We get the qualifications required for elders spoken of in 1 Timothy and Titus, so that if we were to ask what these elders were in character, we would go to these two epistles where Paul gives us the qualifications. It is important to have men of moral weight locally so that administration does not break down and Satan is not allowed in. The democratic principle must be abolished. It is a question of moral power in rule; a man has not a right to speak unless what he says has moral power behind it.
A.H.P. Does the last chapter of the Song of Songs enter into that subject? "Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon: he let out the vineyard unto keepers; every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand silver-pieces. My vineyard, which is mine, is before me: the thousand silver-pieces be to thee, Solomon; and to the keepers of its fruit, two hundred"(@Song of Songs 8:11,12). Would that be the same thought?
J.T. Very good. Solomon was in mind; in the one thousand pieces the keeper was concerned about Solomon and he represents Christ to us. There is a yield for Him; that is what the apostles had in mind in choosing the elders. Notice the apostles themselves chose *them* elders in each assembly, that is how it reads in chapter 14:23. That is, the apostles relied on the ability God gave them in discernment to choose these elders. They were not chosen by vote, but by the apostles; it was with apostolic authority or through apostolic delegates like Timothy and Titus. Of course there are no such officials today; it is a question of moral weight amongst us.
{127}
J.S. Would what you are saying be seen in Jerusalem? Judaising teachers went down from there to spread Judaism; Satan had got in at Jerusalem.
J.T. Yes.
C.T. It does not say 'elder' but "elders", indicating more than one.
J.T. You never get one elder mentioned in a town or assembly. The word is always in the plural, the Spirit of God foreseeing what Christendom would come to. So no brother can say, My meeting, my people. The thought is always in the plural.
S.McC. The brethren in the beginning of the book were to look out from among themselves men (@Acts 6:3), but here the apostles definitely choose for themselves.
J.T. I think it must point to the youthfulness of the meetings; they were quite young and the apostles took the matter on of selecting the best possible for the service. Of course, those chosen would have authority because of apostolic choosing; the weakness of the position required that.
J.Ht.Sr. There is not such a thing as apostolic succession in the Scriptures.
J.T. Not at all!
A.N.W. Apostolic authority would be in the assembly always.
J.T. It would be only there, and there is no such idea as having a brother do a certain thing for a certain time and then another brother taking his place. There is no such thought as that in Scripture.
C.T. What is your thought about youthfulness in the assemblies?
J.T. The idea would be to support the weak. The apostles would be concerned that these assemblies should be set up through their work with as much advantage as possible. See how weak Corinth was! But there is no word mentioned of eldership there, a remarkable thing!
{128}
J.A.T. Paul sent Titus to Crete that he might establish elders in each city, that things might be set in order. Does that come in?
J.T. That fits here, only that was done through a delegate, not directly. Titus was sent there to do that; it was part of his work; so Timothy was at Ephesus later to set in order things that were lacking, showing that in the beginning of an assembly the apostles would give them all possible advantage with what they were and had.
C.M.Y. How would this feature of fasting work out today?
J.T. Fasting is denying yourself what is legitimate. That is, deny yourself food so that you might have more spiritual power. I do not think it is much tried.
C.H.H. What do you think about replacing another brother?
J.T. I have heard of brethren holding so-called offices for a certain period of time and having to give them up so that others might take them on. It is not right at all; it is not Scriptural.
C.H.H. If a brother has the service of announcing and he is not expected to be there, is it right to have someone else in mind to take his place?
J.T. Order would require it. You do not leave things at loose ends; the Lord is with us in these details. If you do not ask a brother to do it, it may not be done at all, or else done inaccurately.
Ques. If a brother was reading the Scriptures and doing it well, would it be right to displace him? Would it be wrong to ask another brother?
J.T. Why should you ask?
Rem. I was asked to read the Scriptures in my own local company, so I want to be clear about it. The other brother had to sit down and I have been reading the Scriptures since.
{129}
J.T. Why did they take it out of the other brother's hands?
Rem. They thought it might be good to make a change.
J.T. That is a human innovation! The reading of the Scriptures should be in the dignity of the anointing. The Lord stood up to read; that was in the dignity of the anointing. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor". @Luke 4:18. Why should the reading be taken out of the hands of a brother who does it well?
A.H.P. The thought is that the younger brethren should read the Scriptures in order to encourage them to be active.
J.T. That is a detail too, but it is not simply that they should read the Scriptures well but be in the dignity of the anointing in spiritual power. There should be something of the anointing in it and the Lord sets an example in the synagogue at Nazareth.
J.W.D. It has been pointed out that the patriarchal idea is to seek to make room for others and to retreat yourself.
J.T. I do not understand as to the patriarchal idea.
J.W.D. I heard you give an address on the patriarchal idea, to see others shine in the assembly, always looking for new and fresh material to continue the service of God, to make room for others. I was thinking of the offices in a local meeting, whether to make room for others and retreat oneself?
J.T. Do you agree with that? The Kelly party asked Mr. Darby to resign the leadership God had given him. What nonsense! God had given him the position. These men, chosen by the apostles, are anointed; that confers divine authority. Who can
{130}
ask them to resign? If one is disqualified by a misdemeanour that is another matter.
C.T. If a brother has to give up a service, is it a sign of weakness? Caleb was old but able to go on.
J.T. Go on as long as possible.
J.W.D. Moses had complete control but there were those appointed to help him, captains of tens, thousands, and so on, as if the spirit of a Moses would make room for distribution of these features in connection with offices.
J.T. That is quite right, I am sure.
This matter now in chapter 16:13 is the most important of our whole subject, setting out how the testimony came into Europe, what was there before it came in, and how it was continued even in the prison, continued in spite of sufferings and the severest persecution. We have in verses 13 - 15, "And on the sabbath day we went outside the gate by the river, where it was the custom for prayer to be, and we sat down and spoke to the women who had assembled. And a certain woman, by name Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, who worshipped God, heard; whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul. And when she had been baptised and her house, she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there". The setting is beautiful! There are the river outside the gate, the women, and a place where it was the custom for prayer to be made. God honoured that; that is the thing to see. It was the entrance of the testimony into Europe. That is what Paul found when he arrived there and he joined in with it, he did not brush it aside, he joined in with it. He did not get any specific work to do for a time, except that. That is what he had and he went on with it. The result was that the Lord opened the heart of a woman in that connection, one of the most distinguished
{131}
of the sisters spoken of in Europe. She was accustomed to pray there and the Lord honoured it, He opened her heart. Incidentally it is said that she was baptised and her house, as if the house is set up in that connection, in connection with prayer, and then a door opened. So that we have the whole position beautifully set out as identified with what was there in the place of prayer. It was the custom for prayer to be made in that particular place.
J.S. Would this help us to define the course of the river as flowing in a north-westerly direction?
J.T. Well, the antecedent to all this is the man from Macedonia. They are now in Macedonia, that is the province. Alexander's empire began there, showing that God had all this in mind, and this prayer meeting is there. But the man from Macedonia had also prayed in keeping with this river, the riverside prayer meeting. In a vision to Paul he had prayed, "Pass over into Macedonia and help us". That is the prayer from Europe, a cry for apostolic help in the service of the gospel in this great area of the world that the gospel was entering into and was nourishing in.
C.A.M. You were referring to the danger of the enemy coming into conditions such as Eden. As you are speaking of this matter of the women and prayer it looks as if there were conditions there that would nullify what Satan had done.
J.T. That is the setting. The next thing is Lydia's conversion. It is put that the Lord opened her heart, a beautiful expression, to attend to the things spoken by Paul. Do not forget that he is God's minister, called out as an elect vessel for this very purpose, and it is God's work therefore. She has her heart opened to that and then she opens her house. The next thing is, "And she constrained us". She was in earnest in her invitation. Then it goes on to say, "And it came to pass as we were going to
{132}
prayer that a certain female slave, having a spirit of Python, met us, who brought much profit to her masters by prophesying". The devil comes in and it is in the street, apparently an open street. He brings in "a certain female slave", another woman, so it is a female matter. So far the man of Macedonia has not appeared at all, so that the servants must have been tested in that he did not appear; and now this female slave appears, "having a spirit of Python". Luke is here in this service. "And it came to pass as we were going to prayer that a certain female slave, having a spirit of Python, met us, who brought much profit to her masters by prophesying. She, having followed Paul and us, cried saying, These men are bondmen of the Most High God, who announce to you the way of salvation. And this she did many days". So that this is a form of attack; she is advertising the ministers. How are they going to act? Are they going to accept the devil's support? Look at the Salvation Army: it is supported by the world; it accepts the devil's support. Would the servants of God accept that? Paul is distressed at any such suggestion. "She, having followed Paul and us, cried saying. These men are bondmen of the Most High God, who announce to you the way of salvation". From such a source as that! It is a good point to consider as to how the service is to be carried on to avoid any kind of support like that.
C.H.H. Would the consequence of that be something similar to the pains of birth in @John 16:21? The result there is that a man child comes to light, and here a man comes to light after all this suffering, the man of Macedonia.
J.T. The man, I suppose, is the jailor. The idea of travail is in the terrible persecution and suffering that had to be endured. This woman with the spirit of Python is the beginning of it; it was an awful thing. The apostles suffered dreadfully but they
{133}
carried on; prayer must go on in spite of it, between themselves in the prison. We find it now, not at the riverside, but in the prison, in that prison! That is where the prayer meeting is, and a praise meeting and a gospel meeting and a convert! Now we have the real thing for Europe, a real man converted!
W.B. Why did the spirit of Python introduce a millennial title here?
J.T. To divert from the present dispensation. Christendom has either gone back to a past dispensation or is anticipating the future one. The real point is the present moment, the present ministry, the present service, which is the gospel Paul preached.
W.B. It is in contrast to what we get in chapter 13:2, "And as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them".
J.T. Yes, what a difference!
C.T. The praying of Paul and Silas was at midnight. Was there a feeling of their surroundings and the way things were in darkness?
J.T. Quite so, but they were in energy. It was a time of weakness but they were in energy; they carried on the prayer meeting, praise meeting, worship meeting and gospel meeting, all in the prison!
F.C. Do you think Paul would say to himself, Was I out in my calculations regarding this matter in concluding the Lord had called us to announce the glad tidings here?
J.T. Yes, I should think he would. Like mariners, they had to make calculations along those lines, and no doubt he was tested enough by the delay. "And it came to pass as we were going to prayer that a certain female slave, having a spirit of Python, met us, who brought much profit to her masters by prophesying. She, having followed Paul and us, cried saying. These men are bondmen of the Most
{134}
High God, who announce to you the way of salvation. And this she did many days". She was calling attention to them in this way, and no man at all was interested; it surely was a test to the servants.
J.W.D. Is this idea of an earthquake connected with prayer a feature of the dispensation that we can always count on, even in the most dreadful world conditions today?
J.T. Yes; God's intervening tests the position. They had the man in mind: he had asked them to come but he did not appear; the women appeared. One of them was soundly brought into the truth, but there is this dreadful woman who is brought into the field. Lydia is not interfering, what is to happen now? Is God going to bring the man in? No, instead of that the prison! What awful suffering! It was a test, but they were superior to the test; you marvel at them. In prayer, it says, they praised God, then they preached the gospel. God gave them the audience, they did not preach to the air, and God gave them a convert, it was the man!
J.T.Jr. I am impressed with the ferocity of the attack. They tore off their clothes, then they laid many stripes upon them.
C.N. So the suggestion is that however dark the situation becomes we continue to pray.
J.T. That is the point. However terrible the war is, keep on praying. God will do something. He will act in wisdom; He will answer your prayer: the prayer of faith will accomplish something. And in prayer remember to praise; do not forget that in Antioch that is what they were doing, ministering to the Lord. That involves praise. Then God says, I will give you the audience.
W.L. Would this be an encouragement for our young brethren who are taken from us at this time, to continue praying wherever they go?
J.T. Pray at all times.
{135}
A.R. I think I can see from these meetings the reason why the brethren in Great Britain were exhorted to continue the service of God in prayer and praise.
J.T. That is the thought. It is a great triumph that has come about, the service of God in prayer and praise.
C.H.H. Men should always pray and not faint according to @Luke 18:1.
J.T. We might get a little faint. That is our position here but God gives us the audience; we may get a little audience but we do not get many to hear us.
J.Van G. Would you say the house is very important in this subject of prayer, Cornelius¬ house, Lydia's house and then the jailor's house?
J.T. That is why the idea of the household is stressed in this chapter. It is attached peculiarly to Paul's ministry. I believe the gospel service preceded by prayer in our houses is an occasion of blessing; even if there are not many additions, the saints are getting help.
S.McC. Sometimes we feel that surely God will not allow our bodies to be touched, but He allowed the bodies of these great servants to be touched, and with what a result!
J.T. Yes, how affecting that is! A great many of our brethren have had their bodies touched, and we may expect that; but we must not be discouraged by it, it is in keeping with the position.
A.R. Paul said to the saints at Philippi, "I thank my God for my whole remembrance of you ... because of your fellowship with the gospel, from the first day until now", @Philippians 1:3,5. Would that come in?
J.T. I think it is beautiful. Philippi seems to be a peculiar assembly in his mind as to what they were to him. He does not even stress his apostleship in
{136}
writing to them. We should look at the opening verses, "Paul and Timotheus, bondmen of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, with the overseers and ministers; grace to you, and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ". He does not stress his apostleship. He speaks of certain women who laboured with him but he does not stress his apostleship; he says, "I thank my God for my whole remembrance of you, constantly in my every supplication, making the supplication for you all with joy, because of your fellowship with the gospel, from the first day until now; having confidence of this very thing, that he who has begun in you a good work will complete it unto Jesus Christ's day", @Philippians 1:3,6. He goes on, "as it is righteous for me to think this as to you all, because ye have *me* in your hearts, and that both in my bonds and in the defence and confirmation of the glad tidings ye are all participators in my grace. For God is my witness how I long after you all in the bowels of Christ Jesus". That is one of the most remarkable paragraphs you can find as showing the affections the great servant had for those he had served so well.
C.H.H. Do you not think they would be much encouraged too as the exercise started householdwise, to note how Christianity entered into the household of Caesar? There were saints even there.
J.T. That about covers what one had in mind in this chapter. It is one of the most important parts of our subject, how the gospel came to the European nations and how it came to us of course, and whether we are taking up these great features now and using them; because success is on those lines. Then finally we see the relation in the way of love between Paul and those he served, and the place he had in their hearts. To touch on @Acts 20, it says, "But after the tumult had ceased, Paul having called
{137}
the disciples to him and embraced them, went away to go to Macedonia. And having passed through those parts, and having exhorted them with much discourse, he came to Greece", @Acts 20:1,2. This would of course include Philippi. Then in the middle of the chapter he embraced Eutychus and at the end of the chapter we have this beautiful comment, "And having said these things, he knelt down and prayed with them all. And they all wept sore; and falling upon the neck of Paul they ardently kissed him, specially pained by the word which he had said, that they would no more see his face. And they went down with him to the ship" (verses 36 - 38). Beautiful tribute to existing love between the great servant and those he served!
J.S. Is it an evidence of first love?
J.T. That is what it was. Clearly Ephesus developed love under his influence because he spent three years there. Compare that with Corinth; he spent four and a half years between Ephesus and Corinth, the great proportion of his ministry, as though God would bring out special features in those two cities. Ephesus is surpassing in the results, has a special part because of the love that enters into this chapter.
J.S. I was thinking of what he must have suffered in Ephesus: "If, to speak after the manner of man, I have fought with beasts in Ephesus", @1 Corinthians 15:32.
P.W. They covered him with kisses.
J.T. That is the prodigal's experience passed on. That is what happened in Cornelius¬ house, for the Spirit of God coming on the gentiles carried abundance of love. Let it go on in prayer! "But *ye*, beloved, building yourselves up on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God", @Jude 20, 21. The point is to *keep in* what God has vouchsafed us so bountifully in His coming in among the gentiles.
{138}
BROUGHT TO GOD (1)
@Exodus 19:1 - 11; @Psalm 42:1 - 3
J.T. The proposal for these readings is to look at Exodus from the standpoint of being brought to God. Believers are brought to God. Scriptures may come before us other than those read as we proceed, but it is particularly desired to look at Exodus from the standpoint mentioned, not to consider it from the collective or assembly standpoint but rather to show how, in type, it prepares believers for assembly service. The service of God is in view in Exodus. The request of Moses was that the people should be let go to serve God. God also conveys to Pharaoh that Israel was His son. "Let my son go, that he may serve me", @Exodus 4:23. But what is now in view and what runs throughout the book is preparation for service through the knowledge of God, and ultimately we shall see, through the knowledge of His house. But the first thought is that God has brought us to Himself. It was thought that God has helped us in His service for some years back, but that where the defect lies is in the knowledge of God Himself, the God whom we serve. And correlatively, we have the type of the Mediator and the knowledge of Him, then too, priesthood.
So that the first feature to be considered is the divine proposal in chapter 19:6, "Ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation". And then the challenge in the proposal: what there is in the people, based on the experience they already have with God and so, underlying all, integrity in them. In their relation with God they are to be trustworthy.
L.E.S. Would the house of Jacob and the children of Israel link together these two ideas?
{139}
J.T. Well, in chapter 19:3 we have, "Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel". They are addressed by the two well-known names, implying features that are set out in Jacob and Israel, firstly, the idea of responsibility and secondly the spiritual, concurrent condition contemplated by God. These two features are necessary for the bringing out of integrity in the saints. Of course, we must keep in mind that we are really dealing with ourselves now, not them. It is a question of integrity in coming to God.
H.G.H. Is your thought that the people are brought to God not so much from our viewpoint but God's viewpoint? "Then shall ye be my own possession", @Exodus 19:5.
J.T. That is what I thought we might see in this section, the divine proposal, that God had said that He heard their groans and had come down to deliver them. This passage shows that His own affection and the intent of His own heart are in question. "Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself. And now, if ye will hearken to my voice indeed and keep my covenant, then shall ye be my own possession out of all the peoples -- for all the earth is mine -- and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation", @Exodus 19:4,6. That is the divine proposal, what they are to be, what is in His heart for them. Not only that, but we are to think of the area that is His. There is plenty of room: "all the earth is mine". There is plenty of scope for them. Later He tells them that He spied out the land of Canaan particularly for them. But here the idea is plenty of latitude: He has control of all the earth. So Israel will be well provided for.
Ques. I think what you say about the knowledge of God is most important. Would you say that if
{140}
there is a mental knowledge of God and what is suited to God's service without this nearness, there will be outbreaks of sin in holy spheres?
J.T. That is what I thought we might reach in detail, the great need for integrity in the saints. God sets this proposal before them. Also He reminds them of what He can do. "Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself". But then the proposal carries with it requirements. "And now, Israel, what doth Jehovah thy God require of thee ... ?" @Deuteronomy 10:12. He is looking for integrity. "In order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit", @Romans 8:4. What a painful want of integrity is seen in our own history and generally as in the service of God! Where God is known He is looking for integrity as seen in these chapters. That is what I have in mind, making all allowance for the law, and the difference between these chapters and Christianity as seen in @Hebrews 12.
C.B. What comes to light in what God has done to the Egyptians, and how He has borne His people on eagles¬ wings and brought them to Himself would indicate that there is abundance of power and plenty of scope.
J.T. Just so. Plenty of scope, "All the earth is mine", and plenty of power also.
A.N.W. In @1 Corinthians 15:34 we are told that some were "ignorant of God".
J.T. Yes, that is significant. Integrity in us is a moral necessity. It is striking how the Spirit of God lays bare evil conditions that worked out in the Corinthians, yet not lessening the position as in the first nine verses of chapter 1 which show what God had done for them.
{141}
A.Pr. Is there any principle involved in the thought that Moses conveys God's commandments to the people and then conveys their thoughts back to God all in connection with the third month? It would be a separate epoch now.
J.T. We must take into account what preceded in their history, the mediator is a type of Christ. The mediator knows what to do. So the assembly is here in type, in Zipporah (chapter 18). It is the setting in which God is carrying on and the mediator knows what to do. So the position is plainly set out. "And Jehovah said to Moses, Go to the people, and hallow them today and to-morrow, and let them wash their clothes; and let them be ready for the third day; for on the third day Jehovah will come down before the eyes of all the people on mount Sinai. And set bounds round about the people, saying, Take heed to yourselves, not to go up unto the mountain nor touch the border of it; whatever toucheth the mountain shall certainly be put to death: not a hand shall touch it, but it shall certainly be stoned, or shot through; whether it be a beast or a man, it shall not live. When the long drawn note of the trumpet soundeth, they shall come up to the mountain", @Exodus 19:10 - 13. The position is very clearly defined. They were encamped before the mount in the wilderness. We can see, however, that Moses is really with God, he went up to God. The mediator is thus in evidence, having liberty to go up; his history is already given to us.
A.Pr. When we reach the sense of that in our souls, it is then that definite steps are taken towards God.
J.T. That is it. The mediator knows what to do. God calls to him out of the mountain, showing that everything is ready for this great matter. Are we ready to come into this in integrity? Is there integrity in our relations with God?
{142}
R.H. Would @Romans 12 fit in here? On the basis of the compassions of God we are exhorted to present our bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable.
J.T. Well, that comes in. When we come to the material for the tabernacle our bodies must come in. @Romans 7:3 sets out the marital side, that we are to "be to another". @Romans 8:4 shows that "the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit". And all is in keeping with that great background of love, which we do not get clearly here. Here it is God in the intents of His heart, what He had in mind for the people, what they would be in relation to Him, namely, "a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation". This is in principle worked out in Romans -- the presenting of our bodies is a priestly action.
Ques. Would the eagles¬ wings indicate the urgency and speed that God was moving in from His side, and stand in contrast to the forty years of wilderness wanderings on the part of the people?
J.T. Just so. That is a good suggestion, showing how God had to wait. The journey should have taken the people only eleven days, from mount Horeb to Kadesh-barnea, but it took forty years. You will observe, however, that when the people come to the territory indicated in @Numbers 21, they move toward the land speedily. It is a question of the Spirit: "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", @Romans 8:14. They would move toward God. God becomes all to us as seen in that chapter. In @Numbers 21 there is buoyancy, the buoyancy of the springing well; and so they move forward. But God is waiting for us. He is waiting for them, and He intends in this proposal to fill their hearts with something worth while, what they are going to be to Him. What scope for
{143}
them! He spied out the land for them, as though He said, I have considered for you, and decided on this land for you as the most choice.
L.E.S. Would the eagles¬ wings be more the divine side and would Matthew where we have the wings of the hen, be more conditions in which we are found in adversity?
J.T. Deuteronomy enlarges on the eagles¬ care and how God protects the people. Here it is the wings as denoting power, power in flight. The hen's wings imply protection, too, with warmth. So it is not exactly the Holy Spirit in us, but a power outside of ourselves to support us as a beast supports, as the Samaritan's beast in @Luke 10. This is already accomplished, and is referred to in order to encourage them. The proposal in our chapter is laid before the people and the point now is their integrity of heart to respond to that.
H.G.H. What about verse 6? What do you say about the kingdom of priests and a holy nation?
J.T. Well, it is worth while considering what a holy nation is, in comparison with the nations of the world today. It is what God has in mind for His people. A kingdom would mean that the thought of a king, involving rule, is there. We have in Revelation, "Who ... has ... made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father", @Revelation 1:5,6. Then in @Revelation 20 we are priests of God and of Christ. Here, I think, the idea is that there is the power of the kingdom with the people. Numbers goes into detail and suggests what this is, God in the midst of His people. But in this chapter it is the power of the kingdom, not exactly in Christ or in Jehovah, but in the people; they *are* the kingdom. Then the idea of a nation is another point. I suppose it defines a subdivision of mankind. Israel was a subdivision, taken out indeed, but set in among all nations. So
{144}
there are the two ideas which run together, a kingdom and a nation. It is a kingdom of priests. I think we shall see in the millennium what God had in mind. He modifies this with Israel and takes Aaron and his family for the priesthood.
C.B. Would the thought of the holy nation be seen prominently in Solomon's time when the service of God was set up?
J.T. Yes, that would be right. A nation is a subdivision of humanity having its own distinction. God begins by taking out a people, a people that shall "dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations"(@Numbers 23:9). It is marvellous to see what is in His heart for them, a kingdom of priests, a holy nation. There is plenty of scope. He removes other nations. See what He does to the Egyptians, and in Isaiah He speaks of giving nations for them. What will He not do for them? They are also in the position of a subdivision of mankind, but the centre of it all, bringing into evidence what God can work out in what He selects.
L.E.S. Is not all this based on the severe judicial ways of God with His people?
J.T. Yes. This is a serious matter and is in mind in what is before us. Ezekiel outlines the history of the nations, and shows that it was one of sin. God did not overlook anything; that is implied in what is before us now. Integrity of heart is needed to work this out with the people. There is a possibility of the want of integrity, indeed it was already a fact, but God is not defeated, and He has taken up Christ to carry it out. The proposal now comes to us.
L.E.S. God says, "Thee hath Jehovah chosen ... out of all the peoples that are upon the face of the earth", @Deuteronomy 14:2.
J.T. That would bring out the idea of the nation, the subdivision God selected.
{145}
A.N.W. Peter says, "*Ye* are a chosen race, a kingly priesthood"(@1 Peter 2:9). Would race be a larger subdivision?
J.T. The word 'race' in that sense implies a certain kind of humanity.
A.N.W. Had you in mind to say something more about the position of the mediator? I am thinking about his relation to the elders and then to the people.
J.T. That is the next thing. "Moses came and called the elders of the people, and laid before them all these words which Jehovah had commanded him. And all the people answered together, and said, All that Jehovah has spoken will we do! And Moses brought the words of the people back to Jehovah. And Jehovah said to Moses, Lo, I will come to thee in the cloud's thick darkness, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee also for ever". You will notice there that the mediator is in God's mind to be established in the confidence of the people for ever. He magnifies him in the eyes of the people. The Lord Himself in all His greatness is in that place with us. It is only Christ, as typified here, who is able to carry divine thoughts to the people. So Moses reports God's thoughts to the people and the words of the people to Jehovah. "And Jehovah said to Moses, Go to the people, and hallow them today and to-morrow, and let them wash their clothes; and let them be ready for the third day; for on the third day Jehovah will come down before the eyes of all the people on mount Sinai". You can see how Moses is thoroughly with God and God thoroughly with Moses. The people are given three days, full opportunity to bring out what is in them. If we look at this point, viewing God as in the type. God is taking account of us as to whether integrity can be worked out and He is giving us scope to prepare against His coming to us.
{146}
L.E.S. Will you say a word about integrity as appearing in the elders of the people?
J.T. He called the elders of the people, which would mean that God is working with the best features there are. An elder ought to be the best, he has experience. God is not taking up the young people specially, but He is taking up the best, working through the best. They are to influence and lead according to God. And then there are three days given them. "And it came to pass on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings and a heavy cloud on the mountain, and the sound of the trumpet exceeding loud; and the whole people that was in the camp trembled. And Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the foot of the mountain". Well, you say, That is a test that applies to them, that is not Christianity. But we are dealing with the God of Christianity. He is dealing with a people, to bring out what is in them; "to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart", @Deuteronomy 8:2. God deals with us on these principles, working in us to bring out what is there. This is a serious matter -- the whole people in the camp trembled. Can I stand in the presence of this? "Our God is a consuming fire"(@Hebrews 12:29). But you say, Is that Christianity? Does the assembly come into that? This is typical, but the principles here enter into God's ways with us. Verse 17 says, "And Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet with God". Not yet God in His house, we have not reached the house yet. It is simply, God. @Psalm 42 comes in here, "As the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God?". There is a man in dire need of God, he is cast down, he is out of Jerusalem, evidently driven out. He is out by the Jordan, and he says, "My
{147}
soul thirsteth for God". He would find a refuge in God. We are in troublous times; do we understand what it is to find God in them?
A.N.W. You are still holding back the collective thought.
J.T. This is all preparatory. The mediator takes them *out of the camp* to meet God. The camp here would be an external position before the mount, but not yet what Numbers presents. The camp protects in some little measure. But here they are brought out to meet God Himself. Typically each one is before God in testing circumstances with no protection except the mediator.
A.Pr. Is the thought in this preparation that although in verse 8 the people say, "All that Jehovah has spoken will we do!", God answers again and says, "Go to the people, and hallow them today and to-morrow, and let them wash their clothes; and let them be ready for the third day; for on the third day Jehovah will come down before the eyes of all the people on mount Sinai"? This is the answer God gives the people.
J.T. Yes. Why all this if God has already said that He has brought them to Himself? He says you cannot come close to the mount. All this indicates the character of the God we have to do with. "And Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the foot of the mountain. And the whole of mount Sinai smoked, because Jehovah descended on it in fire; and its smoke ascended as the smoke of a furnace; and the whole mountain shook greatly". Some brother might say, That is not Christianity, you are bringing us back to Judaism. No. This scripture is written for us; it is the same God. Hebrews says that He is a consuming fire. His love is behind all this; but He is looking for truth in us. What we have here is not mere history; it is written for our learning.
{148}
A.B. Does the "third day" suggest that matters do not go on indefinitely. God sets a time?
J.T. It is a completed preparation. God is stressing what is suitable to Him. There is a good deal of that in the Scriptures, three days, seven days and so on. They are periods of time referring to spiritual experiences having certain ends in view. Three days have adequate testimony in mind. The three-day period of exercise was needed for the great occasion. "Go to the people, and hallow them today and to-morrow, ... and let them be ready for the third day; for on the third day Jehovah will come down before the eyes of all the people on mount Sinai". What about that? Have I learnt to wash my clothes, or is God to do all? In the beginning of the book of Revelation we are told that Christ does the washing, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood". @Revelation 1:5. In chapter 7, however, it is the people that do the washing. "These are they who come out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb", @Revelation 7:14. It is a great matter to do it *well*. They washed their robes and made them *white*. In chapter 22 when it is a question of entrance into the city and of the right to partake of the tree of life, persons must be marked as washing their robes. Here these three days have reference to meeting God (verse 17). This is a serious thing; we have to learn to judge ourselves so as to be before God acceptably.
Ques. Would the knowledge of God help us in this respect?
J.T. It is a question of the knowledge of God. He requires that we keep our robes white. If we are to be with God it must be on His terms; He says, "Be ye holy, for *I* am holy"(@1 Peter 1:16).
{149}
H.G.H. The people in the camp trembled and now they are brought out of the camp. Does this show that camp conditions are to be set aside?
J.T. The camp affords some protection, but now the people are to meet God outside of it; it is to be God, and the people each one in his responsibility, owning God's rights. It resulted in the exposure of the utter worthlessness and untrustworthiness of man in the flesh; but each believer has to learn this as @Romans 7 shows. This one thing is before you. You are facing God, not as in His house, but *God*. We see in @Psalm 42 a true person longing after God. He is suffering under the government of God, but he is seeking Him. He cannot get help from Jerusalem; indeed he is forced out of it. A broken law is the cause and he has to learn this. It is a needed experience in us all. Have I got that experience?
C.B. How does God take us out from all the externals represented in the camp?
J.T. Moses does it. The mediator works for us and for God. He will not help you to cover yourself behind the order of the camp, but will bring you out to meet God. You say that is not in Christianity. It certainly is necessary to Christianity and Romans teaches this lesson.
Rem. No subsequent declaration of favour sets aside what God is in His holy Being.
J.T. Christ on the cross said to God, "Why hast thou forsaken me?"(@Matthew 27:46). We have to understand the 'why'.
A.N.W. I was wondering about the divine appellations in this chapter, God and Jehovah. It is Jehovah as the mediator relates to Him the words of the people (verse 7); but as the mediator leads the people towards God, it is God in all His attributes.
J.T. It would imply His attributes, involving Him "with whom we have to do", @Hebrews 4:13. @Romans 8:28 is the full result, "All things work together
{150}
for good to those who love God". We have to learn to face this solemn scene and to see it worked out for good.
A.Pr. Is it a special point here that the children of Israel are brought to know God as a living God?
J.T. He has told them that He has brought them to Himself. Why this attitude now? He knows what they are and they have to know it. So in verse 18 we get, "And the whole of mount Sinai smoked, because Jehovah descended on it in fire; and its smoke ascended as the smoke of a furnace; and the whole mountain shook greatly". The mediator brings them out to meet God. They are trembling in the camp but they are brought out of it to meet God on the mount Sinai, not God in His tabernacle I would suggest to anyone who questions this being Christianity that he read Hebrews where the writer says, "Our God is a consuming fire"(@Hebrews 12:29). Christ experienced it on the cross. The flesh in man had to be judged. We have to learn to judge the flesh; the situation enforces judgment of the flesh so that we become a real people, a people who are marked by integrity. "And the whole of mount Sinai smoked, because Jehovah descended on it in fire; and its smoke ascended as the smoke of a furnace; and the whole mountain shook greatly. And the sound of the trumpet increased and became exceeding loud; Moses spoke, and God answered him by a voice". There is one man that can be relied upon. Moses is reliable and God speaks to him. Moses is a type of Christ as the Mediator. So the passage runs on, "And Jehovah came down on mount Sinai, on the top of the mountain; and Jehovah called Moses to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up". Now we are going to get the assertion of God's rights, the law by which is the knowledge of sin. This is to be worked out later in the people.
{151}
R.H. Referring to the forsaking of Christ, the consideration of that would bring about moral integrity with us.
J.T. Exactly. We must face that. Both Matthew and Mark tell us that the Lord Jesus endured the forsaking of God; we must understand this in those gospels. Luke is the priest. In our chapter we have priests among the people mentioned for the first time, showing that God, while ever the Same, modifies conditions and helps us in our weakness. "And Jehovah said to Moses, Go down, testify to the people that they break not through to Jehovah to gaze, and many of them perish". It is gazing He is dealing with, their trifling ways. I do not want that, God says. We often take liberties with God which He resents. "And the priests also, who come near to Jehovah, shall hallow themselves". Now we have priests. These are not of the house of Aaron. Who are they? It is enough for us that the designation is there. God had compassion; God has the priests and that is all for the time being. The priests also that come near to Jehovah are to hallow themselves. You can see that God is dealing with those who take things up lightly. What do we come to the meetings for? Do we come to meet God? He is telling us that He wants reverence and holiness. It is to our blessing that these things are not optional with us. And then, as we remarked, we have the priests, that is, persons who have compassion on the ignorant. Presently He tells us He will have special priests of His own, the high priest and his family. God says elsewhere, "I will be hallowed in them that come near me"(@Leviticus 10:3).
Rem. Some of the local eruptions that are found amongst us are due to the absence of holiness and truth. What you are speaking of would be evidenced today in having the fear of God and accompanying holiness.
{152}
J.T. Exactly. What is said here to the people is needed in the assembly today. This chapter would challenge our hearts as in the assembly. Even the way some sit in the meetings indicates a painful want of reverence.
A.N.W. Things must be taken account of according to divine requirements.
J.T. Just so. Moses elaborates on it in Deuteronomy. He reminds the people that he had gone through terrible things *for them*. "Jehovah was angry with me on your account"(@Deuteronomy 1:37,4:21) he says. So the mediator is the saviour of the position and this chapter brings him out in a striking way.
It is said of the priests in verse 22 that they "shall hallow themselves, lest Jehovah break forth on them". In working this thought of priesthood out in assembly matters priests are a provision. Without them there is no hope. If error or sin takes place we can depend upon the priests to look after the matter and yet here even the priests are not to go up. They were in danger of breaking through. All this shows the urgency of the requirements of the presence of God.
R.H. Is that why Peter emphasises the sufferings of Christ? "I ... who am ... witness of the sufferings of the Christ", @1 Peter 5:1. And again, "Arm yourselves with the same mind", @1 Peter 4:1.
J.T. Quite so. Peter helps as to being brought to God. Christ "suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God"(@1 Peter 3:18). Peter was a "witness of the sufferings of the Christ". He could say, I witnessed those sufferings and now He has gone up and I can go up; I wash my clothes. He speaks of the saints as a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Why are things not dealt with amongst us? The truth is we are often content with the outward forms,
{153}
overlooking the inward state needed in the presence of God. "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law"(@Romans 7:25).
H.G.H. What would you say about verse 24 of this chapter -- Aaron going up with Moses and the priests not allowed to go up?
J.T. We have not come to priesthood as connected with Aaron yet. "The Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Jesus", in @Hebrews 3:1 refers to Moses and Aaron. Later God tells Moses to take Aaron his brother and his sons, and clothe them with the clothes for the priest's office. Not the mediator, but the priest's office. But here Aaron is just Aaron, simply a man of note. He is already a proved man. So far his status is seen in chapter 7, "And Jehovah said to Moses, See, I have made thee God to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet", @Exodus 7:1. Moses is God to Pharaoh representatively and Aaron is his prophet, not his priest. Aaron is part of the system, a man who would consider what is suitable in it, especially in what was *said*.
L.E.S. In @Psalm 42 do we see the ways of God with Korah reflected in his sons?
J.T. "An instruction; of the sons of Korah". They would remember what happened to their father and what would have happened to them were it not for the sovereign mercy of God. This psalm contemplates Israel as cast out and the house no longer available. It is not a question now of the house of God, but of God himself. He is not yearning for the house yet, as in @Psalm 84:2,3, "My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of Jehovah; my heart and my flesh cry out for the living God. Yea, the sparrow hath found a house, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she layeth her young, thine altars, O Jehovah of hosts, my King and my God". It is *God* in @Psalm 42. In this sense, the position is the same as @Exodus 19. David had gone to Gath, but
{154}
God was not there, although He did not forsake him. Achish gave him Ziklag, but a terrible calamity befell him there. The Amalekites took as captives the families of himself and his men and burned the city. It was a dreadful disaster, but faith and the knowledge of God in his soul triumphed, "David strengthened himself in Jehovah his God"(@1 Samuel 30:6). The fellowship and saints help us but we have to learn to get along with God alone.
L.E.S. On the cross Christ was entirely shut up to God. He says, "My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me?"(@Matthew 27:46).
J.T. He was there vicariously, meeting God on behalf of Israel in regard of His judgment on them on account of the broken law of Sinai. He made the salvation of the sons of Korah possible and the resultant psalms open for them. We all come in on this line, for "God hath shut up together all in unbelief, in order that he might show mercy to all", @Romans 11:32.
I.L. The knowledge of this in the soul becomes a preservative in subsequent history.
J.T. Yes. You can get along with God alone, so to speak. This is an immense advantage as you have nobody else to help you. You are with God against yourself, your own natural propensities, the flesh in yourself. @1 Samuel 30 is one of the finest illustrations of a man who overcame in the most difficult circumstances with none to help him but God. David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. In this history it is most important to notice that he availed himself of the priesthood: David enquired of Jehovah through it (@1 Samuel 30:7,8). In drawing near to God we have a great Priest over the house of God.
J.Q. Would @2 Peter 1:2 come in here? "Grace and peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of
{155}
God and of Jesus our Lord". And then in verse 10, "For doing these things ye will never fall".
J.T. Yes. Peter's second letter would also help us in the sense of *addition*. Not simply objective truth but what is done in my soul in real progress. "For doing these things ye will never fall". That is a fine word, "Never fall". "Wherefore the rather, brethren, use diligence to make your calling and election sure, for doing these things ye will never fall; for thus shall the entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ be richly furnished unto you", @2 Peter 1:10,11. Many rely on objective Christianity and neglect the corresponding experience in the soul. It is in "doing these things ye will never fall". It is in this alone we can have steady assurance.
C.B. Is that connected with the thought of gazing (verse 21)?
J.T. Gazing there would be unholy looking into divine things. Christendom is full of it. People take the symbols of Christianity and look at them man's way. God will not have that sort of thing.
A.N.W. "They look, they stare upon me", @Psalm 22:17.
R.H. Would there be a difference between Exodus and @Psalm 42 in that the psalmist says there, "The health of my countenance, and my God". That would not be gazing in this sense.
J.T. That is holy appreciation of God in Christ. I may be near enough to God to see His countenance but not with an unhallowed gaze. The psalm reads, "Why art thou cast down, my soul, and art disquieted in me? hope in God; for I shall yet praise him, for the health of his countenance. My God, my soul is cast down within me; therefore do I remember thee from the land of the Jordan, and the Hermons, from mount Mizar. Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy cataracts; all thy breakers and thy
{156}
billows are gone over me. In the day-time will Jehovah command his loving-kindness, and in the night his song shall be with me, a prayer unto the God of my life. I will say unto God my rock, Why hast thou forgotten me? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy? As with a crushing in my bones mine adversaries reproach me, while they say unto me all the day, Where is thy God? Why art thou cast down, my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God". First it is the health of God's countenance, but then it is the health of the psalmist's countenance. I would take that to mean a healthy state of things manifest in me in my relations with God. In having to do with the saints it is a great thing to have a healthy countenance as the result of apprehending God in Christ, the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
C.B. Would the working out of that be seen in Moses¬ countenance in a peculiar way?
J.T. Yes, divine glory reflected in his face. Our chapter ends with God's great concern that the people should not break through to Him to gaze. It is not that nearness to Him was not to be accorded to them ultimately, but they must learn what He was and what they were. They would be a people near Him (@Psalm 148:14), but this will be through Christ. "And Jehovah said to him, Go, descend, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee; but the priests and the people shall not break through to go up to Jehovah, lest he break forth on them". Moses had confidence in what the people would do, but you cannot be sure of people until they have judged themselves in the light of Christ's death, and typically the people had not yet come to this. In chapter 24 Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu are directed by Jehovah to go up to Him. "They saw God, and ate
{157}
and drank"(@Exodus 24:11). The thought of nearness and acceptance is increasing. Throughout Exodus the principle of nearness to God and moral elevation is progressive; but Leviticus opens with Jehovah in His house and intimates that the way of approach is open to all. "When any man of you presenteth an offering to Jehovah"(@Leviticus 1:2). We can readily see the great difference between what is seen there and what @Exodus 19 presents. In Numbers each believer typically has a fixed position, through redemption, in relative nearness to God. In Christianity we have "boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus". Through Christ we have access by one Spirit to the Father (@Ephesians 2:18).
{158}
BROUGHT TO GOD (2)
@Exodus 20:1 - 26; @Exodus 21:1 - 6
J.T. Our subject is how we are brought to God. We have looked at chapter 19, where Jehovah Himself states that He has borne the people on eagles¬ wings and brought them to Himself. And then He makes a proposal to them as to what they would become on the ground of obedience. Then we have Israel taking on the proposal, intimating that they are prepared for the way of obedience, and Moses then brings them out of the camp to meet with God. We dwelt at length on the integrity required in them by God here. It was pointed out, by way of clarification, that Exodus is taken up as typifying the saints, but not in the sense that we are not under law as contrasted with Christianity as in @Hebrews 12:18,22, "For ye have not come to the mount that might be touched and was all on fire ... but ye have come to mount Zion". And so it is clear that these chapters are to be taken up typically, showing how God would have us secured in our profession of relationship with Him. So as brought out of the camp to meet God the people are tested, and in chapter 20 it is formally stated that God brought them out to prove them: "And Moses said to the people, Fear not; for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not". That is what this section brings into mind. By the law we have the knowledge of sin. God asserts His rights over man and sin is exposed. We see what sin is in itself, so we must not bring sin into the presence of God. As we go down this chapter, certain other features are introduced. The mediator is viewed as with God, and coming with God to support the people in the presence of God in relation to what is due to Him and His rights.
{159}
"And Jehovah said to Moses, Go down, testify to the people that they break not through to Jehovah to gaze, and many of them perish" (@Exodus 19:21). It was said that 'gazing' alludes to natural ways in the presence of God, disregarding His rights, and also indicates lack of reverence. "Let us serve God acceptably with reverence and fear. For also our God is a consuming fire", @Hebrews 12:28,29. These principles run into Christianity; they are what are acceptable to God. A disregard of them is seen in the sin of Korah, also in Aaron's sons, Nadab and Abihu. It is carrying the flesh into the presence of God. Then it was noticed that God spoke to Moses as to the priests, "And the priests also, who come near to Jehovah, shall hallow themselves", the word 'priest' here alluding to the element God brings in in consideration for us to help us, not yet Aaron and his sons. These priests were to hallow themselves lest Jehovah break forth upon them. Where fleshly conditions arise the most spiritual may be affected. No flesh can break through into the presence of God. God sends Moses down again to testify to the people that they are not to break through. Moses, however, has more confidence in the people than God has; Moses expects the people to do what God says, but that still remains to be proven (verse 23). Jehovah knew that they would not abide by His commandments, so He says to Moses, "Go, descend". And then, "Thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee". Aaron was not yet constituted priest; his status was that of a prophet. It is a question of the mind of God, and Aaron knew how to carry out instructions. So Moses and Aaron were to go up. In the last verse of chapter 19 it is said Moses went down to the people and told them.
In chapter 20 the position is clear for God to assert His rights over the people. In this chapter the idea of love is introduced. Then another beautiful
{160}
feature is in chapter 21, the love of the bondman, a type of Christ. In Romans the love of God is presented first, not our love for God but God's love for us: "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit", @Romans 5:5. In @Exodus 20 we have the thousands who love God.
H.G.H. In chapter 19 God is brought before us in His greatness in relation to the mount. Chapter 21 speaks of a man who loved. Would that appeal to us on the affection side?
J.T. Yes. It is love introduced in man in a threefold way. First we have the love of thousands, and then love in one person who has it in a threefold way: he loves his master, his wife and his children. He says plainly, I love. The whole realm, we may say, is filled with love, exemplary love. Typically it is the love of Christ seen as indispensable to the position. That is what chapter 20 requires; a man was to love the Lord his God with all his heart and his neighbour as himself. We get this quoted by the Lord Jesus Himself.
L.E.S. Would God's reference to the thousands of them that love Him be an abstract idea?
J.T. It speaks of the lovers God has. 'Thousands' is a very full thought: thousands of them that love Him. Why should He not have thousands of lovers? Why should He have any other than lovers? In the meantime we get the great example in the bondman, ascending love, horizontal love and descending love. "Be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge", @Ephesians 3:18,19. Then, too, the apostle says, "The love of Christ constraineth us", @2 Corinthians 5:14. So the psalm we had this morning comes in here, how the psalmist's heart longs for God. He was a lover of God. The psalms serve in that way along with the Pentateuch. We began with the two
{161}
this morning, the second book of the Pentateuch and the second book of the Psalms. The thought in mind is that we should come into the knowledge of God and corresponding to that the knowledge of sin, and then come into the thought of loving God. David says in @Psalm 18:1, "I will love thee, O Jehovah". It is the resolve to love God.
A.N.W. You were speaking about these principles being found in Christianity, not being set aside. @Exodus 20:12, "Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be prolonged in the land that Jehovah thy God giveth thee", is quoted in @Ephesians 6:3. It would be the same principle there.
J.T. Exactly. It is brought on to the higher level of Christianity. So also in @Romans 13:10, "Love therefore is the whole law".
A.B. What love is shown in the true Hebrew Bondman over against a Judas whose bowels gushed out!
J.T. What a contrast!
R.H. Why do we have the thought of mercy introduced in connection with the thousands of lovers of God?
J.T. Well, I think it is to encourage our hearts to love God: "Showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments". The New Testament opens up in the fullest way the great subject of love. "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us"(@1 John 3:16). What will God not do for His lovers?
A.B. The end of the apostle's ministry at Corinth was that they should be lovers of God.
J.T. That thought would underlie both epistles. The first epistle as bringing out the condition at Corinth runs very close to this section. The Lord says to Paul, "I have much people in this city"(@Acts 18:10), but lovers of God were in His mind. Paul said later, "If
{162}
anyone love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", @1 Corinthians 16:22.
L.E.S. Does @Romans 7 help us in becoming lovers of God constitutionally?
J.T. @Romans 7 refers to the chapters before us. It is the working out in the believer's experience of the effect of the law as exposing sin in him. "By law is knowledge of sin". God's thought is to the end that sin might become exceeding sinful in our eyes, that we should judge it and refuse to serve it. So that the experience described in @Romans 7:25 leads the writer to say, "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law". The Holy Spirit enables him to maintain that. The flesh would serve sin's law. Exodus typically lays the foundation for drawing near to God.
Rem. Sometimes there is a great deal made of love at the expense of keeping the commandments. Keeping the commandments helps to preserve us in the love.
J.T. That is seen in verse 6: "Shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments". Thus the law is not made void. Love is "the fulness" of law. Paul says, "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", @1 Corinthians 14:37. In Exodus God raises the question of this great subject of love. "No one has seen God at any time: if we love one another. God abides in us, and his love is perfected in us", @1 John 4:12. In Deuteronomy we get, "And take great heed to your souls (for ye saw no form on the day that Jehovah spoke to you in Horeb from the midst of the fire), lest ye corrupt yourselves", @Deuteronomy 4:15,16. We are to learn to know God as presented in Christ. We are to love God whom we have not seen. The keeping of the
{163}
commandments helps us in this. I know I love God because I keep His commandments.
H.G.H. Why is the thought of judgment brought in here? There is the showing mercy unto thousands of them that love Him, but the judgment comes prior to that.
J.T. The law is mainly prohibitory, and hence the evil is more prominent. By the law, as we have noted, is the knowledge of sin. Paul says, "I had not known sin, unless by law"(@Romans 7:7); and again, "In order that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful"(@Romans 7:13). The thought is therefore that we should know sin and judge it and be free from its power through the death of Christ. In the New Testament we have the positive side of the law. The first commandment is love for God, and the second love for one's neighbour. All the law and the prophets hang on these commandments. In giving the law God was there in all that He is, but not yet "in the light". Indeed it is said here that Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was. This marked the moment as compared with Christianity as seen in @Hebrews 12. But there was light as in the second giving of the law, Jehovah came down and passed before Moses¬ face and proclaimed, "Jehovah, Jehovah God merciful and gracious"(@Exodus 34:6). The positive is before the negative there; when Moses came down from the mountain his face shone. But in the first giving of the law there was severity; Paul uses the word, the "severity of God"(@Romans 11:22). In connection with the gospel the most terrible severity is revealed, "wrath of God from heaven", @Romans 1:18. In this chapter he speaks of the righteousness of God as also revealed, righteousness of God and wrath of God. The wrath of God revealed from heaven and the righteousness of God in the gospel. God would have us to *know* Him. We are apt to think wrongly of God. In a great disaster David encouraged himself
{164}
in the Lord his God and God gave him a great victory; all that was apparently lost was recovered. Scripture says, "And there was nothing missed by them, neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil nor anything that they had taken: David brought all back", @1 Samuel 30:19.
A.N.W. The wrath of God is revealed against impiety and unrighteousness. I suppose that would be wherever it was found, even amongst us.
J.T. Yes. Anathema Maranatha would be the strongest expression of wrath you can get. It means accursed at the coming of the Lord. Regarding the legalists spoken of in Galatians, Paul says, "Let him be accursed", @Galatians 1:8.
Ques. Would you say that enters into our care meetings?
J.T. You mean Anathema Maranatha. Well, the brethren are characteristically like God, they cannot tolerate sin any more than God can. The passages just quoted show that, also passages such as @2 John 9,10 and @2 Corinthians 11:12,15.
L.E.S. How does all this enter into the care meeting?
J.T. Well, righteousness must prevail. But while sin is sin, whether in a Christian or an unbeliever; the Christian as disciplined is regarded as one to be helped by the discipline "that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus". But the apostle speaks of some among the saints at Corinth that were not Christians. There a man is judged for his crime. "For *I*, as absent in body but present in spirit, have already judged as present, to deliver, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ (ye and my spirit being gathered together, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ), him that has so wrought this: to deliver him, I say, being such, to Satan for destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus", @1 Corinthians 5:3,5. You cannot have
{165}
anything plainer than that. The man is put under discipline according to his crime, but in order that his spirit may be saved; the flesh is to be destroyed; God uses Satan to that end.
C.B. "Hating even the garment spotted by the flesh", @Jude 23.
J.T. You love the person abstractly, but hate his garment as spotted by the flesh.
R.H. Canticles refers to "flames of Jah", @Song of Songs 8:6.
J.T. Yes, the only reference to Jah in the whole book. Divine jealousy is in mind.
A.N.W. God speaks of Himself in this chapter as a jealous God; and Paul says in @2 Corinthians 11:2, "I am jealous as to you with a jealousy which is of God".
J.T. The epistles to the Corinthians are strongly linked with this chapter in Exodus. God's commandments are contemplated in both. "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep", @1 Corinthians 11:30. Those spoken of are real Christians who failed to judge themselves. Even Ananias and Sapphira would be real Christians, but the flesh in them had to be destroyed.
A.Pr. Paul would bring out the spirit of the mediator.
J.T. Yes, showing the compassion God has for His people. But He has not any compassion on the flesh in them, as we have noted in these epistles. "But if we judged ourselves, so were we not judged. But being judged, we are disciplined of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world"(@1 Corinthians 11:31,32).
A.Pr. In verses 18 and 19 the people are afraid of God.
J.T. Well, their knowledge of God is not completed yet. The passage reads, "And all the people
{166}
saw the thunderings, and the flames, and the sound of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking; and when the people saw it, they trembled, and stood afar off, and said to Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die". They do not know God yet; God is testing them. Deuteronomy enlarges on all this. Here "Moses said to the people, Fear not"; he knew God. As mediator he is on God's side and on our side. People were to realise that they were having to say to God. "And Moses said to the people, Fear not; for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not". God is before Israel on the mount in this awe-inspiring and solemnising way to bring about a spirit of judgment of sin in them. The people stood afar off and Moses drew near to the obscurity where God was.
A.Pr. David put himself in the hands of God when given a choice as to the judgment that should come upon him at the time he numbered the people. He knew God and thus confided in Him.
J.T. You are alluding to @1 Chronicles 21:9,13, where Gad, on God's behalf, offered three alternatives. It brings out the knowledge David had of God. We were speaking this morning of Ziklag. David encouraged himself in the Lord his God, the God he knew, and he obtained a great victory. So in this case David judged rightly, because God relented; He said to the angel, Withdraw thy hand. So what is before us today is that we might know God, and, as knowing Him, prove what sin is in ourselves and how hateful it is to God. Sin is intolerable to God, and as I learn God in this way it is intolerable to me.
H.G.H. It is absolutely necessary that I am divinely taught in this way in order to appreciate this character of holy love.
J.T. In @Romans 5 we have the love of God shed abroad in our hearts. That is a great leverage for
{167}
God in the heart, His love shed abroad by the Spirit. The Spirit is the great power in operation. @Romans 8 contemplates that there are those who love God.
A.Hy. Is Daniel a type of lovers of God?
J.T. Yes, a very fine one. David, too, who said in @Psalm 18:1, "I will love thee, O Jehovah". It is set as a song in the historical account in 2 Samuel, but he prefaces it here with "I will love thee, O Jehovah, my strength". Later he says, "Search me, O God, and know my heart; prove me, and know my thoughts; and see if there be any grievous way in me; and lead me in the way everlasting", @Psalm 139:23,24. The Psalms help us greatly as working out the teaching of the Pentateuch in the saints.
L.E.S. It would come out in Jeremiah: "Righteous art thou, Jehovah, when I plead with thee; yet will I speak with thee of thy judgments. Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they at ease that deal very treacherously? Thou hast planted them, they also have taken root: they advance, yea, they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, but far from their reins. But thou, Jehovah, knowest me; thou hast seen me, and proved my heart toward thee", @Jeremiah 12:1,3. What about the prophets in relation to the Pentateuch?
J.T. Well, they represent God in calling the people back on the one side to the law, announcing judgments on those who disregard His rights. God says He rose up early to send them, a touching word. The large number of them, the divine pains shown in sending and the divine principles and truth set forth by them, coupled with pleadings of love all testify to the wonderful patience of God. Thus, in general, Moses represents the rights of God in His love for His people, the prophets the patience of His love. Hence the immense importance of prophetic ministry.
{168}
A.N.W. Could a sister serve in a locality, holding the position for God, as you have been speaking of the prophets?
J.T. I think so. That is how the elect lady stands out. John commends her and her children whom he loved in the truth, "The elder to the elect lady and her children, whom *I* love in truth, and not *I* only but also all who have known the truth, for the truth's sake which abides in us and shall be with us to eternity ... . I rejoiced greatly that I have found of thy children walking in truth, as we have received commandment from the Father". He then goes on, committing the principle of discipline into her hands. He says in verse 7, "For many deceivers have gone out into the world, they who do not confess Jesus Christ coming in flesh -- this is the deceiver and the antichrist". Then in verse 10, "If any one come to you and bring not this doctrine" -- showing what can come into a locality -- "do not receive him into the house, and greet him not; for he who greets him partakes in his wicked works" (@2 John 1). See how much is laid upon one person and that a sister, how the truth may be maintained by one in any locality. We see in the epistles to Timothy and Titus, especially Timothy, what a sister may be in God's service and how she is to be honoured accordingly. She can be put on the list at the age of sixty for temporal care by the assembly.
R.H. Do you mean to say if there is one such brother or sister in a locality that the position can still be held?
J.T. Yes. We must not abandon the position because of fewness of numbers or because of conflict. God would not have the position abandoned, He will support assembly qualities. It is a question of the altar. In the book of Ezra they set up the altar in its place because of fear of the people of the countries. It is not a question of
{169}
numbers, but of the altar. God would protect the altar.
A.N.W. By refusing an entrance to evil teachers the elect lady keeps the way open for the Lord Himself.
J.T. Yes, maintaining purity and the truth in her house. How useful the house of such a sister would be!
Ques. Would there also be a point of recovery in one such person as well as maintenance of the truth?
J.T. I love to think of the sisters in M -- -- , who kept the door open for years although there was no brother there. I often refer to them. It is very poor and humbling when the position is given up that integrity and energy could hold.
A.Pr. It is a question of knowing God. You will continue as knowing God.
J.T. Yes, as a lover of God you will stand.
R.H. Is that why the altar is brought in?
J.T. The time for it has come. "And Jehovah said to Moses, Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel: Ye have seen that I have spoken with you from the heavens. Ye shall not make beside me gods of silver, and ye shall not make to you gods of gold". See how abhorrent the thought of idolatry is to God. "An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me, and shalt sacrifice on it thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep and thine oxen: in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee". This shows God's interest in the people. He is not going to be always on mount Sinai; He is going to come to them, "In all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee". God will accept the offerings of His people on the altar which they make unto Him, where He causes His name to be remembered. He will come to them and bless them.
{170}
A.Pr. Is this the primary thought of the sanctuary?
J.T. It is leading up to it. These chapters are the preparation for the service of God. This altar is not yet the altar of the tabernacle or the temple. Abraham made an altar to God; God did not tell him to do that. Now He is telling His people to make Him an altar. Well, what kind of an altar are they to make? -- an altar of earth. The altar of earth would have the incarnation in mind. This same God, in truth, here Himself in manhood. A pause is called for here; like the word 'Selah' in the psalms.
Then Jehovah goes on, "And if thou make me an altar of stone". This is a commandment, contingent on their making Him an altar of stone. The altar of stone is progressive, coming from the people but regulated by God. Typically, it is Christ as the Son of God, Christ apprehended as risen.
A.N.W. Would all this indicate our increased knowledge of God? The altar of earth is in connection with where God comes, but further the altar of stone is brought in.
J.T. Quite so. I think the idea of earth must go back to the creation. God made man of earth. It would prove a very interesting study to pause and look into the use of earth by God, Christ as come in flesh. "And confessedly the mystery of piety is great. God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit". Jesus Christ was come in flesh and the Spirit of God justified it. And then it says, "has appeared to angels, has been preached among the nations, has been believed on in the world, has been received up in glory", @1 Timothy 3:16. The mystery of piety includes all this. @John 9 teaches the great truth of the incarnation in a striking and touching way.
{171}
A.B-m. What had you in mind regarding the moistened earth?
J.T. Well, it is not ordinary earth. "But a mist went up from the earth, and moistened the whole surface of the ground"(@Genesis 2:6,7). This is mentioned immediately before the formation of Adam, whose name signifies that he was made of earth. "Dust of the ground" agrees with this, only it is intended to be humiliating in view of man's sinful history. Moistening alludes typically to an action of the Spirit.
R.H. Would there be a link with @Hebrews 10:20, "The new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh"?
J.T. Well, I think so. We have to pause and consider this subject, look into it carefully, then we shall find it out. One of the things in the instruction is to pause and look into matters.
L.E.S. Would @Psalm 8:4, "What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?", help?
J.T. Yes, I suppose it would. There are two words for 'man' in that verse. The second is man as made out of earth, the first is Enosh which means mortal, weak creature. They bring in two thoughts. What is before us as to the altar of earth would allude to something God uses for His own purposes and now He is directing the saints to use it. It must be understood from its context. It clearly has reference not to "dust of the ground", but to humanity as in Christ.
L.E.S. "What is man?" -- that would be feeble man. Then, "And the son of man, that thou visitest him? Thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and splendour. Thou hast made him to rule over the works of thy hands; thou hast put everything under his feet: sheep and oxen, all of them, and also the beasts of the field; the fowl of the heavens, and the fishes of
{172}
the sea, whatever passeth through the paths of the seas. Jehovah our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!"
J.T. That is Adam -- the word signifying earthy. But it is evidently Adam in the sense of dignity as an order of being. Here it is Christ as Son of man. See what God says about Him; then see what God says to us. "An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me, and shalt sacrifice on it thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep and thine oxen: in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee". In other words God would say. They are mine and I am coming to them and will bless them. *He* is coming, what an incentive! He will not restrict Himself to the mount; He is coming to His people. Lovers of God rejoice in this.
L.E.S. "Jehovah, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!"
J.T. That is it. He will have good times with His people and they will have good times with Him.
A.B. Why the personal pronouns: "Thy sheep and thine oxen"?
J.T. It conveys the idea of sacrifice. While it was in thine hand, Peter says to Ananias, was it not thine own? He was making out that he had given all, whereas he was holding something back.
A.B. God takes account of the sacrifice in relation to the offerer.
J.T. God sees you giving. Are you giving to make a show or are you giving wholeheartedly as a worshipper of God? The worshippers are measured (@Revelation 11:1).
C.B. Would the altar of earth indicate how near God will come to us?
J.T. It is a familiar thought. God speaks from the mount, but now He comes near to His people; indeed according to chapter 25 He would have a
{173}
dwelling-place in their midst and He would speak to them there. "And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth", @John 1:14. The word there is 'tabernacled'. He was here as dwelling amongst His own.
C.B. God comes into this position to save man.
J.T. You can see how it works out in Jesus. "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth". The disciples were around the Lord Jesus in affection. And what did they see? -- the Only-begotten with the Father. @John 14:21,23 carries this through to the present time.
Ques. Would @Philippians 2 be any part of the altar of earth?
J.T. It would. Two important passages link up especially with what we have here: the one just quoted, "The mystery of piety is great. God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in the Spirit", and @Philippians 2:6,8, "Who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form, taking his place in the likeness of men; and having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross". "Taking his place in the likeness of men". Himself the Creator, takes His place in the likeness of men, amongst men as a Man, at first without special distinction outwardly, 'Nor yet in triumph passing'(`188:4).
Ques. The accompanying exaltation would then be in line with the humbling?
J.T. Exactly, and this would accord with the altar of stone, "And if thou make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone; for if thou lift up thy sharp tool upon it, thou hast profaned
{174}
it. Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon". Jehovah is now bringing forward certain thoughts as connected with the altar of stone provided by them which is an advance on the altar of earth. The stone would typify Christ risen; no sharp tool was to be lifted upon it.
L.E.S. Do you see the two thoughts in Philippians, the altar of earth, and then the altar of stone -- God hath highly exalted Him?
J.T. Yes. As growing in the truth we are able to proceed to another altar. Colossians would correspond. It is a safeguard against "vain deceit"(@Colossians 2:8). Colossians is resurrection, not ascension. It is spiritually progressive, believers there are viewed as risen with Christ and quickened with Christ. The Colossians had never seen Paul's face in the flesh -- they had got along well nevertheless. They had got along better than the Corinthians with whom Paul had spent much time. But then something someone says to Paul leads him to see that the Colossians had become exposed to a certain danger. Epaphras combated in prayer for them that they might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. He was one of them and knew them (@Colossians 4:12). Their danger was philosophy and vain deceit. There is the principle of *combat* in the letter to Colosse. "For I would have you know what combat I have for you"(@Colossians 2:1). So the 'if' in @Exodus 20 regarding this altar suggests that the people might or might not make an altar of stone. Be sure there are no human innovations. God will not have them. He intimates that there is to be great care on this point.
L.E.S. What is your thought about the last verse?
J.T. "Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon". Well, that is Christendom with its cathedrals and high altars. The Church of England has followed Rome
{175}
in all this religious show. It is human nakedness exposed in the things of God; God utterly refuses it.
A.B. The principle underlying the altar is the idea of the offering.
J.T. Yes. God is helping us in all these beautiful suggestions in connection with altars, causing His name to be remembered. He says, I will come there. No human suggestions can be allowed. The altar must be made as God prescribes it; God's service depends upon this.
A.B-m. Would the nakedness here be linked with the nakedness of Laodicea in Revelation?
J.T. Yes. She says, "I am rich, and increased with goods"(@Revelation 3:17). The Lord counsels her to buy from Him white garments so as to be clothed that the shame of her nakedness should not appear.
C.B. The Romish church is marked by fleshly refinement in regard of its services.
J.T. Yes, and what is required must be provided. Look at Babylon in @Revelation 18! See the might of her luxury! See how the commercial world is linked up with her! Note the fine things that enrich her! Those who represent her everywhere seek to have the best, including the real estate sites.
R.H. Do you think what you have said regarding the altar of stone should be a challenge to us in regard to the service of God? We must not have things pre-arranged in our mind, otherwise there may be great heights reached but without power.
J.T. Yes. Taking quickening and resurrection as objective truths only illustrates this. Paul says, "Wherefore, leaving the word of the beginning of the Christ, let us go on to what belongs to full growth"(@Hebrews 6:1). We must have a spiritual state corresponding with the truths we bring into our services in the assembly. "Quickened with Christ" is a present reality; and Paul sought to attain to the resurrection from among
{176}
the dead, and pressed forward for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus.
Rem. Let us have something now about the Hebrew bondman.
J.T. That thought is needed to finish our subject for this reading. It is in type a perfect expression of love, and is set here in relation to the teaching of Exodus. It is the testimony of love, ascending love, and horizontal love and descending love; the whole sphere is, as it were, filled with love. It is tested love, too, in that the bondman says plainly, "I love my master, my wife, and my children, I will not go free". It says, "But if the bondman shall say distinctly, I love my master, my wife, and my children, I will not go free; then his master shall bring him before the judges, and shall bring him to the door, or to the door-post, and his master shall bore his ear through with an awl; and he shall be his bondman for ever". We have not had any lover of God like this one yet. Typically it is Christ, as we all know. We have had the altar of earth, but this is Jesus as the Bondman. His love is now definitely before us; we are "to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge"(@Ephesians 3:19). The whole house of God is filled with this thought; it leads up to priesthood. Aaron is called to priesthood in chapter 28. Love must underline priesthood. Aaron was Moses¬ brother and he and his sons were appointed to minister to Jehovah in the priest's office. The habiliments mentioned refer to the thoughts of God about them.
Rem. You mean that, God having secured love in this perfect way, priesthood is intelligible.
J.T. Yes. We have had priests in chapter 19, but now we have the glorious Person (typically Christ) in chapter 28, and his sons. As we have seen, Aaron had the status of prophet, but now he is priest. Christ was Prophet, as seen in the gospels, and also
{177}
Priest; He is "a great priest over the house of God", @Hebrews 10:21.
Ques. Have you any thought as to why it says, "If thou buy a Hebrew bondman"? Is it a part of the fixed ordinances?
J.T. Yes. The law as to the Hebrew servant begins this section, chapters 21 - 23. Typically it covers Christianity, the laws applicable to our own dispensation. It is the purity of love thus expressed; Christ loves and serves for ever. It leads to the section which we may look at tomorrow. We are now on the footing of love, seen in a morally great Person. Aaron is the official side; he is said to be Moses¬ brother in chapter 28, which means there is a family link between them. Christ is the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Hebrews tells us. Everything is in His hands and He loves in every direction, Master, wife and children. In chapter 28 He is clothed with the habiliments that denote what He is and the thoughts of God about Him. What a Person He is! He has a family. He loves His children; He loves His wife -- there is a touch of the assembly there. Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar are to be clothed with priestly garments, too, as of the priestly family.
L.E.S. Love leads in the way of surpassing excellence.
J.T. It is a question of divine thoughts, of serving God acceptably in love. The Bondman, the great Lover, has offered that one sacrifice, He has laid down His life because He loves. Love in Christ is one of the greatest thoughts you can get. "To know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge", @Ephesians 3:19.
H.G.H. The greatness of it impresses you, He says distinctly, I love.
J.T. There is no doubt about it -- He loves.
{178}
C.B. Why is it said, "His master shall bring him before the judges"?
J.T. These are officials having to do with moral things, so that the position is legally established. As we have seen, this comes under the head of "judgments".
Ques. Is there any link with the love in @John 13? "Having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end", @John 13:1.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. It is wonderful to see the Master gets love, the wife gets love and the children get love from this bondmanship.
J.T. What a heart is the heart of Christ! "And to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge". "The love of Christ constraineth us"(@2 Corinthians 5:14).
A.N.W. The point to see here is that this is voluntary love.
{179}
BROUGHT TO GOD (3)
@Exodus 24:1 - 18
J.T. Most of us are aware that the subject of these readings is the saints being brought to God, and what develops out of this, confining our remarks particularly to Exodus although other scriptures from both Old and New Testaments have been read. We have not been regarding the thought here from the standpoint of the saints being convened but rather as the truth that enters into our assembly service Godward. This has shown to us that the teaching is cumulative and what is particularly to be observed is that chapter 20 refers to a people *proved* by God. "And Moses said to the people, Fear not; for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not"(@Exodus 20:20). We are told in the New Testament that "by law is knowledge of sin"(@Romans 3:20), that by it we should *know* sin. The law is an exposure of sin, causing it to be exceeding sinful so that we may discern it and be free of it in serving God.
The thought now is that we should look together at chapters 21 to 24 that we might see as we proceed how a community would be established, a people governed by fixed laws. Chapters 21 to 23 contemplate a community in which these ordinances are enforced, in which the righteousness of the people is worked out experimentally. We learn righteousness and it becomes a fixed thing with us, so the great divine end is reached, that is, the people are enabled to *go up*. The thought in chapter 24 is the outcome of the intermediate chapters, these fixed principles being worked out. So the saints are right in principle and in practice. They are morally qualified to go up: in fact, God asks them to go up. That is the end in view in these chapters.
{180}
The psalms link with these chapters in working them out in practice, and in order that the brethren may see clearly what is in mind I would refer to @Psalm 15 where David says, "Jehovah, who shall sojourn in thy tent? who shall dwell in the hill of thy holiness? He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth from his heart. He that slandereth not with his tongue, doeth not evil to his companion, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour; in whose eyes the depraved person is contemned, and who honoureth them that fear Jehovah; who, if he hath sworn to his own hurt, changeth it not; he that putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against the innocent. He that doeth these things shall never be moved". This is like Peter's second epistle. If we keep this psalm in mind, we shall see the practical working out of it in these chapters seen together. It is a cumulative idea, the truth worked out by the Spirit of God, culminating in chapter 24, where Jehovah directs certain ones to go up, and they go up and they see the God of Israel. This must be compared with the prohibitions and terrors of chapter 19. It is a matter to be noted that in chapter 21, as we saw yesterday, these fixed ordinances or laws include divine Persons in the antitypes, that is, the love of Christ comes into them. The New Testament says, "The love of the Christ constrains us"(@2 Corinthians 5:14); this love is seen in type in the Hebrew bondman. Principles developed out of it immediately follow. Chapter 21:7 - 11 contemplates Israel as in wifely relations with God and with Christ. The passage shows how fairly she is dealt with although she proved unacceptable to her Master. Verses 12 to 17 refer to the death of Christ, the most dreadful crime. In connection with this, grace is established in the cities of refuge. These great things are seen in the gracious activities in the book of the Acts.
{181}
L.E.S. Would these fixed ordinances correspond somewhat with the position of the truth in Matthew and the Corinthian epistles?
J.T. Very much so, the authority and order of the assembly being manifest in these sections of scripture.
A.N.W. Is all this seen largely in our dealings with one another?
J.T. Yes. A great divine fact is seen clearly in the bondman -- the wonderful working out of love in Christ. It is the first and greatest of these fixed laws. "The greater of these is love", @1 Corinthians 13:13. It never fails.
Rem. This section would emphasise in detail that local differences are to be taken up. They interfere seriously with the service of God.
J.T. Yes. Many matters are allowed to drag along because we fail to recognise these fixed principles. There is no reason for matters to drag along; they should be settled at once, otherwise how can we go up? Romans and Corinthians correspond with these chapters; Colossians and Ephesians come in in relation to ascension, corresponding to chapter 24.
L.E.S. In Deuteronomy you get the principles corresponding somewhat with Colossians and Ephesians.
J.T. There you are under the direct power of the Spirit in type. You are getting near to the land in Deuteronomy; we are very near to heaven in that book. In @Exodus 20:20 Moses says to the people, "Fear not; for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not". He brought them into the wilderness for that very purpose, to prove them, to bring them to His own thoughts. Chapters 21 - 23 are to prepare us for the service of God and ascension. The whole scope of love in its activity has come to light in the Hebrew servant, Christ in type, and the saints are to know
{182}
how to live together in the light of this, judging all that is contrary.
R.H. Would the verses in @Psalm 15 mean that, as coming into fellowship and being in fellowship, moral integrity must mark us: if it does not we must expect to be challenged?
A.Pr. The seventy elders would be versed in these fixed principles.
J.T. They would. Thus the teaching implies that the condition of the people, as seen in chapter 24, is improved as compared with chapter 19. In the latter, Jehovah said to Moses, "Go, descend, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee; but the priests and the people shall not break through to go up to Jehovah, lest he break forth on them. So Moses went down to the people, and told them"(@Exodus 19:24). What a difference in chapter 24! "And Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up; and they saw the God of Israel ... they saw God, and ate and drank". The quality is greatly improved. The fact is that chapters 21 - 23 contemplate that result and it is in view of the tabernacle. The material was to be heavenly; the 'pattern' was shown *above*. Thus in @Ephesians 2 the saints are said to be set in heavenly places before they are seen as built together for a habitation of God by the Spirit.
A.N.W. There is a reference to going up three times a year in another scripture but in relation to this chapter the going up would be special.
J.T. Yes. The going up to Jerusalem was one of the fixed requirements; the way would be open for those holy convocations. But in our chapter God is inaugurating the idea of going up; it is going up in the wilderness. What you are referring to is in the land, but this is the beginning of the thought as in the wilderness where we learn to go up.
{183}
C.B. The fixed principles are the key to the working out of this. The Hebrew bondman gives the lead.
J.T. Yes. You have the love of Christ. He says distinctly, I love. Love is active in all its features, it permeates the whole section. These 'judgments' must be worked out in love. Love never fails. Seen in the bondman the fixed principles do not fail.
A.Pr. Are they the basis of worship? These fixed ordinances find their place in the worshipper.
J.T. That is the point. The three chapters previous to chapter 24 contemplate these principles in the offerer. The offerer is to be in the assembly as having worked out these principles; otherwise his offering will not be acceptable. "If therefore thou shouldest offer thy gift at the altar, and there shouldest remember that thy brother has something against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and first go, be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift", @Matthew 5:23,24.
Rem. I have noticed in dealing with local matters that what is often prevalent is a reviling of the judges, people sympathising with a person under discipline.
J.T. I am glad you brought that in, for there is much of it. A brother might make a mistake, of course; Paul made a mistake when he called the high priest a whited wall, but he quickly rectified it. But if any of us has been disregarding leadership amongst the brethren, he should not delay in judging it, repudiating it. We do not want to be like thorns that cannot be touched unless "with iron and the staff of a spear", @2 Samuel 23:6,7. These chapters are crucial. We have love introduced in the beginning of this section. It is introduced in chapter 20; God speaks of "thousands of them that love me"(@Exodus 20:6). In chapter 21 there is one
{184}
Person seen showing love in all circumstances, the love that never fails.
A.Pr. And this is worked out in a sense in connection with the youths who offer the sacrifices in chapter 24.
J.T. Yes, although they are not called priests. We have already touched the thought of priesthood in chapter 19, but here the youths are not called priests, though they act as priests. The idea is youthfulness in this service in these initial circumstances, without official titles. Moses *sent* them. They are young men, "youths of the children of Israel". Clearly they served well; their work would be in energy and freshness.
The more we know about these three chapters the better we shall understand ascension. There is not time now to go into detail, but the great underlying thing is love. These principles are worked out in love; they will never fail. They enter into the book of Acts where evil working among the saints was not allowed to go unjudged, as chapter shows.
A.N.W. Is that why chapter 13 comes before chapter 14 in 1 Corinthians? The tongues and gifts generally in the assembly are of little avail without love; it is, so to speak, the vitality of the system.
J.T. Quite so. In earlier days there was much more debate in Bible readings, but now things have improved; God has helped us in making way for love amongst ourselves. The brethren are recognising the idea of leadership and of speaking the truth in love to one another. We may surely thank God for this and seek to "abound still more"(@1 Thessalonians 4:1).
Rem. You are making a point of the bringing in of love as characteristic.
J.T. I think it is the great principle of the moral system. The bondman is brought in, showing how
{185}
to love. He is committed to it; he has no idea of ever going out alone, but continuing to love eternally.
R.H. The book of Proverbs lays down divine principles for us and it is written by the son of his father's love. "For I was a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of my mother"(@Proverbs 4:3).
J.T. He was a son *unto* his father. Quite so. There is a suggestion there of what the book of Proverbs is provided for. For the Father has "translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love"(@Colossians 1:13). Clearly Solomon was a type of Christ in this sense as the son of his father's love; he is the author of that book. We have Christ in this chapter in type as a Bondman, saying 'distinctly' that He loves and committing Himself to it eternally.
Rem. The exercise for us would then be in becoming constitutionally lovers like Christ, also bondmen like Christ.
J.T. These chapters speak to us of love. In chapter 20 there are thousands, but chapter 21 refers alone to Jesus: He says, 'I love' and commits Himself to it eternally. Being in the house now by the Spirit, the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts. Then, He is Son, the Son of His Father's love, and He teaches us to be sons of our Father.
L.E.S. Do we realise what love is really by the judicial ways of God amongst His people?
J.T. We had better look at an example. Take one in Acts; Ananias and Sapphira agree to lie in regard of their possessions. You get *severity*: they are smitten and carried out one after the other, dead. The holiness of God in His house required it; *holy love* required it. How can true love tolerate sin? In the lake of fire sin is infinitely limited. Paul speaks of the goodness and severity of God; it is severity in love -- God is love. What He does is the
{186}
outcome of this. He is the same God in this section of Scripture as He is in @Acts 5 and @1 Corinthians 11. His goodness and severity are seen throughout. In Hebrews He is said to be a consuming fire.
C.B. Ananias and Sapphira agreed together to lie and that would be insupportable.
J.T. Conduct such as that, allowed, would destroy the assembly. The three divine Persons are alluded to by Peter in dealing with these two persons.
Rem. There is also seen in that passage the principle of distinguishing between man and woman in the sin, as in Adam and Eve in the garden.
J.T. Satan had resorted to his old methods, but the guilt is dealt with summarily. Some might say the judgment was very hard, but see the result: "And great fear came upon all the assembly, and upon all who heard these things. And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders done among the people; (and they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch, but of the rest durst no man join them, but the people magnified them; and believers were more than ever added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women)". @Acts 5:11 - 14.
H.G.H. Is the principle that anything contrary to love will be removed?
J.T. Yes. There is the lack of fidelity, untruthfulness coming in which is contrary to love. God will not allow anything that is not truth and love. What was used to make Adam a living soul, the breath of God, will also be used to ignite the lake of fire (@Isaiah 30:33).
I.L. It is the same God that we know in love.
J.T. It is the same God that in our chapter is said to invite Moses and Aaron, seventy of the; elders of the people and four sons of Aaron to go up. You can see there is a change from chapter 19;
{187}
the change is not in God but in the people. The change must come about in us, and what is in these chapters, as was remarked, effects it. There is much detail, but in all the judgments, through love working, righteousness prevails. The community in which Jehovah is to be known is being built up as in @Acts 2:42 - 47. God intends to be known among His people as a community formed in love. As we come to the end of this section we see what was in mind. Jehovah says, "Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee to the place that I have prepared. Be careful in his presence, and hearken unto his voice: do not provoke him, for he will not forgive your transgressions; for my name is in him. But if thou shalt diligently hearken unto his voice, and do all that I shall say, then I will be an enemy to thine enemies, and an adversary to thine adversaries. For mine Angel shall go before thee", @Exodus 23:20,23. There is to be a divine representative amongst the people; here he is called an Angel, a representative of the divine presence. The same is true in our dispensation, only we have definitely a divine Person, the Holy Spirit. It is not a code of laws merely; the ordinances are there, but there is also the great fact of an Angel representing God. The Holy Spirit is amongst us; and it is said, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". Although dwelling in the assembly and serving incessantly. He is to be regarded objectively as a divine Person. We are baptised "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit (@Matthew 28:19)". Ques. If I do not allow the work of God to progress in my soul, would it be possible that the state implied would become a fixed matter with me?
J.T. Yes, God says, "Let the filthy make himself filthy still". @Revelation 22:11. You may reach that point. It is the government of God.
{188}
A.Pr. We are to take account of these fixed principles. Is the thought that as we walk in them they become living in us?
J.T. That is it; thus we are characterised as being of a "righteous nation". Coming to our chapter, we are in the presence of God's mind that He wants the leaders of the people to go up. "He said to Moses, Go up to Jehovah, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship afar off. And let Moses alone come near Jehovah; but they shall not come near; neither shall the people go up with him. And Moses came and told the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the judgments; and all the people answered with one voice, and said. All the words that Jehovah has said will we do! And Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah". Now we are getting down to bedrock. What Jehovah said is now written by Moses. There must be no doubt as to what Jehovah said, what the people committed themselves to. Sometimes as troubles arise one reports something someone had said, but he cannot name the person who said it. Such testimony is useless or worse. Thus Moses writes all the words of Jehovah and so they would always be available as an accurate testimony to the divine requirement.
Rem. I think what you are saying is most helpful.
L.E.S. "Who shall ascend into the mount of Jehovah? and who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath blameless hands and a pure heart; who lifteth not up his soul unto vanity, nor sweareth deceitfully: He shall receive blessing from Jehovah, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them that seek unto him, that seek thy face, O Jacob. Selah", @Psalm 24:3,6.
J.T. Yes. I think the psalm might suggest that although we are in fellowship we may not be asked to *go up*. There must be a suitable state.
{189}
R.H. Do you not think that at the start things should be plainly defined so that people know what they are committing themselves to in coming amongst us?
J.T. That is right. The truth governing the fellowship should be plainly stated and you commit yourself to it. "Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah, and rose up early in the morning, and built an altar under the mountain, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel". Then further down, "And he took the book of the covenant, and read it in the ears of the people; and they said. All that Jehovah has said will we do, and obey! And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said. Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words". And the book of the covenant was also sprinkled with the blood (@Hebrews 9:19); it was brought under the death of Christ with the people. The position is thus most solemnly binding.
L.E.S. Is this establishing the way by which we can draw near to God? It is not a matter of being His people merely, but of following the words of the book.
J.T. Yes, that is it. The order of the truth as affecting the saints is clearly seen here. Thus not only is title to ascend, as received from God, seen here, but also ability to do so through redemption. The undertaking by the people to obey is accepted. The type conveying what was in the mind of God, for Himself and in His people, is complete. What precedes the sprinkling of the blood is the pillars. Let us note their presence here, they are monumental. There is not only the idea of going up, but the whole divine mind secured. Being *twelve* in number, they allude to working conditions. The proposals of Jehovah will be worked out in love. The whole position has the tabernacle in view. The
{190}
sanctuary is formally introduced in the next chapter and fills almost the whole of the remaining part of the book.
A.Hy. "Whence neither the first was inaugurated without blood. For every commandment having been spoken according to the law by Moses to all the people; having taken the blood of calves and goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, he sprinkled both the book itself and all the people, saying, This is the blood of the covenant which God has enjoined to you", @Hebrews 9:18,20.
J.T. That is quoted by the writer of the epistle to the Hebrews to show that all must be founded in the death of Christ. The twelve pillars contemplate administrative ability, applying to all dispensations. They are monumental here anticipatively; their fulness will appear in the heavenly city. What they indicate would be worked out by Christ through the twelve apostles and the twelve tribes of Israel. These "words of Jehovah" which Moses wrote as the people committed themselves to them would be basic of what the twelve pillars represent. Moses sets up these pillars now, doubtless affected prophetically by the thought of what God would do as material is available. The idea of twelve appears first in the book of Genesis, and it has a leading place throughout the Scriptures. Love enters into it in those whom God uses administratively; it enters into the service of those who form the assembly. Am I an *administrative* part of it, or just a spectator? Each of us should understand this and accept it. Love would lead me to do what my hand finds to do in its affairs.
L.E.S. "We, being many, are one loaf(@1 Corinthians 10:17)".
J.T. Yes. In @1 Corinthians 10 and 11 we have the Lord's supper, our unity being expressed in the loaf. In chapter 12 we are obligated to function in the body, the members being many and the body
{191}
one. There are also specified in chapter 12 certain gifts which God has set in the assembly to function in the service for which He has qualified them. Into all this love enters in accord with the administrative principle of the numeral twelve.
C.B. Would the twelve pillars indicate spirituality?
J.T. Yes, here in an administrative sense. Pillars are conspicuous. There were pillars in the assembly in Jerusalem; "James and Cephas and John, who were conspicuous as being pillars". @Galatians 2:9. They supported what was approved of God, and so they gave to Paul and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship. There are two pillars in the temple of Solomon, Jachin and Boaz. The New Testament fills out the thought suggested in the pillars.
A.N.W. The devil working in Judas would make the twelve eleven.
J.T. Quite so. The hand of him that betrayed Him was with Him at the table. It was working against the truth.
Rem. Love would quickly make up the twelve again.
J.T. @Acts 1 brings that out. "Let another take his overseership. It is necessary therefore, that of the men who have assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us, one of these should be a witness with us of his resurrection"(@Acts 1:20,22). They say in effect. This is the kind of man; we do not want another Judas among us. Love did not work in him. His hand was against Christ.
C.B. Pillars in a local assembly are not much use unless divine things are worked out through them.
J.T. Well, they are pillars only as thus marked. They observe God's commandments themselves and
{192}
see that no others are introduced. We are exhorted to obey our leaders; they care for the assembly.
A.N.W. The number twelve is a very versatile and workable number; you can divide it into twos, threes and fours.
R.H. What is the distinction between elders of the assembly and elders in a city?
J.T. Elders in a city refer to ordered concentrations of men in which God is working; their rule in each would include the whole area. Elders in an assembly would just take care of it without reference to the city or place. Thus the cities or places of "the assemblies of Galatia"(@Galatians 1:2) are not specified, whereas the cities of "the seven assemblies which are in Asia"(@Revelation 1:4) are specified. Timothy was left in Ephesus to adjust certain things, including eldership, but when the elders are sent for by Paul they are called "the elders of the assembly"(@Acts 20:17). Thus whether viewed in the assembly or in the city, the service of elders would be generally the same.
A.B. As a brother takes on a service, the question is if he can do it suitably. If he can do it suitably you would let him keep on doing it.
J.T. Why should he give it up? We get the idea with Aaron; he carried on until Jehovah ordered his death on mount Hor; and Moses continued his work unto the end of his course, being one hundred and twenty years old. As a servant is with God Scripture does not contemplate his superannuation or displacement.
Ques. What is your thought about two brothers sharing a service?
J.T. It is a well attested principle throughout Scripture. Two is a divisor of twelve, and so enters into what we have been saying of that number. Moses sent the youths of the children of Israel, and they offered up burnt-offerings and sacrifices of bullocks to Jehovah. The youths of the children of
{193}
Israel performing the priestly service is very suggestive: the freshness and vigour of youth under the direction of Moses adds to the scene peculiarly.
H.G.H. Would all this be in relation to the going up?
J.T. All is in relation to that. The time is come that Jehovah should be so honoured and the mediator provides what is needed. Moses "rose up early in the morning, and built an altar under the mountain, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel. And he sent the youths of the children of Israel, and they offered up burnt-offerings, and sacrificed sacrifices of peace-offerings of bullocks to Jehovah". Typically the precious death of Christ is most strikingly and fully set before us in verses 5 to 8.
R.H. Tell us a little about the sprinkling.
J.T. Well, there is no mercy-seat here; we have not come to that yet. This is the sprinkling of the altar and the people and the book. "And Moses took half the blood, and put it in basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar. And he took the book of the covenant, and read it in the ears of the people; and they said. All that Jehovah has said will we do, and obey! And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words". Half the blood is said here to have been put in basons and half on the altar. The idea of vessels appears here. I think it is the great volume of the blood to comport with the love of Christ in the bondman, that is in mind; the volume of the blood, the full efficacious death of Christ.
Rem. No scarcity, plenty for now and for all time.
J.T. It is there in *vessels*. We get the same thought in chapter 12. Moses brings in the thought of the basons, meaning typically vessels to conserve
{194}
all the great thoughts of the blood; the affections and intelligences of the saints appropriating the truth of the death of Christ, cause it to be available for efficacious application, not only the Person of Christ, but the death of Christ. The death of Christ has a remarkable place in this book.
Ques. In referring to the youths, sometimes we find in meetings young men in bondage of some kind. Is it due largely to the lack of understanding of the death of Christ?
J.T. We know how methodically the apostle Paul outlines the truth of the death of Christ in Romans, and how John calls attention to the blood and water that came from His side. It is the blood and water in John's gospel; he draws attention to the fact that he is a witness to it. And then in his epistle he says, "This is he that came by water and blood, Jesus the Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is the truth", @1 John 5:6. These scriptures bring these things before us in volume, the death of Christ not only in the Lord's supper but also in the gospel. Although the preachings in our meeting rooms may not result in relatively many conversions, they, at least, keep the truth of the death of Christ in all its aspects before the saints who are constantly helped by such services.
Rem. I am sure that is right. They would help the young people especially. They are often found much occupied with their own affairs, young peoples¬ gatherings and the like. All this militates against this service Godward.
J.T. I am sure it does. Paul says in @Romans 1 there are two things revealed. One is the wrath of God revealed from heaven. The other, in the gospel is revealed the righteousness of God. "For righteousness of God is revealed therein, on the principle of
{195}
faith, to faith: according as it is written, But the just shall live by faith", @Romans 1:17. Preaching on the principle of faith to faith is a *living* matter and it cannot but help those who hear. Those who have faith get blessing "on the principle of faith to faith". As you preach to the saints, faith is active and as the idea of the righteousness of God coming out through revelation is presented souls who have faith as listening certainly obtain blessing.
Now, our chapter continues, "And Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up; and they saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness. And on the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: they saw God, and ate and drank", @Exodus 24:9 - 11. These three verses bring out the position reached. A great landmark is reached. There had not been anything like this before. Those mentioned *go up*. They are not said to be on the mount itself, but the word 'up' is there. They have ascended. As to believers now, typically, we take heavenly ground, not by our own efforts, but in the power of the Spirit. Then Moses is called up into the mountain. "And Jehovah said to Moses, Come up to me into the mountain, and be there; and I will give thee the tables of stone, and the law, and the commandment that I have written, for their instruction. And Moses rose up, and Joshua his attendant; and Moses went up to the mountain of God". The great position of the mediator is brought out here. He goes up by himself. Joshua, his attendant, would represent the spiritual side of the position. "And he said to the elders, Wait here for us, until we return to you; and behold Aaron and Hur are with you, if any man have any matter, let him come before them. And Moses went up to the mountain, and the cloud covered
{196}
the mountain. And the glory of Jehovah abode on mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days; and on the seventh day he called to Moses out of the midst of the cloud. And the appearance of the glory of Jehovah was like a consuming fire on the top of the mountain, before the eyes of the children of Israel. And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and ascended the mountain. And Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights". Notice the mention of 'seven' here. The elders do not go up like this. The mediator is especially prominent here. The thought of the mediator runs all the way through the instruction. The pre-eminence of Moses is striking here. He goes up to the mountain of God. The people are provided for in the meantime; Aaron and Hur are with them.
A.Pr. Joshua first comes to light in @Exodus 17, where he is seen as able to stand against Amalek. In this chapter he is the attendant of Moses. Evidently he has got on.
J.T. He fills out the spiritual side of the position. We have now reached the idea of spirituality. We have to learn it. I think if we keep in mind the progress indicated in these chapters, especially the great position reached in chapter 24, we shall obtain help, enabling us to take heavenly ground in the service of God; and we see how we become material for the divine dwelling. The next chapter refers to the saints; the saints are this material, material required for it as taught in 1 Corinthians, 1 Peter, Ephesians, etc.
{197}
BROUGHT TO GOD (4)
@Exodus 25:1 - 9, @Exodus 40; @Exodus 35:20 - 29; @Hebrews 9:23 - 28
J.T. What is in mind this time is to bring out from these scriptures that believers of this dispensation are connected with a *heavenly* system of things. The progress of the truth requires now that we should take up this side of the truth by itself. When the time came in the antitypes for the heavenly side of the truth to be brought into prominence, Peter had the vision recorded in @Acts 10, the sheet coming down from heaven and going up again thrice, and remaining there. All that is heavenly goes up to heaven: it goes to its own place, "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", @1 Corinthians 15:48. The 'pattern' here is a type of Christ and the saints, representing what is heavenly.
Reverting to @Exodus 24, "And Jehovah said to Moses, Come up to me into the mountain, and be there; and I will give thee the tables of stone, and the law, and the commandment that I have written, for their instruction. And Moses rose up, and Joshua his attendant; and Moses went up to the mountain of God"(@Exodus 24:12,15). Again in verse 15, "And Moses went up to the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain. And the glory of Jehovah abode on mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days; and on the seventh day he called to Moses out of the midst of the cloud. And the appearance of the glory of Jehovah was like a consuming fire on the top of the mountain, before the eyes of the children of Israel. And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and ascended the mountain. And Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights". The position is therefore clear typically, that the mediator is now above, definitely on the mountain with God for an extended period
{198}
of time -- forty days and forty nights. As on high he receives instructions as to the sanctuary, "And they shall make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them. According to all that I shall show thee, the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the utensils thereof, even so shall ye make it". Then @Hebrews 9 confirms all this, that the pattern was really a question of heavenly things, the representation of heavenly things, pointing to ourselves, that is, to those who form the assembly, that the system we are connected with is entirely heavenly. Although it is on earth provisionally, it is entirely heavenly: it comes from heaven and goes back into heaven. Revelation shows it as "coming down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God", @Revelation 21:10.
I think we should see all this clearly, that the development of the truth typically leads us to this point where the saints are viewed as affording the material required for the tabernacle.
A.N.W. Do all the things that God stipulates indicate the kind of Being that is to dwell among us? Does He indicate His mind in that way?
J.T. This description conveys what is in His mind. Chapter 35 shows that the saints understood and supplied what was needed, and in abundance.
Ques. Do you include the "vessel", the "great sheet" in the idea of pattern, or does the pattern wait more for Paul's ministry?
J.T. It is what Paul will develop. What was in the sheet was what God impressed on Peter's mind; it required Paul to develop it. Barnabas understood that; those who were converted at Antioch were at first just "added to the Lord"(@Acts 11:24); they were not formed in the mystery yet. It required the service of Paul with Barnabas for a whole year to bring out what was in the mind of God, that is the mystery, the heavenly idea. Afterwards the great evangelical
{199}
services of those two great men issued forth to the nations, not from Jerusalem but from Antioch, showing that it was a completely new development. The great difficulty, I believe, in ministry at the outset is to accustom our minds to the heavenly side of the truth. "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones". That is really what is in mind in this pattern, in what Jehovah would show Moses. He insists on it, that everything must conform to that. A great weakness amongst brethren is inability to lay hold of the heavenly by itself. "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones. And as we have borne the image of the one made of dust, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly one", @1 Corinthians 15:48,49. That is what the Corinthians needed to know; and I fear we are all deficient in this great feature of the truth.
H.G.H. The instructions that are given as to this heavenly material refer to "every one whose spirit prompted him" (chapter 35:21); does this show that the heart is under the control of the heavenly system of things?
J.T. Yes, alluding to the Spirit of God in our hearts prompting us. It is a heave-offering, a heaving up of the affection by the Spirit of God. Chapter 35 shows they were not wanting; they exceeded what was needed, all pointing to the fact that the truth is cumulative and that the saints typically are now brought entirely round to the divine mind.
L.E.S. Would the pattern here shown on the mount have its bearing more as to the public position of the testimony here, and the pattern shown by the Spirit in David's time more to the spiritual side?
J.T. The spiritual side is stressed in David's account. He says he had the pattern by the Spirit and he specifies the items. Here it is Jehovah showing, and the point is the altitude, or the position
{200}
above. David does not mention this feature: that is assumed in a cumulative sense; because his service with Solomon's must be regarded as continuing from Moses. Here what is in mind is "the heavenly" in the wilderness, what is suited for testimony in the wilderness. There is a passage in Hebrews that might be mentioned to clarify our minds as to what is before us, "The first therefore also indeed had ordinances of service, and the sanctuary, a worldly one", @Hebrews 9:1. There is a footnote to that, '*Kosmos* came to be used for the world, signifying the order in it. Mere grammar here would require it to read'the holy universal order'. The tabernacle, as the pattern of heavenly things, represented this order. Hence, it would mean the'holy order of the tabernacle, which represented the vast scene in which God's glory is displayed in Christ''. It is the universe, but figuratively in a tabernacle, which as a type is not a fixed order of things, but movable and hence fitted for testimony in the present time. God has constituted the assembly capable of being down here in heavenly representation. That is where the crux of the matter lies. It is difficult for most of us to get our minds on to what is heavenly down here. It involves the greatest testimony of God.
L.E.S. David's pattern would be more the eternal side.
J.T. Yes. He builds inward. Exodus is more outward for testimony; what is of heaven come down here. We are constituted for that purpose provisionally; we can be down here in the wilderness and maintain our heavenly-mindedness, as expressed in the "tassels" with "lace of blue"(@Numbers 15:38).
Ques. Do the scriptures we read in Exodus refer to what is constitutional in the saints?
J.T. Yes, they are the material. It is a question of what we are: "Whose house are *we*", @Hebrews 3:6. Peter says, "To whom coming, a living stone, cast
{201}
away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious, yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ" (@1 Peter 2:4,5); that is, we are all that down here for the purpose of the testimony, including the service of God. Hence, you find provision is made for *carrying* the items of the tabernacle; whereas, when the ark was placed in the temple the staves by which it was carried in the wilderness were now put in the sanctuary as a memorial of its earlier services to Israel in grace.
Ques. Does that emphasise the opening of the chapter? "Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me a heave-offering", and so on.
J.T. Quite so. When you come to the actual fulfilment of the requirement the giving was very free. Moses called them and issued the request, "And all the assembly of the children of Israel departed from before Moses. And they came, every one whose heart moved him, and every one whose spirit prompted him; they brought Jehovah's heave-offering for the work of the tent of meeting and for all its service". In the antitype it is persons. What God uses is persons, "whose house are *we*", @Hebrews 3:6.
A.Pr. Jehovah lays claim to it here. He calls it "my heave-offering".
Rem. It is important to know that Egyptian claims should be broken in our hearts before this is workable.
J.T. That is clear enough. "Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians"(@Exodus 19:4). That is a settled matter. Unless it is, we corrupt the assembly, bringing in Egyptian thoughts. That was going on in Corinth.
A.B. What bearing would Peter's ecstasy have on this? It was when he was in an ecstasy that he got the light as to the assembly.
{202}
J.T. The incident brings out the instrumentalities that God uses. He was one capable of it. I do not know that there is any one alive who is capable of ecstasy. There is no question of God being able to bring a person into one, but there is a question of our capability. Peter and the early servants generally were, I judge, capable of being brought into ecstasy. It is a question of spirituality. The raising of Tabitha brought this out. There comes need for elimination. The weeping widows were there. Peter put them all out. That is, the elimination of mere natural feelings which must precede an extraordinary thing like this, the power of fasting. He put them all out and kneeled down and prayed in the upper room, the body of the dead person being there; and Tabitha opened her eyes and seeing Peter sat up; as if God would say. This is the environment for a risen person, *Peter*, not the weeping widows. Such elimination may seem severe but it is needful for the result desired. The Lord Himself put out the flute-players in Jairus¬ house. It is the power of elimination of the things that would hinder us in the house of God. Peter remained at Joppa some time after that, in the house of Simon the tanner. He went up on the house to pray and became hungry and while the meal was being made ready an ecstasy came upon him. He was hungry, the state of emptiness was no doubt necessary for the change to come over him. He was in an ecstasy; then the vessel comes down. The account of this remarkable occurrence raises the question of availability to God for certain things. Here the sheet came down. The circumstances in which the great servant was were morally suitable for the divine happening. The Spirit of God enlarges on it. It is a remarkable chapter.
Is Peter now ready for the pattern of the heavenly? It is just a sheet knit at the four comers,
{203}
called a 'vessel'(@Acts 10:11). The word 'vessel' is to be noted there. In @Acts 9:15 it referred to Paul, and now it is the idea of something coming down from heaven. A voice from heaven, and what followed, eventuated in Peter's being thoroughly assured. In giving an account to Jerusalem, he is thoroughly assured of the whole matter; and his account is accurate. You can see his whole heart is in it. He is now with this new state of things that the Lord had effected. The lesson to be derived from this is availability to God for His services. The metals and other things mentioned here refer to the saints; thus each of us should enquire as to whether he is available to God as material for His house.
Ques. Chapter 25 just mentions the materials, but chapter 35 speaks of nose-rings, earrings, and rings, and bracelets. Would you say something as to that?
J.T. Would it not point to excess of sacrifice: things that women are so fond of? The fact that they had "departed from before Moses" makes the liberality of the people all the more valuable; it was from their hearts, not because of his influence.
Ques. Would it help for us to get into our souls that there is something here today commensurate with what is in heaven?
J.T. That is a great point and it is not simply that the things are commensurate with what is in heaven, but typically *they are heavenly things themselves*. Another very important thing is that God is working with us according to pattern, and He will not deviate from it; He mentions this several times in this book.
Then, not only are materials for the divine dwelling needed, but also workmen. "And Moses said to the children of Israel, See, Jehovah has called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of
{204}
the tribe of Judah, and he has filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, and to devise artistic things: to work in gold, and in silver, and in copper, and in cutting of stones, for setting, and in carving of wood, to execute all artistic work; and he has put in his heart to teach, he and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: he has filled them with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work of the engraver, and of the artificer, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in byssus, and of the weaver, even of them that do every kind of work, and of those that devise artistic work". All this is most important and interesting. We know that God Himself is the Workman: "He who has built all things is God", @Hebrews 3:4. But then He does it through others, as the Lord Jesus says, "On this rock I will build my assembly", @Matthew 16:18. He does it through others, and these work in the power of the Spirit of God. So that when Paul goes to Corinth, he deliberately confines himself to certain features of the truth. The saints were not ready for more. He says, "As a wise architect, I have laid the foundation", @1 Corinthians 3:10. Other men would build upon it, but each was to take heed how he built. Some might build in wood, hay and stubble, how abominable that is to heaven! Bezaleel and Aholiab would not build in that sort of stuff. These workmen are entirely in accord with the mind of heaven. It is, in the antitype, the Holy Spirit, who uses whom He will. Thus in all these meetings, if we do not make room for the Spirit of God working in us, we do not effect anything; on the contrary, bad material is built in.
L.E.S. This is one of the vessels of light, good gifts, that comes down from the Father of lights. Uri, his father's name, means light.
{205}
J.T. These names are very significant, because God is conveying to us that they are in accord with the mind of heaven regarding the material. Christendom today is not from Bezaleel, which name conveys the thought that God is protection. Current religious structures are from human patterns borrowed largely from Judaism and heathenism.
A.B. Is it not important that Bezaleel was filled with the Spirit of God? The material comes, "They came, both men and women; every one who was of willing heart" -- that is one thing, but to make the material to fit into the structure is another; it requires that the workman must have the Spirit of God.
J.T. Yes. You will notice how much *heart* is brought into it, both in regard of material and also the workman, Bezaleel. "See, Jehovah has called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, and he has filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, and to devise artistic things: to work in gold, and in silver, and in copper, and in cutting of stones, for setting, and in carving of wood, to execute all artistic work; and he has put in his heart to teach, he and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: he has filled them with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work of the engraver, and of the artificer, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in byssus ... of those that devise artistic work". It is all a heart matter, as Ephesians takes it up, "That ... the Father of glory, would give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him, being enlightened in the eyes of your heart, so that ye should know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints", @Ephesians 1:17,18. That is what is needed, that
{206}
we are thoroughly in the thing; as to material, every brother and sister; and also as to the workmen. Material is a wider idea, but it is all a heart matter.
L.E.S. Is there something in the fact of Judah and Dan being brought together here for the operating side?
J.T. Dan's name means 'judge' and Judah's 'praise'; but there are other things in regard of both. This book brings in the whole twelve tribes. Dan is left out in Revelation, but not here; he is in the operating side. Judah carries the thought of sovereignty, in royalty and also in the service of God. There is great fulness in this tribe.
Ques. Would the wave-offering be the thought of consecration, being available for the Spirit? The footnote in @Leviticus 8 reads, 'My impression is that'wave-offering'is more'consecration'; see @Exodus 29:24; and'heave-offering'more'offering'; see @Exodus 25:2,3'.
J.T. Yes. You have to follow the word 'heave', upward, a movement of affection; the word 'wave' has more the idea of what is horizontal. The Lord Jesus risen, according to @Leviticus 23, is the sheaf waved. God's eyes are directed to it; that is the idea of the waving, I think. Heave-offering suggests power in the soul to move Godward.
A.N.W. Would the heart promptings be where the thousands of those that love God would come to light?
J.T. Just so, they are coming to light here in @Exodus 35. 1 Corinthians shows there was a great paucity of actual affection, in spite of the fact that the Lord Himself said to Paul, "I have much people in this city". @Acts 18:10. And Paul stayed a long time to get them. God was making the best of somewhat poor material; thus Paul warned of wood, hay, stubble. Much is made of the Spirit at the outset of 1 Corinthians. Paul says, "Things which
{207}
eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit", @1 Corinthians 2:9. Well, did the Corinthians love Him? That is the question that has to be proved: whether I love God or not, not whether I am in fellowship. It is all a tentative matter. The bride in Canticles says, "For why should I be as one veiled ... ?" (@Song of Songs 1:7). I do not want to be questionable among the people of God. God has things for His lovers. Paul says, which "God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God", @1 Corinthians 2:10. We are destined for great things according to 1 Corinthians. It seems that the Corinthians were extremely tardy in coming forward from this point of view -- loving Christ. So the apostle says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", @1 Corinthians 16:22. That is how serious it was.
A.B.J. What a contrast to the bride in Canticles, "I am black, but comely"(@Song of Songs 1:5), as thinking about what has been said of the Spirit's work constitutionally!
J.T. She was black; the sun had shone upon her and had that effect, but she was comely; she could say that much.
Ques. Is it not remarkable that the chapter before us speaks of both men and women? "Every one whose spirit prompted him" and "every one who was of willing heart". It is what the Lord is looking for.
J.T. That is what comes out in this book; the divine request was intended to show how the truth develops until we come to a point where the saints are ready. The question is. Am I ready for all this? That is why the apostle is so severe on conditions at Corinth. For in spite of the labour he had expended on them and the great care he took so as
{208}
not to present too much to them, the response was feeble. There was division among them, also an incestuous person, and they had not been humbled about these things. Thus the apostle has to say, "*Ye* are puffed up, and ye have not rather mourned"(@1 Corinthians 5:2). Even though they did not know what to do, they ought to have mourned about the evil.
Ques. Do you think that the willing-heartedness would manifest itself today in attending all meetings and entering sympathetically into all that the brethren are taking up? If brethren do not attend the meetings and take up with the heart what is ministered, what can be done?
J.T. It is a real difficulty, not only the attendance at the meetings but the lead in the meetings. Deborah said, "For that leaders led in Israel"(@Judges 5:2) Leading is a most essential thing. It is a way of God; as in Moses and Aaron and these other names mentioned here, Bezaleel and Aholiab, and then, as you say, the need of the saints attending the meetings appreciating and supporting what God gives.
A.N.W. Is that how the willing heart moves on to become a wise heart? "He has filled them with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work of the engraver, and of the artificer, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in byssus, and of the weaver, even of them that do every kind of work, and of those that devise artistic work", @Exodus 35:35. Would that develop from the willing heart?
J.T. Just so. The subsequent chapters tell us everything was done. "He made", "he made", everything was done. There is no suggestion that any of these men would be delinquent.
Rem. "Thou shalt not delay the fulness of thy threshing-floor and the outflow of thy wine-press", @Exodus 22:29.
{209}
J.T. "Cursed be he that doeth the work of Jehovah negligently", @Jeremiah 48:10. It is a very serious thing to have ability and deliberately avoid using it.
L.E.S. Would the working out of these matters be on the basis of being conscripted for it; it is not an optional matter, whereas willing-heartedness is more the promptings of the Spirit of God from within?
J.T. If God directs or requests us to do something it is obligatory, not optional; nevertheless the promptings of our hearts to comply are very pleasing to God. One of the striking things in Acts is the spirit of control; that governed all that was done. This is especially seen in @Acts 2:42 - 47.
A.Pr. In the beginning of Proverbs it is said, "To receive the instruction of wisdom"(@Proverbs 1:3). Would that have in mind the way God is working it out?
J.T. We have already alluded to that book. The Father has "translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love", @Colossians 1:13. The Son is made unto us wisdom from God (@1 Corinthians 1:30). We see it here in Bezaleel, Aholiab and others who worked with them. The book of Proverbs is remarkably written. John in Patmos received directions from the Lord as to the order in which he was to write the book of Revelation. Proverbs is also written in parts, culminating in the description of a woman of worth. "Her price is far above rubies"(@Proverbs 31:10). "She openeth her mouth with wisdom". What is in mind in the book is the feminine side of the truth, really the assembly; the design of the book is toward the assembly. And you get a man saying, "Truly *I* am more stupid than any one; and I have not a man's intelligence"(@Proverbs 30:2), and yet he is a wonderful man; there is no pretension about him, but notwithstanding his professed ignorance, he has remarkable intelligence in many things and the way he states that certain
{210}
things are beyond him helps me to understand them. It is a book that every Christian should read; especially because it contemplates the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love. The writer says, "Get wisdom, and with all thy getting get intelligence"(@Proverbs 4:7), and he goes back to past eternity to bring out the wonderfulness of wisdom. God did nothing without it. In the New Testament it is said that He gives it liberally. "If any one of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all freely", @James 1:5.
L.L. Is that the leading you referred to as in Judges, "The people willingly offered themselves"?
J.T. Well, Deborah said that leaders *led*. Her song, too, encourages us to enter conflict if the testimony requires it. She refers to certain who are delinquent when they should have been in the battle.
A.B. The close of Deborah's song helps us in what you have before you in these meetings: "But let them that love him be as the rising of the sun in its might"(@Judges 5:31).
J.T. Yes, "them that love him". That is what this book brings out, lovers of God; God said He had thousands of them, and now they are coming to light. He would not have asked for these materials for His dwelling if He had not known they were there. God does not put us under bondage, but gives us the opportunity of acting like Himself, in giving cheerfully.
L.E.S. So that it says, "But if any one love God, *he* is known of him", @1 Corinthians 8:3.
J.T. God knows him; He would honour him. Love is greatly stressed in the two letters to the Corinthians.
A.B. Do you think there is a tendency amongst us to discredit the material as they did at Corinth? "*I* am of Paul, and *I* of Apollos, and *I* of Cephas, and *I* of Christ", @1 Corinthians 1:12. We might be over
{211}
favourable to some and despise others; whereas, "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones"(@1 Corinthians 15:48).
J.T. We see that at Corinth. The primary thought was to bring the full knowledge of God to the people there. Those who were to be saved there were already in the mind of heaven; the Lord says, "I have much people in this city"(@Acts 18:10). He puts it on His greatest servant to seek them out, and Paul stays there eighteen months to do that. And then look at the result -- what we are capable of! What power the flesh has in us! We find the Spirit of God is constantly directing us to Corinth, and it is because there is so much of this amongst the brethren in all our gatherings.
Ques. In view of what you have said, would not wisdom enter into the selection of scriptures taken up in local meetings? They would be in view of current state, not just any suggestion.
J.T. Just so. It is a question of gauging what is needed and seeking to meet it. Paul said, "I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified"(@1 Corinthians 2:2). He would select his scriptures according to what the need required. The minister ought to be able to do that. It is part of levitical skill to determine what is needed.
Ques. One person leading has perhaps more liberty. What about the local reading, the selection of scriptures for that?
J.T. Well, that would devolve on those who take the lead and if they have genuine feelings how the saints get on, they would be with the Lord as to what should be read. The Lord Himself, when He came to Nazareth, where He was brought up, alluding to the local position, entered into the synagogue according to His custom, and stood up to read; they handed Him the book, and *turning* to a passage, He read it. Is that not an example for us? Then He
{212}
said, "To-day this scripture is fulfilled in your ears", @Luke 4:21.
C.H. If you are intelligent and have feeling with regard to something that may be lacking, you give expression to it in that way.
J.T. Yes. If you desire gift, be sure it is prophecy: that is what is specially needed. Every day, every week brings up something to be met. Therefore when we come together for the ministry of the truth let us be concerned about a prophetic word. Some one might be there who needs conviction. If one prophesies it is likely he will be convicted and he will fall down and be judged of all. That is an additional provision that the apostle furnishes in the first letter as to the condition of the saints at Corinth.
A.Pr. I was thinking of the willing-heartedness in connection with what we have been speaking of as to the choosing of the scriptures. It is one thing to choose a scripture but are we capable of developing it?
J.T. And then be balanced, not continuing unduly on one line. Under certain circumstances Bezaleel would say, There is too much of that particular material; thus the offerer would be obliged to stop or else seek to provide some material needed. That is another thing; there is always the spirit of control in the things of God. It is when the quantity of material is in question that the element of control appears. It was good, but there was too much. The Lord selected a *short* scripture at Nazareth. He read just what was applicable at the time. The Lord's example is to be observed when scripture is being selected for an address or reading.
A.N.W. "Jesus Christ, and him crucified" was sufficient at Corinth.
Rem. The question is, How do we come together? Is it in the unity of the Spirit? If so the choosing of the scripture would be simple.
{213}
J.T. At Pentecost, the great inaugural occasion, "they were all together in one place"(@Acts 2:1). There was no contrary element. The Holy Spirit came down; there was room for Him.
L.E.S. In order to serve the brethren you not only love them but you must have respect for them.
J.T. That is a good point. Chapter 35 shows the brethren are worthy of respect; they are liberal in giving. The idea of going up and being owned of Jehovah above had already been introduced. The pattern of the tabernacle was given to Moses above, and the material for it must be heavenly. The suggestion is that the people are now ready for this; their hearts are touched, they are, we may say, lovers of God. In the second letter to Timothy, the apostle deplores that in the last days men would be "lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God", @2 Timothy 3:4.
R.H. These chapters in Exodus help us to realise what we are potentially in having something to contribute.
J.T. That word is right. There was very little material in Corinth. It is most distressing that the apostle had to bring in such words as wood, hay and stubble; most unsuitable for building. Yet the people of God are in danger of bringing in such stuff. Here, however, I think the teaching requires more than what marked Corinth. This typical teaching requires Ephesians, because we get up to the very top, it is a question of what is in heaven. Moses was suitable to be up there, and Jehovah unfolded Christ, the heavenly One, to him. So when He finishes unfolding the pattern to Moses, He talks about the sabbath, and it is said God is refreshed on it. He had not said this before; evidently it is a question of the unfolding of the heavenly. Think of what Christ is in heaven! He was received up, but as up there He is indigenous to heaven, He belongs to
{214}
heaven. Think of Him actually there! What the Father finds in Him! It is the unfolding of that on the mountain, and then we have the saints, "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones"(@1 Corinthians 15:48). For this we need more than Romans; we need Ephesians, the revelation of the great love of God and the purposes of that love. These thoughts enter into His habitation provisionally down here.
C.B. So if we are truly lovers of God, we will not just be concerned with the outward service of God, but conditions suitable for God.
J.T. That is the idea; that God may dwell amongst us. It is not only so many persons; it is a building. "And they shall make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them". In the antitype the body underlies it; not so many persons but an organism, the human body being the symbol of it. There is perfect unity and equality in every sense so that each organ is functioning.
Ques. Is that why Ephesians says, "groweth unto"?
J.T. Yes. That is the final thought, meaning that in Ephesians you go right on into the millennium; the apostle has in mind that the assembly is to be the temple in it. The mind of God is to be disclosed to every one in the millennial day. He says of the gentiles in that passage, "In whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit", (@Ephesians 2:21,22). But the primary thought is "in whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord", which refers to the millennial day. In verse 22 the Jews are left out, they have been left out for centuries. The divine idea is realised among the gentiles. "*Ye* also", the 'ye' is emphatic; "in whom ye also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit". Although the primary thing was Jew and gentile, God
{215}
is now carrying on this great thought among the gentiles.
L.E.S. Would you say a word on the principal men in a locality? They had onyx stones and stones to be set for the ephod and breastplate. Evidently there was a very priestly touch as to their service. "And the principal men brought the onyx stones, and the stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate" (verse 27).
J.T. What they brought was of the highest quality. "And the spice, and the oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the incense of fragrant drugs" (verse 28). They were men of special quality. Paul says to the Philippians, "I pray that your love may abound yet more and more in full knowledge and all intelligence, that ye may judge of and approve the things that are more excellent, in order that ye may be pure and without offence for Christ's day, being complete as regards the fruits of righteousness, which is by Jesus Christ, to God's glory and praise"(@Philippians 9,11).
{216}
BROUGHT TO GOD (5)
@Exodus 40:1 - 38
J.T. What is before us now is the tabernacle set up, the service of God inaugurated, and the priestly family. The next book begins with Jehovah calling to Moses and speaking to him out of the *tent of meeting*. So that, instead of speaking from the mount which could not be touched, which, according to chapter 19, caused terror, we have now come to the tabernacle, Jehovah speaking out of it and opening the way for the service of His people. In order to get a clear view of @Exodus 40 we must carry with us all that has been before us in the previous meetings, particularly now as typically we have come to the heavenly system of things. The priesthood is essential, and it is thought that we might dwell at some length on the priestly family, noting that Christ's priesthood is heavenly. If He were on earth He would not be a priest. He is viewed in Hebrews as exercising His priesthood in connection with the heavenly system; He is "Minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man"(@Hebrews 8:2). While Aaron is in view earlier as associated with Moses particularly as his prophet or spokesman, he is not regarded as a priest until we come to chapter 28, that is, in relation to the pattern of the tabernacle. It is clear that priesthood was needed, so Moses is told to take Aaron and his sons with him and clothe them and anoint them, constituting them priests. And what helps in relation to all this is most important, namely "the Hebrew bondman", seen at the beginning of chapter 21, who inaugurates the great service of love; loving his master, his wife and his children he would not go out free. This underlies the priesthood. The
{217}
great Lover typified in the bondman, becomes the great Priest. The saints of the present dispensation, typified in Aaron's sons, complete the priestly family. Love as seen in the bondman is the great motive in this service. The habiliments described in chapter 28 denote the greatness and glory of Christ; the saints are also provided with suitable garments. Chapter 29 describes the consecration of Aaron and his sons. It is most important to lay hold of our position as priests: Christ is Priest above, and we as His family carry on the divine service here below -- but *as of heaven*.
In chapter 40 the tabernacle is set up and anointed and Aaron and his sons are also anointed. The service is to be carried on. So, while on the one hand we are the material forming the tabernacle, on the other we belong to the heavenly priesthood. The system is heavenly and those serving in it are heavenly.
L.E.S. Would you say that the greatness and glory of what has gone before necessitates such a priesthood as is typified in Aaron?
J.T. Yes, "Such a high priest became us", @Hebrews 7:26. Hebrews brings especially before us the greatness of the Person who is our Priest. He having offered one sacrifice for sins set Himself down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens. Our greatness is set out in the fact that "such a high priest became us". What a great people we must be, God regarding us in this way!
Ques. Would you suggest that experience with God in direct teaching of this kind should bring us to priestly service in connection with the heavenly side?
J.T. Yes, as it was at Antioch. In the end of Exodus the system is set up, but the service has hardly begun. Everything is there, and in Leviticus the drawing near is seen and there the priesthood is
{218}
very prominent. In Exodus the position of the testimony is seen. In Antioch we have the same thing, "the assembly which was there", @Acts 13:1. But @Acts 11 shows how it was effected. What is taking place in Antioch arouses exercise in the assembly at Jerusalem and they send Barnabas to Antioch, a man filled with the Holy Spirit, a "son of consolation". And Barnabas having arrived at Antioch "rejoiced, and exhorted all with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord". "And he went away to Tarsus to seek out Saul"(@Acts 11:22,26). He finds Saul, and they labour together at Antioch a whole year. The work is not to be in unskilled hands; it is a question of skilled labour. Two such workers are specially mentioned, but the service is open for everyone who is skilled. "Every man that was wise-hearted, in whose heart God had put wisdom, every one whose heart moved him to come to the work to do it", @Exodus 36:2. Barnabas knew where Saul was. Under God, he decided Saul was the man for this work and he procured him, and they worked there "in the assembly" for a whole year. The position then is clear: it is not attached to Jerusalem; it is now Christian. It is not merely that people around called the saints Christians, it was from God. It is the name designed for the disciples of Jesus. That position is established at Antioch, and the service of God proceeded.
A.N.W. We must allow a definite period for complete instruction before what is of God comes into evidence.
J.T. This is just what God asked for; He requested them to make Him a sanctuary, and here it is. "And the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle". God is wholly satisfied with what is provided. The Lord says, "On this rock I will build my assembly"(@Matthew 16:18). The saints, as represented in Peter, are the material: the saints, as related to Christ, are also the priestly family.
{219}
Rem. All so far has been connected with the thought, "As Jehovah had commanded Moses".
J.T. Quite so. The position corresponds with Isaac and Rebecca. Some think that they are typical of Christ and the assembly in heaven, but actually the point is Christ and the assembly in testimony down here. And that is this chapter; a heavenly system and heavenly priests but taking up the position of testimony in the wilderness. Verse 34 states, "And the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle. And Moses could not enter into the tent of meeting, for the cloud abode on it, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle".
H.G.H. In our chapter we have the tabernacle system inaugurated and we have the priests, Aaron and his sons, anointed. There is priestly functioning; we come into a settled order of things.
J.T. They are the same people that form the tabernacle who are viewed as functioning in it, but it is a family, Aaron and his sons, referring to Christ and the saints. The greatness of our heavenly position is in mind. There is breakdown recorded in @Exodus 32, it would look as though all is lost, all divine thoughts defeated; the tables are shattered. But what comes out is recovery through the mediator, and not only through him, but through others who love God. The challenge goes out. Who is on the Lord's side? And there were those who came out. Look at the history of the assembly. The breakdown has been terrible. But the Mediator has come in and taken the tent and pitched it outside. Moses pitched it outside, far off from the camp, and God came down there to Moses and spoke to him face to face. Joshua was in the tent; he departed not from it. And then God proposes to write again, upon other tables of stone, the words that were upon the first tables. He directs Moses to hew two tables of stone
{220}
like the first. Moses is honoured. He maintains what is due to God, overcoming the breakdown. So Moses hews out the tables of stone, and God directs him to come up to Him on the mount. No man beside was to be on the mount, no cattle. And Jehovah comes down, and proclaims the name of Jehovah before Moses: "Jehovah came down in the cloud, and stood beside him there, and proclaimed the name of Jehovah. And Jehovah passed by before his face, and proclaimed, Jehovah, Jehovah God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy unto thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but by no means clearing the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, upon the third and upon the fourth generation". And a fresh covenant is made, somewhat typical of the new covenant, and the ten words written on the tables, and Moses comes down with his face shining. We do not get tabernacle material until after that. All this corresponds somewhat with the history of the assembly, a serious breakdown, and then the truth of the assembly coming in in increased freshness; the priesthood and the divine system are revived and God is free with His people as at the beginning.
H.G.H. Whatever breakdown there is, the priesthood goes on. It is an everlasting priesthood, according to verse 15 of our chapter.
J.T. Quite so. There is no breakdown from God's side. God would say to Moses, "I will make of thee a great nation"(@Exodus 32:10). God will go on; He will never be overcome, but He hearkens to Moses and spares Israel through his intercession. All this brings out typically the greatness of Christ.
A.N.W. The first two chapters of Hebrews would bring out the One who never fails, either on God's side or on ours.
{221}
J.T. Yes, "the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Jesus", @Hebrews 3:1. Hebrews has been called the book of the opened heavens, corresponding to what Stephen saw as the heavens were opened. There is no breakdown there. The Jewish system was morally discontinued in the death of Stephen, but the martyr "having fixed his eyes on heaven ... saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God"(@Acts 7:55). That is the position now. The new system properly starts from that point. So the heavenly position prevails today. From the side of the saints, that position has been restored in principle, the priestly family included, and the responsibility rests upon the brethren today to carry that on to the end.
L.E.S. The ministry is authoritative, "as Jehovah had commanded Moses".
J.T. That is the way it is put here. You will notice in @Exodus 39:32 - 43, "All the labour of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting was ended; and the children of Israel had done it according to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses -- so had they done it. And they brought the tabernacle to Moses -- the tent, and all its utensils, its clasps, its boards, its bars, and its pillars, and its bases; and the covering of rams¬ skins dyed red, and the covering of badgers¬ skins, and the veil of separation; the ark of the testimony, and its staves, and the mercy-seat; the table, all its utensils, and the shewbread; the pure candlestick, its lamps, the lamps set in order, and all its utensils, and the oil for the light; and the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the incense of fragrant drugs; and the curtain for the entrance of the tent; the copper altar, and the copper grating that was for it, its staves and all its utensils; the laver and its stand; the hangings of the court, its pillars and its bases; and the curtain for the gate of the court, its cords, and its pegs; and all the vessels
{222}
of service of the tabernacle, for the tent of meeting; the garments of service, for service in the sanctuary; the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his sons¬ garments, to serve as priests. According to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses, so had the children of Israel done all the labour. And Moses saw all the work, and behold, they had done it as Jehovah had commanded -- so had they done it; and Moses blessed them". It is a most impressive passage, and as having part in the recovery from the great breakdown in the history of the assembly, we must, in principle at least, provide all these items. Anything less will not do for God.
A.Br. At the close of chapter 40 we get the thought of Moses finishing the work. In chapter 39 it is the people. What is the distinction?
J.T. Well, in chapter 40 Moses is typical of the Lord. He set up the new divine system at Pentecost, and later, more completely, through Paul. At the end of @Acts 2 we see how the saints contributed. There, and in the result of Paul's work at Antioch and elsewhere, we may trace the items mentioned in @Exodus 39. To Laodicea, the Lord addresses Himself as "the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God"(@Revelation 3:14). He counsels her to buy from Him that she might have what she sorely needed. He indicates that He is ready to provide what we need of the features of the tabernacle so as to function as of it.
D.McD. In verse 3 the ark of the testimony is placed in the tabernacle. Christ must have the prominent place.
J.T. That is at the direction of Jehovah. Then beginning at verse 17 we get what actually was done. "And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first of the month, that the tabernacle was set up. And Moses set up the tabernacle, and puts in its bases, and fixed its boards,
{223}
and put in its bars, and set up its pillars. And he spread the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above over it; as Jehovah had commanded Moses. And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and put the staves in the ark, and put the mercy-seat above on the ark. And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and hung up the veil of separation, and covered the ark of the testimony; as Jehovah had commanded Moses". This is the actual carrying out of the divine requirement. The tent is set up before the ark is put in its place. You must have the tabernacle first as the required dwelling-place and then the symbol of the divine presence placed there. What is before us now is what Moses *did*. "Moses set up the tabernacle". Then the ark is put in its place, in the tabernacle, the testimony, meaning the tables of stone, having been put into it. The ark is covered, the veil of separation being hung up. All these great features are worked out in Christianity.
Ques. I was wondering about the bringing of the material to Moses as though he has to approve of it before it is put into function. Would it involve the exercises of 1 Corinthians?
J.T. I think so. In the antitype the Lord *authoritatively* has to say to what enters the structure. This is seen in Acts in the prominence accorded the apostles as representing His authority. The same principle is seen in Paul, especially in his letter to the assembly at Corinth. It is also seen in the authoritative ministry of the revival in these last days. How much needed correction! Take the Lord's supper, the instruction governing it had been distorted, not only in Rome, where it was made idolatrous, but in all the sects. The Lord in the power of the Spirit through His servants revived the truth as to it and the evil that had developed around it became exposed and repudiated. And more recently
{224}
certain unscriptural things that remained attached to the precious institution have been purged out and the gain of this is manifest. The Lord has helped greatly in all this adjustment. Constant vigilance and the ministry of the Spirit are needed to keep out the result of the workings of our natural minds so that the tabernacle and all that pertains to it may function according to God.
H.G.H. Moses puts the testimony in the ark and after that it is called the ark of the testimony.
J.T. All is divinely accurate. The ark refers to what God presents in testimony. It is now in its place and functioning. The mercy-seat is above it. Here the ark refers to Christ in His place, the law in His heart so the will of God is persistently enforced by Him in the assembly. Every meeting we have like this the Lord would use to reach us; something is to be adjusted. While He was here He fulfilled the law, and made it honourable. It is a great point to make the truth honourable and not to discredit it by anything we do. The first great thought is having the tabernacle set up; then the testimony is there in the ark.
A.Br. Antioch would have the heavenly side in mind, the link being that they were first called Christians at Antioch.
J.T. Yes. The disciples were now in principle separated from Judaism. They are called Christians and carry on for God under that name.
R.H. Would the anointing link with the name, Christians?
J.T. Yes. By implication the name carries the thought of "the Christ"(@1 Corinthians 12:12), which alludes to the assembly as anointed for testimony: it is Christ's body. Peter says if a believer suffer "as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in this name", @1 Peter 4:16.
{225}
D.McD. The ark was the centre of the anointed system then, so Christ is the centre of the anointed system today.
R.H. Would the veil of separation be involved in the recovery of the truth as to the Person of Christ?
J.T. The truth of the Person of Christ includes the veil of separation. "And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and hung up the veil of separation, and covered the ark of the testimony; as Jehovah had commanded Moses". The veil is His flesh. It is that into which He came, as exposed to the human gaze. He was found in fashion as a man and took His place in the likeness of men. He was here before the eyes of men but protected. This is implied in "the mystery of piety"(@1 Timothy 3:16). "God has been manifested in flesh", and that involves the veil of separation. Christ as in abstract deity could not be seen by a creature, for God dwells "in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see".
G.Hy. Why is the Lord's Person alluded to in this way?
J.T. He is to be apprehended with reverent affection, not with the unhallowed natural mind. The priests must take down the veil and cover the ark. The Person of Christ is not treated as a mere human subject. The Lord says to His disciples, Who do men say that I am? One says John the baptist, another, Elias, another one of the prophets, just the human way of treating a most holy subject. They were regarding the Lord as a distinguished man among other distinguished men. We should never bring the Lord in as an ordinary subject of conversation. The priests only were to look at the ark.
A.N.W. "And of whom, as according to flesh, is the Christ, who is over all. God blessed for ever", @Romans 9:5.
{226}
J.T. The table for the shewbread was placed in the tabernacle northward. "He put the table in the tent of meeting, on the side of the tabernacle northward, outside the veil, and arranged the bread in order upon it before Jehovah". As seen in @Leviticus 24 the twelve cakes on the table represent the saints as before God administratively. They are typically the saints inside His abode in holy fragrance and order before God. Paul views the Colossians in this way: "Rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ", he writes to them(@Colossians 2:5).
L.E.S. In the recovery, of which we have spoken, the position was authoritative. "As Jehovah had commanded Moses" is said in this chapter.
J.T. Bethesda disallowed what the Lord said as to the condition at Plymouth, occasioning the division among the saints at that time. The commandment of the Lord is the test; if it is refused there is no protection for the truth.
C.B. The lack of these principles is the root of the trouble in our local gatherings.
J.T. Yes. We must regard the saints according to what they are in Christ. They are "the bread of the presence" before God. God is looking at them as in Christ. They are in the presence of God in His beauty and excellence. How lovable they are under the divine eye! When Jesus was baptised the heavens were opened and there was a voice saying, "*Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight", not '*all*' my delight. The 'all' is left out, whereas in @Psalm 16 the Lord Himself says of the saints, "In them is all my delight". The voice from heaven at the Jordan implied that the saints would come into favour in the Beloved. The fact that He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His companions remains always. So we come in as the extension of
{227}
Christ. The saints really are the Christ. "So also is the Christ"(@1 Corinthians 12:12) -- the anointed vessel. "And he put the candlestick in the tent of meeting, opposite to the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward". The candlestick throws on the table the light of the ministry of the Spirit. The table is on the north side, there under the eye of God and the light shows up the saints as they are there. Moses lighted the lamps before Jehovah. Everything is beginning to function now. "And he put the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the veil. And he burnt on it fragrant incense; as Jehovah had commanded Moses". Thus prayers go up in the fragrance of Christ. "And he hung up the curtain of the entrance to the tabernacle". That is the finish of the inner part of the tabernacle. "And he put the altar of burnt-offering at the entrance to the tabernacle of the tent of meeting and offered on it the burnt-offering and the oblation; as Jehovah had commanded Moses". So that one feature after another is functioning, all under the command and at a given time. All these things made according to the heavenly pattern enter into our service Godward. And as seen there, we are functioning.
In Hebrews the writer alludes to these things, setting them out until we come to the way in which we draw near: "Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus, the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh, and having a great priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart, in full assurance of faith ...", @Hebrews 10:19 - 22. That is how the truth stands. The divine system is viewed as set up and functioning, and priesthood is attached to it. The whole system is anointed, a *heavenly* system down here anointed to maintain its dignity and power in service and testimony.
{228}
So the laver comes in immediately because we are still in the wilderness and thus need it. "And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet out of it; when they went into the tent of meeting, and when they drew near to the altar, they washed; as Jehovah had commanded Moses. And he set up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and hung up the curtain of the gate of the court. And so Moses finished the work". It is *finished*; and now God manifests His thorough acceptance of the sanctuary His people provided for Him. "And the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle. And Moses could not enter into the tent of meeting, for the cloud abode on it, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle". It seems to me that God has come in for the brethren, after the great breakdown, and revived the truth of all these things. And we are tested as to whether we are observing them: whether we are appropriating them and functioning by the Holy Spirit in service toward God according to what is presented in type here.
A.Pr. Why is the blood not mentioned in this chapter? Is it getting ready for Leviticus?
J.T. Quite so. Of course the burnt-offering (verse 29) involves the blood. All that was needed for Jehovah to take up His abode among His people was there. That He did come in. His glory filling the tabernacle, is the great and blessed fact witnessed here. That Moses could not enter the tent of meeting "for the cloud abode on it, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle", demonstrates how appreciatively He appropriated the dwelling which, in response to His desire. His people had prepared for their God.
{229}
CHILDREN OF GOD (1)
@John 1:11 - 13; @John 11:49 - 52
J.T. What John had in mind in writing this gospel was to connect the thought of the "children of God" with the dispensation generally in its inauguration. In Acts the dispensation is inaugurated in connection with the Spirit. In both it is said to have been inaugurated by Christ. According to what John says in chapter 3, the Father "has given all things to be in his hand"(@John 3:35); so that John would show that the Lord had in mind at the beginning of the dispensation the thought of a family, and that in view of the last days the children of God which are scattered abroad should be gathered together into one. In @John 1 we have the idea of 'right' attached to us, the "right to be children of God". We shall see in John's epistle that our position as children is connected with the love of God, the Father's love; but here what is stressed is the right to be children of God, a very solemn word as to our position in the family. Our position cannot be questioned, it is established on a right appointed to us by Christ. The characteristics of children confirm that we *are* children, but here the right is the great point.
J.F. In this chapter we get a kind of beginning as to receiving Him on the one hand, and then as to being born of God on the other. Do you think a few remarks on that line might be helpful?
J.T. The matter is introduced here not only on the line of repentance or new birth, but "as many as received him". That is what I thought we should take up, looking at each of the items here in order to get the great bearing of our position as children. It is said, "He came to his own, and his own received him not; but as many as received him, to them gave
{230}
he the right to be children of God, to those that believe on his name". This is the great thought of God that is to govern the whole dispensation.
C.T. In @Matthew 10 it speaks of power. Is that connected with the thought of right?
J.T. It is a question of right or authority as compared with power. It cannot be questioned.
E.G.McA. Is this to be confirmatory to us?
J.T. It is to stabilise the position of the family. It is a most important matter that the position began with a family status, and that is to be stabilised; just as one who washes his robes has "right to the tree of life" and goes in "by the gates into the city". @Revelation 22:14.
E.G.McA. Does that offset this statement that "He came to his own, and his own received him not"(verse 11)?
J.T. So that it was a wide thought that all who should read this gospel in this late day should be assured of the family status. It is very important as over against the principle of Christendom all around.
H.H. What is of God in the family is preserved all through.
J.T. The mere profession of Christianity is worthless, save as what we have in these verses is entered into, the personal right of those who receive Christ to be children, meaning children in a dignified sense. We belong to the family by divine right, for Christ has secured it to us. There are evidences of our being born of God: "To those that believe on his name; who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God" (verse 12).
J.F. Does this being 'born' refer to new birth?
J.T. Here it is born "of God". Chapter 3 touches new birth but it does not go so far as this. Here we are born of God, it is full Christian status. I think if we get the dispensational thought into our minds first, then the matter will be clearer to us, how the
{231}
dispensation is set up in the family, the family of God; and how we become children, not sons here, but children of God. It is the seed which is to be called. Those that are born after the flesh are not the children of God; it is the persons that are born of God. Here Christ is securing this right for us. The family thought runs right through this gospel.
H.H. It is going through at the present day, is it not?
J.T. That is why I read chapter 11 which helps as showing that the scattered children are to be gathered.
E.G.McA. Do you mean that this gives us a generation that has an indisputable right to consider themselves children of God, distinguished from anything else in the world? We belong to the family by right and it is a company who believes on His name; that is, Christ has become a definite Object of faith.
J.T. The use of the preposition 'on' here means 'all that own His name'. We are born, not of flesh, but of God; so that all mere outward profession is set aside.
C.T. Would you say the right is not given to me until there is a move on my part?
J.T. The question is now whether we are willing to receive Christ; do not forget there are those who do not. It is a question of definitely receiving Him into our minds.
J.K. It is not only those who receive Him, but that they believe on His name.
J.T. It is having a definite object for your faith; then we believe on His name.
A.B.McC. It there a distinction made between receiving Him and believing on His name as progressive thoughts in our souls?
J.T. Yes; I think 'His name' here alludes to the thought of Him as in heaven, but His name is cherished here. The opposers would say, "When will
{232}
he die, and his name perish?" @Psalm 41:5. The genuine members of the family cherish His name; it will not die in their eyes.
C.T. What is the thought of believing "on his name"? It says elsewhere that we might have life "in his name".
J.T. The 'name' here corresponds with the place above; it is what He has acquired through His work as John presents it to us.
P.W. Would being "born ... of God" be the position of even the youngest believer in the Lord Jesus?
J.T. The youngest believer is said to be "born again", but "born ... of God" is that I become developed in the knowledge of God so as to be marked by divine characteristics. As you believe on His name you receive Christ; you believe on His name; you are born of God; not of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man but of God. That is the statement here.
A.B.McC. Is this matter of receiving Him in the light of the presentation of Him in the opening of the chapter?
J.T. Just so, over against those who did not, those who refused Him; that is the Jews. So that this is a world-wide thought establishing Christianity as genuine through men being born of God. This was written long after Christianity had been inaugurated, so that it is intended to establish the matter on family lines.
P.G. Would you say that there are those who would not take advantage of that right?
J.T. That is the point in our reading, that we might be established on the principle of right.
J.F. The Jews here were seeking to maintain their right as children of Abraham. The Lord had to tell them that they were of their father the devil.
{233}
J.T. Paul's statement in @Romans 9 helps as to what is maintained in the seed. It says, verse 6, "Not however as though the word of God had failed; for not all are Israel which are of Israel; nor because they are seed of Abraham are all children: but, In Isaac shall a seed be called to thee. That is, they that are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God; but the children of the promise are reckoned as seed. For this word is of promise, According to this time I will come, and there shall be a son to Sarah. And not only that, but Rebecca having conceived by one, Isaac our father, the children indeed being not yet born, or having done anything good or worthless (that the purpose of God according to election might abide, not of works, but of him that calls), it was said to her. The greater shall serve the less: according as it is written, I have loved Jacob, and I have hated Esau"(@Romans 9:6 - 13). So that this is a very solemn matter at the present time. The seed of Esau is said to be hated. God is saying that about mere profession now, "I have loved Jacob, and I have hated Esau".
H.H. Profanity comes in on that side at the present time; things are held in a very profane way with many. Esau was Jacob's twin brother and yet God says, I have hated him. Esau was a profane man with no spiritual touch in his soul.
J.T. That brings the matter out very solemnly; you are hated or you are loved. It is a terrible thought that will come out some day that one may be hated of God! Esau despised his birthright. Some day those who continue on that line will be hated; they are already hated really. So that I think we shall get help if we see the bearing of this as coming out after Christianity had been established in the world, that from God's point of view the persons believing on His name have family status as children of God.
{234}
Rem. This right, if entered into, will show on my part a public expression of the work of God. One born of God will be seen exercising this right as having entered into it.
J.T. Well, that is it. You value the presentation in the opening up of the gospel; God gives you a right to be one of His children.
E.G.McA. What dignity the children have in being the children of God, because of the One who gave them the right, shown in the presentation of Christ in the first part of this chapter!
J.T. I think that is right, according to what is said later, "The Father loves the Son". Who is doing this? He is no less than God. He is securing for believers who own His name the right to take the place of children of God. It is a very very important matter for young people to take up this right, because it is the Lord Himself that is doing it. All that is said of Him earlier (because this passage is just introductory, a few words of the great position of Christianity) brings out how the Lord Jesus has given this right to believers on His name.
Rem. The Lord asked the man in @John 9, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?"
J.T. This is just a preliminary statement which is to be opened up in the remainder of this gospel.
C.T. All I have to do is to accept this right. Is that the thought?
J.T. It is a question of receiving Christ as presented in the gospel, and to him that receives Him He gives this title, the right to take the place of children.
Rem. The way He is received seems to be linked with the way He came.
E.G.McA. Do I understand that the receiving of Christ in this way is receiving Jesus as my Saviour so that the character of children of God comes out?
{235}
J.T. Luke spoke about the time of His receiving up; he begins this thought in chapter 9 of his gospel: He was received up in glory, that is heaven's estimate of Him. Those to whom He came refused Him, they were not in accord with heaven; then there were others who were receiving Him. John's gospel was written later.
A.B.McC. Would you say that the place of superiority had been with the Jews?
J.T. The Jews refusing Him, the gentiles came in because they received Him. The Jews put themselves out and the gentiles came in because of this.
J.K. I like what you say in regard to receiving Him. It is not merely the matter of receiving the Lord but it is a question of holding Him as an Object so that we are governed by it.
J.T. Receiving involves some action on my part; there is some definite action on my part in receiving Him. Martha received Him into her house but she criticised Him as soon as He was there. Well, that is not what is in mind here. There was nothing about her then that marked her as one of the children of God. She criticised both the Lord and her own sister.
Rem. In the last verse of @John 17:26 it says, "That the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them".
J.T. That is pretty much confirmatory; He has a place in our hearts. "I in them" would be that.
Ques. Would it go further?
J.T. It is definite. Long after the dispensation was inaugurated at Pentecost the apostle is seeking to bring out that it was inaugurated on family lines. It is a question as to whether we are going to take what is available; there is great dignity afforded to us because we receive Christ.
{236}
E.G.McA. The receiving of Christ in this way impresses the idea of an immediate result in me as corresponding to that dignity, to that relationship.
J.T. Quite so. And it implies some movement on our part. It is not simply that you assent to what someone says to you about being the Lord's. In Lydia's case the Lord opened her heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul; she received Christ into her heart and then she opened her house. She did not criticise Him as Martha did. Paul says to the Corinthians, "Receive us: we have injured no one, we have ruined no one, we have made gain of no one", @2 Corinthians 7:2. You are doing something that shows that the Lord has a place with you.
Ques. Would you say a word about the right to take that place? If we do we shall be supported in it.
J.T. The other side is inauguratory and would bring out the state; it is the Spirit that is emphasised in @Acts 2, but here it is a question of the right given in the inauguration; John is saying that in this inauguration Christ gave them the right to take this place. Then you would see the place the family has in the inauguration. We have the right to take the place of children of God, the very highest place as you might say, and this requires that they have not only the right but the characteristics; they are born of God. This term "children of God" is unique; it applies to saints of this dispensation. It is a very distinct word applying to all real Christians. It would not apply to angels; they have their own place. Paul refers to every family in the heavens or on the earth and this is a unique family. It is Christ who gives the right.
E.G.McA. Does Paul touch this in @Ephesians 5:1, "Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children"?
J.T. What one is seeking is that we might get into our souls the magnitude of the dispensation;
{237}
the scattered children of God are to be gathered into one; Christ died for that purpose, that they should be gathered into one.
E.G.McA. "Into one", is that the family?
J.T. That is the idea, that there is nothing incongruous between us, we are of the same nature, as it were.
C.T. Does the thought of 'family' bring in the thought of nearness?
J.T. What is in mind now is that everyone should lay hold of the fact that he has a "right". It is a definite right given by Christ to those that believe on His name and that name eclipses all other names. The name of Christ is to eclipse every other name in our minds. We are among those who believe on His name; it is a definite matter as an object of faith represented in the expression, "his name"; it is a glory that is acquired through redemption.
H.H. That sets out the thought of a characteristic believer, something distinguished in each one.
J.T. It is how we talk of the Lord Jesus and speak to one another and to men about Him, what place He has in the witness of His name.
H.H. It stands out against all the reproach; the support of the Spirit is with the children of God, so that what you say is important. It brings in the thought of the Bridegroom.
J.T. If you are speaking about that name all others are eclipsed; their names are of no value at all. The word in @Revelation 11:13 says, "And seven thousand names of men were slain in the earthquake".
H.H. It is interesting that at the end of @Revelation 11 the ark is seen. This line of things goes through.
J.T. Quite so. It is said that when the ark was put into the house that Solomon built there was nothing in it save the tables of the covenant that
{238}
Moses put there. That is the bride's thought of Christ in His power. He is seen and the ark is seen in @Revelation 11; seven thousand names of men are slain but Christ remains seen in heaven.
H.H. It emphasises the importance of receiving Him and all that is true of Him, all that His name covers.
J.T. What is going on today is that great persons are distinguishing *themselves*, whereas the children of God are marked by definite believing on the name of Christ as an object of faith.
E.G.McA. Mr. Darby's footnote in @2 Timothy 1:12 would include confidence in the believing: "I know whom I have believed", Paul says.
J.T. We were talking about the seven thousand names of great men. So many things are being done now that history would be full of names that are intended by the devil to appeal to the young; whereas the children of God are occupied with one name. To believe on that is a faith matter.
E.G.McA. Chapter 11 speaks of Jesus dying "for the nation; and not for the nation only, but that he should also gather together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad".
J.T. It says in verse 47, "The chief priests, therefore, and the Pharisees gathered a council, and said, What do we? for this man does many signs. If we let him thus alone, all will believe on him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation". Well, that is the idea. The devil is against believing on Him: "All will believe on him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation". There is a great deal of that going on now, nations being taken away; that is what they were afraid of and it happened. So it goes on, "But a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest that year, said to them, Ye know nothing nor consider that it is profitable for you that one man
{239}
die for the people, and not that the whole nation perish. But this he did not say of himself; but, being high priest that year, prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the nation; and not for the nation only, but that he should also gather together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad" (verses 49 - 52). I think that last clause is from the Spirit of God; that is what the Spirit had in mind. Of course today the scattering is very extensive, and as we carry the thought of the death of Christ in our hearts let us remember that His thought was to gather together into one the children of God that were scattered abroad.
E.G.McA. Would you think that that part was spoken by the Spirit of God, not by Caiaphas?
J.T. I think so. He had said before, "Ye know nothing nor consider that it is profitable for you that one man die for the people, and not that the whole nation perish. But this he did not say of himself; but, being high priest that year, prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the nation". I think that latter is the Spirit adding to what he said.
H.H. God provided every word in the mouth of Balaam and the people were blessed; "He hath blessed, and I cannot reverse it"(@Numbers 23:20), he said. His words were in line with God's thoughts of His people.
J.T. Yes. I think it ought to affect us concerning our brethren who are children of God scattered abroad, that the death of Christ involves their being brought together into one. The high priest would hardly have in mind the idea of the children of God; he would have in mind the nation of Israel, that Christ should die for that nation.
Ques. Is that why the thought of the nation is brought in in connection with the family thought here?
J.T. It is brought in in the mouth of the high priest and I think the Spirit pursues the thought in
{240}
verse 52, "But that he should also gather together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad". It looks as though the Spirit of God would put these last words into the mouth of the high priest, but it is the Spirit saying it.
J.F. It is remarkable that the Jews understood that if all believed on Christ it would undermine their nation.
J.T. They were just beginning to realise what we have all around us now; and we know that that nation has been taken away, as the high priest said, that the Romans would come and take away both their place and nation. That is exactly what they did. But Caiaphas was able to prophesy that Christ would die for the nation; then going beyond his words the Spirit says it is that the children of God should be gathered into one.
H.H. I remember a remark being made that what would help in our local difficulties would be for one brother to die for the meeting.
J.T. How much is in mind when you think of God speaking by a man like Caiaphas -- how God can use men who are not really converted at all to convey His mind! It ought to assure us as to what God can do; how He came in here to meet a crisis, because Christ was hated of the chief priests. "What do we? ... . If we let him thus alone, all will believe on him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation". They did not suggest that the Lord Jesus had power to save their nation. Jesus was going to die for the nation; the Spirit of God gives the interpretation of what the high priest said. Caiaphas meant that it is better that Jesus should die than that the Romans should come and take away their place and nation; but it is a question of the children of God, that is the whole point. The matter of Israel as a nation is left; that will come in later. God put this into the mind of the
{241}
high priest. It is remarkable how much there is in scripture of God's dealing with men in this way. In regard to Abimelech(@Genesis 20:6,7), God says to him, as it were, I know your integrity but, you know, this man is a prophet that you are dealing with. God can operate in men who are in authority in favour of His people. "The children of God", that is the word for us now.
J.F. That is the condition now, that the children of God are scattered. We need to look around and see if there are the characteristics of such.
C.J. There is so much scattering! But the provision that they should be gathered into one is the death of Christ; He died for that purpose.
J.F. So that the Lord said, "I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me", @John 12:32.
J.T. It brings out the different phases of the death of Christ; this is one of the phases, to gather together the children of God; there are many more but that is one great phase.
C.T. It does touch our hearts to see His great power that those who are scattered are being gathered.
J.T. What a great family they are, and what a sorrowful thought is their being scattered abroad!
A.B.McC. What is the force of the word 'one'?
J.T. One nature. We have a similar word in chapter 12 when the Greeks came up, "But Jesus answered them saying, The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit"(@John 12:23,24). Paul says to the Hebrews, "He that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one" (@Hebrews 2:11); it is the same idea.
E.G.McA. How does that passage in @John 17:22,23 fit in, "And the glory which thou hast given me I have
{242}
given them, that they may be one, as we are one; I in them and thou in me, that they may be perfected into one"?
J.T. One in nature, in affection, and there is nothing to cause division among us; bound into one, meaning of the same nature according to God.
{243}
CHILDREN OF GOD (2)
@1 John 3:1 - 3
J.T. Our subject for this time is most precious to us, that is, the manner of the Father's love to us expressed in the fact that we are called the children of God; not simply that we shall be that but "that we should be called the children of God". This is to bring out the Father's love. What we had this morning stressed largely the right accorded to us by Christ to take the place of children of God. Now we are to consider the love, the Father's love, in the fact that we are called children of God, and what is based on it or produced from it: "For this reason the world knows us not, because it knew him not", it knew not Christ. This brings out the relationship of children, and involves that we are like Christ in external character; we are not known as He is not known. This raises the whole question of Christianity, what it is characteristically. In this world we are not known, hence there is opposition, suspicion, distrust and even division.
E.Mc. Is this 'calling' different from "called saints", @1 Corinthians 1:2?
J.T. I think it is; what we have here is a designation, but there it is a matter of saints being called, a called-out people. It is not in the sense of designation there, but the fact that we are called out is very much involved in the assembly. In @Acts 11:26 it says that "the disciples were first called Christians in Antioch", it was God's mind that we should be designated in that way. It is the fact that we are called Christians that indicates the manner of the Father's love; we are known in that sense as children of God. I suppose that in John the large use of the word 'children' would bring this point up, how it conveys the Father's love, and the manner of it.
{244}
Rem. You spoke this morning of "I have loved Jacob, and I have hated Esau", @Romans 9:13. Would not this be more that kind of love?
J.T. It is the exalted character of the love. The Lord Jesus spoke of the Father's love, that the love wherewith the Father loved Him might be in us. It is the same kind of love He has for Christ that He has for us, and He would that this love should be in us. The Lord had in mind in @John 17 that the Father's love for Him should be in us. That we should be called Christians is a very remarkable thing; this title suggests the character of the work of God at Antioch. Paul laboured there for a year, we are told, in the assembly and taught a large crowd. The 'crowd' would gradually diminish as merging in the idea of the 'assembly'. The nations also were affected; the idea of the assembly developed and in that connection we have it that the disciples were first called Christians at Antioch. This is clearly to bring out the quality of the service of Barnabas and Paul in that city. But here it is the manner of the Father's love; *who* has so called us is not stated, but it is the fact that we are called "children of God". We are called upon to think of the thing, to meditate or think of what has been bestowed upon us. In John's gospel it is stated that we have a *right* to be that, but here the kind of love is set out, the Father's love. The fact that we are called children of God must imply that there is a reason for it, that we are like the Lord Jesus; we are not known, as He was not known. It is said the world knows us not because it knew Him not. The fact that the love is given to us is remarkable, as if the apostle John, knowing love so well (he is the disciple whom Jesus loved), would bring out how lovable the children of God are.
E.Mc. Would you say that the right to this as stated in the first chapter of the gospel is not enough,
{245}
we need the attraction of affection now which is found in this passage?
J.T. It is given distinctively to the saints of this dispensation. The Father names all the families: "Of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named", @Ephesians 3:15. But we in this dispensation are especially distinguished in having this revelation made to us. We are of that character, so that people call us that.
H.H. What about @John 14:6, where it says, "No one comes to the Father unless by me"?
J.T. @John 13 - 17 deal largely with how the Father and the Son are occupied with us, or with the disciples, and in chapter 13 the Lord Himself calls them 'children', as if He were Father; He had acquired that place among them and He says, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves" (@John 13:35). Love amongst ourselves would enter into what we are saying, the manner of the Father's love given to us that we should be called the children of God. The manner of the love would mean that the saints of this dispensation are peculiarly lovable.
H.H. That last remark in regard to being lovable seems to help, that we might respond to this divine love bestowed upon us.
J.T. These chapters would treat of it. Think of the place we have in the affections of divine Persons! The Spirit keeps Himself out of it as to name, but He is the power of all this. It is a question of the Father and the Son. Think of the dignity attached to us as having the right to take this place! What we are saying now we shall not be able to get hold of unless we appropriate this right, and then having appropriated it we come to see what the Father thinks of us, the manner of the love which He has given to us.
H.H. Conditions are necessary in that way, in order to understand and respond to divine affections.
{246}
J.T. The Lord laboured that the conditions should be there.
H.H. Does this scripture throw light upon the scripture that, "To us there is one God, the Father", @1 Corinthians 8:6?
J.T. It does. "God, the Father" is God, and you can understand how that would work out in us, what God is to us. Who is God to us? It is the Father.
E.Mc. The Father's love would throw light on this particular passage.
J.E. The outcome of that is that we may be able to cry, "Abba, Father".
J.T. That One is God to us.
J.F. There is evidently a difference in the two thoughts; what we had this morning is that the world may believe, and here the world knows us not.
J.T. That brings out what we are going through just now. The young brothers who have to appear before the authorities find that the world does not know us; we have to be very patient towards them as they do not know us, we are not understandable to the world. Our position and manner is mysterious and we have to suffer because of its very mysteriousness.
H.H. "Which none of the princes of this age knew" (@1 Corinthians 2:8).
J.T. I think that is one of the most difficult facts we have to contend with just now. "For this reason the world knows us not, because it knew him not".
H.H. It is amazing to see how the high priests and Pharisees and elders all refused that life in Christ, and yet it is the only thing worth having. God is drawing our attention in a peculiar way in these last days to the vast value of what there is in Christ.
J.T. It implies something come down from heaven and taken up again into heaven; it is distinctly
{247}
heavenly. Christianity is not a worldly thing, it is an out-of-the-world thing. There are many dispensations and each dispensation has its own products. Christianity is a heavenly thing come down to earth; its origin is up there and its testimony is heavenly; presently it will be up there, caught up like the vessel that was let down to Peter three times and taken up and finally stayed there. The world does not know it. The word is, "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", @1 Corinthians 15:48. That is the secret of our being unknown. The more the world knows us the more we are of the earth and the less we are heavenly. It is by our conformity with the world that the world comes to know us.
C.T. Is your thought that I am not to be known in the world?
J.T. Well, actually we are not known by the world; that is what it says here and it is because it knew Him not; that refers to Christ.
R.Q. Would not the thought of the world knowing us involve the thought of the mystery, that they neither accept nor understand it?
J.T. 'The mystery' is the word covering the assembly because God made it a mystery, it is still hidden as far as the world is concerned. Here the idea is that Christ is heavenly, and that when He was here He was not known by the world. We take on His character, have the same love and are like Him; so that it brings out what we are and whether we have been reconciled to suffering for Him, or whether we would rather be known by the people in the town and honoured by them. Many prefer to be so known and honoured. John has in mind that you will be unknown as you are really in the truth of children of God, because you are like Jesus.
C.T. One reason we do not find growth is because we are known in the world.
{248}
J.T. We like to be honoured naturally, but Colossians says our life is hid. It is because of what we are, we are not intelligible to the world any more than Jesus was, although we move about among men. They do not know us because of our character, our ways and our outlook.
J.F. There is no one plane on which we can be with the world, is there?
J.T. There is not. There is something near to it when the apostle used the word, "For in him we live and move and exist" (@Acts 17:28), but this is merely a creative thought. There is no question of our minds being on the same level.
Rem. In @John 8:19 the Lord Jesus says to the Jews, "Ye know neither me nor my Father". Now we have a family of that character, those unknown by the world.
J.T. Very good.
E.Mc. We are not intelligible to the world.
J.T. They do not understand us. You give a reason for the hope that is in you, but you cannot give a reason for everything because the thing is not intelligible to them.
E.Mc. The natural mind does not understand the things of God.
J.T. Just so.
J.K. "I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them, because they are not of the world, as I am not of the world"(@John 17:14).
J.T. We are not only not known, but we are hated.
J.F. That is a further development that we have to accept.
J.T. It enters into the present moment. You have a questionnaire to fill out and you have to tell everything, but you cannot really tell everything. What John is dealing with is what we are constitutionally, that we are what Christ was constitutionally; we are
{249}
given the same love. But still, you have to tell pretty much all that relates to you, and especially what relates to God and how that enters into your citizenship in this world, the government's claim on you. To some minds what you say is very unreasonable and this sometimes breaks out and severe penalty is involved. Well, these are facts that we have to face. The things that we prize most are the occasion of suffering, and if we do prize them most they will be recompense for the suffering. That is the way the truth of Christianity will be developed; it is worth while. The names of the twelve apostles are in the foundations and are adorned with precious stones (@Revelation 21:19,20); that refers to the sufferings. The recompense is worth while.
Rem. Would that recompense be the sense you have of the Father's love?
J.T. It is given to us to suffer (@Philippians 1:29). It is an honour given to us.
H.H. Would not the thought of righteousness come in in @John 17, "Righteous Father, and the world has not known thee"?
J.T. That is quite so, "The world has not known"; it involves the Father, the Son and ourselves.
H.H. It is right for us to be in this position and it is wrong for us not to be. Righteousness is what is right on the highest rung of the ladder.
J.T. The Lord's expression in His prayer to His Father in @John 17 may be taken as a standard for our calling, the highest level. Think of the Father's love being given us here, "That the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them"(@John 17:26)! Think of the Lord asking that!
C.T. The men of the world understand that we do not belong to the world.
J.T. The difficulty is very great because we have to do with men in the world. We are obligated to
{250}
them, but we are a people that are as unknown to them as angels are. We are as unintelligible to them as angels.
C.T. In regard to Peter they said his speech was like a Galilaean; his speech made him manifest.
J.T. Just so, showing how far away a Christian may get from what he is abstractly. I hope tomorrow we may see how the matter of being born of God is worked out; but now the point is the Father's love, the manner of it, the manner of the love that is given us that we should be called children of God, and that we are not known because of this.
H.H. It would involve how perfectly Christ has made the Father known.
J.T. Quite so, the Father and the Son and the saints (the saints involve the Spirit) are bound up in these chapters that you allude to (@John 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17). We are speaking of how we are brought into that, and especially now in this manner of love, the manner of love the Father has given to us.
J.F. It is remarkable that the Lord, the Son, is in that way brought forward as an example of being unknown by the world.
J.T. He was here in their midst and they did not receive Him, "He came to his own, and his own received him not". John really had that in mind, he had the Jews in mind, they did not know Him. So that the application today would be to the religious world, the leaders of religion; they have a status of their own to defend.
Rem. So that this thought of the kind of love that the Father has bestowed upon us is distinct in that particular way, as indicating the peculiar character of the love the Father is pleased to bestow upon us, no less than that.
J.T. It is the same way in which Christ loved His own. "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as
{251}
of an only-begotten with a father"(@John 1:14); well, this love is in addition to that.
H.H. Was that seen when He was about thirty years of age, not as the Babe lying in a manger, but when the twelve contemplated a Man in whom all this was set out? "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a Father".
J.T. In chapter 17 the Lord says, "I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou gavest me out of the world", and then goes on to delineate them and says, "The glory which thou hast given me I have given them, that they may be one, as we are one". He spoke about their being one and that He had given the glory to them that the Father had given to Him; it is a question of family glory. Then He goes on to say, in verse 24, "Father, as to those whom thou hast given me, I desire that where I am they also may be with me, that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world".
J.K. It says 'men' there, but we have been speaking of the thought of 'children'.
J.T. The word 'children' refers to us down here and sonship refers to us up there. We are down here as derived from God and essentially like Him, "As *he* is, *we* also are in this world". You can only understand that in an abstract sense, that we are viewed as holy as being born of God.
-.P. So that this idea of 'children' is distinct from the idea of "little children".
J.T. The word here is the most exalted word used for the relation in mind.
H.H. I think what you have just said is very important, that we are derived from God so as to be essentially like Him.
J.T. It is the manner of love. The love that is spoken of is surely worth while; it is surely a recompense.
{252}
C.T. Is that what we are today?
J.T. That is the idea; that is what this epistle is for, to give us the full thought over against what there may be otherwise. We are looked at in just one way.
A.B.McC. This can be known in time.
J.T. It is a question of this dispensation; it is not a question of what we are in heaven; it is a question of the dispensation here in 1 John, how it was inaugurated in family relations, how these family relations involve the supreme love of the Father, and that we are unknown, but that it is worth while to suffer because of the manner of the love of the Father. The more we look at the position the more we are convinced that suffering is the only thing for us, and God will make it worth while. John shows here by the Spirit that it is not what we shall be, how we shall appear up there, but it is down here. When we shall see Him we "shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is". In the first verse it is present, "That we should be called the children of God" now.
E.Mc. You mean that when we are manifested it will be intelligible?
J.T. This is not manifestation. This is something that men cannot understand but "what we shall be has not yet been manifested", but "if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is". This is a moral thing that we are dealing with now; it is what we are down here.
Rem. In that way the "thing is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing and the true light already shines" (@1 John 2:8).
J.T. The 'thing' there is eternal life. What is true of Him is true of us now. We are dealing with likeness and similarity to Jesus personally, and therefore sufferings are unavoidable, but then it is worth while.
{253}
H.H. Do you think we are to be like Him now? We shall see Him as He is but we are to be like Him now.
J.T. We are to be like Him in this moral sense. I think we have to make this allowance, that what Jesus was in the forty days down here is not just what He is now. What He is now is described in "body of glory".
H.H. Why do you bring in the forty days?
J.T. Because they were for a purpose in relation to the testimony. The point is spirituality in the forty days; they bring out the kind of condition He was in as risen, not as glorified.
H.H. "What we shall be has not yet been manifested".
J.T. The forty days¬ condition was manifested, but that was for the testimony. Paul saw Jesus in glory and that was to impress Paul for the testimony down here. When the Lord comes for us it is not simply that we shall be like to His spiritual body, but like to His body of glory. So that there is something yet that we have not seen, the great thing we are coming into.
R.Q. In what sense is the word 'if' used here (verse 2)?
J.T. It is a matter of being like what Jesus was when He was down here in the days of His flesh. Now we are the children of God, but what we shall be is not yet manifested. You cannot say what it will be, nor can anyone; we know that when it is manifested we shall be like Him. There is no doubt about it. The force of 'if' is in the sense of 'when', it is left in the indefinite future. When it is manifested then we shall know. I do not think anyone has seen Him as He is yet, though Paul saw Him in His glory. When it is manifested so that we shall be brought into it for eternity, when we shall see
{254}
Him, we shall be like Him. The apostle here connects what it is with our seeing Him; we shall be impressed in our whole being with what we are seeing.
R.Q. That would really go beyond the thought of manifestation in the day of display, would it not? It is what we are to be in our eternal abode.
J.T. The Lord presented Himself living, that was a sort of appearing to the brethren; it is in a particular way. But what we are to be and what we are to see in heaven is yet in the future.
E.Mc. Do I understand you to mean that this manifestation of what we shall be is for us in the future?
J.T. No one can tell you what it will be. A man will rule over a city or five cities; the idea of rule is invested in us. If I am ruling over a city I must have something to indicate my office; but when it is a question of what I myself shall be like, or Christ Himself apart altogether from testimony, we have to wait to see how it is going to be.
H.H. Would not this carry with it the thought of union, that is, the assembly is Christ's fulness; would it reach out in that direction? There must be a proper parallel between Christ and the saints in that way; they are not morally on a lower basis or level than He Himself.
J.T. I think that is in order, but when you get to wifely conditions, then you are on another line of things, although these truths are interwoven. We are to be with Christ in family relations eternally; what is to be seen then is no question of testimony or service, but pure enjoyment and love, simply being for divine Persons.
J.F. The statement that the life has been manifested is in view of testimony, but this is not in view of testimony.
{255}
J.T. No, not when you correspond to what He is; that does not allude to any particular attitude. In @Colossians 3:4 it says, "When the Christ is manifested who is our life, then shall ye also be manifested with him in glory". That is all for a public testimony -- "manifested with him in glory" -- but to see Him as He is, that is the eternal thing. We shall be like Him because we shall see Him as He is.
Think of the Lord Jesus giving them the glory that the Father had given Him, as we are told in @John 17:22! We should be in complete correspondence with Him, although we do not come into the Deity, into the glory which He had with the Father before the world's foundation. You feel that John had a wonderful place! Peter had a special place in administrative work, John in love work, and Paul in the mystery. These are three outstanding servants.
H.H. That bosom and that breast are available for you and me now!
J.T. Just so. So that it is worth while to suffer for these wonderful things that are held for us.
C.T. I suppose our young brothers are suffering for these things.
J.T. God is bringing them before the governments of the world. The world, the powers that be, have to be looked at as of God without any reference to their knowledge of God; so that God can take up any of them even though they do not know Him. Then there is the world in another sense, "The whole world lies in the wicked one", @1 John 5:19. But looking at the world as used of God in regard to our young men that are called by the authorities, it is a question of whether these great truths are sufficiently in their hearts to make it worth while, so that they should be a testimony here in suitability.
H.H. Some of our best brethren are the men who went through the last war; many of them did, it
{256}
was the making of them. They have been a very marked testimony ever since.
C.J. How do you account for the fact that there seems to be no particular enquiry as to the future? Naturally I suppose there is more or less inquisitiveness as to what we shall be, our state, but here it seems to be just restfulness in knowing that we shall be like Him.
J.T. The Lord usually had to correct the disciples; they were very inquisitive. They say to Him in @Acts 1:6,7, "Is it at this time that thou restorest the kingdom to Israel?". The Lord would not have them ask questions on these lines. He had said, "The Father himself has affection for you". In @John 16 they are very doubtful about things and they do not ask the questions that you would expect them to ask, so that when they say, "Is it at this time that thou restorest the kingdom to Israel?" they ignore @John 13, 14, 15 and 16. But the Lord says, "It is not yours to know times or seasons, which the Father has placed in his own authority"; He has reserved that to Himself, indicating that we should be occupied with the main things in our dispensation. The Spirit will disclose everything, much greater things than the restoration of the kingdom to Israel. So that it goes on here in verse 3, "And every one that has this hope in him purifies himself, even as *he* is pure", that is, hope in Christ.
E.Mc. In regard to this manifestation when we shall see Him as He is, it is touching that we shall have bodies of glory like His.
J.T. That is what is meant. It does not appear as though anyone has yet seen Him as He is; John puts it in the future. The present state is not glory. What is opened up to us is that everyone having this hope in Christ -- that we are going to be like Him when we shall see Him as He is -- purifies himself. But that is a higher level of purity than the ordinary.
{257}
What we are dealing with now refers to supreme refinement.
C.T. Is the thought that I must have the hope that you have been speaking about in order to purify myself?
J.T. "Every one that has this hope in him purifies himself, even as *he* is pure"; think of the standard we get represented to us! The furnishing of the tables involved purity, washing; a large amount of water was required for the lavers and the vessels for carrying water for purifying; and then there were the ashes of the red heifer. All these are essential and we can hardly be Christians without them. But here we are dealing with the refined thoughts of God; He is pure, of course He is pure, but why should this be brought in? It is a supreme standard of purity, the most fine gold; that is the idea; God is preparing us for our translation and why not take these things in and let them work in us? He that has this hope in Him is pure.
H.H. Pure is over against unclean. You referred to the ashes of the red heifer; this is a plain word for us all in regard to uncleanness: it makes the way for supreme refinement.
J.T. Why should it be said that He is pure?
J.F. Is it on account of lack of water of purification in the second chapter?
J.T. You cannot possibly be conformed in the physical sense while you are down here. But think of what you will have when you see Him, a body of glory! We shall be like Him, the supreme Standard of everything. If you have that hope you have it in Christ who leads into the purifying now of the supreme kind. John would lead us into more excellent things.
C.H. We should be morally conformed to the image of Christ now; later we shall be so physically.
{258}
J.T. He alludes to the physical change when we shall see Him and that sight is connected with the transformation of ourselves.
E.Mc. I think that is most helpful, nothing else has a purifying effect like this.
J.T. God would just like to prepare our hearts to go in for the greatest, the most blessed, and the supreme things. I think that as to the resurrection, even before we come out of the grave we shall have some intelligence. We shall be conscious that things are being done; in fact we have here the word, "We know that if it is manifested we shall be like him", showing that God is contemplating that we are conscious in these things. The Lord will visit the graves to take us out and something will happen in us, conformed to the full transaction. "Lazarus, come forth"(@John 11:43), for instance: when the name was mentioned Lazarus moved and the dead came forward. They that are in their graves shall hear His voice and come forth. Something happens in them, and when we hear Him we shall see Him, and sight is taken account of, we shall be like Him for we shall see Him as He is.
H.H. When you get into the hands of divine Persons there is no telling what They will do with you.
J.F. What we have here involves the transformation of our bodies of humiliation.
J.T. You hear His voice and come forth: you come forth a spiritual body and you come forth a body of power; but then this one thing is left, that we shall be like Him for we shall see Him as He is. That is the supreme thought! God will make men in the grave to hear the voice of Christ and they will come forth; but not only that, they will see Jesus as He is! We shall have some inkling as to how God operates. He is dealing with the best kind of material in the saints of this dispensation. In fact
{259}
Paul goes so far as to say that the body which we are going to have is our "house which is from heaven"(@2 Corinthians 5:2). We should have these thoughts in our minds so that we may be amenable to God.
J.F. "Star differs from star in glory"(@1 Corinthians 15:41).
J.T. God is dealing with material now; He created out of nothing but He is not doing that now. He is taking up material and dealing with it inwardly so that there is intelligence in it. Think of being in the hands of your Creator and knowing what He is doing with you!
J.F. How great the measure of glory there will be with us when God raises us!
J.T. I am sure it is a wholesome thing to have before us as to how much glory there will be in us. "For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the coming glory to be revealed to us", @Romans 8:18.
{260}
CHILDREN OF GOD (3)
@1 John 3:7 - 12; @1 John 5:1 - 5
J.T. It was thought that we should continue with this epistle because it affords more instruction on our subject than any other epistle, that is, as to being born or begotten of God. This is a root idea and is an initial thought with the apostle John. The apostle makes an analysis really and the idea of being begotten of God enters much into this. It works out in our contact with sin, sin in ourselves, so that the subject becomes intensely practical and enables us to understand and to analyse our inner movements, how it can be said that one born of God "does not sin". It is connected in these passages with righteousness, dealing with sin in its root character, "He that practises sin is of the devil; for from the beginning the devil sins" (verse 8). This is over against one that is begotten of God who does not practise sin, as it says in verse 9, "Whoever has been begotten of God does not practise sin, because his seed abides in him, and he cannot sin, because he has been begotten of God. In this are manifest the children of God"; so that we have here root comparisons. In chapter 5 the fact of believing that Jesus is the Christ is a proof that one is begotten of God, and this gives victory over the world too: "For all that has been begotten of God gets the victory over the world; and this is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith. Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?"
Another thing to be noticed is that persons are brought into this epistle and the other two epistles of John, as illustrative of both good and evil, so that we may compare and think of persons in assembly
{261}
relations; we have names given in these epistles which guide us both as to good and evil. We see the idea illustrated in persons. Another important thing to keep in our minds in this inquiry is Peter's view of the matter: he says we are born of incorruptible seed by the word of God (@1 Peter 1:23). It is important because it involves intelligence as to our constitution, as to ourselves, how we are brought into being by the word of God.
H.H. So that in connection with what you are saying as to righteousness one thinks of the movements of "Jesus Christ, the righteous"; what you are drawing attention to is practising righteousness, which is very important on our side, is it not?
J.T. It helps us as to this matter of being born of God. First the apostle addresses us as 'children', meaning he has a father's place which brings the Fatherhood of God very near to us. The apostle represented the thing in measure so he says, "Children, let no man lead you astray; he that practises righteousness is righteous, even as *he* is righteous. He that practises sin is of the devil; for from the beginning the devil sins" (verses 7, 8). The comparison is based on root principles and hence is intensely abstract; it is only as we understand the abstract idea that we can understand these verses.
E.Mc. Do you say that "born of God" is the root of righteousness?
J.T. That is the way it is presented here, as a constitutional matter and Peter's reference would help us as to intelligence. The "living and abiding word of God" (@1 Peter 1:23), gives the idea of what is of His mind, and it is communicated to us as we are begotten so that we are intelligent as to ourselves.
C.J. Is not Mr. Darby's translation a great blessing in this particular scripture? The King James's translation would seem to suggest a single act, while Mr. Darby's translation indicates that it is 'practice'.
{262}
J.T. It does help. The abstract idea helps because you are enabled constitutionally by the word of God to discern what you are. You are enabled in analysis to dismiss what is extraneous to the subject, otherwise no one in the flesh as we are would be so spoken of, that he cannot sin. He is identified for the moment with birth from God, not simply new birth but more than that; it is "of God" and you cannot connect what is of God in this root way with sin; nor can you connect anything else but sin with the devil; he does not know anything else.
E.Mc. Does Paul refer to this when he says in @Romans 7:25, "So then *I myself* with the mind serve God's law; but with the flesh sin's law"?
J.T. He does. Paul works it out in himself, he works it out by strong abstract pronunciation indicating plain dealing with one thing, and leaving other things that have no place here. Why not? If you are making an analysis of any kind of material, for example, if you are looking for gold in rock, you are entitled to look for the gold only; the gold is the gold.
C.T. So according to this there should not be the spirit of going astray.
J.T. You are intelligent in what is being done, going back to the root. You go back to the fact that you are born of God, and you have no reason to connect anything to do with sin, any seed of sin, with what is born of God.
H.H. How would you speak of the 'word of God'? What does that mean?
J.T. It conveys intelligence as to His mind; it is said for instance that the very worlds were framed by the word of God. That would mean that they were formed intelligently, not drawn together as by sections, but intelligently. There is a plainly marked reason for everything, but much more plainly marked in a living being; so that the Lord Jesus said that
{263}
He was altogether that which He said: I am "altogether that which I also say to you", @John 8:25.
H.H. It says in @Psalm 139:14,15, that we are fearfully and wonderfully made and the work is wrought in secret. Would that apply?
J.T. Yes, quite so, that may be alluding to the assembly. In @Genesis 2 the histories of the heavens and the earth are referred to; the shrubs are spoken of before they grew.
H.H. God does things and He does them perfectly from the outset; seeds grow up to plants and He made plants that yielded seed.
J.T. When He treats of life on the third day He connects it with the earth, fruit trees bearing fruit, and so on; everything comes up out of the earth. But what comes up is regulated on the fourth day by the lights in the heavens so that the earth is dependent upon the heavens. And so it is with the believer, he is constitutionally intelligent and all ministry is to enhance that; he knows his origin and then the lights in the heavens regulate him. The Holy Spirit comes down and regulates us.
H.H. I am impressed with the word 'dry', @Genesis 1:9. I suppose the saints are on dry ground, the waters being gathered together in one place in the death of Christ and the saints on the dry ground.
J.T. The element of water is not only judgment, but the dry is over against the wet; the Spirit of God moved on the face of the waters but what He had in mind was to bring out the earth; the water engulfed the earth, but He let the dry ground appear, meaning it is brought out of the wet which indicated chaos. The water is not only that but it is needed for refreshment, and so in @Genesis 2 we get a mist going up from the earth so that the earth itself has moisture, which is essential. So in regard of the Christian, he has the Spirit, and even if he has not the Spirit there is some moisture there: "That which
{264}
is born of the Spirit is spirit" (@John 3:6), and that alludes to material which the Lord can use. The one who is born of the Spirit has something, and that involves material which the Lord can use. A person born of God is born by the word of God, meaning that he is intelligent in the hand of God and knows what God is doing with him.
H.H. He is able to receive testimony.
J.T. He can move and enter into the kingdom; he does not move in the world, he is intelligent because of what God has done in him. It is intelligent material that God is using and if I am normal I will adhere to that; sin will be foreign to me and the Holy Spirit will enable me to maintain that. If we say that we have no sin, that is a lie; we must look at the thing contextually, we are entitled to identify ourselves with being born of God.
J.F. By reason of being born of God we are able to reckon ourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus.
J.T. You can do that because Christ died for us, it is only because He died for us vicariously; that is reconciliation. But in @Colossians 3:1,3 it says, "If therefore ye have been raised with the Christ", and "have died, and your life is hid with the Christ in God"; this all alludes to the material God is working with.
A.B.McC. Is practising righteousness a feature of the kingdom?
J.T. Surely it is, it is in connection with being born of God; it shows how the truth is interwoven. A man cannot enter into the kingdom unless he is born of water and of Spirit; hence the Lord says to Nicodemus, "Thou art the teacher of Israel and knowest not these things"!(@John 3:10) The scripture makes things plain to us and we should understand.
H.H. What does the thought of 'water' mean in that connection?
{265}
J.T. There water is to cleanse, not for refreshment.
H.H. Is it connected with state?
J.T. It is the element of helping oneself. It is moral cleansing that is in mind, and that is in the constitution of a man; it is a root principle that I judge sin in cleansing myself from it. There is plenty of water and why not do it?
C.J. I would like some help in connection with verse 9, "Whoever has been begotten of God does not practise sin, because his seed abides in him, and he cannot sin, because he has been begotten of God". I was wondering whether 'his' refers to God, and 'him' to one who is begotten of God.
J.T. 'Whoever' is you or me, "Whoever has been begotten of God does not practise sin, because his seed abides in him"; that is *your* seed. The root principle of your origin is the idea, the seed by which you are a being according to God; that abides in you and you cannot sin because you have been begotten of God. It is wonderful all the way through, as I understand it! This is a matter that requires that our minds be under control and attentive, and the Holy Spirit will help us. You will know the difference between your own spirit and the Holy Spirit because He witnesses. It is an analysis I have to arrive at in the understanding of it, in spite of the fact that I am also viewed from another point of view. But from this abstract point of view I identify myself only with what I am before God. When sin presents itself I avoid it; that is a great matter.
H.H. If we sin; we confess our sins, the abstract idea of what I really am helps me to judge the sin.
J.T. "If any one sin, we have a patron with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous"(@1 John 2:1); that is what God does. But from this abstract side I deal with the matter myself instinctively, and that greatly helps us in the application of the first part, chapters 1 and
{266}
2. You do not get the idea of an advocate here; it is what you are doing yourself in virtue of what you are as born of God.
H.H. I was thinking of dual conditions; you mean that on the one hand we are in Christ, but we must practise righteousness and hence there is responsibility.
J.T. That was the issue fifty years ago. It is Galatians that treats fully of the mixed condition; there is a warring all the time inside of us; but what an immense victory when we arrive at this and identify ourselves wholly with what we are as of God!
E.Mc. One born of God has immediately the intelligence to understand what is of God and what is of the devil and to act accordingly.
J.T. He has that in principle; the fulness of it is contained in the gospel and he has intelligence to repudiate what is not becoming at all, so to say; and since sin is condemned by God in the death of Christ, I am entitled to condemn it in myself. Now you are able to look at the abstract side, eliminating all that has been set aside by the death of Christ.
Ques. Is that why he goes so far back to the root principle seen in Cain slaying his brother Abel?
J.T. Here the first one to sin is the devil himself, as John says, "He that practises sin is of the devil", that is, if he is not born of God he is of the devil, whatever he professes. The next person in this paragraph is the Son of God, He has been manifested that He might undo the works of the devil; so that we have the devil first, and then the Son of God undoing his works. Then we have Cain in verse 12, "Cain was of the wicked one, and slew his brother; and on account of what slew he him? because his works were wicked, and those of his brother righteous". These are examples of doctrine.
{267}
-.W. Is it possible today in a practical way for me to slay my brother?
J.T. Yes, if you hate him you will do it as you have opportunity. "Every one that hates his brother is a murderer". It is an analysis and we are looking at root principles; your hatred means that you would do it. In the way we take account of one another, we see how hatred arises in the mind first by dislike; the fact that I am born of God ought to check that at the start. So we ought to see to the root in dealing with a case of that kind, get at the root of it. Why did you not check it at the beginning? If you had done so you would have saved yourself.
C.T. Is the thought here that if I do not love my brother I am not of God?
J.T. It is really an analysis: if anything comes up I must deal with it at the root; the longer it goes on the stronger it is.
Rem. James says, "According to his own will begat he us by the word of truth, that we should be a certain first-fruits of *his* creatures", @James 1:18.
J.T. That is James's view; Peter says, "By the ... word of God". "The word of truth" would regulate us at the very beginning of any working of sin in us.
J.B. Practising the truth in John's gospel results in coming to the light, that a man's works may be manifested that they are wrought in God (@John 3:21).
J.T. So that John in his second epistle mentions the elect lady -- another personality that helps. He says of her and her children, "Whom *I* love in truth, and not *I* only but also all who have known the truth, for the truth's sake which abides in us and shall be with us to eternity", @2 John 1,2. That is a sister. Then in the third epistle he speaks of a brother called Gaius "whom I love in truth", and he speaks about a brother called Demetrius who "has witness borne to him by all, and by the truth itself;
{268}
and we also bear witness" (verse 12). Well, these are examples for us in dealing with this important matter as to how the truth works out in persons. Then there is a brother called Diotrephes who "loves to have the first place" in the assembly, "neither does he himself receive the brethren; and those who would he prevents, and casts them out of the assembly", @3 John 9,10.
Ques. "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren", @1 John 3:14. Would you say a word as to the bearing of the word 'know' here?
J.T. It is a conscious state of things in the believer. This is the word for 'consciousness' in an analysis, implying what is expert, only experts can make an analysis; they know what they are dealing with. The idea of a man from one point of view is that he has five senses, and as he develops those five senses he develops his manhood, so that in dealing with matters, for example, material things, he is conscious of them. He is conscious all the time of what he is dealing with; he says, 'That is that' and 'That is that'; it is not simply that he is viewing things objectively but his senses are making him conscious of things. I think that is what ought to enter into our care meetings when we have to do with sin, that in dealing with these things we know what they are. The real point is to get to the root and see what it is in itself.
J.F. An analysis is helpful, being able to reduce things to their root elements; it helps us to be able to name things.
J.T. That is what I would say. First the devil is brought in and then the Son of God. Think of the great distance between these two persons! The devil does not do anything but sin, but the Son of God is undoing his work. The conflict is in ourselves and we want to be on the side of the Son of God.
{269}
J.F. Would you say that it is in ourselves that the works of the devil are being undone?
J.T. Just so. The battle is in ourselves between the devil and the Son of God, the Son of God undoing that which the devil is doing, which is nothing but sin.
H.H. You get the analysis and the battle in the last chapter of the gospel of John, the Lord having to do with Peter before the brethren, involving searching and going to the bottom of the thing.
J.T. There Peter changed his word from one suggesting 'conscious' knowledge to 'objective' knowledge. He attributes everything to the Lord, the Lord is conscious of everything, He knows inwardly what everything is; Peter observed that until the last question of the Lord, "Art thou attached to me?". Then he changes from conscious to objective knowledge. He says to the Lord, You know that objectively I love you. The Lord knew that, the very look of his eyes indicated to the Lord that he loved Him.
H.H. Peter prevailed in that way.
J.T. The evidences in Peter that he loved the Lord were coming out.
H.H. It is encouraging to anyone going through some peculiar exercise.
J.T. You can look the brethren in the face if you have done something wrong and repented. They will see your repentance in your face and in your gestures.
E.Mc. I wonder if that is the force of the expression Mr. Darby uses in saying 'undoing' rather than 'destroying'? The whole thing is 'undone'.
J.T. It is not a time for destruction; "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy", @1 Corinthians 3:17. We are to leave the tares and wheat to grow up together, we could not destroy the tares
{270}
without endangering the wheat. We are to undo the thing, and for that skill is required.
E.Mc. The conscious knowledge of this gives one the sense of victory.
J.T. In @Matthew 13 we have the tares and the wheat growing together and the Lord says, Do not interfere with this because you will damage the wheat if you do. But then He goes on to the end and He speaks about fishermen, another parable; the net is cast into the sea, it is drawn in and the fishermen refuse the bad fish, they can do that without hurting the good ones that are in the net. The fishermen have control; that is the meeting. They have control and if a brother is bad they deal with him; that is the idea of conserving the good. We do not have control of Christendom but we do have control of the company of saints, and you can throw out the bad in it. So that I think you can see that brethren must analyse things because we deal with most precious things. In our care meetings there is dealing with the brethren and not allowing them to be associated with evil.
P.W. In a care meeting how would you regard the five senses?
J.T. By the sense of smell you can detect a person -- we smell certain garments; and then hearing, a man speaks and his speech betrays him; he writes a tract or a book and you read it, that brings in taste. The senses are active in that way. All this brings out the necessity for being careful in handling the things of God, for they are root matters and work out unto eternal life. We have the true God and eternal life, that is Jesus, the One who is with us.
H.H. I suppose these chapters bring in the light of eternal life.
J.T. It comes in in chapter 5, but in this chapter in verse 15 it says, "Every one that hates his brother is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer has
{271}
eternal life abiding in him". Then in verse 16, "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us; and *we* ought for the brethren to lay down our lives". So that it is an evidence of eternal life, an initial idea, when a brother lays down his life for the brethren. Eternal life is in Christ but John here tells us where it is *not*; it is not in a murderer.
H.H. "I am the resurrection and the life"; that was personified in the Lord.
J.T. Quite so, as the life. That is what we come to in the next to the last verse of the epistle, "We know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding that we should know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life". The matter is worked out in that wonderful, glorious position, one Person who has the true position, "the true God and eternal life". So that we begin to look for it in persons who love. We know love because He has laid down His life for us and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren; "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren" (verse 14). Then in chapter 4 it is the Spirit that we have to do with currently, and in chapter 5 it says: "Every one that believes that Jesus is the Christ is begotten of God". This subject enters into all these great matters.
H.H. Would that work out practically in relation to the Supper?
J.T. There you will touch an atmosphere, the atmosphere of love, which is related to eternal life. I think the assembly is in mind in these three epistles as a sphere for eternal life in a practical way; so that we are taught where we shall *not* see it in one who hates, and where we *shall* see it in one who loves. You can look there for life; you will not get it in anyone who hates but in one who loves. There
{272}
is a difference between life and eternal life in the scripture. The assembly is a sphere where life is to be seen. It is where love is.
H.H. Will you give us another word as to the distinction between 'life' and 'eternal life'?
J.T. Eternal life is a fixed matter; life is what is operative. Eternal life is clearly over against death and time. Life by itself is more what is operating in us, so in @Romans 8:10, "the Spirit [is] life" operating in us.
C.T. The gift of God is eternal life: that is a fixed thought.
J.T. The nations will go into that in the millennium; it operates by the way of love and good works and the like.
I want to call attention to chapter 5 as regards being born of God, how it is said that, "every one that loves him that has begotten loves also him that is begotten of him" (verse 1). We are essentially one; if we love God we love one who is begotten of Him, and if there is love in that one there is reciprocation. It is easy to love a person who is lovable.
E.Mc. Is that the response of God's nature in you and me, that we love one another?
J.T. The nature is the same in you as in me. If I am cultivating fleshly feelings I am hard to love; if you are like God you will love in spite of incongruity, but it is more difficult to love an unlovable person than a lovable one. I think John was a lovable one and he knew how to love because he was lovable. I should like to have been in the house of John! The Lord committed His mother to John and he took her into his own home; the Lord authorised the relationship that she should dwell in John's house by making her John's mother and him her son; the Lord did that on the cross.
C.T. In regard to the thought of love, would the last verse of @John 17 fit in here, "That the love with
{273}
which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them"?
J.T. Here we are dealing with love by itself; He is laying His life down for us, and "Hereby we have known love". The objective evidence of love is that He has laid down His life for us, so that we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren; He has taught us how. As begotten of God, the same nature operates in all.
Ques. Is that why he brings in the commandments, that we know we love them, "When we love God and keep his commandments" (verse 2)?
J.T. That is the legal thought; there is no use speaking about loving God or the brethren without keeping the commandments. "If ye love me, keep my commandments", @John 14:15.
E.Mc. So John says, "His commandments are not grievous" (verse 3).
J.T. Anything that God says is liberty; it is just what you like to do. The Lord Jesus loved to do all that the Father told Him; there was nothing grievous about that. It is a question of the divine nature in me: I accept the commandments as the perfect law of liberty.
E.Mc. May I ask this question in connection with the care meeting? If these things are in me and the love operating in me, I would make the first advance, would I not, in a case of difficulty?
J.T. I think that is very practical. Some brothers are very unapproachable; you have to do all the advancing; but if both are born of God characteristically it is very easy.
C.T. What has this got to do with victory over the world?
J.T. First, believing that Jesus is the Christ would save us from antichrist; and second, loving one because he is born of God; and third, keeping His commandments, and His commandments are not
{274}
grievous, we are told in verse 3. Then all that is begotten of God gets the victory over the world, and the saints viewed in the aggregate are morally victorious over the world. We may go down and die but we are victorious in our life as begotten of God; so that we can see how what God has effected in our times in forming gatherings like these -- this matter of love working out -- how it accords us the victory. The point is that "all that has been begotten of God gets the victory over the world" (verse 4). It is the aggregate of the saints in the victory.
E.Mc. Is verse 5 an advance thought over verse 1 on the line of faith? In that verse he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God gets the victory over the world.
J.T. Believing that Jesus is the Christ is a testimony that you are born of God, and this would be protection against antichrist. Here those born of God have received Christ. Well, if I receive Christ I will not listen to antichrist. There are many antichrists; they are working in the schools and colleges everywhere now so that it is good to be a clear believer, a definite believer, in the fact that Jesus is the Christ, the Anointed of God. Then it adds in verse 4, "For all that has been begotten of God gets the victory over the world". God is showing the value of being born of Him. Then verse 5 is faith, "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" Not now "the Christ", but "the Son of God", who enters into another order of things, in whom eternal life is hidden.
J.B. The Lord asked the man in @John 9:35, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?". Was he victorious as cast out?
J.T. That is a good illustration of it. The Lord says, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?". And the man worshipped Him. He was cast out, excommunicated,
{275}
but having come to the Son of God he has victory, he will never go back again under any circumstances. The Son of God introduces him into something positive.
C.T. Does the believer in verse 5 follow the faith of verse 4?
J.T. You get another side of the position in the word, "believes that Jesus is the Son of God", because of what the Son of God introduces us into; "He is the true God and eternal life". Now as you met the man in @John 9 he would have been very downcast as cast out of the synagogue, but when the Lord heard that, He found him; that is the positive side. So that @John 10 is what He gives, which is eternal life and a place in the one flock. The Son of God and the man were both outcasts and the Son of God sets up another system; he could not be cast out of that!
J.F. So that in his being rejected and cast out the world was overcome.
J.T. The Lord says that He had overcome the world, and the blind man had overcome the religious world.
C.T. John says, near the end of his gospel, "That ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name", @John 20:31.
J.T. It is "That ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God"; it is the Messiah and the Son of God; the Son of God is brought in. It is an entirely new matter that we have part in; we have life in His Name. All that bears on our present position.
{276}
CHILDREN OF GOD (4)
@Romans 8:14 - 30
J.T. What is in mind at this session is that we should see the connection of the Spirit with the children of God. Heretofore we have been stressing 'born of God', that children are born of God. Sons are not said to be born of God, except the Lord Jesus who is said to be a begotten Son; Jehovah says in @Psalm 2:7, "Thou art my Son; *I* this day have begotten thee". Thus sonship for us is that we are adopted, and in that connection the Spirit is immediately brought in, "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father", @Galatians 4:6. Sonship properly belongs to heaven. The relationship of children views us as on the earth, but in this section of scripture we have the Spirit connected with children, the most important part of our subject, so that we might see a little more how the Spirit serves us. The Spirit is the great subject of chapter 8; chapter 7 in the latter part of it treats of our state and gives an analysis enabling us to determine the motives of our members, of our automatic members; the Spirit operates in them sometimes without affecting our minds. There is the principle of springing up attached to the Spirit in us, and we become intelligent as to His movements and as to the movements of our members, our automatic organs which the Spirit acts upon; we are enabled to determine what they are. Through the analysis the Spirit helps us so that we are told here that "the Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are children of God" (verse 16). The chapter speaks of the Spirit in me, relations with Him involving that we are free through the analysis of chapter 7, where we arrive at a point where the
{277}
speaker alludes to his ego, "*I* myself with the mind serve God's law; but with the flesh sin's law"(@Romans 7:25). The believer is thus able to determine what law is being served in his movements and he repudiates the flesh, so that we read, "There is then now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death. For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent His own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit". We are now set out on the highway in spiritual power, with Canaan, heavenly places, in view. The corresponding section in the type is @Numbers 21 where the Spirit is recognised, and from that point the children of Israel moved forward toward the land unhinderedly. It is said here that "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God. For ye have not received a spirit of bondage again for fear, but ye have received a spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father", so that we are now in happy relation with the Father. Then we are told that "the Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are children of God"; this is different from the statement of the Spirit that we are children of God; it is the Spirit bearing witness with our spirit that we are.
E.Mc. Why is it necessary for the Spirit to bear witness that we are children of God? Because of our surroundings?
J.T. I think it is to liberate us so that we can go on to heavenly places; the Spirit sees to it that we know we are children of God. You will remember how in @Numbers 21 it is stated that they went forward from one point to another toward the land. The Spirit would aid us inwardly so that we are not
{278}
hampered but have the assurance that we are children of God.
H.H. This is what we would call a wilderness setting; the Spirit finds us while we are here.
J.T. The allusion would be to the Lord's own life: the Lord's own pathway here was in the wilderness; that was the principle of it. He came in on Deuteronomy ground telling the devil that man should not live by bread alone, but by every word of God should man live. Luke says He was "led by the Spirit in the wilderness", not 'into', but "in the wilderness" (@Luke 4:1). Here it says, "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God" (verse 14), so it is that we are in the wilderness too; and the point is to be led by the Spirit as sons of God. Then the Spirit shows us at the same time that we are children under the care and protection of the Father. I think it is a very comforting matter.
H.H. I was thinking of it in connection with what we had about "the right to be children of God", @John 1:12. God has the saints in the wilderness setting where He would be everything to them. In the wilderness there is nothing but death, but God takes up His right with the saints by the Spirit first of all in the wilderness setting, do you not think?
J.T. We are on the highway to glory in @Romans 8. John in his treatment of the subject stresses our position here, "Now are we children of God", @1 John 3:2. It is always a question of *God* here with John; if it is a question of God's children they are conformed to Christ so that they give pleasure to God, so that His love toward them is the same love wherewith He loves Christ. Paul takes the ground of the highway into heaven, so that the glory of the children of God is in mind. It says, verse 20, "For the creature has been made subject to vanity, not of its will, but by reason of him who has subjected the same, in hope that the creature itself also shall be
{279}
set free from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God". As the Spirit witnesses with our spirits that we are children of God it is said that we are heirs of God too. So that it is heavenly places and glory that are in prospect from this point of view, and the Spirit is aiding our spirits; thus the analysis enables us to understand so that we may go on.
H.H. I think you have said elsewhere that Ephesians gives us the upper springs -- that would be the Spirit in relation to the heights -- but here you have the Spirit in relation to the wilderness setting.
J.T. It is a question of going through. John rather contemplates us in a general way here as having a right to be children of God.
H.H. John brings heaven down here. Paul moves us up toward Him.
C.T. Is that why we get the thought of suffering with Him, this being the wilderness side?
J.T. "Heirs of God, and Christ's joint heirs"; the suffering is to denote that the glory is in view. We are not to shrink from it, it is appointed to us, "if indeed we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him", @Romans 8:17. Glory is brought in here in connection with suffering, it belongs to the children in the children's position.
H.H. It was true of the Lord; He was here in suffering and the saints are here in suffering.
J.T. The children are morally like the Father, morally like God and therefore like Christ. We are heirs of God, joint heirs with Christ; God is the Source of all but we are the joint heirs of Christ, so that the suffering comes in; as He suffered so we suffer. Christ has given us the right to take the place of children, the Father bestows the love upon us, and then the Spirit instructs us, reminding us continually
{280}
that we are children of God. It keeps things fresh in our souls.
R.Q. Enoch had the testimony that he pleased God.
J.T. Very good; I think God is clearly stressing that we are just on the eve of translation and that He would translate what pleases Him.
H.H. I would like to ask how you regard it that God allows the creature itself, the beast of the field, to come into this?
J.T. It is a fact stated, "him who has subjected the same" (verse 20); that is "the creature has been made subject to vanity, not of its will, but by reason of him who has subjected the same, in hope". I suppose the subjection of the creature was through Adam. Well, there is hope in the matter: "In hope that the creature itself also shall be set free from the bondage of corruption". This word 'hope' is to be noted; the thought comes up earlier in this paragraph: "The anxious looking out of the creature" (that is the hope) "expects the revelation of the sons of God" (verse 19). Then we have suggested: "In hope that the creature itself also shall be set free from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God". These are two remarkable expressions, "the revelation of the sons of God", and "the liberty of the glory of the children of God". It is interesting to determine what "the revelation of the sons of God" alludes to, and what "the liberty of the glory of the children of God" alludes to, both affecting the creature.
H.H. It looks on to the millennial scene.
J.T. There must be some subjective conditions involved in that there is hope. Where there is hope, who has it? The creature expects first, expects "the revelation of the sons of God", there is hope for it somewhere. And then, "In hope that the creature itself also shall be set free from the bondage
{281}
of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God".
E.Mc. Twice in this chapter we get reference to the sons of God, and we get children of God also.
J.T. I think it is a combination that is divinely intended on the highway. Sons of God really belong to the land, that is the prospect; but in the meantime what we have actually is that we are children: "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are children of God".
J.F. What is referred to here as 'the creature'?
J.T. The general animate creation.
J.F. Is the thought that they are consciously looking for something?
J.T. There is some hope in the lower creation because the gospel is preached in relation to it. The gospel is preached to all the creation (@Mark 16:15), and that means more than man. It is not that you preach to the cattle, for they would not understand you, but you preach to the owner and if he is receptive there would be some change in his care of them; he would alter his attitude.
C.T. When the children of Israel went out of Egypt they took their cattle with them.
J.T. The righteous man takes care for the life of his beast, and he does not take his gun and go out hunting for sport; he must respect the creation.
Rem. The note to verse 21 in Mr. Darby's translation says, "'Glorious liberty' does not give the sense: the creature has no part in the liberty of grace; but it will have in that which glory gives".
J.T. That will be in the millennial day when the glory of the children of God will be shining out in sonship. This passage would tell you that we are awaiting something; that is sonship or redemption, "and not only that, but even *we* ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, we also ourselves groan
{282}
in ourselves, awaiting adoption, that is the redemption of our body". Our present condition is not in accord with sonship, the redemption of our body is necessary for that so that we are awaiting sonship; the word 'adoption' is 'sonship', our bodies are not yet changed in suitability to it.
E.Mc. The revelation of the sons of God waits upon the liberty of the glory of the children of God, and the redemption of our bodies?
J.T. That is the outlook on the highway. It is a wonderful outlook even connecting up the animate creation, that all is coming into the effect of these relations.
C.T. Verse 18 says, "For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the coming glory to be revealed to us". Would you say that is moving in the highway with the coming glory revealed to us at the end?
J.T. That is the thing that is to be kept before us, the coming glory to be revealed to us. Then there is also the glory of the children of God. We are not to lag here but to go forward, Paul is keeping you moving; you do not settle down anywhere.
H.H. Paul kept moving himself.
J.T. Quite so. In Philippians he is pursuing, "looking towards the goal, for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus" (@Philippians 3:14).
J.F. Would you say that the creature coming into this place is dependent, as we might say, on a subjective work?
J.T. They await the revelation of the sons, they are anxious; the looking out of the creature expects the revelation of the sons of God. It must be in some representative way, for a cow or a goat does not expect; it must be as linked up with those who are intelligent. *We* have the first-fruits of the Spirit; "*We* ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit,
{283}
we also ourselves groan in ourselves"; we groan with the groaning creation; I think the intelligence must be in ourselves as part of the creation. That is what is meant in the living creatures in the book of Revelation. We are connected with creation, we must be viewed as associated with the intelligent part of it, so that we carry with us the idea of the creation which God never gives up.
J.F. Would you say that the living creatures are representative of the whole creation?
J.T. They are not as great as the elders, but they say a great deal about the "Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is to come", @Revelation 4:8. All that intelligence is somewhere in the creation, and where would it be but in ourselves? The living creatures are symbolic of the whole creation, whereas the elders represent experience with God; their tithe would indicate that. We have part in both.
H.H. I think what you just said about God having rights as Creator is the foundation of everything. Job was defective in his knowledge of God as Creator.
J.T. That is one great trend running through the book of Job. God spoke to Job about thirty different creatures, each one of them witnessing to God, whether it was an ostrich, or a war-horse, or leviathan. Leviathan would allude to the devil, and what we are speaking of now includes the devil. God uses Satan too, not indeed as a creature awaiting the revelation of the sons of God, but as an instrument. So that Job comes into what we are speaking about, into the idea of the "living creatures"; they refer to that element of creation which is delivered.
R.Q. The bringing in of the creatures would be instructive; we look forward to what God has in His mind on the basis of our intelligence.
J.T. We groan in ourselves awaiting adoption; adoption here is sonship and we are awaiting that;
{284}
our bodies are not yet conformed to it. We have pains and we need food and medicine and other things as they also do; there is a positive link. So God says to Job, I made that creature; it is the same structure of creation as you. So that we are linked up with them by redemption. We have the spirit of sonship already, but our bodies are not ready for sonship yet. God will see that everything that has breath shall praise Him. The principle of leadership is in this; He has brought in leadership in man. So God says to Job, When the foundations of the earth were laid, did you know? Were you born? When the morning stars sang together, were you born then? Did you know what happened? But Job did not know what happened. God would have intelligent leadership in His creation.
H.H. The book of Revelation would show God putting forth His claim to everything, that is, "*Thou* hast created all things, and for thy will they were, and they have been created", @Revelation 4:11.
J.T. Reference to the four living creatures comes in chapter 4, and see the intelligence they have! You have the lion and the calf and the man and the eagle, showing that the lower creation is in mind, but man has the leadership in it. God would say, I made these creatures with you; so that man has a link with the animal creation. The Lord is taking account of them all in relation to their Owner. I hope the brethren agree with what we are saying about the creation, and the living creatures having intelligence, and that the creation groans and we groan with it. All this is instinctively working for the revelation of the sons of God and for the appearing of the liberty of the glory of the children of God.
E.Mc. This thought of being led by the Spirit indicates that I am one of the sons of God; then in verse 26 the Spirit helps, making intercession with groanings that cannot be uttered.
{285}
J.T. God is bringing all this to our attention now so that we should be on the highway. We are conscious that we are linked with the lower creation in our bodies; we represent the looking out, the anxiety. The note to verse 21 that has been read shows that the lower creation has no part really in the liberty which we have, nor in what we have in redemption, for they have not the Spirit of God. But in the meantime they are living creatures and we are linked up with them.
Rem. But they will have part in that which glory gives.
J.T. In the millennium the whole scene will be lighted up by the glory, and the lower creatures will have part in this. We read of the wolf lying down with the lamb and other such things; God will show His great triumph even in the lower creatures.
J.F. It is a question of liberation with the creatures; they are changed, they are brought into liberty.
J.T. The wolf and other animals will be changed, God will act in them to change their ferocity.
C.T. It says in verse 19 that the creature expects the revelation of the sons of God. Is that during the time of groanings?
J.T. That is the attitude for us now, the creature is looking out for it anxiously. It is not so easy to define that, but I believe it is through the intelligence of the saints viewed as creatures, and as we go about every day we have this outlook.
H.H. It is interesting to consider things in their right connection and to see how Paul alternates between the thought of sons and the thought of children.
J.T. I think the types help us. When the children of Israel came to @Numbers 21 suggestive of the Spirit, they had the outlook of the land before them and they began to move; they were going there. As
{286}
children we have needs in the wilderness and we may see in the types how God provides for those needs. For instance, Esau or Edom would not allow them to pass through his land. Moses asked Edom if they could pass through his land but he refused. Edom did not like them. The idea is that the world knew them not; although Israel was related to him, Esau did not recognise any sympathetic link with him at all. God took account of that and provided for Israel Himself. Think of the care that He had for them in the wilderness! He provided water for them, too, out of the rock.
H.H. What Esau represents would block the way morally in the last days; he would block the way for those going into the land.
J.T. That is why such severe judgment is pronounced against Edom. It is he that is born after the flesh persecuting him that is born after the Spirit. All that comes out in the wilderness journey on the way to glory.
Ques. Do you think that having the Holy Spirit enables us to enter sympathetically into all that is in the creation?
J.T. I think we look at things as God looks at them, and the Spirit enables us to see all things clearly. The man whom the Lord led out of Bethsaida had to have a second touch; at first he saw men as trees, as too great; he did not see the animals or the landscape. That is the idea now in modernism. He saw men as trees walking, he did not see anything else, but there were many other things to see; what we are speaking of now involves these things. It will appear in the millennium that God has triumphed. God will change the animals, but He changes us in the sense of being begotten of Him. A cow is God's creature, a domestic creature; God made it with man. If man would see things aright there would not be the same cruelty towards animals. The beast of
{287}
@Revelation 13 is called "the beast" because he has taken on the character of the lower creation.
H.H. In @Ephesians 3 we have "The Father ... of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named" (@Ephesians 3:14,15). How would you speak of the family? Would you connect it with children or with sons?
J.T. @Ephesians 3 contemplates the purpose of God, and children do not enter into that save as we are viewed in that way provisionally now; but the counsels of God would refer to sonship.
H.H. Would sonship stand in connection with every family in heaven and on earth?
J.T. I would think so. That is what I am in the presence of God; if He is impressing me with His counsels He is telling me that I am a son. The outlook here is sonship as we already remarked, and we are awaiting it, that is, adoption. Then it says, "Because whom he has foreknown, he has also predestinated to be conformed to the image of his Son, so that he should be the firstborn among many brethren" (verse 29). That line of thought is never connected with children. We are to be conformed to the image of His Son, so that He should be the Firstborn among many brethren: that is the outlook on the highway -- to connect it with the type -- because God has still to care for us in our natural bodies; but the same care will not be needed when our bodies are changed in conformity with sonship; we shall then no longer need care as down here.
E.Mc. It is really the marvellous outlook of the land in @Numbers 21, and it is for us to look forward to it in the same manner.
J.T. It ought to stimulate us because we are drawing near to the time of translation. It is said of Enoch that he was "not found"(@Hebrews 11:5). Who was looking for him? Was the military army looking for him?
{288}
He was not found. God knew where he was for God took him.
C.T. The Son really has His place here as the Firstborn, Christ, and we are to be "conformed to the image of His Son".
J.T. That is the very purpose of God; you will never get the idea of Christ being the firstborn among children. Children would suggest care down here, but it stops when we are in glory.
C.J. Is being "conformed to the image of his Son" really future?
J.T. Quite so, we must have our bodies of glory. We are awaiting adoption, to be conformed to the image of His Son.
H.H. Christ is not Son by adoption, but we are.
J.T. Quite so. It is true that we have bodies of humiliation but God is going to change them into conformity to Christ's body of glory, and He will be Firstborn among us. Meanwhile we are cared for as children but we also have a link with the lower creation.
J.B. It says in regard to the rapture, "We shall not all fall asleep, but we shall all be changed", @1 Corinthians 15:51.
J.T. The change in the animals from what they are is the victory of God. God will have rescued everything and brought in the glory, brought in the liberty of the glory of children of God.
E.Mc. You referred to the animals being changed back to the way God created them. God said to the serpent, "On thy belly shalt thou go, and eat dust all the days of thy life". @Genesis 3:14.
J.T. It means that he is living on death. It is a remarkable thing that in this particular setting in Genesis it is one of the lower creatures that God has taken to be His instrument. Satan appears as a serpent; God calls him a name as though he belonged
{289}
to the animal or lower kingdom and He speaks to him and says, You are to go flat, you are not to stand up, "On thy belly shalt thou go, and eat dust all the days of thy life". That was a judgment on him. Then God says to him, "I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; he shall crush thy head, and thou shalt crush his heel". I think God is saying that that is the end of him, his leadership is gone, his head is crushed by the seed of the woman. In @Revelation 20:2 he is called "the ancient serpent who is the devil", and one angel binds him and puts him into the abyss for a thousand years; that is a provision so that he shall not interfere with the liberty of the glory of the children of God. He is certainly interfering now! But after the thousand years he is released. He is feeding on death, but the children of God have the manna that comes down from heaven; we have food from heaven for building up a constitution. We have to eat ordinary things but our food is properly heavenly.
J.F. As representing Satan the serpent evidently does not represent an element that will be delivered from bondage.
J.T. The serpent is being used. For instance, if a brother is withdrawn from, the principle is that he is delivered to Satan for the destruction of the flesh; but Satan is not to have any part in the liberty of the glory of the children of God.
H.H. What is meant by the destruction of the flesh?
J.T. Destruction of the flesh means that he judges himself. @Romans 7 and 8, the flesh is gone.
E.Mc. The serpent as representing the power of Satan never was released from the position into which he was put.
H.H. It is wonderful how God recovers things for Himself, as Mr. Coates says in his hymn, 'In the very
{290}
place of sin we see His glory most' (`431:5). Things are recovered; they are put right.
J.T. So that the intelligent creature carries everything forward in his forward look, seeing it head up in victory, Satan not interfering any more. The right hope is in us and it is reached. We carry something forward. We belong, of course, to the assembly, but we know something about Israel and we carry that forward in affection. Looking down from heaven we shall see the lion and the tiger change, but that order of things is not going to continue; God will have families, but all will merge into a spiritual condition; but the animals will not merge, they will not continue, they are just provisional. So that what is victorious will eventually merge into what is spiritual. God can make man in flesh and blood condition live indefinitely as shown in the millennium. It is a wonderful triumph! Every little boy and girl will be playing on the streets; that is what God is going to display just to show what He can do. We ought to have all these things in our hearts.
J.F. So that at the end the tabernacle of God is with men.
J.T. The heavens and the earth will be entirely new, they will not carry over. But the millennium is not that; there is a possibility of sin there, but it is to show what God can do in defeating the devil. It is wonderful that he should be defeated on moral lines, not by almighty power which God could have used at the beginning; it is all on moral lines. It is the taking away of the first and the establishing of the second as shown in the book of Job.
{291}
CHILDREN OF GOD (5)
@Philippians 2:12 - 16; @Ephesians 5:1 - 21
J.T. The reference to our subject in these two epistles should afford a fitting close to our meetings. We cannot but include the respective characters of the two epistles in our conversation. They are the most heavenly in their teaching and bearing of all the epistles. Ephesians contemplates our heavenly place, God "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies" (@Ephesians 2:6), and then "we are ... created ... for good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them" (@Ephesians 2:10). Philippians corresponds with this in experience down here, so that we are to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, God working in us, that we may be "harmless and simple, irreproachable children of God in the midst of a crooked and perverted generation", @Philippians 2:15. Ephesians speaks in the passage read of our being "beloved children" of God. What is in mind in Ephesians is our most exalted relation with God as down here as children, and our walk in His ways is to afford pleasure to Him. In Philippians, immediately before what we read, we have the passage relating to the down-stooping of Christ, His obedience even unto death. It is said of Him, "who, subsisting in the form of God, did not esteem it an object of rapine to be on an equality with God; but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form, taking his place in the likeness of men; and having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself,, becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross". This surely enters into what is before us because of the question of the mind of Christ being in us, the descending mind of Christ. If we are to
{292}
correspond with Him we must be irreproachable children, harmless and simple children of God.
Well, that is what is in mind; it is clearly applicable to these latter days. The apostles have been here and have gone, our great leaders that have been used of God to provide the truth have gone, but we are to continue individually to work out our own salvation. Theirs has been worked out, and ours remains to be worked out; it is how we appear in the working out that is the point. We should be "harmless and simple, irreproachable children of God".
H.H. Philippians has Ephesians behind it. You cannot be a Philippian unless you have some real sense of what the upper springs are in the heights.
J.T. Philippians seems to be a complement of Ephesians. Ephesians contemplates our place, our heavenly place, as we are already raised up and set down together in the heavenlies, and Philippians would be a working out of all that. The apostles have gone and we are to work out our own salvation: it is our own; we are to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, whether it be a whole position on earth or a local position in this city; the salvation has to be worked out.
H.H. It would be an assembly salvation, so to speak, if it is governed by Ephesian light, would it not?
J.T. Just so. That is most difficult because we are to carry the brethren with us, and in many local companies or in the saints as a whole the states of soul are really graded, as John's epistle tells us, into fathers, young men and little children. The little children have to be carried along with us in salvation, and one of the most important things for them is the recognition of leadership, and the recognition of experience in elder brethren whom God would regard as leaders, whether local or general.
{293}
H.H. The young are able to take account of that; the brethren who take part regularly in the meetings leave an impression on the minds of the young. One does not know who is listening, some of the young men and young women have ears to hear; the Lord is encouraging them to listen and to take it in.
J.T. The hope is that the word of God in what you are saying will affect them in spite of their youthfulness. Youthfulness in itself is a hardship but it suggests what is teachable, and the great point in applying the truth to the young is therefore that there should be in them subjection and confidence in their leaders. In Hebrews we have it brought in that we are to remember our leaders who have spoken the word of God to us, but the present ones do not need to be remembered, they are to be obeyed: "Obey your leaders, and be submissive" (@Hebrews 13:7, 17). Aside from being submissive there is no hope at all.
C.J. Obedience seems to have a great place in connection with working out our own salvation; it appears at the beginning of an exhortation, then the apostle interrupts himself, but he finishes the exhortation, "My beloved, even as ye have always obeyed ... work out your own salvation".
J.T. Obedience is the essential thing for the reception of the Holy Spirit. God gives the Holy Spirit to those who obey Him. There is no hope at all unless there is unqualified obedience, and of course that works out in leadership here, and involves the ordered service in the assembly, because if the assembly is involved all that pertains to it is involved. Whatever the Spirit says in the way of guiding us in assembly service should be listened to: "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies"; whatever is given in that sense is universal. What one sees in moving about among the saints is that there is disregard for positive truth
{294}
which should govern us in our service to God in the assembly. The order is that the Lord's supper refers to the Lord; it is not God's supper, nor the saints¬ supper, but it involves Christ's marital relations with the assembly. The relationship acts between Him and the assembly, and then the Spirit works in us, the Spirit of sonship, so that we are able to join with Christ Godward as sons. The service proceeds upward on these lines so that we go out through the opposite door to that through which we came in. There is liberty and power available to carry out these obligations such as we have here, the working out of our own salvation amidst contrariety; but as one moves about one senses great incongruity in the service in those who take part, and at times great heaviness; sometimes undue activity, and sometimes lack of regard for the order of the assembly in the hymns that are given out. I mention all this because it really enters into this question of salvation, that we are to work out our own salvation. This morning we had in one of the meetings a prayer for the sick in the midst of the period in which we were speaking to God in a most exalted way. That is not working out our salvation. It is what we are to be saved from, and in order to save ourselves and work out our own salvation in these matters there should be correction given in all long-suffering.
C.T. The footnote to verse 12 says, 'to work out into result'; so in the working out you would expect results.
J.T. These two epistles are intended to show what the working out is in the midst of contrariety. The tabernacle was in that sense a type of how the assembly behaves in contrariety.
E.Mc. Is the "fear and trembling" that I might not interfere with God in His working in me?
J.T. I am sure that is important, because I cannot say what I please. This enters into many
{295}
things such as care meetings; there should be the fear and trembling in regard to transgressing. Brethren may say just what comes into their minds unless there is the fear and trembling.
C.T. Does not the apostle speak of fear and trembling to those in Corinth (@2 Corinthians 7:15); is that not on the same line?
J.T. Well, that would be quite right in regard of God and what He was doing. There is a danger of Satan having part in things; it is a solemn consideration; when the sons of God appeared, Satan also came. If I am in the flesh in any way and have my own welfare or thoughts before me, he will have me for a vessel or instrument.
Rem. The passage in @Ecclesiastes 5:1,2 might have a bearing, "Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and draw near to hear, rather than to give the sacrifice of fools: for they know not that they do evil. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter anything before God: for God is in the heavens, and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few".
J.T. Quite so, it has a very great bearing. We are to work out our salvation at this moment; it is a very critical time and there must be subjection.
P.W. One would covet spiritual sensitiveness so that the service in the morning meeting might move onward in the proper order.
J.T. That is what I am thinking of. The Lord has been helping us very much and it involves our salvation, because assembly salvation enters into this matter and that involves the service of God. Then the increasing contrariety in the wilderness is in view here, so it is, "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling". That is, we must make room for God whether it be in the local position or the general position, and if we are insubject we are making room for the devil. We have our part in the week,
{296}
but these experiences with God go on from Saturday evening to Tuesday morning. The service of God begins on Saturday afternoon in the Far East, in Australia and New Zealand, and then works around to us in Europe and America, ending in prayer on Monday evening. Now if the prayers go up, and they are all taken account of in Christ's name, then the next thing is the answers. The answers require the subjection of the saints, that they are available to God; and if we are not in subjection we are not usable.
E.Mc. Would the offering of strange fire by Aaron's two sons come in in connection with this? They acted independently of God.
J.T. That is a very appropriate reference. The service was halted for the moment as Aaron came under the power of that act, but it was to go on. Aaron failed to eat the sin-offering and Moses rebuked that, but still the service went on; but we can see what confusion there was. How solemn a thing it is, because God is very much more severe with will operating in the assembly than He is as to its working in the wilderness outside. These men were smitten down at once.
H.H. That was connected with the inauguration of the priesthood, was it not?
J.T. It was like the sin of Ananias and Sapphira. It was an attempt of the devil against what God was setting up.
J.K. You are putting obedience on a high level.
J.T. I am rather treating of the reference to the assembly that Mr. H. made, the 'assembly salvation' which is a good phrase. We must go through together. In type the tabernacle represented the whole thought of God in the wilderness. It is most important that it should go through; the attack of Aaron's two sons in offering strange fire was to defeat the purpose of God going through, but the tabernacle
{297}
was to go into the land. We are told by Stephen that our fathers brought it into the land. Well, it is to go through, and we must have the order of the service; anything else would be, in character, like the offering of the two sons of Aaron.
E.Mc. It is a very serious matter.
J.T. It comes out in Corinthians. The apostle in chapter 11 had been speaking about the relation of men and women, and of Christ, as to headship. The Head of every man is Christ, and the head of every woman is man, and the Head of Christ is God. Verse 16 says, "If any one think to be contentious, we have no such custom"(@1 Corinthians 11:16); any debating in the assembly is simply acting for the devil, because things can be proved, as by the Bereans who searched the Scriptures to see if these things were so; we certainly should not refuse anything unless we search the Scriptures about it. The apostle disclosed a most distressing situation: that they were eating and drinking in party groups. How can the assembly go through to the land of Canaan like that? That is the point made in the chapter, "Let a man prove himself, and thus eat ... On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep" (@1 Corinthians 11:28,30).
J.F. Submitting ourselves to one another in the fear of Christ would save us from that.
J.T. In the presence of submission the devil is shut out; we must go through. The teaching in the main refers to the assembly, that is the divine thought, so that we must keep the directions that are given, as the apostle says, I praise you because ye keep the directions; he makes a point of that in @1 Corinthians 11. If we do not keep the directions given in regard to the assembly we can never be carried through.
C.T. The directions are carried by all, is that the thought?
{298}
J.T. All were to be brought into it.
A.A. You spoke of state; I suppose working out our salvation would promote a good state.
J.T. Quite so. Our individual salvation is one thing but to carry the whole collective idea through is what God has in mind: "Work out your own", not each his own, but "your own salvation with fear and trembling". God is with you, He "works in you both the willing and the working according to his good pleasure".
J.F. "Our salvation" would involve the exercise of adjusting matters, seeking to adjust one another in relation to the order.
J.T. That is all in our meetings including our care meetings. Eldership is very scarce; the care meetings have largely to take the place of eldership and in them we take counsel together about matters to the end that we should go through; the assembly thought should go through, should be saved: therefore the importance of subjection one to another.
C.T. Would you say a little about the passage, "according to his good pleasure"; what is the thought in these words?
J.T. The thought is that God is pleased with our care meetings and with every meeting as we are all set for the one thing involving "the willing and the working". The idea of "the willing" would be, I suppose, our subjection; "the willing and the working", God is in both, it is a continuous thing; the assembly here is a continual pleasure, and God is in it. The first day of the week is the beginning of things, it is inaugurated by the Father. Glory is carried through, "from glory to glory", in assembly service; then the prayer meeting comes in rightly on the Monday, and on Tuesday would be the question of whether we are available to God in the carrying out of the answers to our prayers. Why should they not be carried out? If we forget the prayers, why do
{299}
we make them? We should be available for the fulfilment of them, that is the procedure. Then we follow with the reading of the Scriptures, ministry meetings and the like; all is bent toward the one purpose of working out our own salvation.
R.Q. Obedience is a military idea, is it not, the thought of the will of the commander-in-chief being carried out, and obedience attained?
J.T. I think that is good. "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", @1 Corinthians 14:37. If there is insubjection in the household, it will be in the meeting also; very often the insubjection develops in the sisters, and then brothers are brought under their influence. I would not be unfair to the sisters, but the principle is that Eve was in the transgression, then Adam was brought into it. A sister's influence in the home very often leads to insubjection in the care meetings.
P.W. Would the care meeting be the most likely meeting to expose us as to our own salvation?
J.T. I think so. It ought to be a spiritual matter. The Lord says, "Behold, *I* am with you all the days" (@Matthew 28:20); and, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". @Matthew 18:20. Fear and trembling certainly belong to that matter of salvation, and subjection one to another.
H.H. The care meeting is to be in power and obedience to the Lord, having the welfare of the assembly in mind. We learn the character of our brethren, they measure us and we measure them; the measure comes out largely in the care meeting and the local assembly gets the result of it. The idea of a man having a lot to say in a care meeting and nothing to say in the assembly is out of balance.
J.T. As we were saying yesterday in regard to John's writings, personalities in the assembly greatly
{300}
help in this matter; the elect lady, for instance, in John's second epistle, is a person who has a house under her control; her husband is not mentioned; it is no doubt an allusion to the assembly itself. Then in the third epistle there is a brother called Demetrius, who has witness borne to him by all. The elect lady is an excellent example; there is love for her and for her children as walking in truth. It is a remarkable thing that the apostle addresses her; he had spiritual dignity in mind. Peter alludes to someone in Babylon in the same way. Then Paul says that a widow whose name is to be put on the list should be not less than sixty years old, "borne witness to in good works, if she have brought up children, if she have exercised hospitality, if she have washed saints¬ feet, ...", @1 Timothy 5:9, 10. Sisterhood is in mind in all these examples as needful for the ordering of the house of God, indirect influence. A sister is to ask her husband at home, and in asking him and in what he says to her she would answer him and help him and that would be indirect influence.
H.H. I would say a word on that line of things in regard to the sisters and their husbands. Sisters are likely to make a mistake in putting themselves before the claims of the Lord. God is to be first, and then the husband, but trouble occurs when a woman puts herself in front of her husband. The influence of sisters over their husbands is a very serious thing. The service of God comes before the relation of a wife to her husband.
C.J. Is there not often a tendency with our wives to instruct instead of asking their husbands?
J.T. That is true. But the wife is to be subject in hearing, and in asking him as to what happened in any meeting where she is not present; she is to enquire further what is meant. He says certain things and she also says certain things and what she says might be a help to the husband, enriching him on
{301}
those lines. Peter spoke about "fellow-heirs of the grace of life"(@1 Peter 3:7). "The grace of life" is a beautiful expression. It would include the morning readings in the family, and the husband would certainly be helped in the assembly relations on those lines. Take such persons as Aquila and Priscilla: we have noted that Priscilla's name is mentioned first exactly the same number of times as Aquila's; that would mean that heaven's pleasure is equal in these two persons. When Apollos goes to be instructed, Priscilla is available to have part in the matter, showing that she would help her husband, joining in as her husband presents matters to him; they talk to him together. They are set down as examples of how wives may help their husbands, each developing to equal value in the eyes of heaven.
J.K. Does headship enter into what you are saying?
J.T. I am sure that is it. So the point is to learn that the woman was in the transgression; I do not know how many minutes she was in it before Adam, but she brought him into it.
E.Mc. Do you think that a sister should speak in the presence of a brother?
J.T. I think she would just join in. It says of Apollos that "being fervent in his spirit, he spoke and taught exactly the things concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John. And *he* began to speak boldly in the synagogue. And Aquila and Priscilla, having heard him, took him to them and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly", @Acts 18:25,26. Well, that would be just opening up a thing; why should not a sister do that? How comely that would be for her to enter into! It is all in view of salvation, the working out of it, we cannot leave any of the saints behind; they will all go when we are translated to heaven. Apollos was a
{302}
man characteristically exact, but they made him more exact.
E.Mc. In speaking to a sister, the elect lady, John says, "I rejoiced greatly that I have found of thy children walking in truth". They would be good assembly material.
J.T. Very good.
C.T. I suppose we lack in our households as husbands and wives in not praying together as to things of the assembly. I am not thinking of the family prayer but a man and his wife praying alone as to things in the assembly.
J.T. Do you carry that out?
C.T. Yes.
J.T. As "fellow-heirs of the grace of life".
Rem. As fellow-heirs of the grace of life, is it right for the sisters to know all the important things that are taken up in the care meetings?
J.T. I think they should. They should ask, and even if they do not ask they should be told. That is the way, as I understand it, that the wife should know everything. Peter says, "That your prayers be not hindered".
E.Mc. When a brother is praying in the home how can she say 'Amen' if she knows nothing about it?
C.T. What about the single sisters, how are they going to know?
J.T. The single sister ought to be free to ask any brother as to anything, and many do, too. It is 'men and women', not 'husband and wife'. It seems to me that these things are needful for children of God: "Do all things without murmurings and reasonings, that ye may be harmless and simple, irreproachable children of God". That is the intent of our position, to be "as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life". You see the need of persons being guides, "holding forth the word of life". It is a remarkable expression, "the word of life": how
{303}
people are to be saved completely out of the realm of death.
E.Mc. Would the thought in this passage link up with the Lord's intentions for the children of Israel, that they should walk through the wilderness in perfect order?
J.T. That is what Balaam saw, and how they were to move always on the principle of leadership, Judah head of the first group; all is on the principle of divine counsel and leadership. It is a beautiful sight from the divine point of view. It is interesting that the ark went before them first to find out a place for them; if we do not see that the collective position has to be carried through, we miss all that we have been saying.
J.F. It is sad if we are unable to submit to leadership.
J.T. There is then no possibility of carrying through the collective thought.
J.F. Submission would do away with murmurings and disputings.
J.T. One of the principal things that marked Israel was murmuring.
H.H. There is not only the matter of obedience on the part of the saints generally, but the exercise of the older brethren should be that they may be able to lead. If an officer takes his men on the wrong road and into the very camp of the enemy, that is not good leadership. Those of us who are older have a responsibility as to what example we are setting our brethren.
J.B. Would "holding forth the word of life" be over against "a crooked and perverted generation"?
J.T. That is what Paul calls "a boast for me in Christ's day". Then as regards Ephesians, it is, "Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children", @Ephesians 5:1. That is a beautiful touch, "imitators of God"! How expressive of God Christ was, "a sweet-smelling
{304}
savour" to God. Now He is not here, but we are.
J.F. The subjects of love and of walking are quite prominent in Ephesians, how we are to walk in love and how things are to be done in love.
J.T. I was calling attention to that very point in the second chapter: "For we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them" (verse 10). He does not leave it to us as to what we are to do.
J.F. "Ye were once darkness, but now light in the Lord; walk as children of light" (chapter 5:8); it is all through the epistle -- walking as children of light.
C.T. "Even as Christ loved us"; would that be the pattern?
J.T. It is to bring out how we are to take His place, "an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour".
E.Mc. It really suggests laying down our lives for the brethren.
J.T. That is "a sweet-smelling savour". The things that the apostle alludes to in the following verses are not out of place, because we are living in such filthy surroundings, in the awful, unclean conditions that exist; so that it is quite in keeping with what we are saying to note the things that the apostle mentions, that certain things are not to be even named among us, they should not even be known, down to the "foolish talking, or jesting, which are not convenient". In the military camps there is hardly anything else but that sort of thing, and our young brethren are exposed to that.
E.Mc. And perhaps indecent talk; we are reminded that this is unbecoming to the children of God.
{305}
J.T. God is taking account of what we shall have to contend with, so that His thoughts may go through.
C.T. The apostle brings before the Ephesians in verse 8 that *we* were once darkness, but now light in the Lord.
J.T. "Ye were once darkness, but now light in the Lord; walk as children of light, (for the fruit of the light is in all goodness and righteousness and truth), proving what is agreeable to the Lord; and do not have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather also reprove them, for the things that are done by them in secret it is shameful even to say. But all things having their true character exposed by the light are made manifest; for that which makes everything manifest is light. Wherefore he says. Wake up, thou that sleepest, and arise up from among the dead, and the Christ shall shine upon thee". It would look as though a person asleep is like a person dead. Christ does shine and He shines on the living.
Rem. In @Romans 12, dealing with the question of offering our bodies, they are not offered in death but are given over to God as a kind of burnt-offering, and that results in a sweet-smelling savour.
J.T. The presenting of our bodies is an intelligent service; it is a present act, a living sacrifice. That would be the beginning of this; but this is corresponding with Christ as beloved children, imitators of God, it is a question of setting out what God is.
E.Mc. Would this be the result of current ministry in these days?
J.T. That is what the ministry is for, God's gracious provision for the brethren to help us through in this terrible crisis.
J.F. Do you think "imitators of God" would refer back to "compassionate, forgiving one another", in the previous chapter?
{306}
J.T. Just so.
H.H. That would work out in the Philippians, would it not?
J.T. So that these epistles are the most exalted in their bearing, and work out in what is heavenly expressing itself in the midst of these circumstances that are described here, the most dreadful circumstances, how we are to escape them by refusing even to name them. Then he goes on to say, "For this reason be not foolish, but understanding what is the will of the Lord. And be not drunk with wine, in which is debauchery; but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and chanting with your heart to the Lord", @Ephesians 5:17 - 19. The allusion is to our ordinary circumstances in the assembly, to maintain holy buoyancy in our circumstances, because singing has that effect, "Singing and chanting with your heart to the Lord". We have the Lord in mind in it; it is not merely singing tunes that we like, the tune having more place than the words, but the words having direct reference to the Lord.
H.H. In addition to the family reading, is it not well to sing a hymn in the morning?
J.T. It does promote holy joy as you enter the day. We do. We are apt to get under things, but we should be kept above the circumstances. We sing not simply for the tune but the words.
E.Mc. How would you classify these three: "psalms and hymns and spiritual songs"?
J.T. Psalms would refer to our experience, hymns to the Father, and spiritual songs to the Lord Jesus. A hymn is a settled thing having reference to God or the Father.
E.Mc. Are spiritual songs as high as hymns?
J.T. Hardly; hymns are on a higher level. The first song is spoken of in @Exodus 15; it is a celebration; there is leadership in it; but the first actual
{307}
singing is mentioned in the book of Job, and there is no leadership there: "When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy" (@Job 38:7). Singing in the assembly is through leadership. 'Father, Thy sovereign love has sought', would be a hymn: 'Sing without ceasing, sing the Saviour's present grace' (`12:1), is a beautiful song.
E.Mc. You would not sing a spiritual song in the morning meeting?
J.T. I think a song is a celebration; a spiritual song might be sung as we sit down together. The real position is that we have come together to break bread. It is not the thing to do it just at once perhaps, so someone would say, so to speak, Let us celebrate! It is to the Lord above.
C.T. When Paul and Silas praised God with singing, would that be a spiritual song?
J.T. Very likely. They were praising God in prayer, showing that there was power developed on a high level, and the prisoners heard.
C.T. It was a sign of joy.
P.W. You have said a great deal about singing; would you say something about how to sing?
J.T. The Lord said, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises", @Hebrews 2:12. When He prayed one of the disciples heard Him and he asked Him to teach them to pray; they learned how to pray from the Lord. We should learn how to sing from the Lord. Sometimes you get beautiful touches, the Spirit of God is there, and you learn there; you get the highest thoughts in the assembly; you do not get anything like it anywhere else. I think that is it. The psalmist says, "One thing have I asked of Jehovah, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of Jehovah, and to inquire of him in his temple", @Psalm 27:4. That is the high place, the high
{308}
instruments, and then to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
Rem. We ought to desire to qualify for the way of addressing that the apostle gives in this chapter.
J.T. Just so. We are delightful to the Father as imitators of Him and like Christ, so that what we do is fragrant to God, a sweet-smelling savour.
E.Mc. Would you say something about, "Submitting yourselves to one another in the fear of Christ"?
J.T. I think 'Christ' is a more appealing term and title than 'Lord', 'the Lord' would suggest authority; Christ involves grace, the anointed One, producing submission, so that we are submitting ourselves to one another in His fear; you submit to any brother that is right, submitting to one another without preference. Why not attend to what that brother says? There may be something in what he says that will help, and that will regulate the whole position.
{309}
PRESERVATION IN CIRCUMSTANCES OF PRESSURE (1)
@Psalm 42:1 - 11; @Psalm 43:1 - 5
J.T. The hope and expectation is that this book will yield what will be found helpful in view of the effect on the saints of current circumstances in the world. In the second book, we shall perhaps labour under peculiar difficulty in looking into the Psalms, because they are very extensive and perhaps less known than most scriptures, but this one book is selected because there is that which bears peculiarly on the present situation.
The book contemplates the Lord's people, Israel, who had been driven out of their land, at least out of Jerusalem. Many of our brethren are driven out in a like sense from their homes and their local meetings, and this book will yield, it is believed, in relation to them, and to us in relation to them, as to how this extraordinary exigency is to be met, indeed to some extent *has* been met, for the younger brethren are shut off from their homes and local settings and are in foreign circumstances, circumstances inimical to their spiritual welfare. We shall see that this book contemplates such a position and how the memory is taxed on what has been experienced; that is still to be retained in the mind, and used, so that our brethren may be preserved in freshness and not be overcome. This psalm begins with the idea of the panting of the hart, that is, a felt need of what it used to experience, but no longer experiences. So that the psalmist goes on to say, "My soul thirsteth, for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God?" (verse 2). So that we may begin with the longing of the hart in these circumstances for what it once enjoyed and now is deprived of in a measure.
{310}
A.N.W. Remembering such occasions as this, you mean?
J.T. Quite so. Many of our brethren are shut off from this occasion, and such occasions elsewhere. You can see how preservation in the cutting off is contemplated by the mind being kept fresh and active, because the psalmist while speaking of his tears says in verse 4, "These things I remember"; it is what we are able to remember of concrete experiences now being denied us, and how the Spirit would use the memory.
A.H.P. Is there any special instruction in the ascription of the psalm being "... of the sons of Korah"?
J.T. That is a feature of this book which the Lord undoubtedly will stress as we proceed: they were persons who deserved governmental dealings, but were saved.
J.W.D. It speaks of the chief Musician, which I suppose would involve general temple service. Do we not all come into this special exercise you refer to in a feeling, sympathetic way?
J.T. That is what I hope we shall see, but we are not *all* cut off. We are not *all* driven out. The assembly is one, and if one member suffers, all do. Hence, we are now carrying our brethren on our hearts sympathetically and they will gain. The constitution of the assembly implies that they will gain by this, although they will not attend these meetings, and we on our side will gain, too, of course. So that the work of God is to go on, notwithstanding adverse circumstances in this sense. It is a question of overcoming on the part of all, but one particular part suffering.
A.A.T. Do you think Daniel was in circumstances like this?
J.T. He was, just so. He was shut off from Jerusalem, cut off from it, but the windows were opened
{311}
toward Jerusalem. It does not appear that he opened them every time he went up to pray. They were kept open. So that is the idea. Whilst cut off physically and geographically, we are not cut off spiritually because "There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all", @Ephesians 4:4 - 6. So that universal unity, in that sense, is maintained.
H.B. Is there a link with the book of Daniel? We get the maschilim thought in Daniel. Is this one of the Maschil Psalms?
J.T. Half of them at least are in this book, which is very important to remember, meaning that there are those who are instructed, as many of our young men are. They read the ministry and God will use that to support them in their isolation. It is striking that the maschilim idea is stressed in this book, because the written ministry is the thing that they have anyway and should have. They have a Bible, of course.
J.W.D. What is the thought in it being Elohim so prominently, instead of Jehovah as in the first book?
J.T. That is they are not in covenant circumstances. We are in covenant circumstances here in this meeting, so to speak, but they are cut off from their covenant circumstances in the collective sense. We shall also see that there is hardly a mention of Jehovah in this book; it is generally Elohim or God, or other names of God.
J.H.3rd. Would David's prayer in @1 Chronicles 29:18 help in this? He says, "Jehovah, God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and direct their hearts to thee!" Would this be the filling out of that, offering our prayers for those who are cut off?
{312}
J.T. Very good. "The imagination of the thoughts of the heart". That is the thing that enters into this enquiry because these are psalms of remembrance, so here these things are remembered (verse 4). The idea of remembering is found specially in Christianity, because the principle of the Lord's Supper is that it is a memorial. We are habituated to the idea of remembering through it. The mind is peculiarly stressed. It is calling to mind, the power of calling to mind, the power of eliminating what is unnecessary, or useless, but of calling to mind what is necessary and useful. So that Peter speaks about a pure mind, that a pure mind is to be stirred up.
H.G.H. Do these psalms encourage us with the thoughts of the stability of the work of God, things which we can remember in spite of the circumstances? We are reminded how stable they are.
J.T. Very good. He says, "These things I remember and have poured out my soul within me: how I passed", it is historical, "how I passed along with the multitude, how I went on with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, a festive multitude". That is what he brings in in the power of memory, and in anyone who is isolated the power to do this is helpful. It brings the past into the present, and the Spirit, ever present and ever operating, makes the thing good in some sense.
H.G.H. Does this suggest the operations of the Spirit in view of things being held in remembrance in any way?
J.T. I think it does. We all normally have the Spirit. The Christian normally has the Spirit, and the Spirit is always ready to aid in the use of the memory.
C.A.M. Would the longing in @Psalm 1 show that there is this desire for the Spirit?
J.T. The Spirit is symbolised by water, as you know. He says here, "My soul thirsteth for God, for
{313}
the living God". Well, that is the thirst. The thirst is for God, for the living God. The Spirit is God Himself, really. The assembly is the habitation of God in Spirit. That is God in Spirit. That is how it is put in Ephesians. So that the real thing, the very essence of the dispensation is available to us in isolation, whether at sea or otherwise isolated. The constitution of man is intended to be self-sustaining under certain circumstances, so that one is not wholly dependent upon the physical presence of others. The constitution of the assembly makes way for the Spirit to operate for the help of isolated persons, that is, "Death works in us", Paul says, "but life in you", @2 Corinthians 4:12. Life will be operative where the senses are kept open in the individual. The Spirit will co-operate and work to the end that what is going on, what is current in the assembly, is available even to those in isolation.
A.N.W. Would "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day" (@Revelation 1:10) imply that John was ready for such a transfer of his mind and feelings?
J.T. That is a good illustration. He was an isolated brother "in the island called Patmos, for the word of God". He was isolated and great things came to his attention, the whole of the book of the Revelation indeed, and that illustrates, of course, what is very special, but nevertheless what is possible.
J.W.D. The idea of this thirst then is a commendable thing?
J.T. I think it is. I think God values it. "If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink", @John 7:37. The thirsting is taken account of.
J.W.D. I was going to suggest that in @John 14 we have the idea, as I understood it, that if I am in isolation, the glory of the collective really is come into my soul. I do not quite see the idea of thirst, an unsatisfied desire.
{314}
J.T. I think that belongs to man's make up. This is a legitimate normal thing, I would say, when you are deprived of anything: "My soul thirsteth".
S.J.H. It would be right to feel the loneliness of the position?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. The thirst is quite a normal thing which was, of course, more felt in the Old Testament when the Spirit was not given, as John says, "For the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified" (@John 7:39), but the Spirit is now. He is now existent, active in the saints. Thirst may be met; whatever legitimate thirst there may be, it may be met.
J.H. God has been manifested in flesh. We should know God in a different way from these people.
J.T. Quite so. We should make all allowance for that. The psalmist uses the hart as a symbol: "As the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God". The naming of the creatures by Adam runs through, and the psalmist here is contemplating a hart and what characterises him in what is normal. But notice, he not only says, "God", but, "the living God".
A.H.P. Would it correspond with the thought of thirsting in the Lord's word, "Blessed they who hunger and thirst after righteousness", as distinct from an abstract way?
J.T. There it is. The thirst would be met.
R.W.S. Is there something in verse 3 which is akin to the feelings of the heart of Christ when He was morally refused at Jerusalem, as the young men are today: "My tears have been my bread day and night, while they say unto me all the day. Where is thy God?"
J.T. Quite so. David himself longed for the well at Bethlehem -- a good illustration. Of course, the
{315}
Lord had these experiences in measure, so that it says, "Why art thou cast down, my soul, and art disquieted in me? hope in God; for I shall yet praise him for the health of his countenance". He was yearning for something that had been afforded him here, the health of His countenance. We may experience that here today at these meetings, divine presence involving health. Later the psalmist speaks of his own countenance, but this is the health of the divine countenance.
Rem. "My soul" frequently occurs in his thoughts.
J.T. That is another feature, the soul. Man is composed of spirit, soul and body. Here it is the soul, meaning the affections or lower affections, but not the mere natural affections. It is the soul of the believer which is peculiarly liable to be affected, peculiarly as having the sense of need.
A.B.P. Is there a great need of having our feelings controlled by the mind, by our mental attitude, if that is the right expression, as under the control of the Spirit?
J.T. I think that is right. The spirit is the highest part of the tripartite being called man. It is that which links him immediately with God, but then the same feelings may work out through the soul in a lower sense. So that the Lord's Supper, I believe, is the centre for all this that we speak of: how the believer comes into the way under the influence of the mind, a renewed mind, so that it becomes a regulating power generally in him. "So then *I* myself with the mind", the apostle says, "serve God's law", @Romans 7:25. It seems to be the authoritative element in what we might call the institution. Man's own self is an institution and there is an element of dominance by which other things are held in control and regulated. I believe the Lord's Supper is intended for that among other things.
{316}
A.N.W. Is that to be known by us that I should not only control but speak to my soul?
J.T. Quite so. We read that a man ruling his own spirit is greater than if he took a city. The believer is like an institution and the dominating feature, of course, is the spirit, but the mind is a member. The spirit is a greater thought because it really in one sense represents the person. But the mind is what we may call an instrument under the control of the spirit.
A.A.T. If the mind has wandering thoughts, is it not out of control?
J.T. We become useless at a meeting like this if we are not under the control of the spirit through the mind; the control is through the mind. We sing, 'No infant's changing pleasure is like my wandering mind'. That is an acknowledgment of a defect which ought to be remedied. The spirit is given, divinely given. The spirit, it is said, returns to God who gave it. Every person receives the spirit directly from God. It is not a mere created thing. It comes directly from God and through it God has a means of reaching us and searching the innermost parts, we are told. It is like a candle and it is essential to the assembly in function that we should know how to eliminate what is unsuitable, and perhaps useless, and make full scope for what is suitable.
A.B.P. Is the mind regulated by the truth?
J.T. I think that is generally the way it is. The epistle to the Romans makes much of that, how the mind is regulated, how it is renewed: "By the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God", @Romans 12:2.
A.A.T. In working this thing out, for instance on Lord's Day morning before the breaking of bread, if I were occupied with outside things, it would damage the meeting?
{317}
J.T. It does and it is your business to see that the doors are closed against that. "The doors shut ... through fear of the Jews"(@John 20:19), it is said. Every person there has a door in his heart or mind, whatever it may be, to keep out what is extraneous and useless.
A.H.P. Is it not remarkable that whenever you get times of great pressure among the people of God, the deeper feelings of the saints are brought into activity and prominence as governed by the mind?
J.T. We can see here in the psalm, "My soul is cast down within me; therefore do I remember thee from the land of the Jordan, and the Hermons, from mount Mizar". The psalmist clearly alludes to a position physically and geographically that was not his home. He was away from home. He calls it the "land of the Jordan" and "the Hermons" and "the hill of Mizar". The allusion is to an eastern territory, as one would view it who had his home in Jerusalem and affections there, the house of God and the saints there. Now he is away but he is active; his soul is cast down but he says, "My God, my soul is cast down within me; therefore do I remember thee". It is a question of the memory.
H.G.H. So that verses 5 and 6 show the mind in operation in relation to those things?
J.T. I think so. When he says, "I remember thee from the land of the Jordan, and the Hermons, from mount Mizar", he is alluding to his mind, the power to call into mind what he had experienced earlier of God, probably when he had enjoyed the holy convocations at Jerusalem which were times of great blessing; but now he is speaking of certain geographical positions which we can well understand when we speak of our brethren. Well, it is important to know where the brethren are, whether it be, as it were, in the region of the Jordan, or in the Hermons which alludes to a mountain of distinction in the
{318}
east, in that district, or at a smaller mount which is the hill of Mizar. These are allusions to places of distinction known in the world and the brethren are there, but they are not where they used to be. Where they used to be has to be called to mind. They are going to live on their memories for the moment.
J.H.3rd. Would you say something as to the matter of the soul within? In verse 4 it seems to be an act of his own that when he remembers he says, "I ... have poured out my soul within me": but in verse 6 he seems to have no control of it; he is cast down.
J.T. Well, I think we ought to be able to follow the psalmist. These psalms are written by believers and they tell us the experiences of believers in certain circumstances, how the soul is affected, how the mind is affected, how the heart is affected, and we are not strangers to these things. It is a question of gaining through their experiences. The Spirit of God has written them down for us. He has selected certain men to write and certain circumstances in which they wrote, and now the question is whether we can utilise these things, whether the Spirit of God intends that that should support us in the extraordinary circumstances in which we are found, especially those of us who are away in strange circumstances and positions and surroundings.
J.W.D. Do you look at these strange circumstances as different to the remnant? It would almost look as if the devil was directly behind their position. What about our young men in strange positions? Are they in the same position as the godly remnant?
J.T. To some extent, we would say. We are counting that they are. We have to tax our memories as to where they are. We do not visit them very much where they are, but in general they come to us. In general we are all Christians and we have the Holy Spirit. The writers of the Psalms were
{319}
Christians in that sense. They were the children of God. They were the ones taken up by God to write their experience. We have many historical psalms. They are to enable us to grasp the circumstances. Here we have a set of circumstances which are called the land of the Jordan, the Hermons which are the mountains or a group of mountains, and a little mount which is Mizar. Now we have to see where our brethren are, to see if they fit in with these circumstances.
C.R. It is beautiful to see in @Acts 11 that Barnabas, the son of consolation, was sent down to those who were dispersed through the persecution of Stephen, and he exhorted them to abide in the Lord. They sent the right one, the son of consolation.
J.T. Very good. They were scattered. You bring up what is very important at this juncture because the scattering at the time of Stephen corresponds very much. The brethren were scattered. The word scattered was used. Peter used the word dispersion. In both cases it is a question of the government of God. In both cases the saints acted on the circumstances, so that they are far away from where they used to be. We find that God began to work. God used them where they were scattered and then the central position is linked up with them; that is, Barnabas is sent out, a man thoroughly in the thing, a man who was sympathetic with what God was doing, and we have a peculiar expression there, namely, "the ears of the assembly"(@Acts 11:22). These are ears that we ought to have so as to understand what is transpiring in these distant positions into which the brethren have been driven. They have not gone there of their own volition. So the work of God at Antioch went on.
Ques. Are the young brethren to have ears, too? John remembered all the seven assemblies in Asia when he was on the island.
{320}
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Are these two Psalms spiritually balanced in relation to the one who has uttered them?
J.T. Well, that is for us to see. So far, you can see that the writer is influenced divinely. He is not linking up himself with anything in the new circumstances, any adverse thing, not finding any pleasure in them in a natural way. His soul is going through certain things, and now in verse 7 he tells us of certain experience that no doubt he needed. "Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy cataracts"; he says to God, "All thy breakers and thy billows are gone over me". We come here to the Lord's own experience really, and each believer has something of this. He is with God in these strange circumstances. If he is with God, it is not all suffering in the sense that he is having a hard time of it. God has something to say to him in these circumstances.
A.N.W. And does the "My God" imply a history in those far-off circumstances that can be drawn upon? It is "My God".
J.T. The link is there. But there is a sense now of something befalling him. Well, what is it? He says, "Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy cataracts". The allusion, of course, is to some powerful water acting and then, "All thy breakers and thy billows are gone over me". Take Jonah -- what an experience he had in the Mediterranean! He was wilful for a time, and many of our young brethren are wilful. Maybe they are in those circumstances because of that, but at the point they accept that it is the will of God, it is God's doing, it is not an accident. Jonah would not go east although God directed him to go east; he went west and the ship was overtaken by a storm; he was in the mind of God, this particular person; each young brother has to come to that, that there is something in me that God is dealing with. So at last he says,
{321}
"Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea". Well, now he is coming to the position of Christ, and that is what I think this passage alludes to. We must not forget the government of God. Whatever the Government is doing, God is having to say to me. It is, "*Thy* breakers and *thy* billows". So Jonah goes into the depths, and he links on with the temple from the depths of the Mediterranean, which is an excellent illustration of what we are saying: how a person who is driven out like that, whatever the cause, links on with God and His holy temple. His prayer came into God in His holy temple, so that he was not very far from God.
C.A.M. It seems to result in some special sense and type of the sufferings of Christ Himself, does it not?
J.T. There is nothing to be coveted more than that. If things are hard, can I link on with Christ in them? He has been in that supremely and I think that is the point. It is a question of what God is doing. *His* deep and *His* cataracts, and *His* breakers and *His* billows all going over me. It seems hard, but it is God this time. It is not my officer; it is God.
J.H.3rd. I wondered if @Jeremiah 45 fitted into this. Baruch, the young man, says, "Woe unto me! for Jehovah hath added grief to my sorrow; I am weary with my sighing, and I find no rest". @Jeremiah 45:3. I was wondering, if we are passing through that. God would help us to see what He is saying when the word comes to us, "And seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not" (verse 5).
J.T. Quite so. He would keep watch. God is going to bring us out of this sorrow and this pressure. It is a question of seeing that His hand is in it. As Peter says, "It came even to me".
R.W.S. Where is the balance between taking advantage of whatever legal opportunities the Government
{322}
offers to avoid this service, and the apparent gain that will accrue to the young men in the service?
J.T. That becomes a moral issue. If I understand you right, one seeking to evade; you mean that?
R.W.S. Taking advantage of every legal opportunity the government gives to avoid the service. I was wondering if that was right, or if the gain of this experience would be missed?
J.T. That is a very fine point. It is the state of one's soul, whether I am selfish, or whether on the other hand I may be using what God has put in my way to use. It would be a question of the state of one's soul, and I should think it is a fine matter as to whether I go into a thing that the Government seems to put upon me, or whether I seek a way out of it. I am not so sure. I must confess I have never been in any of these circumstances, but I can see that it requires very close examination of oneself inwardly as to what one's motives are.
A.N.W. But even in availing oneself of an open door, which is really open, there is plenty of room for much exercise beyond that and much experience that you are speaking of.
J.T. Yes. "If thou canst become free, use it rather". @1 Corinthians 7:21. It would be a question of motives. It is the word of God that helps you. It is "quick and powerful and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", @Hebrews 4:12. If the word has full scope, then things may come to light that I did not discern before.
A.B.P. Did you have something further in mind in regard to "Deep calleth unto deep"?
J.T. I think it is an allusion to what the Lord Himself experienced. It is in this book the people of God are peculiarly affected. The enemy has
{323}
driven them out. I would not say that all the Jews would be driven out. The antichrist would have to say to the godly, however it will be. They are the ones to think of. Jehovah, or God, would take advantage of their then circumstances to challenge their hearts as to what may be in each case, in each Israelite. He has had to leave Jerusalem, but is there not something to judge in himself?
A.B.P. Would the Lord telling Simon to launch out in the deep carry a suggestion?
J.T. Well, we have arrived at Peter in @Luke 5. He had a household; he was a married man, which is a great matter just now. He had a mother-in-law in his house and this is Luke's way of presenting the history of Peter; and the Lord in the beginning of that chapter selected a boat which was Peter's and stood in it to speak the word of God, and then He said, "Draw out into the deep"(@Luke 5:4). It would look as if He had Peter in mind and what you say really enters into what we are saying in a general way that Peter is intended by God to be a model in regard of God's governmental dealings with us. "Draw out into the deep". Peter thought he knew what he was talking about, but the Lord was in charge. The Lord was the real master of that ship and that is the position, and hence there is a great result in Peter at that time. He fell down at Jesus¬ knees, and that is what I was seeking to occupy the brethren with. Is there not something in each draftee, whether he is a draftee or whether he is rejected, what are his motives? Is he with the Lord in the matter? What are his motives? And what are the parents¬ motives? What are the wife's motives? What are the local brethren's motives? Is God not going to bring out something in all these matters? So that we have "Thy breakers", "Thy cataracts", "Thy billows". Well, Peter's house was not just right. The Lord put his mother-in-law right but the question is about Peter himself.
{324}
Rem. "I will pay that which I have vowed"(@Jonah 2:9), Jonah says.
J.T. Quite so.
W.W. What we are considering here in regard to Peter and others has in view enlargement, and David, who no doubt wrote this Psalm, had in view that pressure had enlarged him. Jehovah had enlarged him, and all pressure has in view enlargement for the saints, has it not?
J.T. Quite so. We are being searched in the very innermost parts of our being. That is what is going on. How are we going to come out of it? So that it says, "In the day-time will Jehovah command his loving-kindness, and in the night his song shall be with me, a prayer unto the God of my life. I will say unto God my rock", which alludes to God in a foundational sense, a sure footing, "Why hast thou forgotten me? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy? As with a crushing in my bones mine adversaries reproach me, while they say unto me all the day, Where is thy God?". Well, this is very striking, because we are under the eyes now of the ordinary man, public man, and the challenge is. Where is his God? Am I able to bring God into these matters? And so, "Why art thou cast down, my soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God". This is like the sequel to the whole psalm. Now it is *his* countenance. He is making headway. He can talk about his countenance. The countenance reflects where we are.
F.K.C. Do you think that Joseph had a healthy countenance in this way? Whatever he did prospered. It says of him that "They afflicted his feet with fetters; his soul came into irons; until the time when what he said came about: the word of Jehovah tried him", @Psalm 105:18,19. He was taken out of circumstances.
{325}
He might have gotten under them, but he moves through in power.
J.T. Quite so. That is a good section to bring up. The word of Jehovah tried him until what he said, what he had committed himself to, really came about.
R.W.S. So that day and night occurs two or three times in this chapter. Does it mean that every use should be made of it? It is a twenty-four hour matter, not only as to our sorrows, but as to our joys. He says, "In the day-time will Jehovah command his loving-kindness" (verse 8).
J.T. He is spending his time well in that sense, showing how the day is apportioned. We often notice that God made the day and He was the first to work in it, to use it.
S.J.H. With reference to the countenance, Nehemiah had never been sad before the king before. Does that help as to individual matters? A countenance should not be downcast because things are difficult?
J.T. The countenance was an exposure, in a way. He had to appear before the king with his complaint, or his request, and another thing that comes up there is that the queen is sitting by. That is to say, the government is balanced. The balance of government we shall see in @Psalm 45, how the queen is on his right hand. We have got to keep in mind that the abstract government is in Christ: "The government shall be upon his shoulder". @Isaiah 9:6. And although the remnant are far away from their own place, yet they do not forget and they know in @Psalm 45 something about the king and they make room for the queen. We shall see that this afternoon, God willing, but I allude to it now because Nehemiah had to do with the king and the queen. The queen was sitting by, showing that God favoured him. The queen has a modifying effect. The feminine side in
{326}
government has a modifying effect which we can count on in having to do with the authorities. And so Nehemiah got his request, and it is encouraging to know that there is modification in government. Persons on the Boards, as the authorities are called, are modifying persons: they are not all the same. Sometimes a man on the Board is quite sympathetic with the conscientious brother; others are against him, but still there is always a balance. That is what Nehemiah found. That is what we shall find.
H.B. Is there a similar thought with the daughter of Pharaoh?
J.T. Yes -- the same thing. It began in @Genesis 1. He let them have dominion, the man and the woman. God has not forgotten that. We should not forget it. The truth of God has its place with us that God has government in balance and the feminine side is a balance.
Ques. Pilate's wife set a balance in that way?
J.T. Just so.
A.N.W. Felix had a wife, too.
J.T. So this matter of countenance is important because it is a question of our appearance. Of course, the regimentals, the accoutrements, affect a young man, but it is a question of the countenance, what appears; too, what is reflected from the inward state of the person; how the countenance reflects and becomes a testimony. That brother, that person, finds favour with the superior man because of his countenance. He is not dour or resentful. He is bright and happy because of what he is inwardly, not because of his circumstances. He is greater than his circumstances. I think that is what the psalmist is aiming at. We get it also at the end of the next psalm. "Why art thou cast down, my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God", @Psalm 43:5. So that it is confirmed
{327}
in this second psalm. @Psalm 43 is really an adjunct of the 42nd.
A.B.P. In the process of working it out, does verse 5 of @Psalm 42 suggest the application of the truth, and verse 11 the subjective result in his countenance, as it were, reflecting the shining of God's countenance?
J.T. As he says in verse 5, "For I shall yet praise him, for the health of his countenance". It is literally 'salvations'. The thing is stressed in the plural that he would be saved in such circumstances, and the salvation is in His countenance, and then verse 11 is "my countenance". God's countenance is working in me and is reflected in me. Then again in @Psalm 43:5, "Why art thou cast down, my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God". So there are those two things, the health of the believer's countenance, and He is his God as well.
S.J.H. What do you understand by the word health, health of the countenance?
J.T. The note says it is 'salvations'. It is the plural of 'salvation'. The thing is emphasised in the person. He is greater than his circumstances through it, reflecting God's countenance in it, and what has been said about Joseph, is, I believe, a good illustration of it. He is always cheerful. As he came into the prison, to the servants of Pharaoh, as it were, he could say, 'What is the matter?' Yet he was a prisoner, too. He was superior.
P.W. Would Daniel and his companions come in here? They refused to eat of the king's meat.
J.T. That is a good illustration. Finer and better looking than the others.
A.B.P. Would Joseph in prison having been given a supervisory position show that it is possible for our
{328}
young men to get advancement honourably without aspiration?
J.T. We have examples of that, of getting recognition because of their conduct.
W.W. Joseph accepted it from the hand of God.
J.T. He said, "God sent me before you"(@Genesis 45:5). The name given him seems to mean the sustainer of the life of the world. It shows what God can make of one of His people in testimony and that in adverse circumstances.
A.N.W. Referring to the young men again, do you mean that they should simply and humbly accept what honour is put upon them?
J.T. I would think so in that sense. We have to be watchful in all of this as to our motives.
J.J. Would you say that promotion is not only honour. Is it not use, ability?
J.T. You mean that the promotion makes you more useful? Quite so, so that he is if he is clothed with humility. The salvation of God is there.
Rem. Darius says that he thought he would make Daniel a president. I suppose he was worthy of it.
J.T. Quite so. It is remarkable how those men were promoted. It is a question of what we are capable of, what we are free from, free from personal motives, so that we are more usable. The word 'salvations' here in the note is just to stress the intensity of the thing, how a believer in his adverse circumstances reflects God in his countenance.
A.H.P. "*They* shall bring me to thy holy mount, and unto thy habitations. Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto the God of the gladness of my joy: yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, O God, my God" (verses 3, 4). Is that the secret of the countenance being bright?
J.T. Yes, God can act in spite of the distance from the place of privileges; "Send out thy light and
{329}
thy truth: *they* shall lead me, *they* shall bring me to thy holy mount, and unto thy habitations". It means that God is not simply going to stoop down and do some work in your soul. It says, "*They* shall lead me, *they* shall bring me to thy holy mount, and unto thy habitations".
J.T.Jr. Peter spoke of the holy mount in his epistle in the way of remembrance -- they were with Him on the holy mount. It is a matter of what had been impressed in his own soul.
J.T. He came in very late. He must have carried that in his soul all those years. He must have enjoyed it, perhaps no one more. He does not speak of the Lord's sonship except there. A very striking thing, but he got the revelation of the sonship of Christ.
J.W.D. I suppose that salvation in a practical sense is that the remnant will return to Jerusalem?
J.T. That is how God will do. Instead of employing a Canadian army to overcome the anti-christian army, God will operate morally, send out His light and truth and make the remnant greater. In @Revelation 14 you see the hundred and forty-four thousand with the Lamb on mount Zion. How did they get there? Evidently through a moral process. They are really there with Him on a moral basis. Look at their character! What persons they are!
J.W.D. I was wondering whether, in a certain sense, this thought of "light and truth" operates from those of us who are still in the Jerusalem position, so that the circumstances are ameliorated and our young men come back to us at different times? If the truth and light of this position is with us, it is a spiritual influence operating in relation to government?
J.T. I think we should especially notice this, light moving from the centre to a distance. "Send out thy light and thy truth: *they* shall lead me, *they* shall bring me to thy holy mount". "*They*" is emphatic.
{330}
The book of Revelation, I believe, works this out in the Jewish remnant, the hundred and forty-four thousand on mount Zion. How did they get there? We have a description of them, what they were, how pure they were.
A.B.P. Do you think this would be reflected in the letters that are written to the young brothers? If the letters are filled only with family feelings, the soul is liable to be disquieted in the distant circumstances, but if light and truth are mingled or contained in the correspondence, it will help them in their position.
J.T. Have we not heard of brethren, young men, getting together in these distant positions, adverse positions, able to help one another in the truth, the light and the truth operating in them so that they become, as it were, independent in that way? The light and the truth operate ultimately to bring them back in their souls, not in their bodies, but in their souls to God's holy mount and to His habitations.
S.J.H. Would you say a word about the first verse? Many of our young men may have to face unrighteous charges by ungodly men.
J.T. That is one of the things we get in the Psalms. It is wonderful how varied they are in their instruction. "Judge me, O God and plead my cause against an ungodly nation".
S.J.H. "Deliver me from the deceitful and unrighteous man".
J.T. What a word that would be if you were unfairly dealt with by an officer or the like! How much of that there is, too. Well, the time is up but @Psalm 44 should be read privately. The 45th may be the one to take up this afternoon and, perhaps, some of the psalms that follow.
{331}
PRESERVATION IN CIRCUMSTANCES OF PRESSURE (2)
@Psalm 45:1 - 17
J.T. This series of psalms which begins here points to the wealth that may be found in God's people, as in the circumstances the book indicates and of which we spoke this morning, people driven out and deprived of their ordinary privileges, yet marked by power to speak richly, first to Christ, and then of His things, as in this psalm. The following psalm speaks about the river of God: "There is a river the streams whereof make glad the city of God, the sanctuary of the habitations of the Most High", @Psalm 46:4. The next one speaks about God: "All ye peoples, clap your hands; shout unto God with the voice of triumph!", @Psalm 47:1. The next one speaks of God greatly to be praised: "Great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the hill of his holiness. Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King", @Psalm 48:1,2. So our lesson should be on these lines. The other psalm which we looked at this morning points to the individual believer gaining in his soul, and speaks of his external appearance, so that he is a testimony personally. The health of his countenance has been stressed. It would look as if in the history of the assembly, this set of psalms would find an answer in the sense that, while the assembly itself and its services were largely lost sight of, there was yet a remarkable appreciation of God and of Christ and even of the Spirit, as instanced in the hymns that are still extant. The brethren perhaps may not have observed that in our hymn book there are a large number of hymns from authors that were not, as we
{332}
say, strictly in fellowship. Were such authors to offer hymns now to the brethren walking in the light of the assembly, they would not be accepted, whatever their wording, because the fellowship now has a place which becomes a test as to spirituality and godliness. In the Middle Ages there were very many precious productions with which the service of God has been enriched now, but particularly in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; we have a large number of hymns that are usable now by the Spirit. Since the assembly has had a place and the fellowship a place, all those in the systems or organisations of men have been tested, and the door has been opened to them to come into the service of God in a true sense; they have elected to stay out, so what is there has become greatly impoverished, and what is coming now in productions of richness for the service of God is from those in the fellowship. Those who elect to stay out of it, seeing it now exists in a spiritual way here, are discrediting themselves. I mention all this, because @Psalm 45 is a wonderful production, it is attributed to an individual who says, "My heart is welling forth with a good matter; I say what I have composed touching the king". Then he goes on to tell us about the King.
J.W.D. Would you say the golden vessels in 2 Timothy always existed until the call came for them to withdraw?
J.T. Yes, God has opened up the door for these vessels to have their proper places. They were not only rich, but they have the places assigned to them in the fellowship, for them to function.
A.N.W. Do you mean that principle did not govern in the gathering of the present hymn book in 1932?
J.T. What principle are you alluding to?
A.N.W. I mean, excluding those hymns supplied by authors not in fellowship.
{333}
J.T. They were already accredited in the fellowship. We have not time to count them or point out the number; but there are a large number by Charles Wesley, Isaac Watts and many others which we, in the enlightened position today, seeing that the test has come and we are all exposed, could not accept. The fellowship must be the test for any production now. I am only calling attention to this, because it is important to know what the Spirit of God recognised earlier and what we recognise now, because they have already found recognition.
W.R. Would you say that the fellowship is really what has taken place inwardly? The Lord spoke of what would be in the believer, "a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life", @John 4:14. Would that not be the basis on which compositions can be made also?
J.T. Yes, because the test has come out; the whole of Christendom is tested, and the Lord says, "He that is not with me is against me", @Matthew 12:30. It is that principle. When the test has come out, persons are exposed as to whether they are going in the way of the truth. "Send out thy light and thy truth: *they* shall lead me", @Psalm 43:3. There is nothing else beyond what they had outwardly, until the Spirit of God wrought and gave a test, a standard, that is the truth itself and the light.
A.A.T. Would you apply those remarks also to the gospel hymns in the book?
J.T. Yes, the same thing applies.
H.G.H. Do you consider the fellowship is a greater test than we get in the first verse? Is "Touching the king" a more general setting than the fellowship?
J.T. The psalm is the product of an individual and it is called "An instruction", so it has its place in the Maschils, as we call them, that is, it carries
{334}
out the test of truth. And so today, many of the hymns we have in the hymn book now have been altered to make them stand the test of the truth, but the psalms of instruction, such as this, carry with them the standard of truth, because the idea is instruction. There is instruction in them, not mere words used to make poetry, but to convey the truth of God, "Thy light and truth".
C.A.M. Would it be right to omit a hymn if you had a sense that the writer would not have gone on in spiritual matters, so as to be in line with what the Spirit is saying today? There may be adjustments; is it not right to feel that the composer would have acquiesced in them?
J.T. If he were moving in the Spirit he would, and they did; many did. The standard was there, the idea was the light, "Thy light and thy truth". The hymn book ought to guide us, as we had this morning; "*they* shall lead me, *they* shall bring me to thy holy mount, and unto thy habitations", @Psalm 43:3. So that every hymn has to be challenged as to whether it leads in that direction.
Rem. It would seem as if the tests are getting more severe as we go on. Would you say a word as to why that is. It seems to me the question of sonship is the distinct test now.
J.T. It is. It has thrown light on the position and it certainly affected us very much in the selection of hymns some years back. The brethren, I am sure, who have looked into the matter, are aware how much we have been affected by the truth of sonship, the sonship of Christ, which has been made clearer to us, and other features too. So the test is becoming more and more severe, and the enemy's effort is constantly to reduce it. The admission of radios into the houses of the brethren and mixed marriages are constant tests. I have noticed this markedly lately.
{335}
J.T.Jr. The character of the test is really seen in the previous psalm: "But for thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are reckoned as sheep for slaughter", @Psalm 44:22.
J.T. I am glad you mention that. It should have entered into our enquiry this morning, because it enters into @Romans 8, a chapter which is outstanding in that book, that is the truth of the Spirit. The truth of the Spirit is mentioned thirteen times in the first thirteen or fourteen verses, and then later the Spirit is greatly stressed. So the truth works out in this, "For thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are reckoned as sheep for slaughter". There is a constant attack, because the most precious things have come out, eternal life some few years back, and sonship later. We are killed all the day long; it is an enigma in the minds of some that these truths that we know to be most precious are held.
Ques. Does it help to revive inwardly "the sentence of death in ourselves", @2 Corinthians 1:9. Given over to death, "killed all the day long" refers to pressure outside, but "the sentence of death in ourselves" would help in the composition.
J.T. Yes, it is inside, calling upon all that is within us, because that is the realm of the Spirit. "Man's spirit is the lamp of Jehovah, searching all the inner parts of the belly", @Proverbs 20:27. All our inwards are searched. What for? To purify us, and not only that, but that God may get His portion, because it is the realm of the Spirit. The saints are the realm of the Spirit, and God is looking for a product from us, and so there is the external killing, and also the sentence of death in ourselves, so the well springs up into everlasting life.
J.T.Jr. Both Matthew's and Mark's gospels, the two gospels under great pressure, give the hymn in regard to the Supper.
{336}
J.T. That is very remarkable. They are the two gospels that furnish the hymn that they sang. The saints undoubtedly sang the hymn, but the Lord joined in it, whatever hymn it was. Some say it was a selection from the psalms that they had. Anyhow, they sang a hymn and then went to the mount of Olives, showing the trend from the hymn. It was sung in Jerusalem where the pressure was, but the trend of it was upward.
J.H-t. Are you suggesting that something substantial should come out of these days of pressure? I was thinking of Paul and Silas, the same word is used of their singing in the jail at Philippi as was used in @Matthew 26.
J.T. I am glad you brought that up. The pressure really was to come. The Lord's supper was instituted before the pressure; Gethsemane came after it. So the hymn involved that the pressure is to bring out what is in us. The Lord entered into Gethsemane and He disposed of what He had, the disciples; He disposed of them, and it was to bring out what He knew was there, because His work was there and Gethsemane would bring it out. In due course, the incoming of the Spirit brought it out, and what is happening now is the same thing in a small way, of course; the pressure is to bring out something, and God is going to bring out something, and proposes to enlarge and to increase the wealth of the service.
Rem. The great composition of the Lord Himself in @Psalm 22:22, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee", follows upon the section that deals with most excruciating sufferings and pressure.
J.T. Quite so. That is the great sorrow psalm of the book; we shall come to that point more fully in @Psalm 69, which comes into this book. The 22nd is the great sorrow psalm; it is the very heart of the whole book of Psalms; it is what came out of the
{337}
heart of Christ in pressure. It is what He sings in the assembly.
A.N.W. Is the same principle seen in the song in @Revelation 5? There is a great ascription of praise in chapter 4, but the song is not until chapter 5, where the Lamb, as slain, is in view.
J.T. Quite so. Chapter 14 brings in the hundred and forty-four thousand as the result, as the yield for God. They are mentioned as a hundred and forty-four thousand in chapter 7, but in chapter 14 is the quality of them and the singing. They can learn singing; they can learn the song of heaven.
A.B.P. Would you distinguish between the wine press and the olive press in speaking of pressure? You referred to Gethsemane, and that has in mind the olive press, has it not?
J.T. Very likely it would. The mount of Olives would suggest that. The wine press is also alluded to in Revelation. It is an allusion to Christendom and the way the judgment of God overtakes it. If we look at the olive as being pressed too, it would rather be the positive side of things.
Ques. This psalm seems to have a bearing in the present tense. The difficulty with many of our hymns is that there are many wholly or partly in the future, and some in the past. It seems a great difficulty to secure hymns that are bearing immediately on the service of God. Is this psalm all in the present tense?
J.T. There is no doubt there is that need. We do not know whether the Spirit of God will ever go as far as formally adding to what we have in the selection of hymns, but certainly there is great need of hymns to the Father and hymns of a present bearing. There are only fifty hymns to the Father and about two hundred and fifty to the Lord Jesus, showing there is disparity in the balance. There is no doubt the Lord means this psalm to give rise to
{338}
what we are saying at the present moment. One is saying, "My heart is welling forth with a good matter: I say what I have composed touching the king. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer". That is the introduction; we shall be all tested, I am sure, as to that, if there is a demand for a revision of what we have got, or increase to it. We shall all be tested as to it, because when the time came for the revision of the hymn book, the volume of the so-called hymns was very great, but the quality very poor.
Rem. This is not an extemporaneous composition. The word is "composed" or 'my occupation', like @Genesis 46:33.
J.T. It evidently was rhythmical, gone into thoroughly, not casually.
A.N.W. It is present, "My heart is welling".
J.T. You mean it is important that the mind is brought into it. But then the heart must be brought into it if we are to have any substance, and the "welling" must be that. At the same time, the writer must have been controlled and have all the necessities for hymn writing.
Rem. I wondered if it would not help us to follow certain features of the Lord's glory in the composition of psalms and hymns, to pay attention to the idea of occupation. It is not just a flow of words; it is the application and putting together of things in an intelligent way.
J.T. There is no doubt Christianity (and Judaism for that matter in the old dispensation) was developed with great care. The language used then, Hebrew, was the richest of all for spiritual terms, affording far more terms for conveying spiritual thoughts than even the Greek. Modern languages are so filled up with worldly things that it is very hard to use them for sacred purposes. So we are reminded, I think, "knowing this first, that the scope
{339}
of no prophecy of scripture is had from its own particular interpretation, for prophecy was not ever uttered by the will of man, but holy men of God spake under the power of the Holy Spirit", @2 Peter 1:20,21. Every scripture is inspired of God; the word "scripture" there alludes to spiritual writing indited by the Spirit of God. Think of the control under which the writer or writers must have been, really abstracted, and that means complete self-control in those whom God would use in these holy matters, so that they had a right product.
C.A.M. Would you say it was subject to censorship? It would be subject to the feelings of those who are intelligent among us. Would you think the dedication, those words at the top of the psalm, would show it was not the composition of a freelance? It was in keeping with all the spiritual thoughts of those who are able to judge.
J.T. The heading is undoubtedly inspired in each of the psalms, and we are reminded in the work of this book of Psalms what skill there was, and how God was to form the vessels, so the writer gives an outline, an indication, of what was in his mind, and as was said, the word "composed" shows that his mind was fixed; his powers, his senses, were all active and he had power to shut the door against extraneous things.
J.T.Jr. The love of God in our hearts would enable us to make a right composition; love would be active in the heart.
J.T. The heart is the vessel in that sense. The Spirit of God has put the love of God there. The mind must control all that, and we see that here: "I say what I have composed touching the king". That is very plain; he has only Christ before him, whatever else he may say, and "My tongue is the pen of a ready writer". "My tongue" is a member, often an unruly one. James says that "the tongue is fire,
{340}
the world of unrighteousness; the tongue is set in our members, the defiler of the whole body, and which sets fire to the course of nature", @James 3:6. How much fire is set going by evil speaking, unfair criticism, but here, "My tongue is the pen of a ready writer". Writing is a matter of accuracy in a person.
Ques. Would the cry of the Lord in the garden of Gethsemane bring out the intensity of the feelings of His heart crying, "Abba Father"?
J.T. Look at the feelings there! You marvel at the activities of the Spirit as to the Lord Himself. The feelings He gave expression to, the sweat as great drops of blood falling down to the ground. Think of all that! What exercise! The word 'exercise' is so common in our language, but the exercise was there physically in the Lord, and so here, the writer is guided by Christ the King. That is the first verse. Then the second verse is, "Thou art fairer than the sons of men"; that is, he is now turning to the Lord and able to speak to Him about Himself. "Grace is poured into thy lips: therefore God hath blessed thee for ever". That is worship.
A.A.T. You have been speaking of hymns, and the hymn book that we use is in the English language. How about the universal aspect of the assembly, where other languages are used, does not something in the way of poetry come into it?
J.T. Quite so, these hymns that we have are undoubtedly the most spiritual you can find in any collection. They are translated into other languages. That is another vehicle the Lord has given us. The Spirit has come down, the tongues were there, and God is saying He has in mind all languages in this dispensation, all men, and that tongues would not be a barrier, as at Shinar. The gifts that the Spirit brought were to furnish ability to translate things that the Spirit gives, so they should be available to all believers in all countries. The universal idea was
{341}
there. "We hear them speaking in our own tongues the great things of God", @Acts 2:11. That is the principle. So this is a time of pressure and it is a question, some one mentioned this morning, of paying our vows, that is, addicting ourselves. The house of Stephanas addicted themselves to the care of the saints. We are dealing now with this section, which is one of buoyancy, richness of thought and word; we can have all this in spite of the pressure and in spite of the dispersal of the brethren.
R.A. Does the richness of David's psalm come out in that way in @2 Samuel 22 over against all that he had gone through?
J.T. Yes, that helps us too. @2 Samuel 22 is put into the book of Psalms and is numbered 18. The song leaves out David's thought in saying, "I will love thee, O Jehovah, my strength", which he inserts in the psalm (verse 1), making it really a psalm. But then, in addition to chapter 22, there is the 23rd, which fits in with what we are saying, particularly the first verse: "Now these are the last words of David: David the son of Jesse saith"; the word "saith" there refers to what is oracular, what David said, "And the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel saith, The Spirit of Jehovah spoke by me, and his word was on my tongue. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, The ruler among men shall be just, ruling in the fear of God; and he shall be as the light of the morning, like the rising of the sun, a morning without clouds; when from the sunshine, after rain, the green grass springeth from the earth" (verses 1 - 4). That is a wonderful contribution, which could be carried through into a hymn. It is a question of a king, and he is ruling. Here it is the same David who says -- I am not saying this is David here, but it is in this selection -- "My heart is welling forth with a good
{342}
matter: I say what I have composed touching the king. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer". Then he goes on to tell us about the Lord; he speaks of the Lord Himself, telling the Lord about Himself.
Rem. In the section you have just read in @2 Samuel 23:3, it says, "The Rock of Israel spoke to me", and in this psalm, "Grace is poured into thy lips" (verse 2): is that an allusion to the grace of manhood as seen in Christ as receiving things, although His deity comes in later in the psalm? It is clarifying the beauteous character of His manhood that receives from Jehovah.
J.T. Very beautiful. "Thou art fairer than the sons of men"; it is Christ in manhood. We have in @Philippians 2 the Lord becoming Man, how He became Man, and what was the language of His heart in becoming Man; it is said He took His place in the likeness of men, that is, He was among them, but what a Man! Verse 2 enlarges on that, "Thou art fairer than the sons of men". He was among them, but there was none like Him; "Grace is poured into thy lips: therefore God hath blessed thee for ever". It is manhood in itself earning, as it were, a reward from God in this beautiful exhibition of grace in his lips, "therefore God hath blessed thee for ever". Then the next verse is military; then in verse 6, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever"; the writer is extremely skilful and able in what he is writing, and we can see how he is worshipful, how he is full of Christ.
A.N.W. Will you compare His reward which He receives, "Fairer than the sons of men", and the reward He receives of God, "Anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy companions" (verse 7)?
J.T. It is the same idea running through; he says in verse 7, "Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated wickedness; therefore God, thy God, hath anointed
{343}
thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions". Earlier it was "the sons of men", but now it is His own companions that He is above in a sense of superiority, "Anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions".
J.T.Jr. Would @Proverbs 8:6 - 9 help in regard to this wisdom? "Hear, for I will speak excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall be right things. For my palate shall meditate truth, and wickedness is an abomination to my lips. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing tortuous or perverse in them. They are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge".
J.T. It shows how wisdom is personified and how it speaks in Proverbs, corresponding very much to what we are speaking of in this psalm. Wisdom is a quality, of course, but it came out in time, as needed. It was always with God, of course, but when the need of it came into evidence in @Proverbs 8, it was there and viewed as brought forth, that is to say, brought in as needed. Is it not a great principle? Where the need is, it is supplied and wisdom comes forth and speaks, as you said, "My delights were with the sons of men", @Proverbs 8:31.
C.A.M. In @Hebrews 1:9 this section of the psalm is said of the "Son". It closes with the expression, "Has anointed thee with oil of gladness above they companions". Do you connect this thought of companions with the sonship of Christ?
J.T. It works out in Hebrews, showing that the principle of the whole Bible is one great thought, and the epistle to the Hebrews, although the author of the epistle to the Hebrews is not mentioned, yet he is there, we can discern who he is. It is accredited to the apostle Paul; and we can discern that he is the writer; he brings in the thought of companionship,
{344}
and, in principle, applies it to ourselves, that is, those of the assembly are made the companions of Christ.
C.A.M. Would you say the reason the Lord occupies that place above His companions is because He inherited the name of "Son"?
J.T. No doubt it is a question of the first chapter. How rich the writer of Hebrews is in thought! This first chapter of Hebrews is wonderfully rich but it is almost all taken from the Psalms. The writer says, "As he inherits a name more excellent than they", that is to say, Christ is seen in the first chapter as "being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power, having made by himself the purification of sins, set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high". Words are used here that you do not find elsewhere in that sense. In the expression, "He inherits a name more excellent than they", you can see the affections of the writer coming up. "For to which of the angels said he ever, *Thou* art my Son: this day have *I* begotten thee?", that is @Psalm 2, "And again, *I* will be to him for father, and *he* shall be to me for son?". That is Solomon, of course, quoted from Chronicles and from Samuel too. "And again, when he brings in the firstborn into the habitable world, he says, And let all God's angels worship him. And as to the angels he says. Who makes his angels spirits and his ministers a flame of fire; but as to the Son, Thy throne, O God, is to the age of the age, and a sceptre of uprightness is the sceptre of thy kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness and hast hated lawlessness; therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy companions" (@Hebrews 1:6 - 9). So that you can see how the richness of the second book of Psalms is expressed and enlarged on by Paul, the probable writer of the Hebrews, and how the book of the Hebrews runs
{345}
along and enters into the service of God as perhaps no other book does.
J.P. What is the link between the sonship of Christ and the kingship of Christ? I was thinking of @1 Chronicles 23:1, "And David was old and full of days; and he made Solomon his son king over Israel".
J.T. They are both the one person. The book of Chronicles shows that Solomon was made king alongside of his father, a most unusual thing. They reign together. The son is brought in in @1 Chronicles 23, and then David tells us that he made instruments of song and then he instituted courses for the service of God. The father is operating, but the son is on the throne too, so we have two great thoughts merging in the idea of the king, that is to say, the father and the son. The father and the son are seen at the end of 1 Chronicles; and the courses for the service of God are instituted under these conditions; and chapter 29 tells us that Solomon ruled instead of his father, but for a while they ruled together. So the father and the son are merging, and sonship is the great prominent thought now. I believe God had that in mind in clarifying the position of Son, so that while in a certain way it is inferior, the Persons are equal, David and Solomon are equal in the sense that they ruled together; the service of God was inaugurated under those circumstances.
Rem. "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever" shows the quality of the Person.
J.T. Yes, His Deity is seen there, and He is spoken of as what He is among men as compared with men, and as compared with His companions, but "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever". Hence, we have the Lord Jesus in the service of God as an Object of worship equal with the Father, only that in the economy He retains His place as
{346}
Son and as Man. The Father is the supreme Object of worship.
H.B. Verse 11 says, "For he is thy Lord, and worship thou him".
J.T. Quite so.
A.B.P. Is the Father a more limited thought than the thought of God?
J.T. I think it is quite right to use those words; "Neither does the Father judge any one", @John 5:22. And moreover, the great end in Revelation is God, not the Father, but God shall be all in all.
A.B.P. Would, it be profitable if we did not use the expression "God and Father" so frequently in our thanksgivings? In the latter part of our meeting there should be more distinction in our minds.
J.T. It may be. I think the progressive order is the Son first, then Christ known in the assembly in relation to the Lord's Supper, not God's Supper, nor the Father's Supper, but the Lord's; and then the marital relation to the assembly, which ought to have a place in the service. Then we have God. It says, "The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ", @Colossians 1:3. But then we have God Himself, "that God may be all in all", @1 Corinthians 15:28. It seems to be the terminal, so to speak.
A.B.P. Is there a period when it is proper to use the title "Father" only?
J.T. I think there is: "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father", Paul says in @Ephesians 3:14.
C.A.M. Do you use the word "God" in speaking to divine Persons without discriminating in your mind as to whether it is the Father or the Son you are addressing?
J.T. I think it is permissible to. I think John's epistle has that in mind in using pronouns. It is a question of spiritual discernment as to whether we are speaking to God, or the Father, or the Son. The
{347}
Trinity is so much in our minds, that it is sometimes a question in our minds to know what is meant.
C.A.M. I am glad to hear you say that, it helps things. Scripture seems to warrant what you say.
J.T. I think it does. We cannot label pronouns too accurately. We cannot assume to label them too precisely, because, after all, we are dealing with infinitude, and we are creatures; we are finite. If we attempt to label terms and pronouns too accurately, we are going beyond our limit. In that very scripture we quoted, "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father", the original leaves out other titles, it is just 'the Father of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named'. And then he says, "To be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God"(@Ephesians 3:16 - 19). But we are in the realm of infinitude nevertheless, and can we undertake to give names to divine Persons in those circumstances, or should we not humbly and soberly recognize our limitations?
Ques. If we are privileged to come to the ultimate of assembly service, do you think that some sense of prostration will take hold of us in the realm of creaturehood in the presence of God, or do we carry forward some of the dignity of sonship into this service?
J.T. The word "worship", it is just what you say, it is a prostration idea. You are falling forward. The word used for worship has that meaning, so that we are absorbed, but we carry that idea of falling upon our knees as Paul says. It becomes us to do this
{348}
in our limitation in the presence of infinitude, that is, in the presence of God.
J.W.D. In this section, @Ephesians 3, Paul still retains the idea of the Father's personality, does he not? He is still bowing his knees to the Father. Is he not conscious of the Father's personality in all these circumstances as an extremely wonderful thought?
J.T. No doubt he is to a point, but if you go on you are in a realm of infinitude, in so far as you can be there. The realm is filled with God, the Persons of the Trinity, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. So the passage runs into that, "That ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God".
J.W.D. I would like a little help as to the reference to God in the morning meeting in a fuller way. Paul refers to "the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ"(@Ephesians 1:3), which covers practically every known spiritual thought in the revelation of God, then to the Father as a distinctive divine Person by Himself. We can rarely use the name of God, except in an extreme sense of worship, prostration, could we?
J.T. Well, "That God may be all in all" is the greatest thought, I think.
J.W.D. You would just pass into that, would you not? You would not use the title "God" promiscuously. These titles, "The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ", and again, "Father", cover every feature of the revelation of God that we can touch.
J.T. That is true. But are you able to discern them and label each thought? Is it within your range to do it in the realm of infinitude? Suppose you take the Spirit as operating in you, by Him you may speak to God, but are you able to say it is just the Spirit? It is God. The Spirit is God. I mean to say, we are dealing with infinitude; we are brought
{349}
into it in the measure in which we can be brought into it as creatures, and that measure is limited, but at the same time, we are touching the thing. If you are at the edge of the ocean you are in it, although you are only a few inches in it, but think of the depths of it! Can any creature name the particular divine Person he is influenced by?
Rem. It is really the sense of inscrutability and the sense of limitation on our side that prostrates us.
J.T. It is the sense of inscrutability and the sense of limitation on our side and the necessity of prostrating ourselves, because the word for worship implies that. I think you would say, I had better begin to draw the line and not assume to go beyond my reach.
C.A.M. In @Romans 9:5 where the apostle is referring to the Lord Jesus, he refers to Him as God: "The Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen". Would it not be possible in a spiritual way to be addressing Him as Lord and use the word God in that sense?
J.T. It is possible to pass from One to the Other. The service as we have it regulates that. The first part of it is to the Lord, but we gradually merge into the thought of God. We are led into the thought of God. We begin with Christ and lead into the thought of God and it is very happy, but we stay there, so to speak, and go no further perhaps.
Ques. In @John 10:29,30, the Lord says, "My Father who has given them to me is greater than all, and no one can seize out of the hand of my Father. I and the Father are one". Would you help us to distinguish between these two features?
J.T. I am not sure I could do that, because They are both doing the same thing. The Father and Son are doing the same thing. In fact, the Lord begins with that in @John 5:17. "My Father worketh hitherto
{350}
and I work". The Father shows Him all He is doing, the Father raises the dead and quickens them; and the Son quickens whom He will. They are both doing the same thing, and can any creature undertake to say that it is this Person or that Person? The simple thing is to accept limitation and that we are brought into that realm, and as we are intelligently able to address the Son we can do so.
A.A.T. I notice in @Psalm 43:4 "Upon the harp will I praise thee, O God, my God". Is that the language to be used in the service? The language there seems to fit in with this thought of the service of God as God. I was wondering if the psalmist was as high in the knowledge of God as we assume to be.
J.T. They thought that God was One. That was the great thought in the Old Testament. They did not attempt to work out in detail the thought of the Father and Son, the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, but we can do that. We are in the realm of revelation, which they were not in, but still, it is wonderful how they did touch these things, and the language they used indicates that some, especially David, had greater thoughts than others. After sonship came out with Solomon, David entered and sat down before Jehovah; that shows he was consciously greater than before. He had greater liberty and he used it.
A.H.P. Would it be right to remark that when speaking to the Lord Jesus we are speaking to God? Whatever title may be used in our minds, we should always remember He is God.
J.T. It is a question of how you can control your mind. The thought is there anyway, but at the same time, when you are speaking audibly, you are governed by what belongs to that part of the service.
J.W.D. I am trying to get help on this thought of going into infinitude, the distinctiveness of divine Persons merges.
{351}
J.T. Yes.
J.W.D. One has followed your previous ministry, with the sense that in speaking to God, you still have the Father in His distinctive personality before you, but now you say it is a little different; that is, it appears to me, when you reach God, distinctive divine Persons in Their personalities merge, so that it might be the Father, the Son or the Spirit.
J.T. It is a question of scripture; scripture is accurate. We cannot say our hymns are accurate in that sense. We had a hymn that we did not carry through which said, 'Thy death hath brought to light the Father's heart'. That is not an accurate thought. The death of Christ brought God's heart to light, not the Father's heart. The Father is not connected with judgment, but with grace, so we did not use that hymn. In another hymn (`207:3) the third verse says, 'Thy heart, our God, made known -- all, all is told!' which is a wider thought.
J.W.D. One thought that you stressed in ministry that, while we reached the idea of God, it was in that Person, the Father, Deity.
J.T. When we come to God, we come to God, how can you limit it? It is beyond us. It is infinitude. 'Thy heart, our God'. "Our God", that leads you to think how that expression stands in the scriptures. Then in the fourth verse of the hymn, O circle of affections all divine, The foretaste of eternity's bright scene, Where all the glories of Thy love shall shine In everlasting joy, and peace serene! the expression, O circle of affections all divine, is infinitude; we may touch it, but that is all we can say.
A.N.W. Is it fair to refer to @1 Corinthians 15:24 - 28 in connection with delivering up the kingdom? "Then the end, when he gives up the kingdom to him who is God and Father", but in reaching finality the word is, "Then the Son also himself shall
{352}
be placed in subjection to him who put all things in subjection to him, that God may be all in all". Does that not confirm what you are saying?
J.T. I think it does. "To him who is God and Father" lays a basis for that, but God is a wider thought. "Him", that is the Person, the abstract idea of the Deity. "To him who is God and Father", but the last statement is, "That God may be all in all". He is all in you.
Rem. In @Psalm 90:2 Moses says, "Even from eternity to eternity thou art God". Between those two words "eternity" is time, when the Father has been revealed in Christ.
J.T. Quite so. The revelation came in there; a great dip, as it were, from above, down from the Deity, "From eternity to eternity". We have the disclosure of the Persons. Moses could not have said that, but the revelation, that is, the incarnation of Christ comes in between the two eternities. Therefore, we have the Persons of the Deity. The question now before us is whether as in that realm, as we have in the hymn, 'O circle of affections all divine' (`207:4), we can undertake to name things? We are in the inscrutable, as well as infinitude; we are simply creatures after all. "Able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height" (@Ephesians 3:18); that is revelation; that does not refer to the Deity. That is what has come out in Christ. We cannot talk of the length and breadth of the Deity; that is infinite.
Ques. The mention of the height, would that be something beyond us?
J.T. The height means that it is not all obvious; that helps too. It is beyond us.
Ques. When we come to this point of touching things, the absolute essential Being of God, do we come to the confines of the economy, are we looking at something outside of it?
{353}
J.T. Well, we can look at that, the economy. The word 'economy' is simply to bring out what God has come into, what the Persons have come into in order to be known and become operational for the designs of love. We can apprehend that in the length, breadth and height of the thing into which They have come; but when we think of the Persons Themselves, we cannot apply "the breadth and length and depth and height" to Them; but we can say that the Persons have come in so as to be apprehended and loved.
Rem. I was wondering if we do not get out of the economy, but we look over the ocean of inscrutability, so to speak, and that is what helps us to assume the attitude of prostration.
J.T. I would be very hesitant about that; we are very limited, you know. The economy is enough, the fulness of God is in the economy: "That ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God". That is what we get in that passage in Ephesians.
Ques. Moses asked God to show him His glory and God said, "Thou shalt see me from behind", @Exodus 33:23. But the Lord Jesus has said, "He that has seen me has seen the Father", @John 14:9. There is further revelation there.
J.T. Quite so. That is the economy; the Persons have come into that so as to be apprehended.
J.W.D. Did you say something at Indianapolis in regard to the fulness of God, the idea of fulness in @Colossians 1, and the greatness in the heavens, implying we could stand in infinitude just over the brink?
J.T. The brink is in the heavens, "where the Christ is, sitting at the right hand of God", @Colossians 3:1. As to the word "fulness" in Colossians, it is said of Christ that "in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily"; the thing has come out. I do not know how far we can undertake to say anything about
{354}
abstract Deity; my impression is that it is beyond the creature's ability to grasp it, but the economy into which Christ has come and where the Father also is with Him affords us opportunity of knowing the Persons, knowing Their love, and loving Them too.
J.A.T. Are the economy and revelation commensurate thoughts?
J.T. Pretty much. The revelation includes the economy. We cannot go beyond the revelation; we are creatures and we never cease to be creatures. Of course, we have the Holy Spirit in us, operating in our minds, but nevertheless we never cease to be creatures.
Ques. God has created the creature capable of prostration, and it is a wonderful thing if we have our part in that prostration.
J.T. Quite so. That is what the Lord means. He tells us, "The hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; for also the Father seeks such as his worshippers", @John 4:23. That word "worship" involves prostration "in spirit and truth". We are all brought into that; that is open to us all. It does not, however, intimate that we have access to the knowledge of Deity in the abstract sense, because it is beyond us.
A.B.P. In @1 Corinthians 8:5 - 6 in regard to idolatry it says, "There is no other God save one. For and if indeed there are those called gods, whether in heaven or on earth, (as there are gods many, and lords many,) yet to us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and we for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him".
J.T. That is all referring to the economy, of course, the Father, the Son and the Spirit, "One
{355}
God, the Father, of whom all things, and we for him". That is all the economy.
A.B.P. That is, to us.
J.T. What we have objectively; how we look at things.
R.W.S. Does that require that the instrumentality of the Lord Jesus Christ should be alluded to before a brother says 'Amen', or is there liberty to just say 'Amen'?
J.T. I think so, so long as it is clear the service is carried on in the name of the Father and the Son. Whatever is done is carried on in the name of the Lord Jesus. I would say the service is carried on in that way. The apostle closes his doxology without any formal reference to the Name. That is how I look at it.
We have not got to the end of our psalm. I think it is worth while to have it before us in this way, so that in this time of pressure there might be richness, there might be something developed inwardly through the pressure, some production for God, something that adds to the service. The following psalms are very rich, looking on to the end of the 49th. We shall have to touch on these again in the next reading. God willing. We should read the 51st, which is a matter of repentance, another element that certainly enters into the present time, and this richness links up with that.
Ques. In @Psalm 47:5 - 7, "God is gone up amid shouting, Jehovah amid the sound of the trumpet. Sing psalms of God, sing psalms; sing psalms unto our king, sing psalms! For God is the king of all the earth; sing psalms with understanding" (verses 5 - 7). That is a beautiful link there. Does the remnant come into that?
J.T. It shows that in spite of their being driven out, dispersed in different circumstances, they retain richness in their thoughts, so we are holding the
{356}
ground in an individual way. We can see how a psalm like this bears that out. "God is gone up amid shouting, Jehovah amid the sound of the trumpet. Sing psalms of God, sing psalms; sing psalms unto our king, sing psalms! For God is the king of all the earth; sing psalms with understanding. God reigneth over the nations; God sitteth upon the throne of his holiness. The willing-hearted of the peoples have gathered together, with the people of the God of Abraham". Thus these scattered ones are holding to the truth of the promises that were made to Abraham.
A.N.W. Would you say a word more about the queen? You mentioned it this morning.
J.T. I am glad you brought us back to that. It is a balancing thought, I believe, in regard to government. "Kings¬ daughters are among thine honourable women; upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir", @Psalm 45:9. I think that is a full divine thought suggested from the first chapter of Genesis. "Let them have dominion ...", the man and the woman. The government requires that, as in the book of Esther, for instance. We have already alluded to the queen sitting by when Nehemiah made his request and how successful he was, and I think these saints we have before us are maintained richly in divine thoughts, beginning with @Genesis 1, worked out in relation to the people, as it says, of the God of Abraham. "The willing-hearted of the peoples have gathered together, with the people of the God of Abraham. For unto God belong the shields of the earth: he is greatly exalted", @Psalm 47:9. That is, God's purpose is involved there, but others are brought into it. "For unto God belong the shields of the earth: he is greatly exalted".
{357}
PRESERVATION IN CIRCUMSTANCES OF PRESSURE (3)
@Psalm 51:1 - 19
J.T. This is a psalm of repentance, which is evidently fitting in this section, the second book of Psalms. The historical heading, which is undoubtedly inspired, helps. The psalm is addressed to the chief Musician, meaning it is fit for the service of God; "A Psalm of David; when Nathan the prophet came to him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba". That is an historical account entering into the book that contemplates the consequence of Israel's guilt. It is not only David's guilt, but Israel's guilt which goes deeper than the sin of an individual. @Psalm 45 contemplates buoyancy, spiritual richness and liberty. This one, as we have remarked, contemplates repentance; the following psalms will bear in the direction of @Psalm 45, so that we have a further incident in David's life in the next psalm, the treachery of Doeg the Edomite; then we have @Psalm 53 which corresponds with @Psalm 14 which is a question of the fool, what he says in his heart; and we have a further incident in David's history in @Psalm 54, when the Ziphites came; and then we have another historical reference, the Philistines taking David in Gath, in @Psalm 56. Then we have three psalms, @Psalm 57, 58 and 59, in each of which the words, "Destroy not", are included. So that the brethren will see, I believe, the order of things in the Psalms, how we have one leading psalm and then one following which is corroborative.
Ques. Do you look upon the sin of David as an illustration of what we might call church iniquity: the responsible element in the meeting violating the sanctity of womanhood, what the church should be to Christ?
{358}
J.T. I am sure that is an important remark, and @Psalm 50 preceding this fits in in that it alludes to the spirit of ritual which marks Christendom. Ritualism is their protection, in a sense, from the guilt you allude to, a terrible state of things existing in Christendom, becoming just like the world itself, looseness.
Ques. What do you allude to in @Psalm 50?
J.T. Well, the allusion is to ritualism, I think. "Hear, my people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify unto thee: I am God, thy God. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt-offerings, continually before me" (@Psalm 50:7 - 8). They are there, but He is not reproving them for it, nor is He commending them. They are not to be commended, for they are superficial as shown in verses 9 to 23. "Unto the wicked God saith ...", that is to Christendom, making the application according to what we said: ungodly, unconverted men taking up the thing in ministry. So @Psalm 50 is preliminary, according to what you say, to the 51st.
Rem. That is very illuminating, and I suppose verse 6 of @Psalm 50 stands out over against that; it is what is inward, the working out of things there.
J.T. The Lord is saying in @Psalm 50 that He is not ignoring the people who offer sacrifices, who carry out ritual, that is those who take on the Lord's supper in an ordinary way, but He is not paying attention to guilt. So He says in verse 5, "Gather unto me my godly ones, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice!". That is there are those, the godly ones, and God is paying attention to them; but He is not paying any attention to the wholesale ritualism in Christendom except to reprove it. It is obnoxious to Him. Hence, the note of the gospel at the present time and the appeal to people to repent.
{359}
J.W.D. Is it your thought, as we had it yesterday in regard to the idea of being cast out of Jerusalem, that our young men have been taken from us to accentuate this spirit of repentance amongst us?
J.T. That is why I called attention to the previous psalms, instances in David's life which contemplate that he was cast out, an outcast, pursued by Saul; and then over against that, the spirit of grace, that we are not to be vindictive to brothers or to professors around. The three psalms with the words, "Destroy not", i.e., 57, 58 and 59, and another one elsewhere, call attention to grace in spite of the retribution meted out finally; it is a period of grace, "Destroy not". The Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives. So those brothers who are in the army, while they have their place in the governmental ways of God, with armies, navies and air force, understand the Christian's principle is not to destroy but to save.
C.A.M. Referring again to what you said about David, his experience not being confined to him personally but representing a larger matter, would you say that the fact that a principal ruler or a principal man passes through such intense pressure is largely on account of what is necessary for the people of God? I was thinking of the apostle Paul saying, "But for this reason mercy was shewn me, that in me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole long-suffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal", @1 Timothy 1:16.
J.T. Very good. Yes, he was a son of abortion, meaning that he was born before the time, showing that he really represented the Jews in the coming day. He was an insolent, overbearing man, and he had to go through things himself. Who experienced such pressure as he, as we learn from the letters to Corinth and other letters? David has to go through things, not only for himself, but for the state of the
{360}
people so that he might be a delineation of the state of the people, in principle, in the call to repentance. It is accentuated at least in some person.
A.N.W. So the Lord's word to Peter is, "When once thou hast been restored, confirm thy brethren" -- as never before, I suppose.
J.T. These men are outstanding -- Moses and Paul, Peter and David, in the Old and New Testaments, persons in whose histories God delineates some principal features of His testimony, whether negative or positive.
R.W.S. Do we not have to own that the work in most of us is very superficial and this allusion would deepen the work of God in us?
J.T. We know it is true in David's history, particularly. God would bring about a depth and richness from the incident alluded to in this psalm and how He met it. It was not simply that David made confession verbally, but the facts relate the depth of feeling that is necessary for repentance, if one is to be accepted by the assembly. @2 Samuel 12 records the parable in which the lamb is used, which is kept in the house; then David is very ready to condemn the guilt of the man in Nathan's parable. But Nathan says in verse 7, "Thou art the man!"(@2 Samuel 12:7). Then he records what happened, and it says, "And David said to Nathan, I have sinned against Jehovah. And Nathan said to David, Jehovah has also put away thy sin: thou shall not die. Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of Jehovah to blaspheme, even the child that is born to thee shall certainly die. And Nathan departed to his house. And Jehovah smote the child that Urijah's wife bore to David and it became very sick" (verses 13 - 15). That is, there was unfaithfulness in her also. That is to say, all this which is recorded in verses 7 to 23 preceded @Psalm 51, showing that
{361}
while it is so far so good, more was needed; this psalm is calculated to be the written words of a truly repentant person, not only one person, but a delineation of God for others.
Rem. It says of Sardis, "Thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead". I wondered if that would link on with this. Do you think the characteristics of Michal, Saul's daughter, as to womanhood, representative of Thyatira, might be carried forward so that dissatisfaction with Michal might lead to Sardis conditions? All these go to the test of repentance and the opening up of David's soul in relation to the divine system of things.
J.T. Quite so. God would have a man here really repentant at all times; but especially in Israel is the spirit of repentance brought out thoroughly and surely. All these instances to which you refer bear on it. The spirit of the world characterises Rome and all the other so-called denominations, so God takes up Jezebel and the persons representing the working out of sin in the most shameful way as the opposite of David.
W.L. Do you think it requires the knowledge of God to bring about repentance with us?
J.T. It does indeed. It is a question of ministry, really. Nathan was the gift of God to His people to meet such a thing as this.
W.L. I was thinking of verses 1 and 2 of this psalm.
J.T. It is much better to pay attention to the ministry to understand how the thing is brought about in us. Ministry has such a place with God. Nathan represents the ministry: his name signifies gift, a man raised up for a purpose and used of God, who is near enough to David to touch him. It is prophetic ministry. He had Nathan and he had God: he began with God.
{362}
Rem. In a sense it is like, "Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and keep it and repent", @Revelation 3:3.
J.T. Well, Sardis is in a way the outcome of Thyatira. I think that is the guilt of Rome. God allowed it. It is the guilt of centuries still going on after it is thoroughly exposed; it is still going on, but it came out at the time of the Reformation; the guilt was called attention to then. God raised up ministry, particularly in Luther, for that purpose, so there should be prophetic ministry from God to meet the case and it comes right down.
J.H.Jr. Would the woman at the well of Sychar be something like this? The Lord asked nothing of Nicodemus; would that link with @Psalm 50? But He asked something of the woman and when He speaks of what the water shall be in her, He raises the question of her moral state; and she recognises the minister: "Sir, I see that *thou* art a prophet"(@John 4:19).
J.T. It is at that point He calls her 'Woman'. The true character of woman would come in there. Nathan was not there. God was there, and so it refers to prophetic ministry now. God honours it at that juncture. So the woman says, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done". It is a prophetic matter.
W.L. Do you think the prophetic word brings out the work of God in us?
J.T. It does. That is the point. It brought it out in David. How rightly he admitted the truth! Nathan says, "Thou art the man!" and David replies and then Nathan says to him, "Jehovah has also put away thy sin".
C.R. Is the effect of the prophetic word seen in @Psalm 32:1? After David had kept silence for so long he says, "Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered!"
{363}
J.T. That helps as bearing on this psalm, as leading up to it because the maschilim character of that psalm (it is the first of the Maschils) shows there is instruction interwoven with this matter of repentance.
R.W.S. Where are the feelings as to this condition normally expressed as 'in the great house'? Are they expressed in prayer or privately or in the prophetic meeting?
J.T. Do you mean the feelings relative to repentance?
R.W.S. Yes. Our sad part in the confusion of Christendom.
J.T. I think the assembly is selected for that purpose. There are to be right feelings. The women of John's gospel, for instance, afford the feminine side of the matter. Nicodemus did not. He was a Pharisee and was more mental in what he was saying; but the woman in chapter 4 is more faithful. She is called woman. We have running through John several women, the next one being in chapter 8, the woman taken in wickedness. That is the thing that has to be recognised. The assembly would take account of all that, so when such wickedness arises and has been dealt with, the feelings are there, but the Holy One as well is there. Not only the prophet, but Peter recognises the Holy One of God and He passes over nothing; He is a priest.
C.A.M. You stress the importance of all this matter of deep exercise. It seems to have come through the long centuries before the glory of Solomon in sonship could be reached.
J.T. Solomon comes in positively as the outcome of David's great sin and the exercise consequent upon it. In @2 Samuel 12, he is scarcely spoken of, but the development came later in 1 Kings, and so today, I believe; the end reached in the Reformation was to bring out something in the way of repentance
{364}
negatively, but positively some movement of the Spirit in relation to Christ too. We might say it was centuries until the real thought was developed as to the Spirit, that is the truth of Christ and the assembly; it was more than a hundred years ago, but the Reformation preceded it. It was not for nothing. It was essential to it. The great call for Christendom to repent which was made through Luther's writings and so on at that time was not for nothing. Then there was the Puritan movement in England and the revivals before the nineteenth century. Following on that -- what we have alluded to already -- the truth of Christ and the assembly. All these furnished contributions for the service of God from individuals, but now we come to the real Solomon, God has brought that out, and I believe these psalms would humble us and sober us and subdue us so as to bring that out, so that the service of God might be enriched.
Ques. I have noticed that the matter of sonship is particularly trying and adjusting to some of our brethren. Do you think the root of that difficulty is perhaps the lack of repentance?
J.T. @Psalm 51 is the negative side, the repentance side; and if that is not there, there will be no Solomon. God has brought the test in of Solomon, Christ as the Son of God, and if it is refused, as it is being refused, you will get no contributions. The test has not been answered to.
Rem. @Psalm 32, verse 5 refers to the same line, showing how David came into the thing.
J.T. It is the first teaching psalm so-called, and undoubtedly the teaching from the Reformation onward is to lead up to sonship.
H.B. In @Psalm 50, verse 17, it says, "Seeing thou hast hated correction", or 'instruction'.
J.T. Well, there it is. I thought we should keep that in mind. God is not condemning the ritualistic
{365}
side. Ritual enters into the service. 1 Corinthians stresses it. The instructions have to be carried out, but the thing in itself is nothing; the breaking of bread is nothing in those independent companies, but there are actually some that are recognised. What is needed really to offset the mere ritualism of Christendom is in @Psalm 51.
J.W.D. I was wondering whether our young people are instructed as they should be, in the historical side of the truth in the Reformation so called, and the Puritan movement, and the great revivals up to the 19th century.
J.T. Just so. It is well they should be.
J.W.D. Very few know the tremendous change in connection with Wesley's ministry and so on.
J.T. The sad thing is that all that we have been speaking of, although it contributed to the service of God, ended in nothing. It did not lead in any collective way to the assembly. It led to nothing; all these great movements merged in the old system of Christendom. They did not lead on to the various truths that have been developed in the last 125 years or so, connected with Christ and the assembly, particularly recently the truth of eternal life and the thought too of sonship, both involving the collective side.
C.A.M. It is interesting that the delineation that Paul alludes to is that they should come into eternal life.
J.T. Quite so.
A.A.T. Repentance cannot be carried out in a general way.
J.T. No. The call to repentance is from the Reformation. That was the call to repentance, but the remnant was to come to light. "To you I say, the rest who are in Thyatira". The rest. That is another important matter. It is not the whole body. The whole body is Jezebel, which is left for the tribulation
{366}
because she will not repent. This psalm is calling on us to repent, but it is exhibited in someone; it is in David. The incident is indeed wonderful. But Jezebel will not repent and therefore the whole body is left. "But to you I say, the rest who are in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, who have not known the depths of Satan, as they say, I do not cast upon you any other burden; but what ye have hold fast till I shall come". @Revelation 2:24 - 25. That is the beginning of the remnant, and the thought I had is that the remnant is developed in Philadelphia.
R.W.S. Is it church repentance?
J.T. Well, I believe it is a question of the individual coming into it. This psalm helps us to acknowledge our part in the thing; if in any way this has happened in any one of us and we have repented in any special way, let us see how the thing is done, how it is exemplified here.
Rem. The collective idea is in @Psalm 50, verse 5: "Gather unto me"; then the continuation of this idea of repentance is not by sacrifice, for sacrifice might represent the historical side of things, but offering sacrifice would be more the continuance of things.
J.T. Offering sacrifice would be the thing being done. One might make use of sacrifice to make some confession in regard of it. It is a simile of it, so to speak.
S.R.Mc. Is the sacrifice here a broken and contrite spirit?
J.T. Just so. That is what we come to in @Psalm 51. The actual remnant in @Psalm 50, verse 5 is the thing to notice as to the general position. "To you I say, the rest who are in Thyatira", that is the actual remnant. Here we have, "Gather unto me my godly ones, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice!". That is to say, the sacrifice is
{367}
recognised and God is not ignoring it, because we have the cross, the supreme sacrifice in the death of Jesus before us, and God looks to us to be in accord with that.
A.H.P. Does this matter fit in with chapter 7 of 2 Corinthians where Paul speaks of the grief according to God working repentance to salvation never to be regretted? Would that be individual or collective?
J.T. Both. God allowed the man to sin in a most abominable way just as we have already alluded to, the looseness of the assembly at Corinth. Well, that is God. With David it was the same sort of thing. God allowed the sin to take place. The only thing said about the man at the first was that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. It was not suggested that he might be saved for the assembly, but in the day of the Lord Jesus; but his repentance was an example and if others are not warned by it, discipline will come in. When the Corinthians were subdued and repentant and obedient, then Paul says, 'I will deal with them'.
J.W.D. David is conscious of his origin in verse 5, then in verse 7 it is "Purge", and then in verse 10 "Create". How do you understand the attitude of the heart towards God in regard to creation?
J.T. We have the exemplification in David himself in @2 Samuel 12. This is composed afterwards, and we should expect to get something more from the later composition. The attitude and actions of David were exemplary at that time, but this psalm is evidently later; so that we have a call first. It says in the beginning of the psalm, "Be gracious unto me, O God". That is, he knew God, and if we are going to call people to repent, we cannot do it unless grace is reigning and so David says, "Be gracious unto me, O God, according to thy loving-kindness; according to the abundance of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions. Wash me fully from mine
{368}
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin". This is a prayer to God; that is God is ready to operate with anyone who is ready to repent and will help them do it. "For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is continually before me. Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done what is evil in thy sight". He had sinned against others too, but the chief thing is to own our sin against God. Then he justifies God: "That thou mayest be justified when thou speakest, be clear when thou judgest". That is quoted in @Romans 3, showing that it enters into the gospel in a negative sense. "Behold, in iniquity was I brought forth, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Behold, thou wilt have truth in the inward parts; and in the hidden part thou wilt make me to know wisdom. Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. Make me to hear gladness and joy; that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a steadfast spirit within me", @Psalm 51:1 - 10. It would seem as if it involves the creative power of God inwardly in new birth. So the word born again means born from the top. It is a thorough matter.
Ques. Is the idea of grace the essence really, the revelation of God in an environment and condition of things where there is nothing to call it forth? Therefore it is necessary to bring that in and then the basis for receiving it is undoubtedly on the line of new birth.
J.T. Well, quite so. It is a question of the constitution of the system, that grace is reigning. It is not demand, but it is grace. Reigning is absolute. If we are calling upon people to repent, grace is operative. So that the matter is dealt with on the principle of the dispensation. Surely the Reformation and all that has followed since is again to set up the
{369}
dispensation. So that there is the operation of grace since God began to work in recovery.
Ques. Do you think in dealing with the principle of sin as we occasionally have to, it would be helpful if we could bring in some feature of the divine glory to bear on the person?
J.T. How many distinctions there are! How many appellations we can list of the gospel! Take the gospel of the grace of God, and the glory of His grace, and a number of others like that showing that God is reasserting the dispensation in view of repentance. If He expects persons to repent, He is able to help us to repent and to resort to the idea of creation so as to help us.
Rem. The apostle uses the phrase, "The might of his glory". That links on with it, does it not?
J.T. Quite so.
J.P. Is it interesting that Peter quotes at length from David in his first gospel preaching in the Acts, and it says, "And having heard it they were pricked in heart, and said to Peter and the other apostles, What shall we do, brethren? And Peter said to them, Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. For to you is the promise and to your children, and to all who are afar off, as many as the Lord our God may call", @Acts 2:37 - 39.
J.T. Quite so. People were affected by the Spirit of God and then they wanted to know what to do. Well, will the clergy tell them that? Will the public do it? Will general ministers of Christendom do it? No. The repenting people appealed to Peter and to the rest, that is the levitical brethren, the twelve apostles. Whoever represents them today are the ones God is using; we have been speaking of the psalms of instruction beginning with @Psalm 32, which is a great psalm for the gospel. The great point is,
{370}
what shall we do? It is teaching people very largely, and so Peter says. Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. That is a beautiful statement of the gospel.
Ques. Would this chapter indicate to us that the person that could write such a psalm has the Holy Spirit?
J.T. He might not have. Most people in Christendom who are exercised in this way have not got the Spirit. They have not the truth of the full gospel because, as Paul says, "In whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise", @Ephesians 1:13. Well, there are those that are anxious about their souls, but it is a question of whether they have the Spirit. It is a question of teaching; they are not told about the matter. These psalms of instruction beginning with @Psalm 32 (most of them are in the second book of Psalms) are to teach us so we can enter into what is necessary to come into the full truth of the gospel.
J.H-t. Is that why Paul says, "In meekness setting right those who oppose, if God perhaps may sometime give them repentance to acknowledgment of the truth"(@2 Timothy 2:25)? That is clear full knowledge.
J.T. I am sure God would use the brethren, those who seek to walk in the truth, to enlighten our brethren around who are largely in the dark night spiritually.
Rem. One who has the Holy Spirit might grieve the Holy Spirit.
J.T. The allusion just now has been to the present application of it: that possibly many have the Spirit who have sinned and repented. Possibly many have. David represents these here, although it is true that the Holy Spirit was not given in that dispensation as it is given now, still David had the experience of the
{371}
Holy Spirit and that would apply at the present time. There are those who experience the Holy Spirit. That helps because there are many like that, and David, I believe, is representative of that for us so that we might make allowance for persons who have the Spirit. So you can ask, 'Have you any experience of having the Holy Spirit? Have you got that truth, sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise?' Well, the person might say, 'I have not', and yet he might have experience with the Holy Spirit, and that would mean he is sealed.
C.A.M. @John 3 helps in regard to that because the Lord speaks to Nicodemus about the Holy Spirit in a remarkable way.
J.T. That is so. The word the Lord uses is not 'convert' at all. It is from the top. The work must take place in the believer from the top to the bottom, re-create. We might say new birth implies that.
W.L. I was wondering if repentance involves a new start with us. David gets back to foundations here.
J.T. Well, I think if anyone is to be exemplary of the truth of repentance, it is to be one who has the experience of the Holy Spirit, like David. He knows how to deal with himself inwardly.
T.S. In @Luke 15:7:10 it mentions twice, "one repenting sinner". He also shows us one who does it in a full way too.
J.T. A good point. It enters into what we are saying. For a man who really repents is a changed man. The man was brought into it and that involves the teaching psalms, that I take in the truth and let the truth I have taken in operate inwardly in me.
R.M. Would you say the repentance of David brought out the beauty of Jehovah and the woman at the well brought out the beauty of the Lord Jesus?
J.T. Quite so.
{372}
R.W.S. Do you differentiate between experience of the Holy Spirit and possession of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. In this dispensation, I would think as to the experience of the Holy Spirit that the person has the Spirit, but is ignorant as to the doctrine, hence there is the need of the instructive psalms to get the man active; then we receive the truth; that is what David is speaking of here.
Ques. Just what do you mean by experience in this connection? A sort of inward conflict with the flesh or does it go farther, sitting under the ministry of the Spirit?
J.T. It would be a question of what would be applied. Paul says, "After that ye believed"(@Ephesians 1:13) It is in the order of one, two, three. The believing comes first. That is with the mind, and then you are sealed with the Spirit, meaning the Spirit acts so as to give you to understand you are divine property. That is the idea of sealing, God has a claim over you, and you are consistent with that. You have an entirely different view of God than you had, in the knowledge of God in the gospel.
--.MacC. David and Saul were both anointed.
J.T. David had the experience of the anointing.
J.A.T. @Romans 5:5 says, "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us", but the indwelling of the Spirit does not come in until the 8th chapter.
J.T. But He is there. It is a question of order. 'After that ye believe' is an act of the mind; and after believing, you are sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise.
A.A.T. How much time might elapse after you believe?
J.T. A long time with many because of want of teaching. These teaching psalms tell the truth of God in the gospel. "Be gracious unto me, O God". Grace reigns.
{373}
R.A. David gives a lead in this matter so that henceforth he says, "I will teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall return unto thee" (verse 13).
J.T. That is the idea. You are exemplary of the truth of repentance in the gospel, but ready and able to teach others. The youngest believer can teach. In fact a young believer can often help unbelievers because he is fresh in his ideas of the gospel.
A.B.P. Do you distinguish between faith and the Spirit? Does faith necessarily precede the gift of the Spirit?
J.T. Always, I would say.
A.B.P. There is a question being raised about some not knowing that they have the Spirit. I was wondering if there was a distinction between what we can touch or reach by faith and what we can touch by the Spirit.
J.T. The order is faith first -- having believed. That is, 'having' means I have got it. Faith first, and then the sealing which is not so much the Spirit working in me as that God has a right over me -- I am God's property. I am sealed, belonging to God. The Holy Spirit would work in me in that sense. I feel God has some rights over me, and I cannot do as I please as I used to do. I am God's property.
--.H--t.Sr. @Hebrews 6:4 says, "Have been made partakers of the Holy Spirit".
J.T. That would be just as we are today. The Spirit is here and every person in this room, if he has any sense of right feelings, is partaking of the thing; but he is under responsibility because of that particular fact. He may give it all up, and that makes him all the more responsible.
J.W.D. Is the thought in verse 14 of blood-guiltiness linked on with the government of God and the possibility of being delivered from it?
J.T. He had really to answer to Bathsheba's husband as well as to God, do you mean?
{374}
J.W.D. I was thinking in connection with sin that whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. Can we count upon God to deliver us from the fruits of His government in regard to sin?
J.T. Quite so. To be delivered from blood-guiltiness is to be delivered from the state in which you are which is intolerable. Cleanse me from unrighteousness. Blood-guiltiness is an awful thing. Primarily this psalm will apply to Israel in future; the smiting of Christ which Peter laid on their conscience. But then the man sinned against too is not to be forgotten. I believe that comes out in the next great psalm that will come to our attention, the 69th, which, no doubt, will teach us something about this and how the sufferings of Christ enter into all this.
E.C. Do you think David had in mind the building of the house when he said, "Deliver me from blood-guiltiness"?
J.T. No doubt.
A.N.W. In that connection should we not look at verse 18, "Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion; build the walls of Jerusalem"? Is not that to be the objective in these recoveries?
J.T. Quite so. If any of us are engaged in the gospel service, we have nothing less in mind than Zion. Converts ought to be brought into that, but instead they are taken into this great system, built up during the last two centuries, and now they do not build up the assembly, they just build up human organisations. In fact some of the leading men advise them to go to this denomination or that, not the assembly.
H.B. Is there the same principle in 2 Corinthians where we get the ministry as to the collection in chapters 8 and 9, building up Zion and its walls and so on? It seems to develop out of the thought of purifying themselves, as though there is a state there for the consolidation of what is of God.
{375}
J.T. That is so. In chapters 8 and 9 of the second letter, the truth is used as advancing in Corinthians. The collection is so wonderful in that sense. It makes much of the assemblies and Christ's glory. It brings that to light which involves Zion, of course.
A.H.P. Then verse 16 corresponds with what was said earlier about sacrifice, and does verse 17 suggest the sacrifices that are secured by way of repentance, what is more positive?
J.T. Yes, they are viewed in their spiritual quality: "The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise". The knowledge of God enters into all this, leading up to Zion.
A.B.P. Would the steadfast spirit, referred to in verse 10, have in mind that we should be preserved from apostasy?
J.T. I think that is good. "Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a steadfast spirit within me". So we are not wanderers like Edom. He is regarded as a roamer. Faith makes us steadfast.
{376}
PRESERVATION IN CIRCUMSTANCES OF PRESSURE (4)
@Psalm 60:1 - 12; @Psalm 68:1 - 18
J.T. The idea of conflict and territory acquired through it victoriously is in mind in this group of psalms. It is thought that this will be seen as applicable to our dispensation, for it involves territory acquired morally, not militarily in the ordinary sense, but in a moral sense by conquest through the Scriptures, as the word, through the gospel. The book leads on into the millennium, which we shall see, God willing, tomorrow, for the remaining psalms after 68 lead directly to the millennial day. Indeed these psalms do too, only their peculiar application is on moral lines, the name God being used, not Jehovah. Now this runs through the whole of the second book: Jehovah sometimes comes in, but God is more definitely before us in this section and God is before us of course in the present dispensation. We have "God's glad tidings, ... concerning his Son ... Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 1:1 - 4.
So what is to be observed in this first psalm read is that it records historically a great triumph for David, and that thought enters into the psalms we have immediately before us. It was a triumph for David, not when he was driven out as we had earlier, although that enters into these first verses too, but it is a triumph during his reign and territory is acquired, not for the sake of acquiring it, but because it was usable. There is not much in territory unless it can be used. It is only a name. So that we have here in verses 6 to 8, "God hath spoken in his holiness: I will exult, I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth. Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine, and Ephraim is the strength of
{377}
my head; Judah is my law-giver; Moab is my washpot; upon Edom will I cast my sandal; Philistia, shout aloud because of me". That is, the shout really refers to God. His is the triumph, as another section teaches us. Now this psalm affords a good opportunity to consider the idea of territory as acquired for present use by God: "The earth is Jehovah's, and the fulness thereof", @Psalm 24:1. Universally it is His and it is acquired through redemption. That is what has come up now. The moral right expresses redemption. God is only acquiring territory for what is usable in it, which leads up to the saints being taken on by God for usefulness, for service; this culminates in @Psalm 68, where we have the great thought of headship which is quoted in the book of Ephesians. So that we have a direct application to Christianity in the present period in these psalms.
Ques. Would the apostle Paul himself be a great evidence of what God has secured for His own use in that way?
J.T. I think he represents what we are speaking of. He is called a vessel by the Lord. That is, he is acquired not merely for heaven but for usefulness in service here below and he it is that tells us about journeyings, and about labours, and about territory. "I, from Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum, have fully preached", @Romans 15:19. What an immense territory he had to do with! He indicates he had Rome in mind. That was the western extremity of the then known world.
A.N.W. In @John 4 the Lord seems to secure more from Samaria than He does from Israel. "Jesus therefore, being wearied with the way he had come"(@John 4:6).
J.T. That is a good suggestion. "Being wearied" with His journey, He not only acquired drink but two days¬ lodging. He was entertained; another good suggestion. The great idea of entertaining, hospitality, is included in what we are speaking of. We are
{378}
not to be forgetful of it. The levites are not a burden to be pushed off at any time as soon as we are through with them. They are to be regarded "exceedingly in love on account of their work", @1 Thessalonians 5:13.
Ques. Does the territory taken, beginning with verse 6, suggest that in the recovery in the power of Christianity and the gospel it extends to both sides of the Jordan? Some of this territory is on the east of Jordan, and therefore involves the light and glory of God getting into the households and business relationships, all our private lives, as well as our ecclesiastical lives.
J.T. Quite so. The territory here is easily traceable and can be applied any time by way of extension. God was not pleased to extend Himself through the gospel towards the East. The Euphrates was not passed. David makes much of that; he establishes his dominion by the Euphrates in @1 Chronicles 18:3, but the gospel does not seem to have worked in that direction. The modern effort does not seem to be a success. The successful or fruitful territory is in the West.
Ques. Are you referring to the scripture in @Acts 16:6, 7: "Having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia, ... and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them"?
J.T. That is good. That comes in, showing how the Spirit was operating in the vessels. Paul was a vessel and he was amenable to the suggestions of the Spirit. He was not suffered by the Spirit to do so and so. The word "Asia" there is the province, not the continent, and was much used in gospel service, but still the point was made at that time that Paul was to proceed into the West. Hence, the man of Macedonia comes in a vision to him and says, "Pass over into Macedonia" (the idea of territory is specially mentioned) "and help us". @Acts 16:9. It was
{379}
not a matter of military conquest; the point is a moral conquest. Paul would be the helper.
R.W.S. How do you understand the first five verses, where it speaks of scattering and bewilderment and displeasure?
J.T. That is in keeping with the teaching of the book. We never lose sight of Israel being scattered and driven out. That is not all Israel, not the apostate or disobedient Israel, but the remnant, those who were subject. The book always keeps that in mind, and it fits in here. The writer, David, contemplates in the very presence of a great victory that the saints should suffer. "O, God, thou hast cast us off, thou hast scattered us, thou hast been displeased: restore us again". That is a prayer, a petition. You may wonder why it is brought in where he has got a great victory. "Thou hast made the earth to tremble, thou hast rent it; heal the breaches thereof; for it shaketh. Thou hast shewn thy people hard things; thou hast made us to drink the wine of bewilderment". Well, as remarked, it seems incongruous that it should be brought in in the very presence of victory but it is in keeping with the second book of Psalms where the people are driven away from their proper settings and their privileges, but where their minds keep clearly the great things of God, His purposes and prophetic intentions.
R.W.S. Is not that a moral victory in itself, the people acknowledging that?
J.T. It is. That is the point now whether those who are much spoken of amongst us, in our meetings, are able to use such things, able to use such language, being able to use their minds to refresh, to carry with them what they once enjoyed. In speaking of our dear young brethren we must not think it is all for them, because the Spirit of God has ourselves who are gathered here in mind. Are we
{380}
learning and able to use such language when we are not passing through these things actually?
H.G.H. Does it suggest that territory can only be obtained as a result of pressure in circumstances, as in the opening verses?
J.T. Just so. Why should we escape? "In pressure thou hast enlarged me", @Psalm 4:1. But all the saints are involved, and if this territory is immune, and it is more or less, it is territory governed of God that is in view. Well, are we to be immune from the proper exercises that affect the brethren elsewhere? Are we not to share in them?
J.T.Jr. The idea of striving comes in in the heading of the psalm. It says, "when he strove"; the teaching must strive to overcome what may be in some of us.
J.T. The Syrians of Mesopotamia had to be met in the early part of Judges, Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, led in that triumph. Mesopotamia refers to the land of the two rivers. "Syrians of Zobah", it is noticeable the place the Syrians have. It is a well-known conflict and a successful one. These exercises in the early verses are proper to us even though we are not passing through them directly in our experiences.
C.A.M. I wondered if the fact that the Syrians are made prominent in the heading, would connect with the commencement of the apostle's career at Damascus when "he preached Jesus that he is the Son of God", and when the king of the place was against him.
J.T. That is a good suggestion. We have already touched on Paul as entering into the whole position here. The Lord at that particular time calls him, "an elect vessel to me", @Acts 9:15. That is, he is laid hold of for service. Now he has to learn how to serve in Syria. We know how the gospel was introduced in connection with Syria in the time of
{381}
Naaman, and how we have it in Saul of Tarsus, the inhabitant of the street called Straight, and how he had to learn to go into the Syrian city and be told what to do. He has to learn to be obedient, for he is to be a vessel, usable, and to have others, not superior officers, but ordinary persons, telling him what to do. The Lord Himself could have told him what to do better than any, but he is to be told what to do by ordinary brethren.
Ques. Would the word, "testimony", in the heading refer to that?
J.T. No doubt.
C.A.M. He expresses it to the Galatians, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me" (@Galatians 1:15,16). I was thinking about this matter of learning to do what he was told. What a great matter that must have been for him!
J.T. So one has to be like a wash-pot, a very degraded sort of occupation for most of us: "Moab is my wash-pot". Moab is said to be very proud in its historic characteristics. Paul was very proud and he had to become a wash-pot.
J.H.Jr. Does John Mark have to come this way before he can be called serviceable and take up teaching on this line?
J.T. He had to learn it over again. He represents a journeyman who fails in his novitiate. The Levites had a novitiate which was five years. John Mark failed; he returned from the work. The idea in the Levite is work (@Numbers 8:24). "Cursed be he that doeth the work of Jehovah negligently", @Jeremiah 48:10. We must not make it a side line. It is a real thing to addict ourselves to and he failed in that. John Mark had to learn over again and he became an excellent worker. There may have to be second lessons like Peter's recovery or conversion. We get the word 'made' applied to Peter: "I will make you". It is a question of the Maker taking advantage of the
{382}
circumstances to work, making the vessel what it is needed for.
Ques. Is this something prior to the idea of gift that comes out in the other psalm suggested? Is this moral formation that qualifies for the flow of what comes from Christ in headship?
J.T. That is what we hope to reach, Ephesian ground. Gift and the ability to serve come from heaven. The Lord Jesus "ascended up above all the heavens", @Ephesians 4:10. We have the exalted character of the service there and verse 8 is a citation from this @Psalm 68. So the Lord would help us as we are subject together. What strikes one here is that if one is to be usable, one has to be subject first, to learn from others who are perhaps inferior. Take your orders from a corporal instead of a colonel, so long as he gives you the right ones; we have to be subject and take them and work them out.
H.B. So Paul in reciting his conversion does not leave out that Ananias said, "Why lingerest thou?", @Acts 22:16.
J.T. That is so.
S.R.McC. "Arise and get baptised, ... calling on his name". Is that the idea of the wash-pot there?
J.T. Just so. The word is applicable, Ananias spoke about that. "Why lingerest thou?". Why do you hold back from what humbles you? Baptism would humble a Jew particularly. It meant he was giving up his religion, Judaism.
T.S. Is the matter of the striving and meeting the Syrian element in the city met by Paul as let down through the wall in a basket at Damascus?
J.T. Yes, it was a very humiliating thing that it should happen to him. He records it himself and calls God as witness (@2 Corinthians 11:31 - 33). It is most important that he did go through such humiliating circumstances, and that at Damascus.
{383}
R.A. @Psalm 60 is headed "Michtam of David", the word means golden; is that a moral quality of David working out as he strove against these Syrians, and in going forth to Goliath? David was ruddy, and of a beautiful countenance.
J.T. Just so. It refers to the character of the instrument used in the service. It is used several times, beginning in @Psalm 16, I think, showing what suggestions there are in the use of the word. We cannot afford to leave out any of these words of the headings. But the vessel had to be usable. It is the language of a victorious warrior, but it is used by the remnant in these circumstances of being cast out, showing that their minds are clear; they are not forgetting old victories and possibly anticipating new ones, in view of the millennium. So, "God hath spoken in his holiness: I will exult", @Psalm 60:6. It is a question of God's triumph. It is God here, not the Messiah.
H.G.H. Does the "banner" in verse 4 suggest the thought of support in these circumstances?
J.T. That is the next thing. "Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth". That is the verse that enters into the whole section. Some one, but it is one that fears God, gets a banner.. We may pursue the thought of Paul in this. How faithful he was! He had grace to be faithful to hold to the truth. The epistle to the Galatians perhaps sets out more distinctively than any of the others how he contended for the truth.
Ques. "God hath spoken", would that be in connection with Paul's experience, his secret relations? How would that come to him, this opening out of the mind of God in regard to striving and acquiring new territory?
J.T. In Paul's own case you mean? Well, he laid himself out for things. He went to Damascus; he
{384}
was led in. He was really blind, but still the work was started and he was found in the house of one called Judas, by the direction of the Lord. The Lord takes the matter on because He is in charge in Saul's case peculiarly. Paul got the Spirit, of course. There is no possibility of making any headway in a conflict without the Spirit. Paul got the Spirit and then preached in the synagogue, "Jesus that *he* is the Son of God", @Acts 9:20. That was the point. We might say, Peter should have done that because he was with Jesus, but he does not do it -- neither in his first address nor in any subsequent ones that we know of. Paul says, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations", @Galatians 1:15,16. So revelations come by the Spirit.
C.A.M. He says, "God, who set me apart even from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me". Do you think that he was "called" when he was converted?
J.T. Well, I suppose so; we know in our own souls how much is done at one time, but I think the apostle is reviewing his history to the Galatians. It was a critical time, it was a question of conflict, an effort of the devil to wrench from the Galatian believers the truth of the gospel, to cause them to return to the beggarly elements from whence they had been taken. So the apostle, as it were, girds himself for conflict. Anyone who remembers the epistle will recall how he girded himself as facing the whole matter, and saying, 'It is a serious matter and all the brethren are with me in it'. It is important to get the brethren with you if it is a real issue. Then he proceeds gradually and steadily to show how he contended and how he was victorious.
Ques. "To whom we yielded in subjection not even for an hour", @Galatians 2:5. I was wondering about that hour. How would you view it?
{385}
J.T. "Not ... an hour", well it is negative. There is no time of yielding. Is not that it?
You mention the idea of time: it comes into this whole inquiry. That is we have territory in mind and time in mind. Time is a great item. It is the scarcest thing we have in the service. We shall find in this section how God is occupied with time so that when we come, for instance to @Psalm 65, the whole year is alluded to. It enters into Paul's service; he did not find time to do all the things he wanted to. It was scarce with him. @Psalm 65 is a beautiful tribute to how God uses the year. As it says, "Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness" (verse 11). That is one passage that enters into this inquiry, how the year, the present time, is "the acceptable year of the Lord", @Luke 4:19. We have the idea of an hour; John uses it and Paul uses it. We have the months too, and we have weeks and we have days, all leading up to the great period of time called the millennium. We shall have to look at that later. I am only referring now to time and how it was used. What a period that will be for God working out His pleasure in men in flesh and blood, not heavenly, not yet changed, and of course if it can be worked out for one thousand years with men in that condition, it can be worked out now. Christians are all men in flesh and blood and God is working in us, therefore time is scarce. We are to redeem it by ample opportunities and not waste any of it, because we will not have another opportunity. If we do not grow now, when shall we grow? Therefore let us be in the habitable part, in rich soil such as a time like this where there is fruitfulness and where the year is finished. He crowns the year with His goodness. Our young people are apt to waste time, to find time on their hands, but no real servant of God finds time on his hands. He has not enough. God is showing us how it is to be used.
{386}
He began to use it first Himself, and how much God did on the first, second and third days, indeed the whole six days!
C.A.M. It is remarkable how much comes into the spiritual year, how complete it all is!
J.T. It came put in Israel. God used the agricultural year and the ecclesiastical year, of course there is the lunar year and that year is in that way usable, and it has to be understood. I am just referring to it now so that we might have it in our minds in the inquiry. So we return to @Psalm 60 where we get the territory acquired because it is usable. God would show His ability to take any country, even the whole continent of Asia, but He did not wish to. He has left it, you may say; it is still lying fallow in heathendom, but He has taken America. It was not known in apostolic times as far as we know, but the time came when it was needed and we can thank Him now that He did take it, because it is in view of the present crisis.
A.A.T. This is in keeping with the thought of the Western movement.
J.T. It is Japheth territory and God has taken it because He needs it provisionally, not because of rebellion against the British.
A.N.W. I think you have mentioned in regard of the East that for the moment God has left it and has it in reserve for use in another day.
J.T. Quite so. Yes, to use it in a quick time. We have time mentioned in @Revelation 12:6,14: "A thousand two hundred and sixty days" and "a time, and times, and half a time". The latter is simply time abbreviated so as to abbreviate experience. It is to show how experience enters into it. I think this is all very interesting, and the brethren ought to be all in it too because we are in the last days and it is a question of territory, of the testimony; the war is about it but God is saying something and these
{387}
psalms show that He can take any part of it He wishes. He could look at these items that can extend to any territory. "I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth. Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine, and Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver". God, as it were, is saying, It is Mine anyway without conflict. "Moab is my wash-pot; upon Edom will I cast my sandal; Philistia, shout aloud because of me". So God can take this continent, the whole continent of Australia, or any other country or island as He pleases at any time, and we are to learn that and be content under divine shelter. "Be still, and know that I am God", @Psalm 46:10.
J.T.Jr. When Paul took Corinth it was a question of time; he served there eighteen months, and then later on three years at Ephesus, and at Rome two years. While these territories are not on the map in that way yet, they are held, are they not?
J.T. He was there, and while he was there the thing was held; he was two years in Rome as a prisoner, under Caesar.
A.B.P. Would it be right to say, with so many of the young brethren being taken away from their localities, there should be exercise that the territory should not be given up?
J.T. That is the point; so we should make way for headship, keep the door open for it, not clericalism but headship.
G.D. "Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth" (verse 4). Is truth the essential and underlying thing in the taking of this territory?
J.T. That is the verse that we have already called attention to. It runs through the whole inquiry, the whole section. "Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth". It is not the person who is trained and
{388}
who has titles but those who fear God; that thought runs through scripture. Joseph spoke about it.
R.W.S. "God hath spoken in his holiness: I will exult, I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth. Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine, and Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver; Moab is my wash-pot; upon Edom will I cast my sandal; Philistia, shout aloud because of me". Is there anything distinctive in what God is doing in different territories?
J.T. Well, He may work it out that way. "Ephraim is the strength of my head" would point to the place Ephraim had in the distribution of the territory. It was Joseph -- Ephraim and Manasseh. Ephraim is the chosen one of the two, representing the sovereignty of God.
A.N.W. I think your reference to Moab as being proud and being used as a wash-pot, is a clue to it.
C.A.M. Referring to the matter of headship, a prominent instance of headship is in the case of Jephthah in @Judges 11. He came from Gilead. I was wondering whether that would have any connection?
J.T. It is remarkable that in Jephthah there should be the idea showing that God can take up such a man and develop it in him. Undoubtedly it is in Paul that it is worked out. He goes right through. We have him in @Psalm 68:27; we did not read about it; "There is little Benjamin, their ruler; the princes of Judah, their company". Benjamin had been greatly reduced but he became the ruler, and where could you find it any better exhibited than in Paul, in the epistle to the Corinthians?
C.A.M. The laying hold of headship would include all territory.
J.T. That is the idea, I think. Tomorrow we shall have the 69th and then the last psalm of this book, which is Solomon's and then, "The prayers of David
{389}
the son of Jesse are ended", a good finish for tomorrow, the first day of the week. But now it is headship, but it is preceded by what we have just been speaking of, the acquiring of territory on military lines. It is how the gospel has acquired territory and how God is working out His thoughts. Although men are maintaining the territory, God says it is His.
Ques. When there has been the acquiring of the territory answering to the last verse of @Psalm 60, we can be assured that there has been the full entering into the moral issues preceding. When we see territories coming under the glory of the gospel and under headship it means there has been the meeting of moral issues in some one who has brought God in. Is that right?
J.T. That is very good. This same portion of the psalm (verses 6 - 12) appears later in the last book, showing how the Spirit of God can use the same thing in different circumstances. It appears in @Psalm 108 in connection with the subject of the last book which leads up to the millennium, universal praise. Here it is used in a more limited way to lead up to headship in the assembly.
J.T.Jr. When the territory is taken I suppose it requires a lot of regulation to set it right, which would come out in the idea of the law-giver and headship. The wash-pot would be an essential thing, taking up things, having everything in order, that morally we are clean all the time.
J.T. Well, that is all very good. I think we may apply it to territory that we have, for instance this country which, for long enough in my own experience, was under reproach spiritually. A man would be warned not to come to America for he would not get on spiritually. That was true maybe, but it would deny what God can do. Even although it might be true, yet God in due course could do something in a country like this. He did something at Crete. Crete
{390}
was a small island in the Mediterranean but it was enough to yield the principle that certain territories are affected by local conditions. That is "Cretans are always liars", @Titus 1:12. Well, that could be extended to any country. There is some particular feature, characteristic of every country, that is likely to damage the brethren, and that feature in this country is independence and other such things.
Rem. The point is to see that there is entire clearance and self-judgment in our souls so that the Spirit is not hampered. Even though I may say wonderful things in the gospel, if I am lacking in the matter of self-judgment, power is not there.
J.T. So this matter of the wash-pot means there is something that must be cleaned up. The things that have to be cleaned up are usually specific, that is they develop out of the character of the country in which we may be, or the local town or city. The washing is to take place. Hence it is, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me", @John 13:8. That is an important thing; I am left out if I am not washed. Then again if one wishes to have fellowship with the brethren, does he wash his robes? "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city". @Revelation 22:14. Well, there is the wash-pot again. "Through the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit", @Titus 3:5. It was all characteristic of the Cretans; they needed washing in a peculiar way, deliverance from the characteristic of the place.
Ques. Do you see anything hopeful in America in any particular way right now?
J.T. Not spiritually. It is just a provisional state of things.
Rem. I have heard that you said that church conditions are more or less generally Corinthian in this territory.
{391}
J.T. That is true. Hence the wash-pot was needed. Baptism is brought in there although Paul says, "For Christ has not sent me to baptise" (@1 Corinthians 1:17); though he brought it in, he baptised certain persons. They were influential persons. So that he kept the matter in mind. As you are suggesting, the general situation is Corinthian, and hence you hardly have a meeting where Corinthians does not enter into it. Earlier it was @Romans 7, but now it is Corinthians.
A.B.P. "The valley of Achor for a door of hope" (@Hosea 2:15) would suggest the value of a particular piece of territory, something that is worked out in it to be regulatory and of benefit to the saints.
J.T. That is the idea of territory. It may suggest a principle. Crete suggests a principle and the valley of Achor suggests a principle; God is going to turn it into hope. It is in that way that I would avoid attaching any special privilege to any territory, because if anything is of God in any territory the thing that is characteristic of that territory has been judged; there is no glory in that.
J.W.D. In regard to this idea of Corinthian conditions, most of our morning meetings, anyway as to light, are clothed by the glory of sonship. Is it hypocrisy -- the sense of liberty in the light of sonship?
J.T. Well, I do not know that I see. Some one said that I had made the remark that this continent was marked by the characteristics of Corinth, but I said once that it was general, that it included all the countries of the world, all the meetings we have. I have been in most parts of the world now and I find this characteristic, the epistle to the Corinthians. You hardly ever miss it in a meeting. It refers to assembly procedure in the main.
J.W.D. You are referring now to the teaching of Corinthians, not to the evil conditions that prevailed in Corinth?
{392}
J.T. That is meant too. The conditions that prevailed in Corinth enter into all the gatherings. It will be constant. We have to keep at it all the time, washing all the time. It is not those who have washed but those who wash, a continuous thing: "Blessed are they that wash".
J.W.D. I see that matter; but the feeling I have in this is that on the side of privilege and purpose we seem to be getting on so well, with light and liberty and joy on the lines of sonship, moving in heavenly territory. It does not seem quite in keeping with a general Corinthian state amongst us.
J.T. Perhaps you are taking what I said too literally, but the ministry that God gives indicates the state where it is given. And what I have observed is that there is a constant necessity for bringing in the truth of Corinthians. It is not being laid hold of and acted upon, the truth of fellowship, for instance. There is hardly a meeting you go to where some one is not proposing getting married to some one not in fellowship, and people think nothing of having a radio although they know it is contrary to the truth of the fellowship.
C.A.M. A number of years ago there was a crisis and the thing headed up in England. When you were asked whether you would apply the truth of Corinthians or that of @2 Timothy 2, the wonderful answer you gave was that you would apply both. That was the real thing that caused the victory in the crisis.
J.T. So it is a question of how you bring the truth in at any given time; I believe the Corinthian epistles are the ones that contain the truth especially applicable because they are on assembly order. The conflict has turned on church order for many years, since, I should say, 1908, involving the Lord's supper. You find it still. There is more clarification as to it.
{393}
A.N.W. I think the remarkable thing about that answer is that one cannot see how rightly there could have been any other answer.
J.T. Because scripture is scripture.
Ques. Do you think in looking at the idea of Corinthian conditions that we may look too much at the grossness of what occurred in the first instance, lawsuits and so on, and forget there was something really that was ecclesiastically worse than that? They were refusing the ministry and the great vessel of the testimony at the time.
J.T. Yes, the first thing mentioned to be condemned was that they were not of one mind. They were not in unity; divisions among them are mentioned in chapter one of the epistle.
W.L. I was wondering if you also had in mind that we can never dispense with the wash-pot idea.
J.T. That has been in mind in what has been said. You feel it comes up at every care meeting. Some places have them once a week and they are needed. You find the wash-pot has to be there every time.
A.A.T. You were speaking of the characteristic of America being independency. Is that feature introduced in any way in the assembly in America?
J.T. It is seen in America more than anywhere. Of course, Australia has taken on American characteristics, a feature of all the colonies.
J.W.D. Would you say that along with these Corinthian conditions there are those of whom it can be said, Two of the assembly, according to @Matthew 18?
J.T. That is the point, "two of you". God is maintaining it even if it be only in two.
J.T.Jr. "According as ye are unleavened" (@1 Corinthians 5:7) should be held in our thoughts at all times.
J.T. That is another point. The abstract idea is never to be given up. The local position must never
{394}
be given up. In that chapter which deals with the licentious person, the terrible wickedness there, it says, "According as ye are unleavened". That is a principle that has to be learned if we are to go on at all. That is to say, the abstract idea is there in the saints, the truth that was set there in the eighteen months of Paul's service. He laid it down, we are told, "opening and laying down" (@Acts 17:3); that was at Thessalonica. So it was continued at Corinth and it took eighteen months to do it, but the truth was laid down in a foundational way. The whole assembly had not apostatised; they had gone on with the truth of the gospel, at least outwardly, and the Holy Spirit was still with them. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" @1 Corinthians 3:16. Therefore the assembly at Corinth was on assembly ground and there was power there to deal with evil.
A.H.P. Does the first verse of @Psalm 68 link on with what we have already had in connection with the wash-pot? Is this condition promoted by the bringing in of these features: "Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered, and let them that hate him flee before him"?
J.T. That is the ground of the psalm. It is a good length, thirty-five verses. It is called a psalm and a song, showing that victory is in it as well as experience. "Wherefore he says, Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men" (verse 18 as quoted in @Ephesians 4:8). Now we get the word, the divine title, "Jah" here. The brethren will notice it is said in the note to occur '43 times from @Psalm 68 to 150 and only 7 times elsewhere'. The meaning of it, as far as can be ascertained is, 'The existing One, objectively'. It can only be ascertained by spiritual persons, and the spiritual person is Mr. Darby, and then even he only conjectured it. It may be only an abbreviation of
{395}
the title Jehovah, but more likely to be an allusion to God abstractly, if that could be, that is to say if the creature could apprehend Him as apart from all else. And it comes into this section of the book of Psalms, and it is not without interest that it has come out very peculiarly during the past ten years or so amongst us, the idea of God in the abstract, that divine Persons have to be regarded in that way; we cannot penetrate that, but we know it is there. God has to be regarded because of who He is, before He did anything as far as record shows. He has to be regarded as by Himself, so to speak, to be apprehended by Himself, and it appears here. It is used, as has been remarked, forty-three times in the book of Psalms from this psalm onwards. It is used also in the song of Moses in @Exodus 15 and in the Song of Songs, but it is especially used in this section of this book, from here to the end.
C.A.M. It is a remarkable thing that after it speaks of the delineation in @1 Timothy 1:16, "But for this reason mercy was shewn me, that in me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole long-suffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal", the next expression is, "Now to the King of the ages, the incorruptible, invisible, only God, honour and glory to the ages of ages. Amen". It seems remarkable that before we actually leave the present time this is being clarified to the saints.
J.T. Is it not suggestive that the Lord is leading us into the real truth of the Deity before the assembly leaves here? He is giving it the truth of the Deity, that the truth of sonship is not in abstract Deity; sonship refers to manhood in Christ. Abstract Deity is beyond us. The Lord Himself says, "God is a spirit", @John 4:24. Well, we cannot define that, but it is there to be apprehended and to enter into our worship.
{396}
Ques. Why does the suggestion of what is rebellious come into such a marvellous setting out of things as the gifts, this wonderful reference to Jah, and so on?
J.T. Well, it is, to finish up this great matter, in this group of psalms, of how headship is reached. That it is not simply for those who are subject. The Corinthians were not subject. They were converted and had the Spirit, but Paul said he had to wait for their subjection generally, so that he could deal with other wickedness in the assembly. "And having in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled", @2 Corinthians 10:6.
A.N.W. Does it not also have such an one as Paul in mind, an insolent and overbearing man?
J.T. Just so, for the rebellious also. It is a general thought, but it is not simply for those who are subdued. There is power in Christ viewed here as having ascended, it is a question of Christ as Man. God is the great theme of the book here but the manhood of Christ is in mind in this. He has ascended there and received gifts in Man. The note says, 'i.e. as man (*Adam*), in connection with mankind'. So it is a question of Christ, involving His sonship as Man, and what He is doing for man and how His power is equal to anything that may arise in man. It did not succeed in Judas, nor will it succeed in the man of sin, but nevertheless it is intended for rebellious people. Saul of Tarsus was brought down, and everyone of us has been. Who here would not admit his rebelliousness? and yet headship has wrought to bring him down.
Ques. It is like bringing the saints to @Numbers 10. I notice the footnote refers to that. The tabernacle had been set up and the encampment around it, and then they begin to move in that chapter towards the inheritance. Is that the idea?
{397}
J.T. Just so. Well, we have just arrived at one of the most important matters, and it is one of the greatest things that have come out in the revival. The leading thought is that Christ is in heaven and the Spirit is on earth, and the gifts are on earth. The headship of Christ is therefore effective everywhere because the Spirit is here in a subjective way, and there is no power that can cope with the Spirit. Those who operate in the assembly ought to bear that in mind that the power is sufficient to deal with anything.
A.H.P. Does verse 13 suggest general characteristics as marking the saints taking on Ephesian character and linking on with verse 18 that you have just read, "Though ye have lain among the sheepfolds, ye shall be as wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with green gold" (verse 13)? Does that suggest the saints being brought into correspondence to Christ?
J.T. It is a highly spiritual, symbolic reference alluding to the Spirit undoubtedly: "Ye shall be as wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with green gold", and enters into what we are saying. Verse 18 is the power: "Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts in Man"; that is Man in relation to men, the manhood of Christ. The whole point in these psalms is God, and here, Jah Elohim, the abstract, and yet operational, thought of God. Elohim is God operating. It is God in His supremacy as in the first of Genesis. So now we are in the presence of what God is doing, but doing through Man, as in Christ, but Christ in the supreme place. Hence you have it and the results enlarged upon by the apostle Paul in @Ephesians 4:7. Now we are here to carry forward the idea of the usability of the saints; and they are being skilled in it, not simply as wash-pots, but for other things, headship, ruling, and
{398}
so forth. So the apostle goes on to say, quoting @Psalm 68, "Wherefore he says, Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men. But that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth". That is, he would have us touched with what was involved in the ascension, that is Christ entered into death. And then he says, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens" -- not simply into the heavens, it is above them -- "that he might fill all things; and *he* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ; until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". That is Paul enlarging on @Psalm 68 and showing how it works out amongst ourselves for the "work of the ministry". So we should all be affected and conformed to Christ; that is the end in mind; headship therefore is seen operating.
J.T.Jr. Do you think that Joshua staying close to Moses would help in the matter of development of gift in young men and ourselves? He remained in the tent of meeting with Moses a great deal.
J.T. Very good. Of course the first reference to him is in @Exodus 17, where the Holy Spirit is seen as coming in through sufferings, just as we have here; the Lord Jesus going down into the depths. That is the first mention of Joshua, and he is seen in the great conflict at Rephidim. We can readily see how the young brothers surely are in mind, that they can learn something about gift in all their pressure, how the Lord went down to the lowest parts of the earth and how He was exalted, and as up there He is thinking
{399}
about the saints and the assembly, and about its perfecting. Let them think about the assembly, not only the spiritual welfare but even as to the collections. It will be very helpful if they do. Let them have them in their mind, that they do not forget the collection. It would be very wholesome in their mind. Paul did not forget it. He would have the scattered ones share in the collections; that is, in the glory of Christ in giving.
{400}
PRESERVATION IN CIRCUMSTANCES OF PRESSURE (5)
@Psalm 69:1 - 36; @Psalm 72:18 - 20
J.T. It seems fitting that we should close our session in the second book of Psalms with the sufferings of Christ as a subject by itself. We have had varied features of the truth as they are seen in the book, and now it seems we should give our minds to the sufferings of Christ. This 69th Psalm is one of the suffering psalms, especially the psalm of sorrow. There are four outstanding psalms which may be thus regarded, the 22nd, 40th, this one and the 102nd. This one is the longest and it will be noted how it stresses hatred of Christ, fixed hatred manifested against the Lord. Remember, the word "hate" is not used in this connection in any of the others; it is used in this special psalm once, standing over against lovers of Christ. In looking through the book, there is the thought of those who are lovers of Christ, especially in the circumstances which the book contemplates, those driven out from the privileges of their homes and local meetings and so on. Now it is a wholesome thing that we should consider together the hatred that there is; that is, whatever external appearance may exist, there is hatred of Christ working out in apostasy. The book contemplates that and, therefore, we have more imprecation than in any of the others, resentment, pointing to the apostate conditions that we have entered upon and which are about to increase. It is the finish and this psalm has in mind how heaven feels about it, how Christ is regarded, how He is hated.
So that what we have in the opening verses is remarkable: "They that hate me without a cause
{401}
are more than the hairs of my head; they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I restored that which I took not away" (verse 4). After that, we come to the experience on the cross: "Yea, they gave me gall for my food, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink" (verse 21). After that we have the resentment and the judgment really called for: "Let their table become a snare before them, and their very welfare a trap; let their eyes be darkened, that they see not, and make their loins continually to shake" (verses 22, 23). There is no suggestion that we have yet come to the time of retribution, for we are still in the period of grace, the gospel period, grace is still reigning, but it is clear we should become conversant with the Spirit of Christ as set out in punitive judgments that are soon to come when the assembly is removed. We are not to be behind in our judgment; God will judge "your judgment", it is what the judgment of the assembly arrives at, if we are going out as the dispensation finishes, that we have a true judgment of what is coming.
Ques. Is there a sense in which God is free to step aside from the general characteristics of the dispensation to this kind of thing? I was thinking of Judas; Peter quotes this as applying to Judas. I wondered if he represented a certain system of things which might be in our minds as anticipating what is punitive, even in the midst of the dispensation of grace.
J.T. One thing is to be pointed out: Romans, which is the great gospel epistle, tells us, "For there is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety, and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness", @Romans 1:18. There is overwhelming wrath revealed. Besides that, we have illustrations of wrath even now in our dispensation, Judas and Jerusalem becoming the subject of wrath:
{402}
"But wrath has come upon them to the uttermost", @1 Thessalonians 2:16. Not yet the final wrath or judgment, but still the thing is there so as to be understood. It is there exemplified. Paul too, in dealing with the sin in the assembly itself says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", @1 Corinthians 16:22. But it is still "Anathema", and the Christian is not to be a stranger to that.
C.A.M. Would you say the gospel of John assumes this line especially as to the hatred of the Lord as an off-set against the lovers of the Lord?
J.T. I think he does. John's writings are severe. He is more severe on Judas than any one. A person in the enjoyment of love cannot abide hatred of Christ: the very thought is an abomination.
Ques. "He that hates me hates also my Father", @John 15:23. How would you illustrate that?
J.T. He said, "But now they have both seen and hated both me and my Father" (verse 24). That would show how in John the Lord as Son lives of the Father. "He that has seen me has seen the Father", @John 14:9.
Our psalm is a matter of opposition to Christ, hatred of Christ, and how it already began when He was here; in fact. His presence is contemplated in the psalm, but the bearing of the psalm is evidently on the last days; it is the end of the book. As we were saying, Paul in dealing with the Corinthians mentions Anathema Maranatha. The curse is not yet, but ready to be executed against non-lovers of Christ. It may take a long time, but it is there. In speaking to the Galatians, he does not defer the judgment, "If any one announce to you as glad tidings anything besides what ye have received, let him be accursed". @Galatians 1:9. It is not deferred, so that wrath in that sense is exemplified, even in this dispensation, so that members of the assembly are not strangers to it.
{403}
R.W.S. It says in @Psalm 55:12, "For it is not an enemy that hath reproached me -- then could I have borne it; neither is it he that hateth me that hath magnified himself against me -- then would I have hidden myself from him". Is that the other side to the picture of Judas?
J.T. The other side? What is your point?
R.W.S. I mean, is God not gracious in connection with the city, forgiveness being preached there by Peter in Acts? Would it suggest how God gave Judas every opportunity to be true to Him? He is not imputing hatred to him in that psalm.
J.T. It would be difficult to prove that Judas did hate the Lord. It does not seem he had any feeling about it; he was so absorbed with the love of money. He hanged himself when he found the Lord was condemned to be crucified; he was full of remorse, but still that thought enters in it, the divine wrath on him, the son of perdition.
H.G.H. Do verses 1 to 3 of this psalm suggest general opposition to the Lord, and the thought you have referred to in verse 4, the specific hatred of mankind?
J.T. The first three verses, of course, would indicate the general subject, how dependent He was, "Save me, O God; for the waters are come in unto my soul. I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing; I am come into the depths of waters, and the flood overfloweth me. I am weary with my crying, my throat is parched; mine eyes fail while I wait for my God". That is the general plaint, which has the whole psalm in mind. Then the 4th verse is the charge, so to speak, "They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head; they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I restored that which I took not away". Now you have in mind that verse 4 is the hatred of mankind?
{404}
H.G.H. Yes, I thought it was more specific than the opening verses. The first verses show the general hatred, the condition of the world.
J.T. The opening verses depict what the Lord was experiencing, His plaint, as it were, but verse 4 refers to known persons, persons known to Him, who hated Him without cause. And how numerous they were! I would say that it is the local position that is in mind, what the Lord was enduring at that time. If we extend and enlarge upon it and bring it into our own dispensation, the punishment that will come about as the church is removed; then, of course, it would refer to Christendom. It is a known Christ that is in mind, the Lord contemplating Himself as a known Person. He is dealing with known facts.
Ques. Is it the sense of the necessity for displacement that engenders this hatred? Do you think John's gospel is in mind; as the baptist speaks of the necessity of Christ's increasing and his decreasing, the Pharisaical hatred for Christ would be engendered in that sense?
J.T. No doubt, especially chapter 8. How hand to hand the conflict was between the Lord and the Jews! It was a hand to hand matter, and He brings forward finally who He is. His deity is asserted, as if it were the final bulwark that could not be overcome, but the hatred was there.
J.H.Sr. That is not really a case for hatred without a cause. Displacement of self in favour of Christ is blessing.
J.T. Quite so. From the Lord's point of view, what cause could there be in view of God coming in? Another psalm says, God "humbleth himself to look on the heavens and on the earth", @Psalm 113:6. He came down, what cause was there? John says, "They have both seen and hated both me and my Father", @John 15:24. What was the cause? The
{405}
revelation of God was in Christ. The Father is the great feature of John, and the Father is active in Christ. He does not judge anybody, therefore the hatred is inexcusable.
T.S. Does the hatred only apply to where the gospel is being spread?
J.T. If we extend the thought here from the circumstances of the Lord's death, as recorded in the ends of the gospels, it is extended from that into Christendom. It is a question now of God here, as it was then. God here by His Spirit, but here everything carried on in a name. Even as to life, we "have life in his name", @John 20:31. Hence, it is hostility to Christ, it is anti-Christ, not anti-God. John says, "Ye have heard that antichrist comes", @1 John 2:18. Antichrist points to hatred of Christ.
J.T.Jr. Was it specially developed in Edom and characteristic of Edom's whole line?
J.T. God says of him that He hated him. That would point to opposition. The prophets say much of Edom's conduct.
A.N.W. Is it set out in type in the hatred of Joseph's brethren, because of the special love of his father to him?
J.T. That is where you get these features. What cause was there? The hatred began and then went on. It will develop full-blown among the Jews presently. Judaism is in mind. Judaism is Christendom, but the devil had Judaism in mind to restore it. It has taken form in the Romish system. You may say of that system that it is to restore what has been set aside by the power of the gospel, so that Anathema, the curse, is there because it is pronounced at the end of the first epistle to the Corinthians (chapter 16:22), where we have the corruption of the temple, the temple of God: "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy", @1 Corinthians 3:17.
{406}
R.W.S. If our young men were hostile to the government, that would be a cause for hatred. Beneath the veneer, is the hatred there because as having the Spirit, we are prepared to go to the wall?
J.T. That is so. The Spirit, of course, is life; but then the comfort is that there is some one there in the Boards and representatives of the authorities who does like it, so that we are not yet in full anti-christian times, we are still in the period of grace, and some one is representing the Spirit of Christ, even on the Boards; there is some representation even in the government. There is hardly a government that can be regarded as openly antichristian, I mean in Christendom. God is keeping the thing going. Christendom is kept going; that implies something is there.
Rem. You credit them with that, even though it is more or less a matter of a young brother.
J.T. Certainly I credit them with that. All these things are operating now under the government of God, and that is why they are becoming favourable to Christianity and the Bible. Why are the Roman Catholics issuing a revision of the New Testament? Why are they doing it? There is something going on to check the thing, but the hatred is there, it is only a question of God lifting His hand; it is for us to learn to judge the thing, not to be deceived by it.
H.B. In Ezekiel it says, "Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with despite of soul, to destroy, from old hatred ..." (@Ezekiel 25:15).
J.T. That is the ancient thing, the old root. They get in the land without going through the Red Sea. That is the idea in Christendom; they have not come through death.
C.A.M. It is very interesting what you say about recognizing everything God is securing, though the hatred is increasing. Would you say that, from
{407}
@John 5 on, the lovers are really more distinguished?
J.T. Indeed, and the Lord would say and is saying today, the Spirit is saying, Jesus "having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end", @John 13:1. It means not to the end of the dispensation but to the end of all contrariety. Nothing can overcome it. He will stand by us; that is very comforting; those who love the Lord shelter in it. John's gospel brings out the love side, the Father, the Son and the Spirit. The Father loves the Son, and the Son loves His own that are in the world, not those just gathered here now, but in the world where the hatred is, and He loves them right through.
A.B.P. The sufferings here seem to be apart from the consciousness of such a love.
J.T. We have just come down to that; we are dealing with the initial side now. We have the hatred as stated in verse 4: "They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head; they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I restored that which I took not away". This shows how prevalent the idea of hatred was, because the actual position of the Lord here was, in fact, about to be on the cross. How many lovers had He? That is the next thing. They are contemplated as there and John represents himself as the one who knew it; that is, he is the disciple whom Jesus loved and he dwelt in His bosom and leaned on His breast. He is a reserve man, and that reserve man is peculiarly taken up with love and keeping it going.
J.T.Jr. Those who stood around the cross would be like the thought of "lilies", Shoshannim, in the introduction to the psalm here.
J.T. Why is that there? That is the point. Like the headings of other psalms, it is the result of the emotion of Christ at the time, like the heading of
{408}
@Psalm 22, 'According to the hind of the morning'. But it is the result that He has in mind. So in this heading, the Lord had results in mind; the lilies were there. "He feedeth his flock among the lilies", @Song of Songs 2:16. He found something, He found Bethany, and so, as extended to ourselves, little places here and there where the Lord feeds, but the hatred is around us.
Ques. In the next psalm it says, "Let them turn back because of their shame that say, Aha! Aha!" @Psalm 70:3. When Christ was on the cross "they that passed by reviled him, shaking their heads, and saying, Aha, thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it in three days, save thyself, and descend from the cross. In like manner the chief priests also, with the scribes, mocking with one another, said, He saved others; himself he cannot save. Let the Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that we may see and may believe", @Mark 15: 29 - 32. Does that link on with this hatred, "Aha, Aha",?
J.T. These are extensions of the New Testament, which the Lord would help us to clarify as we proceed.
-- .Q. Does the love side you refer to bring into contrast the hatred in @John 8:44? "Ye are of the devil, as your father, and ye desire to do the lusts of your father".
J.T. Just so. @John 8 brings out His own thoughts about it.
G.D. The more we enter into these feelings and are made to suffer in company with the Lord, the more we shall seek our own company as those in @Acts 4 did. It says of them, "And having been let go, they came to their own company" (verse 23).
J.T. The Acts opens up to us how the hatred continued. Satan having Sadducees in power instead of Pharisees, the Lord had said of him, "For
{409}
the ruler of the world comes, and in me he has nothing", @John 14:30. But he carried on with hatred, and particularly after the Spirit came down; so in the Acts, the thing is carried forward. The epistles carry the thing forward too, and the addresses to the assemblies carry it forward. Satan is seen right through. Paul says, "Wherefore we have desired to come to you, even I Paul, both once and twice, and Satan has hindered us", @1 Thessalonians 2:18. He says to the Corinthians, "That we might not have Satan get an advantage against us", @2 Corinthians 2:11.
S.J.H. Would you say this condition of purity, or lilies, is brought about by understanding a psalm like this? We love and we hate, and we hate all that hates Him.
J.T. I think that raises a question of shallowness. If we are shallow in love, we shall be shallow in hate. One psalm says, "I hate them with perfect hatred; I account them mine enemies", @Psalm 139:22. God hates an empty vessel; "God loves a cheerful giver", @2 Corinthians 9:7. We have the thing all around us and in us. If we are shallow in love, we shall be shallow in hatred: we shall make excuses for looseness.
Ques. Would you say a word at this point in connection with another part of the heading? Why should a psalm like this be submitted to the chief Musician? In what way does a psalm like this harmonise music?
J.T. It is a question of what hatred is. The designation "Jah" in the Song of Songs is used in this connection. "Jealousy is cruel as Sheol: the flashes thereof are flashes of fire, flames of Jah" (@Song of Songs 8:6). We have already had a word about Jah yesterday, as mentioned so often in the Psalms, forty-three times from @Psalm 68 to the end of the Psalms, more than in all the rest of the Bible. As
{410}
remarked yesterday, it alludes to God in the abstract, but is to be viewed objectively in our hearts, but it is God essentially, and with hatred also; that is, God's name is Jealous; that is another of His names. Jealousy is cruel as Sheol. It shows what God is as against evil, and so, as the question has just been raised, how such a psalm as this fits into the service of God; well, it is in the result of it, it is no reproach on God that He is jealous, that He has kindled the lake of fire; by His breath it is kindled. It is no reproach on God. He is essentially, infinitely against sin, so that this comes into the service of God, and it is for us not to be shallow, for we are to judge ourselves for shallowness. Whether in love or hate, shallowness is to be dealt with in us, so that the service of God involves these thoughts, the thoughts of this psalm, especially in the result that we get in verses 34 to 36. "Let heavens and earth praise him; the seas, and everything that moveth therein. For God will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah; and they shall dwell there, and possess it: And the seed of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love his name shall dwell therein". We can understand, I think, how this psalm enters into the service of God. It is addressed to the chief Musician, and the word "lilies" follows.
Rem. It means if I am to be well grounded in ability to contribute to the service of God, I must know God in all His attributes, not only that He loves grace, and rightly too, but His absolute hatred and jealousy.
J.T. So that He accompanies this dispensation with the thought of the revelation of wrath of God from heaven.
H.B. Does @Revelation 11:16 - 18 fit in? "And the twenty-four elders, who sit on their thrones before God, fell upon their faces, and worshipped
{411}
God, saying, We give thee thanks, Lord God Almighty, He who is, and who was, that thou hast taken thy great power and hast reigned. And the nations have been full of wrath, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead to be judged, and to give the recompense to thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and to those who fear thy name, small and great; and to destroy those that destroy the earth".
J.T. Just so.
A.N.W. Whereas with Laodicea the obnoxiousness of it was "that thou art neither cold nor hot", @Revelation 3:15.
J.T. That is the thing to be abominated, the shallowness of current Christendom.
A.B.P. There is a verse which says, "Let none of you suffer indeed as murderer, or thief, or evildoer, or as overseer of other people's matters; but if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in this name. For the time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come; but if first from us, what shall be the end of those who obey not the glad tidings of God?". @1 Peter 4:15 - 17. Does that bear on what you say?
J.T. Very much. The house of God is where God is operating. Therefore the epistle to the Romans was to the assembly in Rome, and they have it there; they are supposed to have it there. Where did they keep it? Where was the ark kept, when it was put with Abinadab? (@1 Samuel 7:1). Where was the epistle to the Romans kept? Was it treasured there? Doubtless it was, and I have no doubt it was read in the hearing of Phoebe too; no doubt she was present. Well, that epistle would say, "For there is revealed wrath of God from heaven" right in the middle of Rome. That would be sounded out accompanying the gospel, alongside of the revelation of righteousness; the same word is used for both the
{412}
revelation of wrath and the revelation of righteousness.
S.J.H. If this hatred was developed as a consequence of love, there would not be much difficulty in getting rid of so many things you have so often mentioned among us. We would hate them without hindering the flow of love.
J.T. How often after our care meetings we have better assembly meetings and the first Lord's Day after, I have noticed we have better songs in the assembly, because judgment has been indicated by pronouncement against evil.
J.H.Jr. Did Enoch's prophecy on this line have some bearing on his being translated?
J.T. There is no doubt about that. That is another point in the New Testament, also the names of the opposers of Moses and Aaron are brought into the New Testament. Why are they brought in? Why are they not mentioned in Exodus? It is because these things are brought into the judgment of the assembly, so that Enoch prophesied, the seventh from Adam, as much as to say, Why should that be? He is a learner, he is a man who has learned by observation, coming down from Adam, and he prophesied about these wicked persons.
C.A.M. Referring again to the care meeting, it is remarkable the feelings it brings out. I was struck with your remark about the house being the place where God operates. The reason for such intense feeling is because there is zeal for that house.
J.T. That is verse 9: "For the zeal of thy house hath devoured me, and the reproaches of them that reproach thee have fallen upon me". It is the zeal of God's house, so we have just been reminded that "the time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come", the zeal for which must be there to keep it pure. This verse is quoted in @John 2:17, "The zeal of thy house devours me", where
{413}
the Lord is driving out the sellers of oxen, sheep and doves. The thing is to be kept pure. The care meeting helps us to keep it pure. God is taking account of us, our feebleness. For the last thirty-five years there has been no general division among the brethren, and I believe the Lord has His mercy on us. We could hardly stand a general scattering, but instead of that, He has sent two great wars. The meaning is that God is preserving the testimony, the brethren, and saving us from the wolf. If this pressure is lifted, we may look out; God may send us something else. We should make the most of pressure for the moment, God is using it to restrain evil.
Rem. The fear we might have in regard to bringing forward our judgment as to evil, is traceable, no doubt, to a desire to escape the reproach that may follow. I suppose the Lord here is lending Himself to the full burden and weight of whatever may come upon Him in the way, in zeal for the house of God.
J.T. That came out in a striking way in the early days, just about one hundred years from now, in 1845 and 1848. This great issue arose, neutrality. First clericalism in a small way, but in a wider sense where shallowness existed. The truth was not given up verbally, but the wickedness was condoned in a sort of hushed-up way, hence the scattering. But it was to preserve the truth. If neutrality called Bethesda had been allowed to remain, the truth would have gone; God gave a standard for some one to preserve the truth, the zeal of the house. The order of the house came out from all that.
Ques. Was not controversy centred around this psalm we are now considering?
J.T. This more particularly came out in 1866, when the truth of the sufferings of Christ came up. *The Sufferings of Christ*, every brother and sister ought to read that book prayerfully, ought to understand what the Lord went through and acquire love
{414}
for Christ. If any one does not love Him, as Paul says, "Let him be Anathema Maranatha".
T.S. @Ezekiel 9 brings forward the matter of slaughter weapons. Six men came forward at the cry with slaughter weapons in their hands to do the work.
J.T. Very good. Slaughter weapons are an essential thing. An awful verse, but it was there. The man clothed in linen had a writer's ink-horn by his side.
S.J.H. They stood by the altar before they went out.
Ques. In @Hebrews 12 God is known as a consuming fire. Does that fit in?
J.T. It does. "For also our God is a consuming fire" (@Hebrews 12:29).
A.B.P. "Do ye not know that we shall judge angels?" @1 Corinthians 6:3. What is the moral basis that their judgment has been reserved for the saints?
J.T. They are sent out as servants, custodians of things. We know that Satan was the anointed cherub who covered. That would mean that he had a great place in the order of God. Peter speaks about him as having fallen. There must be some basis that the saints have knowledge of, although there is not so much made of that; we are not to intrude into things we have not seen. We do not know as much about angels as we do of men; they are God's spirits. We must be careful and not put that down by @John 4, which says, "God is a spirit" (verse 24). They are called spirits. How much do we know of them? They are a different order from us in nature. It seems as if we are given to understand that we do not know much about them; we do know some have been unfaithful. They have great opportunities and advantages; at least the leader had, and was cast down. He was lifted up because of his beauty, which is an allusion to the devil and the devil has fallen. We are not to be lifted up and fall under the domination of the
{415}
devil, he was lifted up with pride and fell. I think, as learning that, we judge ourselves as being proud. Lifted up through pride, that was Satan's condemnation, he was lifted up because of his beauty. I do not know if that is enough to say, but I think it is enough to suggest how the thing may be arrived at. We cannot sit in judgment upon creatures unless we have some means of knowing their condemnation.
J.W. Would Stephen in his address in @Acts 7 bring home the guilt of Israel? "O stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, *ye* do always resist the Holy Spirit; as your fathers, *ye* also" (@Acts 7:51).
J.T. That is the crime written up, as it were; they are indictments. There must be indictments of the devils too, and therefore we have to sit in judgment; we must know.
H.B. Do you think Jude gives indictments? "And angels who had not kept their own original state, but had abandoned their own dwelling, he keeps in eternal chains under gloomy darkness, to the judgment of the great day" (@Jude 6).
J.T. That is the idea. The indictment is there for the judges to act upon. And then we are to judge the world as well. Perhaps we are in a better position to do that than to judge angels.
A.H.P. Do you regard these two thoughts as two root ideas, love and hatred -- hatred marking the children of the devil and love as marking the children of God?
J.T. Just so. So that as we run down these verses as the Lord speaks in them, and we come down to verse 21, it says, "Yea, they gave me gall for my food, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink". And then He proceeds, "Let their table become a snare before them, and their very welfare a trap; let their eyes be darkened, that they see not, and make their loins continually to shake. Pour out
{416}
thine indignation upon them, and let the fierceness of thine anger take hold of them. Let their habitation be desolate; let there be no dweller in their tents. For they persecute him whom thou hast smitten, and they talk for the sorrow of those whom thou hast wounded" (verses 22 - 26). So that the Lord is associating others with Himself in the attack, enduring the hatred of the opposition. "And they talk for the sorrow of those whom thou hast wounded". What a word that is! How often we cause sorrow to our brethren through our talk! And we mean it often. It is not love, but hatred. No one is accusing the brethren, but how easily we do it. We "talk for the sorrow of those whom thou hast wounded". God is dealing with the saints, no doubt, in many ways, and others join in and talk for their sorrow, add to their sorrow.
C.A.M. Perhaps it is because we seem to have an idea that we can judge as to the government of God. We are not able to do that very much, are we? God's governmental hand rests upon one; we are not often able to diagnose that thing.
J.T. Because the providence of God involved in His government is really a veil. You cannot always penetrate through it. A brother has sorrow in his family; who has not? We ought to be slow to pass judgment upon it. God is doing it.
G.D. We want to guard against being the three friends of Job.
J.T. That is an illustration of how they talked for the grief of one with whom God was dealing in love. "For whom the Lord loves he chastens", @Hebrews 12:6. There may not be guilt there. There may be something God would correct. Here are three friends, they talked for the grief of Job.
Ques. Is the antidote to them in verse 5? It is most remarkable language; if you put it into the mouth of the Lord, you can hardly understand how
{417}
the Lord could use it. "Thou, O God, knowest my foolishness, and my trespasses are not hidden from thee".
J.T. That would only bring out what He was vicariously. You cannot attribute anything like that to Him unless it is vicarious, so we can regard this psalm as a trespass offering.
Ques. I was wondering if it would be a safeguard to me against speaking "for the sorrow of those whom thou hast wounded" to take the thing upon myself, to look upon the sorrows of the saints as my foolishness, my wounds, my trespasses?
J.T. That is the idea. It is a suffering psalm. It is not atonement exactly. Atonement does enter into it vicariously. You cannot think of the Lord using the language in verse 5 save in a vicarious sense. Whom is He suffering for? His very persecutors, the Jews, extended to Christendom. The government of God is extended to it, and the Lord is feeling it, and the saints, as He felt it actually in Himself here as to the Jews. All that He suffered Himself He regarded as sins that He had to atone for. He was the King and representative of all and tasted suffering; therefore, in @Psalm 40, He speaks of His iniquities, how numerous they were; "They are more than the hairs of my head" (verse 12). That was vicarious, we have vicariousness in this psalm, but then, the Lord is thinking undoubtedly of the trespass offering; for the adversaries talk against men, especially against Him, but against one another. "They talk for the sorrow of those whom thou hast wounded". That is trespass, and the Lord feels that. If I am speaking against the brethren, I am trespassing against the brethren, and the Lord feels that.
Jas.P. Did Obadiah take that matter up in relation to Edom? God said through him that Edom had laughed when Israel was under the disciplinary hand of God, and thus Edom was suffering.
{418}
J.T. Quite so. The prophet was dealing with that sort of thing. I have heard people say that God has prophesied about the Jews that they would suffer, and therefore it is right for certain ones to persecute them, but it is not right; God will deal with them Himself. He says, No one else can touch them with impunity, so that if I talk for the sorrow of those the Lord has wounded, the Lord feels it, He brings it up. The Lord is Himself suffering from God; that is atoning suffering, "For they persecute him whom *thou* hast smitten"; that was Himself, "and they talk for the sorrow of those whom thou hast wounded"; that is His people.
A.N.W. In that way does @Psalm 22 underlie this one in our souls? The Lord has no sharers in His sorrows there; He is alone in His sorrows, consequently there is no retribution in that psalm, that probably explains it.
J.T. That is the foundation of the psalm -- no retribution there. It is all blessing flowing from it, but in this latter one, there is retribution, nevertheless vicarious sufferings too, so that the saints themselves might be suffering as Christ was suffering under the hand of God. The Lord suffered governmentally and vicariously, that is, for others. The guilt for which He was suffering was a trespass. I believe it is the trespass offering. @Psalm 22 is the sin offering; @Psalm 40 is the burnt offering; this one would be the trespass offering; the Lord took all on Himself; but then we must watch for trespassing. @Matthew 18 brings the whole matter into the assembly; it is a matter of trespass.
A.B.P. Would the Lord's words, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do" (@Luke 23:34), be in virtue of the trespass offering?
J.T. You mean, He regarded it as trespass?
A.B.P. Or would you call it a sin offering?
{419}
J.T. It would be a trespass offering in that sense; what they were doing was wickedness, but He gives them credit for ignorance, so that it was a sin of ignorance, and that comes under the heading of sin offering (@Leviticus 4). When a sin of ignorance comes to your knowledge you are guilty and have to settle it.
J.T.Jr. Zacchaeus brought in that side. "Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken anything from any man by false accusation, I return him fourfold", @Luke 19:8.
J.T. Just so. That is a good sign; the Lord says, "He also is a son of Abraham". Persons who offer trespass offerings are sons of Abraham.
A.N.W. I think you spoke of another psalm as the burnt offering.
J.T. The 40th Psalm. The burnt offering is alluded to there. "Behold, I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me -- To do thy good pleasure, my God" (verses 7, 8).
T.S. What difference would you make in Paul saying, "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep" (@1 Corinthians 11:30), in the light of that matter?
J.T. That would underlie the government of God. They are not lost people any more than Ananias and Sapphira, but they suffer for their guilt, in government. "On this account many among you are weak ..." For what cause? Not for murder, nor as evil people, but as people who do not know how to conduct themselves before God in the assembly.
S.J.H. Would you suggest that this works out in regard of the young men in their position in the army and scattered?
J.T. It is a time for them to learn the sufferings of Christ; they will have plenty of this, for they have to do with all kinds of men, some lovers of Christ may be, some haters, and Satan uses these circumstances;
{420}
it is for them to be lovers in them. He speaks of retribution here, but in @Psalm 22 He does not; and even here He says, "Then I restored that which I took not away". That is the spirit of grace, but the idea of the punitive suffering from God runs throughout this dispensation into the next, more suitably in the next. The people will be earthly saints, more qualified to be vessels and instruments of God's judgment effectively. All this comes under that.
R.W.S. "For Jehovah heareth the needy, and despiseth not his prisoners", @Psalm 69:33. Would there be something in that? Paul said, "I, the prisoner in the Lord", @Ephesians 4:1. Could our young men view themselves in that way?
J.T. I think what we said at the beginning of our meetings runs through. Our young men are driven out, not in a formal way by the government, but by force of circumstances; the devil is in it, and God is in it too governmentally, but the devil would use it to damage them. Satan would produce resentment, to speak against the authorities. That all enters into what we are saying, so our brethren should be preserved and should come out under the pressure more useful to the assembly. If it is not contributory to the assembly, it has failed in its end. It defeats its own end.
C.A.M. In speaking of the sin offering you are thinking of the holy nature of God. In speaking of the trespass offering you are thinking of the line of God's government.
J.T. Matthew brings that out. Luke confirms it. "How often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? until seven times? Jesus says to him, I say not to thee until seven times, but until seventy times seven", @Matthew 18:21, 22. If you do that, he may be led to bring his trespass offering and, of course, that would reach the service of God. Matthew had that in his mind.
{421}
J.H.Sr. Would you say that @Psalm 102 is the meat offering?
J.T. I would not venture there. Maybe it is. It is a beautiful psalm, because it contemplates the Lord in suffering, and ultimately it says, "Take me not away in the midst of my days!" and then the answer, "Thy years are from generation to generation" (@Psalm 102: 24). His deity comes to light.
T.S. Is it not so, in the letters from the young men, we do not find any complaint against even the officers or the government, compared to what you hear men in the shops saying?
J.T. I am sure you are right. One is greatly encouraged with the visits too. We get a good many visits in the East, when they are about to leave for the front. We are very much encouraged by what we see. I am sure heaven is too. This psalm contemplates those that are not in Jerusalem, as it refers to what they have left behind them; they have left Jerusalem.
H.P. Would that be seen in David? It says, "Saul eyed David from that day and forward" (@1 Samuel 18:9); he sought to smite him, "but David turned away from him twice" (verse 11).
J.T. The experience of David being driven out lays the basis for all these psalms.
Rem. You can understand why he is called the sweet psalmist. All this penetrates into your moral being.
J.T. But the psalm runs on, and we might notice the results in verses 29 to 35. "But I am afflicted and sorrowful: let thy salvation, O God, set me secure on high. I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with thanksgiving; and it shall please Jehovah more than an ox, a bullock with horns and cloven hoofs. The meek shall see it, they shall be glad; ye that seek God, your heart shall live. For Jehovah heareth the needy, and despiseth not
{422}
his prisoners. Let heavens and earth praise him; the seas, and everything that moveth therein. For God will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah; and they shall dwell there, and possess it". The cities of Judah, so to speak, are being reduced; many small meetings are hardly able to keep going; it is a real exercise. It would be a help to the young men if they were to keep in mind that their places are empty. We read of David's seat being empty -- their places are empty and, of course, their prayers must take the place of their presence in the localities from whence they have come.
S.J.H. David remembered them in his absence and sent presents after his victory.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. @Psalm 72:19 suggests a certain richness that some brethren take on now as you suggest: "And blessed be his glorious name for ever! and let the whole earth be filled with his glory! Amen, and Amen". It fills the whole earth, not only the cities of Judah.
J.T. It seems as if we should not close without an allusion to Solomon, because the recent help that the assembly has received from God by the Spirit refers to Solomon largely. It refers to sonship. The last psalm in the book is "For Solomon". It is headed in that way. It commences, "O God, give the king thy judgments, and thy righteousness unto the king's son". So it is one continuous tribute to Solomon. It would seem as if it enters into this psalm; it enters into what Peter says, "Testifying before of the sufferings which belonged to Christ, and the glories after these", @1 Peter 1:11. They are coming in quickly now, Christ in the Spirit (@Psalm 69). Solomon is the close of the book; it is for Solomon. We see the king and the king's son; that is, the Father and the Son, but especially the Son, as if the Spirit of God would give Him a place that perhaps He has not had in assembly service.
{423}
He is an object of worship in assembly service and the way the truth has come to us is intended to move us in that way. The hymn book, of course, helps in it. The three closing verses are, you may say, added to complete the whole matter, as it is a principle of God to finish a thing. "Blessed be Jehovah Elohim, the God of Israel, who alone doeth wondrous things! And blessed be his glorious name for ever! and let the whole earth be filled with his glory! Amen, and Amen. The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended". The combined title of Jehovah Elohim refers back to @Genesis 2 and 3, and it comes in here in connection with the prayers of David and all his exercises, and it looks as if the sorrows of what has happened during the last 130 years must be in mind, but now there is this great truth of the sonship of Christ and His being charged with the service, in charge of everything in it, sitting on the Father's throne -- because that is the position in 1 Chronicles -- the whole service of God coming in there. Well, that is the point to finish with, "The prayers of David ... are ended", the finish of the thing; his prayers went right on to the finish.
C.A.M. Would you say there is an attack by the enemy to destroy sonship in that very matter at the present time? God is securing something especially beautiful in these young men.
J.T. I tell the Lord about them taking them up in an abstract way as the nazarites of Zion, taking the words up from Lamentations. Our prayers will have that in mind, that they may come home better men in the service of God than they were.
Rem. "Know that our brother Timotheus is set at liberty; with whom, if he should come soon, I will see you", @Hebrews 13:23. I suppose that is what we are looking for. "I will see you"; that is, these nazarites like Timothy.
J.T. I suppose we should be free to say Paul was the writer of the Hebrews. He would be like the Spirit
{424}
of prophecy, we get His personal voice in the prophets, but here I think the writer would mean what he represented, he would come with Timotheus. When he comes the thing will be resumed, set free. It would be a resumption of the ministry accentuated in some little way.
R.W.S. "Amen, and Amen" is a very buoyant finish.
J.T. The double Amen is fixity, I should think. It is something like "Verily, verily"; the Lord uses that term or phrase twenty-four times but only in John's gospel, which is very significant; things are verified.
J.T.Jr. "The whole earth ... filled with his glory" is carried forward from @Numbers 14:21.
{425}
PRESERVATION OF THE WOMAN AND HER SEED
@Revelation 12:1 - 6; @Revelation 13 - 17
This chapter is an extension of certain thoughts which engaged us today about a woman. The allusion was made to @Genesis 1 in which it is said that God gave dominion to man, male and female being included. "Let them have dominion"(@Genesis 1:26). This is a thought like many others in Genesis, a seed planted in a rich garden which should bear fruit. It is still bearing fruit. As has often been pointed out, the book of Revelation affords the fruits. Genesis, the roots; Revelation, the fruits. What comes in between affords rich communications, oral and written, the Holy Spirit having taken the matter on and given it completeness; I mean the whole matter of the roots and the fruits in the great field of God.
First, I spoke of the garden, but the scriptures widen out into the idea of a field. Isaac in blessing Jacob, regarded him as a field, "as the smell of a field which Jehovah hath blessed"(@Genesis 27:27). For my point, Jacob represents the nation, or, you might say, the race, taken on in culture peculiarly, and the yield, we know about it, the Israel of God of which we now form a part as believers. But the root I am speaking of is in the passage in @Genesis 1, and includes not only Adam; Adam was the generic thought, but includes the male and the female of the human race. The antediluvian conditions served but little to bring out the divine intent in the woman. It ends with the distressing allusion to the daughters of men, how they became exposed, and Satan found an inlet to work out corruption which God dealt with -- I mean the deluge -- but He has not given up His ideals. He gives up none of them. An ideal is worth
{426}
nothing save as it can be developed into eternity, eternal relations, and these ideals are found in God and God only.
So the next section in the Bible opens up the glorification of woman. It is in the line of Shem, a certain family in which God would develop His ideal. This particular one is full-blown in the chapter I have read from. In no chapter do we find such a presentation of woman, symbolical of course, but still the symbols represent reality. Indeed, it is a sign. The word 'wonder' is not there. God teaches by signs, especially through John's writings, not by wonders. Paul put signs and wonders together. They are both to be used, but not in this chapter. It is a sign, several signs. And what I hope to do is to work out simple practical thoughts about this sign in @Revelation 12, how it may enter into current history among the people of God.
God is doing His best, so to speak, to give woman her place. The devil is doing his best to take her out of her place. And God would say to our sisters and to all of us, that the sisters have a great place in this chapter. We have to stop and think of it; why God wrote certain chapters, why He gave such a place to the second greatest creature. He surely has great thoughts, basic ones, in the end of the book to have recourse to such a sign as this. A sign simply means something that signifies another thing and this chapter is calculated to save the sisters, young ones. It is God's way, too, to make it worth your while. For He would say, 'I have had them all along, great thoughts. I began with them. I have great thoughts about this creature that I am saying so much about now'. She is seen in heaven.
Of course, it is a heaven of mixture, but still it is an operational heaven. It is a heaven of mixture because the dragon is there too. That is another sign in heaven. God, as it were, clears the operational
{427}
scene, and the scene here is heaven, not the heaven of heavens, of course, or the third, even. The allusion evidently is to the first one and the first one is the latest one, where it is called the expanse. It is in addition to the primary created thought. It is called the expanse. He called the expanse Heaven. The word 'expanse' conveys the idea of it, but God graciously or considerately calls it heaven. But it is an addition to what was there. It affords God a wider operational area. The expanse that was called heaven extends right down to the very earth itself, because it includes the atmosphere. The birds are said to be there. The sun, moon and stars are said to be there, and God has great opportunity in it and He seizes this occasion to bring out His idea in woman and He presents her in heaven. As in scripture generally, it is to enlarge on the scripture given in brief. "Great the host of the publishers", we are told (@Psalm 68:11). The Lord gives the word and it is, you might say, woman's day, a day afforded her. Each prince had his day, we are told in Numbers. This is woman's day, so we have this remarkable sign and every Christian, every saint, every sister ought to feel, 'Well, this is something surely that God is saying'.
It was a woman. She was clothed with the sun. Who can conceive of such an immense thought as this save God? It is His own thought allowing His servant John to see. It is an apocalypse, you know. That is the meaning of the word and this is one of the chapters in it; but it is a very remarkable one and God is saying to us that He is going to tell us, open up things to us, as indeed He has the means of doing in the one who is serving, and He has the ears ready to hear. God can do great things in this way, and so to be simple, this is a maternal scene, but the woman is clothed with the sun. She has no such clothing in @Genesis 1, nor even in @Genesis 2. The real creature is seen in @Genesis 2. God made her
{428}
out of a rib that He took out of man, most important and interesting bit of the creation, Adam and Eve being the subjects, and He brought her to the man and what would man's reaction be? Well, it is a question, dear brethren, of what our reaction would be to this scene. "A woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars", as the passage reads. And then she is about to bring forth a child. It is said she brought forth a man child. Really, it "a male son". She is functioning in the highest degree and our minds are directed immediately to the male son. It is just to stress the male idea, that she is subservient to that. Her very existence is subservient to that, the seed of a woman. God spoke to the devil about her and about her seed, and now the devil is here understanding something, that the thousands of years had elapsed, are maturing, and the seed is coming into evidence, a male son; and the devil, the dragon, we are told, stood before the woman and was ready to devour the child as soon as it was born. He is a destroyer.
Well now, to be simple and brief, dear brethren, it is a woman's opportunity, woman's world, so to speak, and God is going to take advantage of what is in His mind. This book is the end of things. He expects us to be attentive. So that she is functioning. It is a maternal idea, as we note the ministry that we have directing us to this particular point. God is not allowing the enemy to have the triumph from the woman's side of the position. All the epistles bear on this and what we had today bears on it. That is the balance in government. It is a governmental time, which is only a provisional time, because what is provisional leads on to what is final, eternal, and the part that the sisters have at this moment is especially to be stressed. God is saying to us, or to them, that He has very great thoughts,
{429}
greater than they have any conception of as to them, and the devil, too, has his thoughts. He would seek to be as great as God in what He is doing. He is the arch-enemy of God. He is the adversary and his first great triumph was over a woman. Is his last to be? Well, it is for us to challenge our own hearts, those who are mothers here and wives, as to whether the enemy is going to get the advantage. God is stressing before us the greatness of the feminine side.
So, as I said, the antediluvian world afforded little. It was a disaster. Even Noah's wife and daughters-in-law were not much. But God began with Shem and provided the sisterhood, glorifying the sisterhood, having in mind the blessing of Jacob, "The smell of my son is as the smell of a field which Jehovah hath blessed". The twelve are here, the twelve stars, a crown of twelve stars. Where is the mother here who does not regard her family as a crown? And an administrative thought is in it. So that the work began, in that sense, in Jacob, and so the twelve tribes come down to us and are seen, as we had today in chapter 14 of this book. What a product we see! We have noted it twice today already, a hundred and forty-four thousand, a great administrative thought on mount Zion, with the Lamb on mount Zion. It is the great thought of God. He is going on with it and the Lamb is there going on with it and the singing goes on. And this one great family on earth is able to learn that song.
But now I am coming back, as I said, to the woman here in this verse. What thoughts! "Clothed with the sun", the supreme thought. You would say, 'Where is her husband?' The husband is prominent by His absence. It is God. God is the great Husband in the Old Testament. And so it is come out in Christ now. But here it is God. And she is clothed with the sun. What adornment in any family! The psalm says, "Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine in
{430}
the inner part of thy house; thy children like olive-plants round about thy table", @Psalm 128:3. How God would stress in the Book of Psalms this great idea of the family and the preservation of the family! You see the preservation comes into evidence at once. The dragon is present here. We are told what power he has got, and I am now urging that we should be most practical as to how the children are to be looked after. It is a great problem amongst men, how the children are going to be protected; the potential brethren are to be protected. The dragon is ready. We are told what power he has got. He is taking the third part. And he is ready before the woman, ready to devour her child as soon as it is born. 'Let the children be destroyed at once', not of course physically, but morally. 'Let them be damaged at once'. What would become of the meetings, the care meetings and all meetings, if these potential brothers and sisters are to be damaged immediately? So we are told by Luke that the fathers and the mothers in the Lord's time brought infants to Jesus -- infants, as if the infants needed protecting by Jesus. You say, 'Cannot a mother do that?' No, the mothers know they cannot. The Lord can, and so the dragon's power is being pointed out. He drew the third part of the stars. No doubt the third part is Europe, physically. In the ancient world, continents were fewer than they are now, but Europe was one of them and it must be the great sphere of Satan's opposition to the revelation of God in Christ, and that opposition takes form in an attack upon the children. It is on now in full force.
The male child must be distinguished. It is not male children. It is a male son. That is, the pre-eminence is in Christ. He must have the pre-eminence. He must come in in His pre-eminence, the Lord Jesus. Hence, Luke is used by the Spirit of God to attract us. The older one becomes, the more one
{431}
values children. The more lovely they are, the more they afford in the way of assurance as to the testimony as it exists. The testimony will go on as the children are present, but the dragon would draw the third part of the stars by his tail. It is an after-effect, I believe. The great Roman system is an after-effect for the destruction of the race. It is an after-effect. It is the tail, and heaven intervenes, although it is not so much in view specifically, but it is said, "She brought forth a male son, who shall shepherd all the nations with an iron rod" (verse 5). This is the Lord Jesus. I am endeavouring to bring this out for a practical working in the families of the brethren; to stress the continuance of what we are now enjoying under the hand of God. But Christ must come in first. Our souls must be always full of Him; that is, we will see however many children we may have, boys or girls, that to start with the right apprehension of their value is to have an apprehension of Christ in the male son. And so it is said, "Her child was caught up to God". That is the outcome. As the child is born, it is enfolded in prayer. "Caught up to God and to his throne". Not some low place inside, but the throne. The conception of Christ from this point of view is immense. It is infinite. He shall rule all nations, so that the matter is settled from the abstract standpoint. The idea of rule, government, is issuing forth according to the first of Genesis in this male son. As I said before, there is a tendency to use the words in that way, but it is to stress the male idea, this great personage. Every sister is subservient in her measure to the divine idea. The child is caught up to God and to His throne. We do not exactly ask for that for our children, like the wife of Zebedee. The Lord is saying, 'That is My Father's blessing'. He is adjusting the idea of government. It must begin in a house. And it is a supreme matter, not simply a secondary matter. It
{432}
is the Father's matter. The position at the right hand of Christ is the Father's matter. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". They are to be there. So the matter is settled.
Now as to the protection of the male son. He is taken far away beyond the range of the dragon, as his range is the whole of Europe, as I said. The stars, the great names of Europeans go back for thousands of years under his control, drawing them with his tail, using his tail, using that system, that ancient system in that section of the world to damage the race morally, yet to deify woman. Think of it, to deify woman! The woman is not deified. The system I am speaking of deifies the woman. It is the devil. It casts a dark shade on the whole realm of revelation to pretend to assume such a thing. "Blessed is the womb that has borne thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked", @Luke 11:27. The Lord says, "Yea, rather, blessed are they who hear the word of God and keep it" (verse 28). That is the word for the house today, for the sisters, the word of God in the house, in the family, Bible readings and the instructions that go with it. Not a hurried word before catching a train, but instructions, however few or little. The word is, Let the idea of an instruction be there, as we had today, the Maschilim idea; the children are taught from their very initial existence in the measure that they may receive any kind of an impression. Let it be given and given fully.
Here the idea of the male son is seen, but it is carried up into heaven. Notice that. Her child was caught up to God and to His throne. The child is handed over as some, whom one could speak of, such as Moses and Joash, John the baptist and thousands of others. "Their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven". Their little minds will be charged with the divine thoughts insofar as the mother can do it, and so her child is
{433}
caught up to God. God will answer our prayers. Will not something happen, some protecting hand, for the saving of that child for the divine purposes? Nothing else. It is not for me to say anything today about governmental purposes, the authorities, but I mean the divine purposes. Every child gets his spirit from God and God has His purpose in it and hence there is divine protection.
And so we are told the child is caught up unto God and to His throne. How wonderfully beyond the range of harm he is! When the devil would have destroyed the Lord Jesus literally according to Matthew, God provides His supposed father to protect the little Child and His mother, the little Child first. Mary was subservient to Him. Joseph was subservient to Him, and He is not touched: "Arise, and take to thee the little child and his mother, and flee into Egypt"(@Matthew 2:13). He is taken into Egypt, of course.
Now we are told the woman fled into the wilderness. That is a wholesome thing, to flee into the wilderness, not to the picture show or tea parties, but to the wilderness, and she did it. Notice it is "where she has there a place prepared of God, that they should nourish her there". I am speaking simply. I am speaking to young mothers, young wives, and elder mothers and grandmothers, that they should function in this matter and not let the dragon have scope. You would say, 'I have no power to deal with the dragon', but still there is a place prepared for the mothers and the grandmothers. They are to be nourished for the great office they are to fulfil in the family. They are to be nourished. And the place is prepared of God. She is to be nourished there, and we are told how many days, "a thousand two hundred and sixty days". You say, 'That is a long time', but it is needed for these mothers. One day after another. Time hangs heavy on mothers¬ hands sometimes, but the children run about as they will.
{434}
The mother's hands are intended to protect them. And the mothers are therefore nourished and they have a place prepared for them. Let the sisters take this in: a place prepared for a certain time by God, or by someone, but here it is a place prepared by God where she is to be nourished a thousand two hundred and sixty days.
Well, the war is on, dear brethren. You say it is on, sure enough. We are waiting for the end of it, but the war here is another one. What happens in heaven is greater than whatever happened on earth and the next verses tell us about this war. It is a war between Michael and the dragon, the devil. I dwell on that, that it is to be fought to a finish, at least the first great phase is fought to a finish and the dragon is cast out with his angels into the earth. God uses several phases and this phase is still to come, but the final one comes afterwards and the devil is cast out.
Now in verse 13 it says, "And when the dragon saw that he had been cast out into the earth, he persecuted the woman which bore the male child". He did not persecute her first. His aim was the child. Now it is children, because the end of the chapter tells about her seed. She is going to have more children. He can do nothing against Christ. The child is taken up to God and to His throne, but the woman remains on earth and she has a place prepared. Take notice of this, how God takes care of the mothers. They are to be nourished. They are not to read novels or have backdoor talks where the news of the day is bandied. The nourishment of God is intended to build up a constitution of mothers and grandmothers to look after the children.
So that now that the man child is taken away. "When the dragon", it says, "saw that he was cast out into the earth, he persecuted the woman which bore the male child". That is, his ire was against
{435}
her, and mothers have to face this. They need our prayers because of the great function they are to perform for God and the great result, the assembly, the continuity of the testimony of God. The devil is persecuting her now. He had not done it before. It is a question of the man child. Now it is the mother of the male child. He is persecuting her and notice that it says in verse 14, "And there were given to the woman the two wings of the great eagle". She has got wings herself now. Where did she get these? It is a question of development of the means of flight that God would use to carry us; He teaches the mothers how to flee. He bore us on eagles¬ wings. And wings are given. So that they would go where? In the desert, not any attractive places, not that which affords food for the natural mind, natural heart. It is a desert; but still, food is in it. The allusion of course would be to Israel in the wilderness. It was a desert, but food was there, the manna. So when the persecution begins not only against Christ, the male son, but the mother, the mothers need to take care to be properly nourished and not to rely on the natural things that are furnished, but upon divine things for nourishment, not for so many days, but for so many times. It is shorter in the sense of experience.
It is said, "She is nourished there a time, and times, and half a time". That is to say, she is to calculate not by days, but by times, and it is a question of experience. We have had it already today. I am seeking to enlarge on what we have as to experience now, how this period is to be worked out by experience, by reckoning in a spiritual way as to what the word time means. We read of the times that passed over David. What times are passing over us! Extraordinary times. Not so many days, but times. It is the working out of something and God is saying to mothers here, to sisters, that He knows how great
{436}
is the pressure. It is the times. It may be times of waiting. It may be shortage of food, shortage of clothing, as it is in many parts of the earth. What sisters must be enduring in these times, peculiar times, but God is saying, 'I have a place for you', for the woman. The woman was in a wilderness. This is a spiritual matter, sisters giving up all natural things and going into the wilderness and proving what God can be to them in looking after their children. "And there were given to the woman two wings of the great eagle, that she might fly into the desert, into her place, where she is nourished there a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent. And the serpent cast out of his mouth behind the woman water as a river, that he might make her be as one carried away by a river".
If you will pardon me for the use of interpretation, let us not be playing with the earth. We are not to dwell on the earth. The man child has gone up there. The wilderness is the position to occupy, pending translation, the place where the mind is not fed with the things of this life. But notice that the position is changed. We shall never get any help from it if we are earthly, feed on earthly things. When we come to the earth helping, that is the physical thought. It is a creative thought, for after all, the earth is God's. "The earth is Jehovah's, and the fulness thereof", @Psalm 24:1. It helps us to give thanks every morning. At least, we should for what the earth yields, for our cereals, and our eggs and our butter and our bread, the fulness of the earth. The earth helps the woman. It is most remarkable. It opened its mouth. Playing with the earth is a moral idea, sensual, devilish. It will destroy us, but the earth will help us if we regard it as a divine creature of God.
Everything is working in our favour: "For all things are yours" (@1 Corinthians 3:21) and so they are. The
{437}
earth is ours in this sense and has a mouth to swallow up the efforts of the devil. So that we can live on it, stand up on it, give thanks to God that it is to enable us to feed our children, to take them where they should go, to get food, to get instruction, to get influence. The earth helps the woman, but she has got seed, as I said before, and in the last verse the dragon was wroth with the woman. "And the dragon was angry with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, who keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus". They have graduated. It is a graduation day for the children. "Her seed". They are able to tell her about the commandments of God on the graduation day. They developed in the glory because it says, "Who keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus".
I have endeavoured to be simple and practical, and to enforce the truth in the family, especially the little ones, and the importance of the mothers, their obligations to see to it that the children go through, the food and protection and influence go through. They need to go through. May God bless His word.
