{1}
NAMING PERSONS AND THINGS
@2 Timothy 3: 8; @2 Kings 18: 4; @1 Kings 3: 23 - 28; @Genesis 2: 19 - 25
What enters into these scriptures as the subject for an address is the idea of naming persons and things. I might remark that the first to give a name formally was God. It is indeed a divine prerogative to give names. This prerogative is seen in God Himself, who, as it is said, called their name, that is the name of the man and the woman, Adam, in the day that they were created. It is seen there in God. And then in His representatives later throughout the Scriptures, we have the divine prerogative of name-giving, until we get into the New Testament, in which we find the Lord Jesus, God manifest in flesh, employing this same prerogative in giving names. In a way that is more interesting to us, or should be, than this, for each of us is named by the Lord. So that both now and in the future, our distinction through life shall be expressed in the name given.
We have, indeed, in the beginning of the Acts, the crowd of names. It might be thought that that is a little disorderly or irregular -- a crowd. It is certainly not an assembly thought. But it is remarkably accurate. It is used for it brings out what I am, in that each of those one hundred and twenty persons had a distinction. The fact that they are seen prolifically does not rob them severally of that distinction. And they are counted. So that it becomes very interesting to those of us who are taken up sovereignly, that we shall develop under the hand of the Lord, especially through discipline, what is in the divine mind, so that it may be expressed in each of us. Cases may arise as to persons and of course, alas, there are many -- as far as we can see -- who are under
{2}
discipline, whose spiritual distinction is not visible to us.
But in these cases we have to retire, and we can do so restfully, knowing that there will be no discrepancy whatever in result -- that each one will fit as he is designed to fit. How it comes about is another matter, and is inscrutable as far as we are concerned. But the names will all be there, and each will shine in his own glory; "for star differs from star in glory", @1 Corinthians 15: 41. We can take that to suggest as to what we should be, dear brethren; that the brilliance and radiance of light should be in us, as the light is the life. The idea of life is that the life is the light. "In him was life, and the life was the light of men". So in each of us the life developed has been the light. And that will radiate and denote the name. For the stars are all named, and so are the saints. The saints are the new creation, and all bears on them -- what each of the saints is to be. All that is very wonderful, and far more than I could touch on now. But, as I said, it is a divine prerogative to give names, and every believer comes under that. The examples we have are only to remind us of the universality of the principle. It could not be otherwise as we think of the saints and how God regards them -- that each should be divinely in order and distinguished by name, not simply accidental, but given divinely, as in the case of Peter.
Well now, what I have in mind is to transfer that thought to ourselves -- as to giving names -- how we are to acquire the way of it. One may say that of me as I am able to name a thing. We will see some propensities in names, and there are many. The natural man has a great many. The Spirit of God has a list of the propensities or the evils of man -- what proceeds out of his heart. The Lord gives a list of about thirteen. The apostle Paul gives about sixteen works of the flesh in Galatians, and about ten descriptions
{3}
of wicked men in the letter to Corinth. These are to be tabulated and watched over. One has to discover them in oneself. As one discovers them in oneself, and gives the name proper to each, one has the mastery over it. I do not say the name itself gives the mastery over it, but the Holy Spirit enables you to master it.
Well now, this leads me to the first scripture read -- that is in Timothy. We have two names that only appear in this particular scripture, although they allude to persons that lived many hundreds of years earlier -- Jannes and Jambres. We need not tax ourselves as to how the apostle Paul arrived at these names. He wrote by the Spirit of God. We need not tax ourselves as to how Jude knew that Enoch had prophesied about sinners in our own times. He spoke also by the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God is conversant with every person and thing from the beginning of the creation until now. But then if Paul used these names there surely is some reason -- it is not merely that what he wrote was indited by the Spirit.
The epistle is a peculiar one. It is, you might say, his last will and testament. The saints were in his heart. The truth was in his heart. He was concerned about the truth. He says to Timothy, "the things that thou halt heard of me ... commit thou to faithful men", @2 Timothy 2: 2. He was concerned that that should be cared for -- put into the hands of faithful men -- not as a creed. He had in mind that his teaching should be handed down in spirit, as in the hands of faithful men. He was concerned about that. It was his last will and testament. He desired that the precious truth that he had received from the Lord should be handed down to us, not only in letter but in the Spirit. And so he is concerned about it in that way, and in many other things one might cite, in order that the truth might stand, and the structure
{4}
of the assembly might stand, as the structure of the assembly of God stands.
Another thing that he stresses is the things that are "in Christ Jesus" -- everything was there. The whole letter is permeated with the thought that what is most precious should be cared for, the things that are "in Christ Jesus" -- the promise of life, for instance, and truth and love. And many other things that I might cite, as "salvation which is in Christ Jesus". All is fixed in that way in infinite security, and so it has come down to us intact. And then, as to the negative side he mentions these two names, Jannes and Jambres. One would inquire as to where he got those names. How his mind travelled back to the Nile! How he would think of those magicians imitating what Aaron did with his rod turning water to blood. How he would think of Pharaoh here.
And then there was the gruesome thing of the Nile being turned into blood, and the poor Egyptians digging around for a little water. That which is for the refreshment of men turned into death -- the mere profession of christianity. How he would feel that!
And as he proceeded to the next plague, the plague of frogs, he would feel that demons were creeping in amongst the saints. How he would be conscious of it as he was there in person in Rome, hearing about the saints throughout the world. The doctrine of demons -- such doctrine as was taught by Hymenaeus and Philetus -- doctrines that eat as doth a gangrene.
And then he comes along and thinks of the plague of gnats. He would see how the plagues of Egypt corresponded with his own times. The third plague referred to what God was doing, I mean doing consistently with Himself. The frogs did not denote what is of God. They denote what is of demons. The river turned into blood denotes death. But when you come to the dust of the earth -- all the dust of Egypt, we are told -- the rod of Moses turned it into
{5}
gnats. You may see there a sure representative of life, figurative of the saints. If God takes up a symbol in that way, we shall find that God has done it in wisdom. There is no modification of the third plague. It is simply brought in, and there is no cessation of it here. It is not said to cease like the others.
How all that would come up in the mind of the great servant of God that I am speaking of. He is speaking of the life that is in Christ Jesus. The promise of life before the world was -- fixed in Christ. Men and women are being made to live, in the power of God, in relation to that. How all that would come into his mind. And so, as I said, the dust of Egypt was turned into living creatures, reminding us of how results were made. Adam was made of dust -- but then made to live. And then we read in that same epistle that God has brought through the gospel life and incorruptibility to light. Not only are we made to live in mortal bodies, but incorruptibility means immortality. Life and immortality are brought to light. How great are all these things! This thought of life -- all things made to live in Christ. "Quickened together with him", @Colossians 2:13. How the apostle would think of all that.
These two names come into his mind. He understands. He brings down the whole position of the plagues in Egypt to the present time, and he shows that the enemy, in his agents, was acting against the truth of God. These two men Jannes and Jambres are the agents against Moses. So they are today against the people of God -- against the truth. As "Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, thus these also withstand the truth". Now I speak in this way, dear brethren, of the importance of being able to name things, and to give them the right names.
We are confronted with this wicked opposition resident in these men. As they withstood Moses so these men withstand the truth at the present time. There
{6}
they are. These two men existed. They are in the mind of the Spirit of God. They are carried down, and the apostle Paul is used to name them for the first time, so that you may understand the distinction they had as ministers of Satan. He speaks of ministers of Satan in @2 Corinthians 11: 13 - 15. Yet they were probably nominally in fellowship at Corinth turned into angels of light. As soon as I can give the name to a thing, I have the mastery.
Well now, I go on to 2 Kings. We read that Hezekiah broke in pieces the brazen serpent -- he called it Nehushtan. As far as I know, we only get it once in Scripture. We get what it means, of course  -- a piece of brass. But it refers to something handed down that once was good. What a history it had. And I see it lifted up. The Lord Jesus Himself refers to it.
"As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up", @John 3: 14. The Lord Jesus took the words into His own mouth.
"If ... any man ... beheld the serpent of brass, he lived". What virtue was in that serpent at that time! But has it got the virtue now? No. It never was essentially anything more than a piece of brass. But then God put virtue in it at that time. And faith laid hold of that. It is a type of Christ. Looking at it at that time was looking at Christ. "If a serpent had bitten any man, and he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived", @Numbers 21: 9. It was the way of life.
The word 'tradition' in itself is not objectionable, but as used in apostate christendom, it is a pernicious thought, and apostate christianity is built up largely on tradition. That is, what is called the writings of the fathers, running on down for several centuries.
And the Apocrypha, too, writings that in themselves may be very spurious -- ones containing things that cannot be used as the foundation of the faith and hence are pernicious. And here was this piece of brass carried down to the days of Hezekiah. And so
{7}
it was that a man of faith corresponding with Paul was needed; Hezekiah was a wonderful saint. He had his blemishes, alas, but he is a wonderful saint, and is honoured in that he is able to use this word 'Nehushtan'.
As I am speaking here tonight, I think of the young people. Look around and think of the evils that confront you -- things that have been carried into the teachings of the school from tradition -- or from modernism, that is the opposite to it. And it is for each to be able to say, 'That is that', to tabulate it.
As soon as you do it in faith, you have overcome it.
This is one of the most practical things I can bring before you. You can name a thing for yourself, not borrowing it from others. Hezekiah did not borrow his name, nor did Paul. It was his own spiritual intelligence that the Holy Spirit used. And that is what I am leading to, that you might be able to put a name on it.
'Well', they might say to Hezekiah, 'this thing has been used as an object of address. It has been used as a deity'. And we have such things as that. Suppose I take the Lord's supper, one of the most precious things we have; what has it become? Generally abroad, particularly in Rome, what was once just a symbol of the Lord Jesus, and is yet to those who love Him, has become an object of veneration. Well, as soon as a man gets his eye opened to that, what does he say? 'Open idolatry'. That is what it is. What does a man that has his eye opened say? 'Well', he says, 'that is just apiece of bread'. And that is what Hezekiah means. 'It is just a trifle of brass. With all your incense that is what it is'. Well now, who is able to say that of himself? 'I have seen the thing. I know that that thing has become venerated and worshipped and all it is is a traditional thing turned into idolatry'. We can name it, you see, and as I name it I am delivered from it. I have mastered it.
{8}
Well now, I go on to what is more positive, and that is, the assembly viewed as a mother. I suppose the idea of the mother is in the range of each person. Almost every child here has some conception of the mother. I suppose the knowledge of the mother is primary with every person. The mother has to do with us more than any, and a mother's love and a mother's care remain, perhaps, more than any with every person. And so it is that the picture in @1 Kings 3 helps us as to discerning the saints in this light. It is a guide to us. Here are two persons -- two mothers  -- and they are contending for a living child. Who is the mother of the child? There is only one man in the whole universe that can tell who the mother of that child is. Thank God for him! He is a type of Christ. He had prayed for wisdom and God greatly honoured that prayer. He says, 'I have heard it. And I gave you wisdom. I greatly honour you because you did not pray for other things'.
And he is tested because of his wisdom. God loves to test us and brings up one test after another. Whether we can name the real thing in the test, brings out where we are, if we have had to do with God. These propensities and traits of evil that I have been speaking of; by the process of elimination, have I been able to tell the evil from the good? Evil is apt to so clothe itself that it will appear at least portionately good, and that is what tests me. "Woe unto them who call evil good, and good evil". They are not able to name things. And so Solomon is tested. And each of us is tested.
These two women are figurative of the saints. Where is the mother? What am I going to call these people? As I look abroad in Christendom today, I see how many sects there are. Do I really feel how incongruous it is? What is my response now the thing is there before me? Can I put a name on these?
{9}
That is what comes out. Where is the child? A living child, not a dead one. This woman is standing there and says, 'That is my son'. And the other one says, 'No, that is my son'. And the king says, "Bring me a sword". Now, dear friends, the sword is the word of God. It penetrates, according to the description we have of it, "piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart". I am in the presence of the king, of Christ, and he says, "Bring me a sword".
He is going to use it. If the living child is to be cut in two, the mother says, 'Oh no! That cannot be'. She yearned for her child. That is what to look for, genuine affection for the people of God. Look for loyalty to Christ, of course, but love for one another. "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", @John 13: 35. Look for that.
Here, you see, it is like a company of Christians. They go after the child. They bring them up on the manna. For they "all ate the same spiritual food, and all drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank of a spiritual rock which followed them: (now the rock was the Christ; )" @1 Corinthians 10: 3, 4. One would love to speak of it to every Christian in the world. Find the mother; to be able to put this name on the saints viewed in that light. And thus the woman that says, 'Cut the child in two', represents professing Christianity. She was heartless. She is not the mother of the child. See how she is to go. She is to leave that public position with that stamp upon her. She is not a true mother. Whereas the other has disclosed her true heart. Like the Lord Jesus and like the apostle Paul, we yearn for our brethren. Well now, that is assembly truth, as presented to us in Galatians. Sarah is the type of it. She is the true mother of the child. Jerusalem above is our
{10}
mother. I think now of the young. The saints love you as a young christian, and would seek to nurture you, and bring you up in the assembly for the Lord's pleasure.
Well now, I pass on to the last scripture read in @Genesis 2, so that I may bring out this position more clearly. We read that He "brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them". Think of the wonderful simplicity of it. He took a sheep and brought it before Adam. Now what has He got in His mind? "To see what he would call them".
That is, He would have delight in the process. Now we come to the older brothers and sisters here, developed christians. The figure applies to us who are more experienced. God knows how to test us when we are old as when we are young. Now there he is.
It is some movement of life. It is for me to see that movement of life and name it. And God has pleasure in the process. I have often thought of the history of heaven. What history goes on day and night in heaven. Each of us makes history. As God brings a creature to Adam, history is being made. "To see what he would call them". What pleasure it would give to God to see the intelligence of His wonderful handiwork in man, to see the intelligence he had.
I cannot say how long it took to name all those animals.
Sometimes we speak about @Numbers 7 where the twelve princes of Israel offered. Each had his day.
What history was made in those twelve days! Each day was filled with one of those princes. Heaven was delighted with it. The beautiful offerings corresponded with Christ in a typical way. Well now, how long did it take for all these creatures to come before Adam? You cannot say. But what delight it brought to God. He was seeing, working out in that creature, the wonderful intelligence He had put there. God says, 'How pleasing that is to Me'. Adam was
{11}
able to name a creature according to the movements of life. Whatever Adam called a creature, that was its name. God was so pleased with the process.
And finally, to come to see the assembly in that wonderful chapter, that is what I am leading up to, to be able to see the assembly, not only as the mother, but as the bride of Christ, to see it in its movements. And so God brought her to Adam. It says, "And Jehovah Elohim built the rib that he had taken from Man into a woman". The word 'built' is used for the first time. What a time it must have been to Jehovah as He brought this creature to man. Well now, he says to Jehovah, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man".
You see, brethren, this is the top stone. We are called upon to name a thing in the sublimest character.
We should be able to detect and name these traits of Christ in the saints, the traits of Christ worked out femininely in the saints. Adam says, "she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man".
Now that is the end of what I had to say. I just wanted to lead you on to spiritual refinement, as it says, "the spiritual discerns all things" (@1 Corinthians 2: 15), that you might see the reflection of Christ in the slightest way. "The spiritual discerns all things", as Adam discerned himself in the woman. As we read the epistles to the Corinthians and Ephesians, we shall acquire the habit of discerning these traits in the Lord's people, the body of Christ as seen in the universe of God.
{12}
THE LORD'S SERVICES IN THE ASSEMBLY
@John 6:67 - 69; @John 13:8; @John 14:5 - 10; @John 17:6,26
J.T. These scriptures indicate how, as believers, we come to know the Lord in His services in the assembly, in His relations to the Father. In the types, Israel had to come to the knowledge of the Lord as priest. The first scripture we read refers to priesthood. Holiness, at least typically, entered peculiarly into this office. So Peter, in our scripture, chapter 6, says, "we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God". They had believed. His disciples believed in Him, we are told, as He manifested forth His glory, but they came gradually to see Him in His varied glories and offices. So in saying that they had believed and known that He was the Holy One of God, they had the knowledge of Him which we may call basic as regards the service of God. The word was in them in that light. The Lord spoke in chapter 14 of their knowing Him when the Spirit should come, and that He was in the Father, and they were in Him and He in them. He comes into their knowledge of Him on this line, as believing and knowing by experience. The gospels provide examples of persons who know who He is in this sense, such as John the baptist, the woman of Samaria, and now Peter. In John the baptist, He was known as sacrificial, as the Lamb of God; in the woman of Samaria, as the Christ, and here He is spoken of as having been believed on and known to be the Holy One of God, evidently acquiring place in the disciples in this way. Paul spoke of Christ being among us, or in us, morally His place in the assembly which leads to the Minister of the sanctuary and indeed as exercising every office in the assembly, for indeed His varied glories are to Shine, as we know, and to be responded to also in a
{13}
reciprocal way in the saints, as He is known amongst us. And then in chapter 13 (Peter again speaking, but unadvisedly), the Lord reminds us in His answer to Peter that we can only have part with Him, not simply as washed, but as He washes us. That is, the matter must be His. Elsewhere, we wash ourselves. He washes us from our sins, too, but here it is not simply that we are washed, but that He does it, and if He does not there is no possibility of having part with Him. This would remind us that in the assembly He must have to say to everything, and then as to the Father, we should question Him. He instructs us in His answers as to how we are to apprehend the Father. That is, He is to be apprehended, but He is to be apprehended in His fulness. No one hath seen Him as to His absolute Being, but He is to be apprehended in His fulness, so that it is what is in Christ. "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father", He says. So that we get into our minds who we are speaking of when we are speaking of the Father. There is some concrete report. He is invisible as God is, but still there are the features that get into our minds that we know what we are saying and to whom we are saying it, when we are speaking to the Father.
And then finally, in chapter 17, the Lord is seen as High Priest. Although John does not give these official titles, yet we can see, by the service He renders, what He says when speaking to His Father, how the divine service is carried on, how the Minister of the sanctuary carries on the service and what place the saints have in it, carried along in the ministry in the teaching of this book, carried along to be alongside the Lord in His speaking to the Father, in which speaking, or we might say, prayer, He calls His disciples men whom the Father gives Him. So that He is manifesting His name to them in verse 6, and in verse 26, "I have made known to them thy name,
{14}
and will make it known; that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them". So that we go on this line, into the love in its greatest position, that is in the love the Father has for the Son.
A.R. Would you say what is involved in the expression "the holy one of God" as in the first portion?
J.T. I think it underlies the service of God in the sanctuary. It underlies the Lord's official place as Priest. The disciples came to apprehend Him in this light. It is remarkable that it comes out when many were going away, and it reminds us of the needs of acquiring a knowledge of Christ, an experimental knowledge, otherwise we shall go away.
H.B. He being in us in this character, does that mean that we are seeking on sanctuary lines, seeking on the way of getting into a sphere that suits us, and where we are in direct first-hand touch with Him?
J.T. You are fixed. You are not going away. There is no one to go to.
Ques. Does Peter get his first glimpse of the knowledge of the Lord in @Luke 5: "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord", Luke presenting Him as "the holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God" (@Luke 1: 35); and immediately after the Lord indicates service for him?
J.T. Well, that is very good. The presence of holiness is there. He felt the presence of holiness, and he was sinful, not only a sinner but sinful. As you say, Luke begins with the thought of holiness, essential holiness -- the Holy Thing. That is essential holiness which can be said of no other Babe. Even the demons recognised it, but in Peter's answer here, it is an experimental matter. It is not simply that he got a revelation as in @Matthew 16, but it is experimental, and therefore, within the range of all of us.
T.T. In the earlier part of @John 6, the Lord speaks about being taught of God, and says, "No one can
{15}
come to me except the Father who has sent me draw him". Is there a connection between the two?
J.T. The chapter is profound in that way. It is a chapter which requires more attention than any for the understanding of it. The Lord says, for instance, "This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom *he* has sent". So that we proceed in the epistles. We become experimental in our knowledge of the Lord. That is, He becomes, as it were, in us. We are told in @Romans 8 "if Christ be in you" and in Colossians, "Christ in you the hope of glory". I believe John builds up that line of truth.
So that as to John the baptist, Christ is in him, and so right along he gives the varied features of Christ's glory in the way it is apprehended, for the names He gets are nearly all by those who apprehend Him, as for instance, by Nathanael.
G.H.C. Is the apprehension of Him connected with the way He is presented in this chapter, as the principle of life?
J.T. It is, because Peter says, "Thou hast words of life eternal". That is the first thing he mentions the words meaning that the truth or the subject of eternal life is opened up to us and made intelligible. There is instruction as to it in detail and that is necessary, too, as regards our essential position because life is essential. It is the living that praise God, as Hezekiah says. But then Peter adds here, "the holy one of God". "The holy one of God" would imply the service of God.
A.G. Do you suggest that @Matthew 16 is special, and this chapter is normal?
J.T. This is normal. It is presented as normal, although the Lord addresses the twelve. It is presented as the normal outcome of what is experienced. He does not ask what they were saying about Him, but He challenges them as to whether they are going away, so that it becomes very practical. The knowledge 
{16}
of Christ as Peter speaks of it here is essential to our being held in the right position.
C.E.W. You spoke of the apprehension of Himself in earlier chapters. Do you think that the character of the service here is more in relation to the assembly?
J.T. I think the basis is laid in Peter's soul for the service of God, that is from this point. We might take up the whole typical teaching, for the types are full of the teaching relative to the service of God. It is very remarkable as you look into the types, take Exodus. The great bearing of Exodus is the service of God. "Let my son go, that he may serve me". That is in chapter 4. And then we have in chapter 25 how God shall dwell among His people, and be served amongst them. So that we can understand how instruction laid in Peter's soul would fit him for the service of God, to take it up as we have seen in the book of Exodus, and then the book of Leviticus -- priestly service. It is the great subject for the moment, I believe, that the Lord is keeping before us, and we are challenged here as to whether we are going away. What is holding us? It is the vital knowledge of Christ, first as the One who has the words of eternal life, and then the Holy One of God.
R.McA. Do you think the Lord felt keenly for those who went away?
J.T. He did. It is from that time, many of His disciples went away, and were walking no more with Him. And then He says to the twelve, "Will ye also go away?" And then Peter's reply. These are the things, these are the initial features, which would hold the saints. "Lord, to whom shall we go?" Who would tell you about eternal life? And then as regards God and our service, who could tell us anything about it? Where can you get it in all the systems that man has made up? They have not a
{17}
thought for the service of God. There must be the Holy One of God for the service of God.
W.H. Does the Lord connect the thought of being in them as known with the idea of eating His flesh and drinking His blood? He says, that he who does So "dwells in me and I in him".
J.T. That is good. It confirms what we are saying as to this chapter.
Rem. So that would be a matter of what enters into the constitution of the individual.
J.T. That is right. That is the word, 'the constitution', because this is not an immediate revelation. It is something we have known by experience. We have believed and known. We believe much that we cannot say we have known, but to say that I have known, I mean that I have had experience of the thing. I have proved it.
Rem. So this is a word for the Lord's own heart as well as a test to the disciples.
J.T. I think that is right. I think it must have been very refreshing to Him, to have an answer like this, and so always the Lord loves to hear us tell what we think of Him -- what would hold us to it. We have vital knowledge of Christ; we have nowhere else to go. Take all the things there are one by one, and where can you go? If you are a spiritual person, if you are a true believer in Christ, where can you go?
Rem. In chapter 17, the Lord says, "the words which thou hast given me I have given them".
Would you connect these words with words of eternal life?
J.T. That is beyond this. Peter said the Lord had them. He does not imply that the disciples had them. They no doubt understood, but this is the experience of His teaching, listening to what He is saying and so what He was saying were words not simply that would teach them, but that one could *have* them.
{18}
Ques. Is it this knowledge that distinguishes the other disciples from Judas? He was chosen as much as they were, was he not?
J.T. The Lord says so -- a very solemn challenge, because if He is the Holy One of God, we will be searched out. Being in the outward position is not enough. Where He is confessed in this way, He could not let Judas off -- not simply that he *had* a demon, but he *was* a devil, showing what may be amongst the brethren, and the Lord exposes it.
W.H. As eating His flesh you would be morally apart from all that the flesh would live in, and drinking His blood would bring you into touch with all that His love would reveal. So that love would be your portion.
J.T. Quite so. The chapter is very profound. It is the Son of God, and the Son of man come down from heaven. It is a question of the life of the world. It is a question of life. No doubt the teaching was being received by him and others. The disciples have reached something that holds them permanently with the Lord, and speaking of a person amongst them who is a devil, he can be dealt with without causing damage. There is something that holds them.
G.D. It would call our attention to the great feature of holiness.
J.T. Well, that is what I was remarking, as underlying the service in the sanctuary. Holiness becomes us for ever. So that we have in Christ the Holy One of God. He is thus Minister of the sanctuary, that is, One available for service who is qualified for all that relates to the sanctuary.
G.D. Is that what was lacking with the two sons of Aaron, not understanding the holiness of the position in their service?
J.T. They offered strange fire and Judas would do that, too.
H.B. Is there the side in which we are indispensable 
{19}
to Him in the filling out of the service of God?
J.T. That is what comes in here, I think. The thought of it comes in amongst the twelve. It must be remembered that all that He unfolded was in relation to the twelve, especially the Lord's supper.
As far as the records go, only twelve were present. What is in mind in that is that what the Lord intended to inaugurate there would be established on a reliable testimony, and the thought of the sanctuary comes in here and the Lord must say there is a devil. He is utterly incompatible with the sanctuary. Anything of that nature must be dealt with. If we go to the types, of course, this is all opened up to us.
H.B. It is said of Mary Magdalene, that seven demons went out of her. Does that in any way touch the idea?
J.T. It would, indeed. She would be thus consecrated material for the assembly.
G.H.C. This thought of Minister of the sanctuary  -- is it known in a peculiar way when the saints are together in assembly?
J.T. That is what I was thinking of, that we might see first as to how each of us comes into it, into the knowledge of Christ in this direction. Many of us may sit down in assembly, and have no personal knowledge; we have to rely on the brethren who have. Whereas the thought here is that the believer comes into personal knowledge of Christ in this character. We have believed and known, Peter says; so that we understand. We sit down in assembly, we look round when we go in, and we take charge.
G.H.C. Is this a sign of His service? Do you think we have not paid sufficient heed to His service in this regard?
J.T. I think it is a question to each person, coming to know the Lord as Peter knew Him.
T.T. They said, "Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we have known?"
{20}
But there was nothing in that that was really in the service of God.
J.T. That is a good contrast. That could never come into fellowship, as we say. It is this personal knowledge that qualifies us for the assembly. Peter could have said many other things at this juncture. He does, but what he says here we may be sure is what was needed, what ends in the instruction.
F.I. Does this personal knowledge of the Lord come to us before we come to the Supper, or while we are at the Supper?
J.T. I think it is a christian experience that we ought to acquire as we are converted. It is the essence of the gospel, that He is raised from the dead, that He is "declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead", @Romans 1: 4. It seems it is something that can be acquired by persons to whom the gospel comes. The element of holiness comes with the gospel. I mean, it is presented divinely in the gospel. The Spirit works it in us. We come together, as I understand, to sit down in assembly, as knowing Christ in this way. He is my Saviour, of course, and many other things, Mediator of the covenant, but He is the Holy One of God, as basic, and it works out in many glories in Christ. What else have you to say about that?
F.I. Well, I have not much else to say. I just wanted help. As you have in view the thought of the service of God, I take it that is carried on as being in assembly in relation to the Supper. You do not look at it as apart from that. Where do we gather up the thought as to the Minister of the sanctuary, or where are we made suitable to take it on?
J.T. I think the Lord's supper is the occasion of this, the introduction to the service of God as in assembly, and what is more, is that each believer is to acquire the knowledge of the Holy One of God. It
{21}
is a basic thought really as to the service of God. He is the Holy One of God, He is looked on as God's in this light. He will look after man in the assembly, in the sanctuary as God while He is Minister in it.
F.W. They did not answer each one for themselves, but Peter answers for all, as though the assembly was involved in that matter.
J.T. Yes. In the Lord remarking about Judas, it is a very small but searching matter, and as in assembly service, there is the possibility of a person like this, and the Lord could not let Judas off when He is confessed as the Holy One of God; He could not let Judas off. He must expose him, for He is in service as the Minister of the sanctuary to expose any evil that may be. So we must, therefore, see that there is no possibility to stay being exposed in the presence of the Holy One of God.
H.R. Is that after He is confessed as the Holy One of God that makes room for Him to take up this service as Minister of the sanctuary?
J.T. He is known to be that. The point is to be that He is known among us. He is in us, as the Holy One of God. And Peter says, "we have believed and known". It is evidently what is known amongst them. You can understand the apostles talking to one another, and the truth would develop in their minds in that way. Peter must have been conversant with the others in saying that we have believed and known.
H.R. I would like to ask in regard of @John 21. Peter says to the Lord, "thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I am attached to thee". It was both conscious knowledge and objective knowledge there. What would this knowledge be that you refer to now?
J.T. I cannot really tell you the original word, but I think it is 'conscious'. Peter uses the word for 'conscious' in @John 21, until he finishes the last
{22}
reference, meaning that the Lord could see in him some objective evidence that he loved Him.
H.R. So that one might have conscious knowledge and yet be possessed of a demon.
J.T. I do not think Judas is included in this at all. He was there. The Lord would not let him off, he would confess to all these things, and no doubt did eventually. What else could he? He was unreal, and if the Lord is acknowledged as the Holy One of God, in effect this is what He says, Judas must be spoken to, and now is the time to do it.
Rem. As to what we said earlier, not one of you has a devil, but one of you is a devil. It is a question of what he was essentially.
J.T. That is right. Quite so.
Rem. He did not name him. The disciples named him. They knew from what the Lord said.
J.T. Yes. He spoke of Judas the son of Simon, Iscariote, that is, the evangelist tells us that. It is as He says later, "one of you shall betray me". It is most important, that as He is the Holy One of God, there must be exposure if He is acknowledged.
Rem. I suppose when you come to @John 17, Judas is not there. You have things operating in the holiest.
J.T. I think so, He is speaking to His Father, and what I think morally follows what we have in chapter 6, is the Lord's answer to Peter's comment in chapter 13 as to the Lord's service in washing his feet -- as the Holy One of God, He must have charge. It must be His matter, and the Lord must have His say as to the whole position, and we may as well confess that. This chapter exposes Judas. He is forced out. He is named as a devil in chapter 6, but he is forced out in chapter 13, and as to that the Lord says, "ye are clean, but not all" (verse 10). The Lord must do it. He will see to it that what is suitable is there.
{23}
Ques. Do you think that apart from the experimental knowledge of the Holy One of God, the ringleader might be exposed as seeking to take part in the service of God?
J.T. He will be. It will come out. The point is it is where Christ is owned as the Holy One of God, where He is recognised.
Ques. Would His character as the Holy One of God be set forth in chapter 1 of Revelation, when He spoke in the midst of the seven candlesticks?
J.T. Well, it comes out, what He is as the Holy One of God. It is manifested, especially dealing with Thyatira. It would correspond with Judas. In spite of the profundity of ecclesiastical claims, the Lord is discerning all that is there. "I have against thee that thou permittest the woman Jezebel", and He tells the church what He had done with her. The worst kind of thing may be allowed in systems where the Holy One of God is not recognised. It is the presence of the Holy One of God, recognised, which is the guarantee of the exposure of the demons.
T.T. Does the Lord carry on this service personally in washing, or has it been delegated now?
J.T. It is delegated here. In the passage we have read, they were to wash one another's feet, but He is not putting it into the hands of the brethren. He does not specify that they *must* do it. He sets an example, which they should carry on, but His first reference is that "if I wash thee not, thou halt no part with me". That is a great fact set out in the beginning of His subject, yet it gets the truth into our souls that the Lord must have the first and last word as to the assembly, as to having part with Him.
H.B. Does this mean that we necessarily need our feet washed in taking part in the assembly?
J.T. We may think they are washed, and the Lord reminds us, 'if I do not do it it is not done'. That is, 'if I do not do it, you can have no part 
{24}
with Me'. You are drawn into the sense of responsibility of bringing the Lord into it. He must be recognised.
Ques. Does the thought of "part with me" relate to service?
J.T. It relates to what follows in the following chapters. I think it is in the sanctuary as with the Father. All these chapters are to lead us up to chapter 17, in which we get a concrete example of His service inside. It is prayer, of course, but still you can see how service is carried on. It is carried on by Him in our midst.
W.H. Would the feet-washing involve that the service as Minister of the sanctuary is to be carried on in freshness amongst the saints, in contrast to the formal thing that obtains in christendom today?
J.T. I think so, and even if it be a saint that does it, you realise that the Lord has done it. I may be qualified to wash the saints¬ feet, but the person whose feet are washed has to see to it that it is the Lord. It must be the Lord that does it.
F.I. The doing of the service, if rightly done, would leave that sense in the soul, if done by the Lord?
J.T. And so that principle runs through the assembly. He is doing it.
Ques. Do you mean that in that connection the soul is definitely to be in contact with the Lord.
J.T. Definite relations with the Lord, whether brethren do it or not, it is the Lord who is doing it. After all, even the ministry is the Lord's or nothing. If it is not of the Lord, it is nothing.
Ques. Would you say the service of feet-washing discovers Judas?
J.T. It is remarkable it comes out in this chapter, and he is forced out.
Ques. What is the thought of having "part with me"?
J.T. That is what we have in the assembly as
{25}
recognising the Lord in our midst, as the Minister of the sanctuary, we have part with Him. I think that is what is in mind. John does not use the word 'sanctuary' or 'assembly', either, but we can see that is what is meant, especially in the last days when you do not want to be using official terms. Therefore, if a brother is serving thus, it is not he only, but the Lord is in it, because that is what makes it effective.
G.H.C. In the verse you read, it is a deliberate move of the Lord towards Peter. "He comes therefore". You are speaking of the Lord calling attention to the service of God at the present moment. Do you think it is deliberate in that way, that the saints should be helped to have part with Him in this great service?
J.T. It is. We can see that in view of the assembly all this precedes. It is not simply what we have been in assembly, but what we take there. That is the state suitable. So that the Lord has us as suitable, and can proceed in His service, which is I think covered in the term "part with me". What can be greater or more blessed than having part with Jesus as He carries on the service before God?
T.T. Would it be accomplished by opening the way for the Father's name?
J.T. That is the next thing. Chapter 14 is to bring us into some little apprehension of what we see when we see the Father we are addressing -- "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". Well now, the voice from heaven finally was to announce the Son, but then that is only the voice, and of course, it is the voice, but we need more than a voice to grasp in our minds the idea of the Father. We see that He is the Father. The declaration of the Father does not depend on the death of Christ. He does not, therefore, enter into the covenant. Many
{26}
have thought about that as to whether the Father may be connected with the new covenant, but the new covenant is a matter of the people, of course. The revelation of the Father does not depend on that. There was no death in the revelation of the Father. The revelation of the Father refers to His relations with Christ before He died. His death was not necessary for that. His death was necessary for the covenant. The covenant is not between the Father and His children. It is between God and His people, and it is effected through death, not through the answer from heaven.
Rem. So that "he that hath seen me hath seen the Father" is proof that it is prior to and independent of His death.
J.T. Quite so. Here what the Lord means in His personally calling attention to the Father, is that the Father is characteristically there. He was in Christ personally, and He was there characteristically, so as to be apprehended. "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father". So that there is a great apprehension of the Father in His characteristics.
W.H. The Lord refers to the works that He did and the words which He spoke, as being the Father's words and works. Would that be what you mean as characteristic?
J.T. Quite so. Jesus is not the Father, but He is a divine Person, and so great enough to personify the Person, to impersonate Him, as it were, as the Spirit may impersonate the Father or the Son now.
G.H.C. In the previous chapter He speaks about departing out of the world to go to the Father, and just after He speaks about coming out from God, and going back to God. Would you help us as to that?
J.T. The passage shows what is in mind in this chapter. He is going to the Father. He is going to God. He puts the two together in chapter 20, saying, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my
{27}
God and your God", and we are His brethren, and God comes in after He is mentioned by Him, after the Father, which would, I suppose, mean God as He was known by Jesus. Not the covenant God, more than that. I am true to that, of course, but more than that. God is known of Christ, Christ's God.
G.H.C. Is 'God' in the way you are speaking of it, a wider thought?
J.T. It is a wider thought than the name 'Father'. The scripture which supports that exactly is that the Father judges no one. God must be a wider thought in that sense. The Father is a name in family relationship, and employed to indicate the character of our dispensation. It is God known in that way, not the God who judges, but God in grace, but then we have to come to the family thought as to ourselves. We are not called sons of God in John at all. It is either "His Father", or "The Father" throughout in it. We come to chapter 20, and then it is "my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God"; and then you say, what about the Father in Matthew? We have saints called the sons of their Father in Matthew, and they are directed to speak to Him as their Father which is in heaven, but I think it is simply the relation the Father has entered into in Christ, and the disciples were brought into that in a provisional way. Indeed, the term 'Father' is applied to Jehovah in the Old Testament. He is said to be "The everlasting Father" in the prophet; @Isaiah 9:6. All that is short of what we have in @John 20. @John 20 is what applies specially to the saints as forming the assembly.
W.H. How far then do you carry the thought of Christ as being the Minister of the sanctuary? Would that go the length of @John 20?
J.T. I think so. Of course, we come to the family thought, God being Father, and the Son in the midst, and we as sons. The sanctuary is a relative thought,
{28}
and shutting out what is unholy. The service goes on in @John 20. It is the Lord in the midst. It is Christ known in us, as it were, but I think chapter 17 gives us the clue, because the Lord having said these things, lifts up His eyes to heaven and says, "Father". You hear Him speaking to His Father. The chapter gives understanding of what the sanctuary is in that sense, the Son speaks to His Father, and in the attitude, in the sense of prayer, in thanksgiving.
Ques. Would 'the Holy One' have reference to where there is unholiness?
J.T. That is the thought, and the sanctuary has the same thought. If we can follow the Lord along these chapters, we shall come to the thought of assembly service, where He is with us. He is on our side, and carrying on towards the Father. In Matthew we have the words, "I praise thee, Father", and in Luke, too. We have in Luke distinctly, that the Lord at that time rejoiced in spirit, showing what may happen amongst us as in assembly, and in chapter 17 we have an extended prayer to the Father.
H.B. In the last clause of verse 6 it says, "They were thine, and thou gavest them me, and they have kept thy word". I was thinking of "thy word".
Would that be sonship as proper to His word?
J.T. The Father's word, that they have kept.
The Lord gives them credit for keeping it. He calls them 'men', which is to be noted. It is the men, and then He speaks of having manifested the Father's name to them, "and they have kept thy word. Now they have known that all things that thou hast given me are of thee; for the words which thou halt given me I have given them, and they have received them, and have known truly that I came out from thee, and have believed that thou sentest me". Well, you can see how they are regarded in His mind. And then He asks concerning them, because the word 'demands' here alludes to that. He can speak to His Father
{29}
familiarly. It is 'demands'. And He says, "I am glorified in them", and then He says, "Holy Father, keep them in thy name, ..." and it says, further down, "Sanctify them by the truth: thy word is truth. As thou hast sent me into the world, I also have sent them into the world; and I sanctify myself for them, that they also may be sanctified by truth". You can see how His thoughts are that we are His companions, and fit to be His companions, not only according to eternal counsel, but according to actual forms.
H.B. That is what I had in mind in connection with the word being in the singular; the same in verse 17, "thy word is truth".
J.T. But then you see sonship is in the mind of the Father. He says in verse 22, "And the glory which thou hast given me I have given them". There I think you come to the idea of sonship. It is the glory; it is not simply the word of the Father.
T.T. Would keeping the word be a proof of affection -- responsive to the word of the Father?
J.T. Well, it would -- intelligent affection, too. The word implies the Father's mind. I cannot keep the word except I understand it.
Ques. Is it your thought then that it would not only be an appropriation of Him in the light of Minister of the sanctuary, but that there should be a suitability to Him as such?
J.T. That is what this prayer is for, that the Lord might have us altogether with Him, as suitable, and He says, "the glory which thou hast given me I have given them". And then finally, "I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known". Now that is a different word from the word 'manifest' in verse 6. It is a deeper word, I think. His name is made known -- that is, effectively made known, and it is through Him. The word could be preached, "... that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them". So that the Lord is
{30}
amongst us in this exalted way, as the Father hath loved Him. It is not covenant love. It is the Father's love in our hearts.
Ques. Is that according to this, the Father, that we are the sons of God?
J.T. John never calls us 'sons of God' except in the book of Revelation. He calls us children. 'Sons' is what we are towards God. 'Children' is what we are here in His care in testimony. "Now are we children of God", @1 John 3: 2.
G.H.C. It says, not only the Father's love in them, but "I in them". Would you say a little as to that?
J.T. Well, I think He is in us on that basis, on the basis of covenant love, in that we need to give place to Him, but it is a more excellent position. He is in us as having the Father's love in us. It is a question of the kind of love. "The love with which thou hast loved me", it says.
Ques. Am I right in thinking chapter 17 views the cross of our Lord as past, and not as we read it, thinking that it was on this side of the cross? It is in view of the Lord as Priest in the assembly, having gone on high, and for us, bearing up His people before the Father.
J.T. Yes, I think that is right. He is bearing up His people here. The point is now to bring out what He is in the assembly -- how He serves in the assembly, and how we have part with Him in the assembly -- a most exalted thought, that we have the Father's love in our hearts, that is the Father's love for the Son"the love with which thou hast loved me", the love wherewith He loved the Son, that we have in our hearts, that we know how to love the Son as the Father loved Him. So that we are on a different platform as He associates us with the Father, and it has to become true of us, having made known to us the Father's name. It is not simply manifested, but
{31}
"made known". It is a fact. It is known in our souls, the Father's name.
F.I. That being so, that the Father's name is made known in our souls by the Minister of the sanctuary, does that fit us to pass over into the presence of the Father?
J.T. I think so. We are now qualified. It would be, I suppose, our enjoyment in heaven, that we love as the Father loves.
F.I. So that as we associate with the Lord in the presence of the Father, you do not view Him there as the Minister of the sanctuary.
J.T. Well, He is seen thus speaking here as the Son. He says "Father". The Minister of the sanctuary is here, because we still have to do with evil here below. The idea of a sanctuary will drop in eternity. There is no evil to be against. It is just the Father and sons.
{32}
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN
@1 John 2: 20, 27; @1 John 3: 24; @1 John 4:1, 2,13; @1 John 5: 6 - 8
J.T. It will be noticed in each of these scriptures that the Spirit of God is largely concerned that we might know -- first that we might be independent of man as regards the antichrist and the many antichrists spoken of in chapter 2; then in the end of chapter 3 as regards God abiding in us, and that we might know the spirits that are current, for evil teaching is not simply by men, but it is wicked spirits using them; then again we have the thought of knowing that we abide in God and He in us, by the Spirit; and finally the testimony of the Spirit as to the water and the blood, that is, the death of Christ. A christian should be intelligent as to all these things; the end throughout the epistle is that things are known; it finishes by saying, "We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in the wicked one. And we know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding that we should know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ". The first two scriptures, as will be observed, are addressed to little children; the second at the end of chapter 3 and beginning of chapter 4 is addressed to the saints as a whole, viewed as the family of God, and so is the passage in chapter 5. So that our first remarks would bear on the young amongst us, exposed to the spirit of antichrist in the schools, and current literature. The Spirit is spoken of in this chapter under the appellation of the 'unction' or 'anointing'. In verse 20 we have an unction from the Holy One, and know all things, and then verse 27 says that "the unction which ye have received from him abides in
{33}
you, and ye have not need that any one should teach you; but as the same unction teaches you as to all things, and is true and is not a lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him".
J.H.B. Would you open out what the word 'unction' implies?
J.T. It seems to be the Spirit viewed in this particular setting, introduced as "the unction from the holy one", "the holy one" alluding to the Spirit, not so much to call attention to Him personally, but in a certain way, as teaching the young. It is "from" Him, "from the holy one" -- without stressing the personality of the Spirit; it appeals to us as to something already known, rendering us independent; it is by Him that we know all things.
Ques. Would it be seen in principle in the movement of the man in @John 9?
J.T. That is a good illustration of it. Of course he had not the Spirit, but that is the principle, as you say. It developed in a wonderful way into knowledge, so that he was superior to the Pharisees in that sense; he showed himself to be intelligent, as having learned more than they did. Just having received light from the Lord, having had his eyes opened, he used his knowledge in a seemly and courageous way. When he was spoken to by his neighbours, he told them the historical facts, but when he was spoken to by the Pharisees, it was what was then present "now I see". They did not see. That, according to the Lord's word at the end of the chapter, brought out the whole position of the Jews, their sin remained because they said they saw.
Ques. The man said, "Now in this is a wonderful thing". Is that what you had in mind in the thought of knowing, the power to take account of divine things?
J.T. I think that is how matters stand, it helps as the truth is introduced here. It would help young
{34}
brothers and sisters among us, as to the schools and colleges, what they hear there, and in business. This chapter is to show them how independent they may be from the standpoint of knowledge; because the unction is "from the holy one" -- the element of holiness is seen. The Lord is declared to be "Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness" (@Romans 1: 4), the Spirit of holiness entering into His operations even in relation to death; so that all that obtains in relation to what God is, is holy. The Spirit's operations are of the same nature, the unction is from the Holy One. It seems to have a bearing externally, emphasising that the saints are superior in their knowledge.
-.J. Is that involved in what the Lord said to His disciples, that they were not to think out beforehand what they would say, but in that hour it would be given to them?
J.T. That is right; and the Spirit of their Father spoke in them. So that the comments on the Lord were that He had never learned -- how did He know these things? And the apostles, too; they were "unlettered", it says. But our passage deals with little children as peculiarly affected by current teachings. They are all against Christ, whatever form they may take; they may even use His name, but they are all antichristian.
P.J.B. Have you religious books particularly in mind?
J.T. Particularly so, and much that is taught in the schools and colleges.
A.M.H. Would the "unction from the holy one" indicate that the test as to what we may read or take in would be holiness?
J.T. Well, I think it is. If you could follow the authors of these books or systems, and hear them speak casually, you would soon detect that the element of holiness was not there. I believe that is the test.
{35}
Of course, it raises the whole question of how the truth is presented; so that when the Lord spoke to the twelve and said, "Will ye also go away?" Peter replied, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal; ... thou art the holy one of God", @John 6:67 - 69. His words were of that character.
J.H.S. What are we to understand by the words in verse 27, "the unction which ye have received from him" -- from whom have we received the unction?
J.T. I think it is John's way of speaking; whether he alludes to the Father or to the Son, and we might add even the Spirit, the pronoun is used; as for instance, in verse 29, "ye know that he is righteous", that would be Christ in a practical way, but it is God, too. It helps us at the present time to see that it is God, and how John is so full of the Deity, whether it be in any one of the Persons, or in the whole Three, John uses the pronoun, without at the time being specific. I think that is his way of imparting the thought of the Deity of each of the Persons. What has been remarked as to the Holy One in verse 20 is, I think, important; that underlying all teaching is the holiness of God, and all antichristian teaching is without it, and must of necessity be without it. That is the test.
J.H.B. Would another feature of what is true be that it tends to cause us to abide in Him, as in the end of verse 27?
J.T. Just so. In verse 20, it is to assert the independency of young christians, they have an unction from the Holy One and know all things. Then verse 27 opens it up more; it is "yourselves" there, calling attention to us in that way. Christians are marked off by that word 'yourselves'. "As the same unction teaches you as to all things, and is true and is not a lie, and even as it has taught you, ye
{36}
shall abide in him" -- that is, the teaching of the unction is to fix us, to impart fixity, because the idea is that we are set up in relation to God in the sense of being in Him, or in relation to Christ, so that one knows where he is, by the teaching.
Ques. Is there any divine teaching at all apart from the unction?
J.T. I think not; teaching is by the Spirit; but the use of the word here is, I think, to bring it home to us as something already known, having external characteristics, so that persons so taught are marked off.
Ques. What would be the difference between this and the anointing as in Corinthians?
J.T. Well, the thought of anointing in @2 Corinthians 1 is to mark us off; it is not a question of teaching. "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". That is a threefold expression of the truth of what God has done by the Spirit. There is not much difference, so far as I understand, between the two words; in either case I think it is what is external characteristically, what the saint is as marked off from others by the Spirit. His public external characteristic is the anointing, and then the sealing is the assertion of divine ownership, and the earnest would be his own portion in his heart. God has done all that by the Spirit. Now the anointing here (1 John) has in mind what is seen in the way of teaching as over against the ordinary teachings of men; and the fact that it is of the Holy One is to stress the thought of holiness.
If John had said, 'from the Spirit' in verse 20, it would, of course, be the Person; but it is rather the character -- "from the holy one", the thing emanates from Him.
Rem. I was wondering whether the thought in Corinthians was more what was outward in the way
{37}
of testimony, and that here perhaps the formation of subjective features after Christ, the thing that is true in Him being true in the saints (chapter 2: 8).
J.T. Well, it is that. It is the public characteristic that is in mind in the unction, as marking off a young Christian, for instance, as he sits in the train, or walks in the street, or works in the office; what he does and what he says is distinctive in that way, as over against those who have not the Spirit and are not Christians. The passage in 2 Corinthians to which you refer gives the threefold view: how God takes account of us as in our public character as anointed, dignified by the Spirit, and then as the property of God as sealed, in divine ownership, and thirdly our own portion, satisfaction in what we have heard, in the earnest of the Spirit.
Ques. Would you say a little as to the latter part of verse 27, "even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him"?
J.T. The apostle returns to the subject, after speaking of the antichrists, exposing what antichristian teaching means, the denial of the Father and the Son; he returns to the subject of the unction, and calls attention to "yourselves" -- that class of persons. Then he says the unction which we have received from Him abides in us. All this is characteristic; it abides in you, and you have no need that anyone should teach you -- asserting that the saints are independent of man's teaching. 'Abiding in him' would, I think, imply being set up in relation with God in a fixed way; that we know where we are, and can give an account of where we are, and of the fixity of the position, because of the teaching. The passage is to set up the saints, and especially young Christians, intelligently in relation with God in their souls. It is not merely to be thinking on what is said by others, but they are formed by the unction, and abide in Him thus. The unction abiding in me
{38}
gives fixity in relation to Him, and then abiding in Him follows; it is on account of His teaching that we know where we are.
Ques. Is it not rather important that the effect of the teaching is that an objective is produced?
J.T. Young christians, and maybe all of us, are very poorly fixed, very uncertain in our minds as to the state of our souls; and the apostle is aiming at setting us up in certainty and intelligence by the teaching of the unction. It is not exactly the teaching of the Scriptures, or of those who have ability to teach, but the teaching of the unction.
J.H.B. Is the point not so much as to what the unction is, but as to whether we are conscious of being brought under divine teaching? I mention that because one is not exactly clear as to what the unction means.
J.T. Well, it alludes to what the christian already knows. The apostle is not treating of something new, but of what is already known to the persons addressed. So in coming back to the subject in verse 27 he says, "yourselves" -- he throws us in upon ourselves as to who we are, are we in this class of persons, marked off in this way? So that if we have received it, we know what is meant, we know what the apostle means, it is that by which we are taught; it is the Spirit of God, of course, but it is the teaching, how we have been taught by Him. If John had used the word 'Spirit', or 'Holy Spirit', of course it would be the Person; but he is alluding to what is already known, what is experienced. The saints are addressed as already having this, it is not something new, but what we have already, and it abides in you, and according to its teaching, you abide in Him.
P.J.B. Have you in mind in emphasising "yourselves" that the trend of religious teaching is to destroy the distinctive character that belongs to the
{39}
christian, and to link him with the religious activities that are current?
J.T. Yes. It is not simply that we are to be in fellowship; that is a nice phrase, and good in its own way; but "yourselves" means a known class that have taken on this teaching. The enemy would obliterate its distinctiveness, and young people are so exposed to that, that they are just like others; the point is that the distinction is to be maintained. "Yourselves" have that distinction, ye have received the unction, and He is able to abide in you, and you are to abide in Him, to be fixed in that position and not to be moved away from it.
Ques. Does @Psalm 4: 3 touch it at all, "The Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself"?
J.T. Yes, it does. The passage in 2 Corinthians that has been cited implies that He has sealed us, we are His property, He has set us apart.
A.M.H. Would the epistle help to develop certain spiritual instincts in the saints whereby they would know all things?
J.T. I think that is what is meant; and how pleasing it is for heaven to see brethren marked off in this way, not merely by the profession of certain principles or a creed, but in the unction, the real thing from God, the Holy One. Not only that the saints are relatively holy, but holy in the way we understand and speak of things.
A.M.H. Do you think that can be damaged? David said (@Psalm 51: 11), "take not the spirit of thy holiness from me"; that was after his sin. Do we need to be thus on our guard?
J.T. Yes, and to avoid all light reading; the more such we read the more we are damaged, instead of maintaining the spirit of holiness.
C.W.H. Does @1 Corinthians 14: 32 enter into this "And spirits of prophets are subject to prophets"?
J.T. The allusion there is to your own spirit.
{40}
Each of us has a spirit from God, and the 'prophet' represents, as it were, the proprietor of it. @Romans 7 brings out "I myself", that is yourself, not your spirit. "I myself with the mind serve God's law". I think that underlies what is said about the prophets; the prophet, as ministering, has under control all his faculties, and even although he has received an impulse in his spirit, he does not need to get up and speak at once; he can control that. The prophets are to be balanced in the part they take in the assembly, not to be carried along by impulse, but to be governed by intelligence. So Paul says earlier (chapter 14: 15), "I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also": that would allude to the faculty of control.
C.W.H. I was thinking of the detection of what is external, and that if the antichristian element appeared, it would be refused.
J.T. Well, when we come to chapter 4 we shall see the kind of spirits that are at work, and the Spirit of God is attributed to the christian as confessing Jesus Christ come in flesh; whereas those who do not confess Him come in flesh are governed by evil spirits. The passage in chapter 3 treats of how we are to know that He abides in us; and chapter 4: 13 is how we are to know that we abide in Him and He in us. These passages are intended to settle us as to where we are, and that we are intelligent as to our state, and what we enjoy -- all is by the Spirit.
J.H.B. What is the difference between our abiding in Him, and the thought of God abiding in us?
J.T. Well, I think God abiding in us (chapter 3:24) is that He is complacent in us; a very great thought, that God rests in His people as complacent in them. Abiding in us means that there is nothing to disturb Him; there is fixity. The dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and returned to the ark, to Noah. I think that would suggest how God by His Spirit
{41}
finds restfulness in His people as He found it in Christ. The dove came down and abode upon Christ; there was nothing to disturb it. The Spirit now enables us to understand that, that God is restful in us. Then we have the additional thought in chapter 4:13; we are to know that we abide in Him and He in us, that is, He secures our hearts in restfulness in Him, so that there is a fixed state of things between God and His people, and all maintained in the intelligence of His people by the Spirit.
Rem. You get the word 'abiding' in regard to the Spirit descending and abiding upon the Lord.
J.T. There was restfulness there, in the dove coming down and abiding upon Him. There was nothing to disturb Him; and I believe that is the thought here; God abides in us, there is nothing to disturb Him, and then He secures us in that we abide in Him, we are restful in God, the Spirit making all this intelligible to us.
Ques. Is this to have an effect upon the saints in every sphere, and in our movements in the world generally?
J.T. John is dealing with us in that way; whatever the circumstances, I think this applies, the sense of God being restful in you, and you being restful in Him, and being intelligent as to it. John's ministry has often been spoken of as abstract, as it is; much would come in to modify this, but these are basic thoughts and are intended to make us stable in an intelligent and conscious way; it is all by the Spirit, not merely by doctrine, but by the Spirit.
Ques. I was wondering whether this was preparatory to @John 14, where the Lord says that if a man love Him, he would keep His word and His Father would love him, and They would come to him and make Their abode with him. Is not what you are speaking of essential if we are to know anything of a divine visitation?
{42}
J.T. Quite so. If His commandments are disregarded, as they have been, the keeping of them brings us back to this position (@John 14:23.) All this fits into this, I think. It is to make real Christians out of us, we are to be in possession of things by the Spirit, not merely by doctrine, but by the Spirit.
Ques. In chapter 4: 15 it is a question of "Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God". This wonderful result comes about as the effect of confessing that He is Son of God. In @Romans 10 salvation is realised by confessing Him as Lord; what is the difference?
J.T. Well, confessing Him to be Son of God is a further thought. The verses we have read speak of the Spirit, and that is what we are dealing with, to show the place the Spirit has in this epistle, and how essential He is to our practical enjoyment of fixity of our Christianity. Many other things, of course, are mentioned in that verse; and then again in verse 16, "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him". There is much that works out of these verses by the Spirit, but the point is that the Spirit is the actual power to make it all effective in us, to make it sure to us, giving us the consciousness of it. Then as regards the teaching that is current, the beginning of chapter 4 speaks of the spirits, we are not to believe every, spirit, but to prove them, as to whether they are of God, because many false prophets are gone out into the world. "Every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is of God; and every spirit which does not confess Jesus Christ come in flesh is not of God". So that it is the incarnation that is in mind -- Jesus Christ come in flesh; not *has* come, but *is* come -- it is the present fact; and every spirit that confesses that is of God. It is christianity essentially, as knowing Christ.
{43}
Ques. Do you refer to His glorified condition now?
J.T. "Come in flesh" includes that. It is not what He was, but that He is come in flesh.
C.W.H. The witness of the Spirit makes that clear, as coming from Him in glory.
J.T. I think so; every spirit that confesses that is of God, so that I suppose it includes what the Lord is at the present time, as in a new condition, but still in flesh, so that we have part in it. Christianity implies that we have part in it. Chapter 5 shows that He came in relation to cleansing, so it says He "came by water and blood"; that would be coming in flesh and blood, as at the beginning. But I think that "come in flesh" would cover Christ as He is, and the Spirit coming down witnesses to that.
Ques. Do you mean that the "water and blood" refers to the incarnation?
J.T. I think so; He came in in that connection He came to die.
A.M.H. Coming by water and blood would be to sweep away everything before Him, and "come in flesh" would be that He abides.
J.T. I think that is it. Chapter 5 is His condition here; but He Himself remains, and we have part in His humanity now.
Ques. Would the blood and water coming out of His side in the gospel bear on this?
J.T. The allusion is to that. The water is first here; it is second in the gospel. I suppose the epistle stresses the great need of dealing with our state; the blood deals with our guilt, our sins; the water deals with our state, setting aside all that would hinder us having part with Christ in a new condition. The Spirit is the witness to that.
Ques. Would chapter 5 also have a reference to His having come by water and blood into His present position?
{44}
J.T. Well, it takes in the whole position; but the point is to bring out that He came in that connection. You get it predicated of Him. In chapter 5: 6 it is "he that came by water and blood", but in chapter 4 it is "come in flesh", to stress the present time; the other is past, the Spirit having in mind His coming to deal with conditions that were here.
Ques. Does it suggest that the Lord Jesus is not available to men in His life here apart from this, His coming by water and blood?
J.T. All His service had that in mind; there would be no point in His service if He did not come by water and blood; what would His teaching and miracles have availed aside from this fact, that He came to deal with the things He was exposing, and to deal with them to God's glory?
J.H.B. What is the difference between verse 6, the Spirit bearing witness, and verse 8, where they that bear witness are three, the Spirit, and the water, and the blood, and they agree in one?
J.T. The water and the blood by themselves are in relation to the death of Christ in the two aspects; you may say, speaking reverently, that the water and the blood are subdivisions, for the sake of teaching, of the great fact of His death; the water dealing with our condition, man's condition, as seen in @Romans 7 and 8, and the blood dealing rather with the earlier part of Romans, the question of our guilt. It is simply the teaching of the death of Christ subdivided as touching these two great phases of man's condition, his guilt before God and his state before God; both have to be dealt with on the basis of the death of the Lord Jesus. The Spirit bears witness to it; the ministry of the twelve, and particularly of Paul, deals with our state as well as our guilt, and I think the witness of the Spirit would refer particularly to Paul's teaching, which the Spirit is constantly
{45}
pressing upon us now. In the historical account in @John 19, the blood is first, because, I suppose, the guilt of man is the first thing that is dealt with, and then the state man was in. Here it is the state first because the guilt question and its settlement had been generally accepted amongst the saints, but not so much the water as dealing with their state. "It is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is the truth". I suppose the meaning of that would be that the brethren were not receiving the whole truth; they were receiving forgiveness, and enjoying it -- the truth that relates to our guilt; but the Spirit "is the truth", that is, He would set out the full truth, as in a man like the apostle Paul, a man who went the whole way, he would set it out in a positive way, being a man who had been delivered from his sins and also from the power of sin in him. So that in verse 7 "they that bear witness are three". Part of verse 7 in the Authorised Version is not scripture at all -- the reference to the Father witnessing in heaven there is no point in that. It is what is down here, there are three witnesses, the Spirit, the water, and the blood, and the three agree in one. The point is a threefold testimony that cannot be broken; it is a complete testimony.
Ques. In connection with the words in chapter 4: 3, "come in flesh", would you connect that with the end of Luke's gospel and the beginning of the Acts the Lord in resurrection? He said, "a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having", @Luke 24: 39.
J.T. Yes, it is what He is now. He is come; not 'has' come, but He is come; so that it bears on His present condition. That is christianity. It is His humanity in a new condition in which the saints have part; that condition did not exist when He was in flesh and blood here; He was alone, there was no man ever like Him; it was a wholly distinct thing; no one before or since ever could be like Him.
{46}
"Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit"; so that we are of His kind, there are many like Him now: that is really christianity. So it says in @Hebrews 2, "For it became him", (that is God) "... in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings. For both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren". They are all "of one", of one kind. That is the truth that really exposes modernism -- christianity in the true sense of it, in another Man.
A.M.H. The thought of Jesus Christ "come in flesh" as including all that He is now is so important, otherwise we shall be taking Him in the way that the unitarians do, and the Oxford Group, where there is no thought as to what He is now, they only have an attempted imitation of what He was on earth.
J.T. True christianity is Christ as He is in heaven, and our having part with Him there by the Spirit. It is of the very last importance to keep that before us, because that is the only thing that stands against the current evil. "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", @1 Corinthians 15: 48.
P.J.B. Is that why it emphasises "not by water only, but by water and blood"?
J.T. It is the complete thing; there is not merely a witness, but the Spirit "is the truth". Christ was "the truth" when here, and the Spirit is now the truth; and the truth implies the two great thoughts of the death of the Lord Jesus in its application to us, and it involves another Man in another place and another condition, and our having part in that. "Is come" is a continuous thought.
Ques. Would His being anointed with oil of gladness above His companions fit in?
J.T. Yes, it does, only that is to bring out His
{47}
distinction above His companions; but still they are His companions. The Lord always has the pre-eminence.
Ques. Would not the witness of the water create in us a spirit of self-judgment, so that we might be able to get the gain of the unction?
J.T. Quite so. Then this witness leads us to the great thought of eternal life; that amplifies what we are saying as to Christ being in another condition now. Eternal life has been referred to as an out-of-the-world, heavenly condition and relationship and being, that is the humanity in which we have part -- He, of course, always retaining His personal distinction and deity, that can never be touched, but this is what He is as Man.
Rem. So that the youngest believer in Christ, when presented with that, would instinctively feel as to whether other teaching was in accord with it.
J.T. That is the point, I think. The spirits that are in current literature, what are they? Literature or teaching or whatever it is that confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is of God; that is the test for us.
C.O.B. Would you link up the way the Spirit is referred to? First the "unction from the holy one"; then "the Spirit which he has given to us", the "Spirit of God", then "his Spirit" and finally "the Spirit is the truth".
J.T. That is a good enquiry. What was said at the beginning, I think, is understood by us, what the unction means; it alludes to the teaching of the Spirit, known already, but enlarged on; then in the last verse of chapter 3 we are to know that God abides in us. Surely that is an important question; it is known "by the Spirit which he has given to us". In chapter 4: 13 you will notice that it is "of his Spirit", not simply that He has given us His Spirit, but He has given us "of" His Spirit. I think that is 
{48}
a most intimate thought, that we are sharing with God in His Spirit; it is a sharing thought; I do not think you get it elsewhere, but it is a very precious thing with God that we are sharing in His Spirit. It is not so much the Person of the Spirit, as that which God shares with you. Then "the Spirit is the truth" is manifestly a question of His testimony down here, the whole truth is in the Spirit; Christ is the truth objectively and the whole truth lies in the Spirit, subjectively now here in the saints. Then there is the other thought, in chapter 4: 2, the Spirit as regards what is of God, as over against other spirits; He is known by the confession of Jesus Christ come in flesh, and I think that opens up the great thought of our part with Christ and eternal life.
C.O.B. I wondered whether they were progressive thoughts, culminating in what the Spirit is.
J.T. I think that is so. He is the truth -- the whole truth, as here in a subjective way, because the Spirit is really in the saints, He is not outside of us; and, of course, that extends to what we have in what is known as the canon of Scripture. The canon of Scripture is what has been arrived at as the effect of the Spirit, by the consensus of spiritual instincts in the people of God, not by 'church councils'. In the revision of 1611 they included the Apocrypha in the canon, but they would not do it now. The Spirit is the whole truth; there is that here which has a clear testimony to everything, there is no doubt about it, so that the saints of God know things. This epistle is to bring out that the saints of God should know things. It implies that there is power here in the Spirit. Young people who have need of getting certainty will get it there and nowhere else; so that the epistle ends: "We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in the wicked one. And we know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding 
{49}
that we should know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life".
C.O.B. The Lord when here could say, "I am ... the truth", @John 14: 6.
J.T. The Spirit is the counterpart of that; it is the same expression exactly.
{50}
SHEEP
@Isaiah 53:6; @Psalm 119:176; @Song of Songs 6:6; @John 10: 14, 15
I wish to speak this evening about sheep, that is, sinners viewed as such, and then saints viewed as sheep. When Adam named the creatures, the land animals particularly, he would convey, in the names given, the traits of each; according to God, the name is to convey what the person or thing is characteristically, and these traits were intended by God, as in these creatures, to serve His testimony later. Some of them even represented Christ Himself in a figurative way, and among these sheep are worthy of special attention. The idea of a sheep is used to typify, in certain senses, the Lord Himself; indeed, in this very chapter I have read from in Isaiah, the Lord is said to have been like a sheep dumb before His shearers, as you will observe -- "he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth". That is a sheep characteristic, and I hope to come back to it as seen in Christ, showing that God intends in the gospel to secure us at least in that characteristic, for the gospel has Christ in mind, not only as the Saviour, but as the Model for all those who are saved; God intends to make all the saints like Jesus. A sheep does not represent all that Jesus is, even typically, there are other important features, but the sheep has a great place. John's sheep particularly represent the saints as conformed to Christ and attractive to Him, loved by Him because of that. They are not viewed as straying or lost in John, because John is concerned about persons who are like Christ, and the sheep are amongst these, they represent that. But Isaiah, by the Spirit, says, "All we
{51}
like sheep have gone astray"; that is not a trait that ever shone in Jesus, I need not say, it never was seen there; the blessed Lord Jesus is "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens", @Hebrews 7: 26. He never did anything contrary to the divine will, the will of His Father, never in thought or word or deed. So that we must first look at these creatures presented in this verse as persons who have exercised their own wills, the very opposite to Jesus -- "not my will", He says, "but thine be done", @Luke 22: 42.
Now there may be some here, christians, as we say, that is, God has wrought in you, but your will has not gone yet, you are not subdued, and your parents are concerned about you -- you exercise your will. "All we like sheep" -- it is a collective thought, and is, of course, inclusive of a great many; but then we have the individuals in the passage, as it says, "we have turned every one to his own way" -- every one. Some young boy here, fairly acceptable to his parents, naturally acceptable, fairly obedient to what his father tells him, as in the parable the Lord uses in @Matthew 21: 28 - 30, he said to one of his sons, "go work today in my vineyard". He said, I will go -- but he did not go, that is the kind of thing. Another one said, I will not go. Well, that is a very objectionable attitude for a young person to take up towards his parents, it is often done. I will not go, he says; there is much of that kind of thing, and it is passed by, too. But then the Lord's parable is intended to show that the one who said he would go did not go, and the one who said he would not go did go, and the Lord shows that the one who did go did the will of his father. His father would thank God as he saw him going off to the vineyard; he would mourn as he failed to see the other one go; so that the first one is choosing his own way -- "every one", it says here, "to his own way"; that was his own way, that is,
{52}
he was a deceptive young man, a very objectionable feature, he was not an honest young man. The other was a bit impertinent, a bit insolent, but he was obedient in the long run, and that is the point. "Every one to his own way" -- as we say, 'his own sweet will'. It will become a bitter will; never did anybody do his own will but it brought bitterness. "Every one to his own way"; well, that is what is stated here and it is put in this setting to bring out that, in spite of that disobedience, in spite of that waywardness, God is acting in your favour. He is acting at great sacrifice, too, in your favour, mark you, it is "the iniquity of us all"; those people who are going astray and doing what they will do -- God is acting at great sacrifice in their favour. These wilful actions of these sheep are all counted up by God, He does not omit one. If we take them to be the lost sheep of the house of Israel spoken of elsewhere, as doubtless they are, how many we cannot say, what wills were active and what deeds they performed in their self-will! But Jehovah was writing them all down, not one is omitted; for God keeps books, and that is one of the most solemn things to bear in mind -- book-keeping indeed occurs. People do not trust their memories, they put their things in books and accountancy and the vast system of mathematics is all needed because we cannot keep everything in our minds, it is worked out scientifically, as we say. But God keeps books, too; it is not that He cannot keep things in His mind -- nothing can pass His mind, but He uses figures to come down to our way of thinking, as much as to say, 'Do not be deceived, I have not omitted one of your sins, not one -- they are all written down'; but then, as written down, He has laid them on Jesus, "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all" -- all that is very touching, and especially as we go on down the verses. The Spirit of God brings before us the sheep character of Christ
{53}
in the very next verse -- how different! He is not doing His own will. We see Him in Gethsemane under the greatest pressure -- not yet from God, He was not on the cross in Gethsemane, He was not bearing sins in Gethsemane -- and His sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground. So great was the pressure, and how the Lord felt it! but in that pressure He says to the Father, "not my will, but thine be done". He was not turning to His own way. He speaks of His own will, but it is the Father's will. It is the *Father* there, not God; He is still in the unclouded precious favour of His Father, but He is under pressure, He is facing death, not ordinary death, not mere martyrdom, but the death of the cross, which meant the forsaking of God, which meant bearing the full wrath of God; that was what He was facing, so He says, "not my will, but thine be done". What was God's will? He is laying all these waywardnesses, these wilful acts of young and old, spoken of in the previous verse, on this precious Saviour. God is doing that; He could not do it without Jesus -- we must understand there are things God could not do. There was no sacrifice worthy of the name really save that of Jesus; no one else on whom these iniquities could be laid. There were, of course, types of it, but we are told expressly that the blood of bulls and goats and the ashes of an heifer could never take away sins -- only the blood of Jesus. So that Jesus is acting for these straying wayward sheep of Israel, and any sheep here who is like it, each going his own way. We are here to tell you that God knows it, He knows it well, He has watched every movement, and yet He is acting for you. This meeting is for you, all the prayers that have preceded it are for you; all heaven is for you. Think of what that means! As soon as repentance is seen in anyone, heaven is aglow with interest, all heaven is on your behalf -- "The Lord
{54}
hath laid on him the iniquity of us all". I need not enlarge on that, doubtless you have often heard gospel addresses on these verses -- I go on to the psalm.
Some of you may not be as conversant with this @Psalm 119 as others are. It is the longest psalm and the longest chapter that the Spirit of God has written, and the verse I read is 176. This is not man's division, as the other chapters of the Bible, generally speaking, are; these psalms are all divinely arranged, the number of them, in nearly every case by the writer -- not in this case: in this psalm the author is not given us, so that we may all put in our name as taking up its language. Speaking of the last verse, you wonder how a man who could write such a psalm as this could say, at the end of it, "I have gone astray like a lost sheep". It is not that it is a matter of history, he is not putting it that way; he has consciously gone astray, not exactly as it was said in @Isaiah 53, there they have just gone astray, but here he says, "I have gone astray like a lost sheep"there is a deeper meaning in this, this man is speaking in a deeper way. A lost sheep is a solemn thought; it is a question of not being consciously in ownership. He wants to be -- and God knows that, and God values that. He virtually admits that he belongs to God, but he is wandering like a lost sheep. Like a ship, too, without a compass or a rudder or a master; he knows it, that is important to see, he *knows* it. The statement in Isaiah is prophetic, persons are speaking in a prophetic way -- "All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way", but this man brings in the word 'lost'. Is there anyone here like that -- with a sense that you are just without any owner? You have right desires -- there are many like that. If you read this psalm you will marvel at the desires this man had and the way he speaks of the Lord and the ordinances and the word, and so
{55}
on, and yet he is not consciously in the hand of an owner. Is there anyone here like that? You are not averse to the brethren, you like them, you like to be with them; you have no pleasure in the world, in theatres or cinemas or race-tracks -- nothing like that; you are sincerely desirous of getting on in the truth of God, and yet you are not settled under the hand of an Owner, there is a sense of being lost, of being astray like a lost sheep, and you would give anything to be like the brethren. You see how happy they are, and you think, Why is it I am not like them? I can speak of the things of God as they can; I can speak even with more sincerity perhaps than some of them; yet they have more liberty, more peace, more joy, than I have. Why is this? Well, this man knows where to go, and he goes there, and that is what I would advise you to do at this time. He says to Jehovah, in the end of the verse, "seek thy servant"  -- not because You are the Good Shepherd, not because there is love in Your heart towards me, but seek me because I am of some value to You. I am not saying too much; why should I not think myself of some value to God? Certainly I am. If this man is born again, if you are born again, you are of value to God. If you love the testimony of God, if you love to read the Bible, to come to the meetings, to talk to christians, you certainly are born again; you belong to God, He is your rightful Owner. But then what this man says is, I am of some value to you, and you are of value to the brethren, they are just waiting for you. But the enemy has somehow darkened your mind and as I said before, you have no definiteness, you are like a sheep and not simply a straying sheep -- it is straying, but straying like a lost sheep -- it is the consciousness he has of it. But all the time he says, "I do not forget thy commandments", that is his plea; he is not pleading grace, he is not pleading mercy, he is not even pleading the
{56}
death of Christ, he is pleading his own personal value; and he is right and God would not spurn that for a moment, for you are of value to Him as the subject of His work -- the gold is there. And this meeting is for you; He intends to liberate you so that the gold should shine, that you should be consciously it, no longer astray, as I said like a ship in the Atlantic without a compass, without a rudder, without an owner, on a dark night. But all the time you say, 'I do not forget Thy commandments'. At the bottom of your heart you think of God, you think of the brethren, too, you think of the Bible, you love to read it, and yet you are conscious of this, that you are astray like a lost sheep, there is the consciousness of not being attached, you are unattached, if you understand me, an isolated person inwardly -- maybe nice enough in your family and to your friends, but inwardly you are unattached; and the point here is the man knows where to turn, and the plea, too -- "I have not forgotten", he says, "thy commandments". This might even be applied to a person who goes in a little bit for the world, because a man of this kind is likely to; unless he becomes attached the enemy has an advantage. The enemy would say to you, You are not attached to the brethren, you are not attached anywhere, so what does it matter? You are unattached spiritually; you may be tempted to go into the places of evil, for the wicked woman who flatters with her mouth has influence over you. You may have been to a theatre. I knew a christian who used to be attached, in fellowship, and he got away and he slipped into a theatre in New York, and, while sitting there, something was brought up in a play and they quoted @John 14. Think of that! think of the devil using the scripture in the stuff he deals out in these wicked theatres. You know, in America they use the word 'comforter' sometimes for 'comfortable', a sort of quilt, and this actor brought it forward
{57}
on the stage, and said, 'What did the clergyman say last night at the church?' and the answer was, 'He spoke about the Comforter'. He wanted to speak in a jocular way, but the Lord had this young man in His mind. This young man knew perfectly what @John 14 said, that the Lord Jesus had said that He would send another Comforter, and it broke him down in the theatre and he went out and wept bitterly. I only cite that incident to show how unattached persons may come under the influence of evil, even though they may be real christians, as we speak, subjects of the work of God. (Although the word 'christian' means more than that, it is an oracularly given name of disciples of Jesus -- "the disciples were first called Christians in Antioch", @Acts 11: 26. It is a known, dignified name, referring to real fully developed christians. But still we speak of it in this way that those in whom God has wrought, who have believed, are christians.) If you are unattached, as I say, you are pretty certain to come under the influence of evil, and you may have to weep bitterly, like Peter, for it was the same in his case -- the Lord looked on him at the right time, and the word came to that young man I have spoken of at the right time. You will understand I am not encouraging anybody to go to a theatre to get converted; no, beloved, the guests of the wicked woman there are in the depths of hell, she flatters with her mouth -- flattery is a great thing in connection with these things. So this man says, "I have not forgotten thy commandments", and, if you read the whole psalm you will understand the kind of man he was, yet he was unattached. Need I say Jehovah heard him? If I connect the passage with @Luke 15 you will see that it is the converse of this. This man is asking to be sought out. "Seek thy servant", he says. Well, that is Jehovah. Jesus is Jehovah the Saviour, He is the good and the great Shepherd. @Luke 15 does not intimate at all that the
{58}
lost sheep sought to be found -- that is not the side there, here it is so, and what you find in @Luke 15 is the very words here. The point is not that it has gone astray, it is in @Matthew 18; here in @Luke 15 it is lost, that is, the sheep is lost to its owner and lost to itself, as you might say, straying -- as I have been speaking of it. But the Lord left the ninety and nine -- of course that means something, too, I cannot speak of it now -- He went after the lost one and found it. That is my business here tonight, to tell you that, if a cry reaches Him, there will be no delay. Luke does not say there was a cry, but there is a cry here, and if you put the two scriptures together, you can see how quickly the good Shepherd goes out after the sheep and finds it, and places it on His shoulders and brings it home rejoicing. It is of value, that is the point; this man was conscious he was of value although unattached, away from his Owner. And the Lord intimates plainly enough that a sheep is of value; He troubled to find it and He found it.
Now I want to show you from the Song of Solomon how sheep are viewed collectively and in attractiveness, they form one of the beautiful features of the loved one, that is, the bride in the Song of Solomon, or the assembly, as we may say now. The assembly, of course, in one of its features; it requires more than one feature to make up the beauty the Lord seeks, and the verse I have read gives one of the features the Lord has in mind in finding the sheep, attaching it, as I might say, to Himself; for @John 10 works all that out, He attaches it to Himself, the sheep is characteristically attached to Christ, it hears His voice and follows Him, and He moves it from the fold to the flock. The sheep are now beautiful in His eyes and He is putting them together -- that is the next thing, if God has found us He is going to put us somewhere. In @John 10 He takes them out of the fold and puts them into the flock; a fold has its
{59}
walls round for protection, but a flock is a question of the saints themselves -- it is a movable thought, and it is the sheep character that is in mind. Well now, the sheep character here, as you will observe, is only one trait, but evidently one of the leading traits. In this chapter you have certain things spoken of in regard to the loved one. Verse 4 says she is beautiful and comely; Tirzah and Jerusalem are mentioned, alluding, doubtless, to some administrative position; and an army with banners, referring to military power, and then it says, "Turn away thine eyes from me, For they overcome me", and "Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep Which go up from the washing". These are selected features in this chapter; in the next chapter you have a great many more features. The Lord is reserving these, for, if they are attractive to you, He will give you others in the next chapter, beginning at this feature; for the Lord loves to go over and parade any little bit of beauty He sees in us, it is all a reflection of Himself, and particularly the sheep character. So here He speaks of the loved one's teeth as like a flock of sheep -- that is one part of the beauty of the beloved. It is a collective matter now, and what I am seeking to do is to attract anyone who is interested, but not yet attached, and to show how the Lord would attach you to Himself by giving you to understand how essential you are to what is before Him and how much you are needed, you are needed to add beauty to what He has before Him. You say, I never thought of that. But then, the Lord is the judge, and I would say to you here tonight, if you are not attached, not set up in relation to Christ and His people, you are denying Him His rights; He says, I need you, I need you because of the sheep character I want to present. "Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep Which go up from the washing", that is, they submit to the washing, they do not rebel; that is where the difficulty lies very often, where
{60}
 saints get light, they do not submit to the washing. The laver stood in the court as you came into the divine system; there must be the washing -- "If I wash thee not", says Jesus, "thou hast no part with me", @John 13: 8. The Lord would say, I have you, but there must be the washing, the submission to the truth in its cleansing character; not only the blood of Christ, but the water that flowed from His side. They came up from the washing, they had been down there; I suppose that means it is a descent, like baptism. As we see with Philip and the eunuch, there needs to be a going down to the water; there is ascent from that. In chapter 4 we have the same language only it is added that they are shorn sheep; you say, there is not much difference, but there is as regards characteristics; it is like Jesus as a sheep dumb before His shearers. That is how Jesus was, He submitted to the shearers, that is taking up what particularly belongs to the sheep. Many hold themselves aloof in self-will, they will not submit to the requirements of the fellowship. The fellowship has requirements, the Lord has requirements, and shorn sheep, of course, are easier washed -- that is, the idea is that you submit. The Lord gave His "back to the smiters", too, it says, and His "cheeks to them that plucked off the hair" (@Isaiah 50: 6), there is submission. That is a great point in christianity; one is of no value really in the attached state of things aside from submission. The church is said to be subjected to Christ, that is the mind of God, and practically it must be so, for naturally we have so many wills instead of only one will as in the assembly. Another thing that is mentioned here, and it is a very important thing, too, is that under these circumstances you have fruit-bearing. But the beautiful thought of the mystery, of the teeth as essential to beauty, is what the Lord stresses, but the word is added that they come up from the washing. That is, the Lord sees the
{61}
company of the saints free from all defilement, and that is seen in the sheep coming up from the washing. Well, finally, in John we have, as I said before, the full thought of the sheep. John makes a great deal of persons. He tells us, for instance, about fishes, even an hundred and fifty and three great fishes (@John 21: 11) -- they are counted. There is no idea of the nets being broken, with him it is a question of the quality of the fish. And so here it is the quality of the sheep, they are the sheep viewed as particularly attractive to the Lord; and so John presents the truth I am speaking of in its finality. The link between the Lord and the sheep is most striking, as I have been showing, but here it is not that He has the characteristics of the sheep, but of the Shepherd. In @Isaiah 53 He has the characteristics of the sheep; now it is those of the Shepherd so that the more you reach the thought I have in mind, the more you come into the sense of your value in the eyes of the Lord Jesus, and of the love that has gone to such lengths, the more you will be able to say, like the apostle Paul, the greatest of the sheep, as I might say, He "loved me, and gave himself for me", @Galatians 2: 20. The Lord says, "I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep". What a wonderful thing that is, that kind of knowledge, not ordinary knowledge but the kind of knowledge between the Father and the Son -- it is according to that. The Lord says much here; it is a wonderful chapter from this point of view, the sheep, viewed with the characteristics of sheep, as seen in the divine mind from the outset, presented to Jesus now, taking form in those who believe -- "my sheep", He says. I "know my sheep" -- how precious that is. I "know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father", and He says, "I lay down my
{62}
life for the sheep", to finish the thought of their value in His eyes, the price He gave for them. And then, as going away, He takes His greatest servant then, Peter, and He says, You look after them -- they are the ones; finally reaching his soul, as he strayed like a sheep, the Lord secures him, and He says, Peter, look after the sheep; feed the lambs, but shepherd the sheep and feed them, too. So that we are taken care of. We see how God has His eye on us and how He would allure us into the circle of the flock where divine love is and knowledge, reciprocal knowledge, such as exists between the Father and the Son.
May the Lord bless the word.
{63}
THE ADMINISTRATIVE FEATURE OF CHRISTIANITY (1)
@John 3: 35, 36; @John 4: 10 - 42
J.T. We have come to the administrative side of the dispensation in this section of this gospel, and it opens up fresh thoughts which the Lord may, we believe, help to bring out -- the rich thoughts to be administered in the books of Kings and touched on earlier. This section is to bring out the administrative side, how it is based on love. "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand", @John 3: 35.
A.S. When you say 'the administrative side' do you say that because it says, "the Father ... hath given all things into his hand"?
J.T. That is what I was thinking.
A.S. He is the great Administrator.
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Do you connect that with chapter 4, "if thou knewest ... who it is that saith to thee ..."?
J.T. Yes. That is how the thought is combining one administered to. The woman has to be taken as representative of those administered to, those who were the objects of the administration. So the Lord says, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water" (verse 10). That is how the great administration of God is set in movement. The objects are set in movement asking, and then agents come, too; part of the administration. For the woman left her waterpot and went away into the city, meaning that she was part of the administration. That is what entered into her movement. Not that she would
{64}
understand. And then the Samaritans came into it, recognising the Lord as the Saviour of the world.
J.S. Is the administrative side seen earlier in the first chapter, "grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ", @John 1: 17?
J.T. Those earlier parts bring out what there is.
"Grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ".
This is to bring the thing into view. That is a great principle in the moral universe. Like all other principles, they have to be made effective. And this is to bring the thing into view. We see grace and truth working in the fourth chapter.
A.N.W. Have we neglected John's ministry in looking at administrative matters?
J.T. Well, perhaps. I thought, maybe, these meetings might serve us in that way, and bring us all into the thing. We have what is set up in the earlier chapters, grace and truth by Jesus Christ. That is, it is one idea. It is what is so needed in the administration. Grace is the first thing needed in God's approach to man. It is in the singular, meaning that it came into being in Christ. As any other great principle in the universe, whatever it be. You may take electricity. It is a great principle. It exists. It is there. Well, the next thing is to make it effective. And grace and truth is the leading thought in the administrative side, because, being sinners, we need that. We need that principle applied. So that John says, "for of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace", @John 1: 16. Not only is it a principle, but they have received the thing. "For of his fulness *we* all have received, and grace upon grace". It is a steady thing coming in. Persons are the subjects of it.
W.B. That word 'subsists' -- does that carry it through this present dispensation?
J.T. That is what is meant. The law came by Moses. It did not subsist in him. That is, it had no
{65}
concrete expression. It came in as an abstract thought. In Christ you would have a concrete expression of it. It subsists there. Grace and truth is one thing, and it is in a Person. And this case in chapter 4 illustrates the point. Chapter 3 brings out the last and greatest of the Old Testament ministers, John the baptist. He speaks about the greatness of Christ, and that he must decrease and Christ must increase. So that approaching the administrative side, the greatness of Christ comes before you, He is from heaven. John defines His position. There is no question about His position administratively; and then finally, "the Father loveth the Son". That is a great fact to lay hold of, "and hath given all things into his hand". And then this solemn fact -- "He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him". That is the position of the believer and the unbeliever. They are divided. The one has eternal life, and the other has the wrath of God abiding on him, that is, an insubject person.
Ques. Is it meant that administration is carried on by the Spirit through the saints?
J.T. Well, it is. We shall come to that when we come to the official side, the agents that are used. Here it is the great central thought, all things in the hand of one Person. We shall have subdivisions later. We shall see other agents later. And we are apprised of the fact beforehand that He gives not the Spirit by measure. But the first great thing to take into our souls is this great Person -- it is the question of the Father and the Son. It is a dispensation of pure grace.
A.M'd. Do we see this in type in Pharaoh giving to Joseph? He put Joseph over the land.
J.T. Well, yes. But you have the thought here of the Father loving the Son. It does not say that Pharaoh loved Joseph. There is no language of
{66}
relationship, no family relationship at all. Here it is a pure family relationship.
H.E. Do you get the thought in Paul committing to Timothy?
J.T. That is good.
Ques. Would you say that grace and truth subsist in the Son as having been here in time to set it forth, having been sent by the Father?
J.T. It is a great general principle. What John says does not simply refer to what He was here in the flesh. This was written after Christ had gone to heaven. That is, it is the present time. The gospel was written after Christ had died and had gone into heaven.
Rem. Grace and truth did not subsist in Moses.
J.T. No. It had no concrete expression. But now we have the great moral system subsisting in one Person, up there, so as to be effective. The system is now set up and it is being effective.
J.S. And the exemplification of it was set forth in chapter 4.
J.T. That is to illustrate how the thing works out. "Of his fulness *we* all have received, and grace upon grace". They are witnesses of the great fact that grace is there. One wave after another. Chapter 4 shows how a poor sinner is administered to. She becomes part of it. You have the idea of a vessel in her.
Rem. Your speaking of electricity is a good example, because it speaks of an abstract element that has to be harnessed, and that comes in in chapter 4.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. Would you say that it is "Come, see a man"? It is not an official position.
J.T. That is very beautiful, how she becomes interested in the Man so as to speak of Him. She becomes a servant. And the object of these meetings 
{67}
is to bring us into line with the administration. It is worked out in us in measure.
J.S. He filled vessels in chapter 2, and how He fills this one.
J.T. That is right. There were six waterpots empty, and He filled them to the brim. And now she is filled. That material waterpot is not the idea. She is the idea.
J.S. She is filled and overflowing.
J.T. Quite so. She went to the men and told them that.
A.F.M. Were you not struck with the speediness of all this? The woman coming to the well with an empty vessel and going away almost immediately. Are you not struck with the speed of it?
J.T. Very strikingly so. She took time to get rid of her natural thoughts. "Art thou greater than our father Jacob ... ?" Well, He was greater. That is the point He made. "If thou knewest ... who it is ...". She says, "I see that thou art a prophet", showing she was coming into the thing.
W.N. Was the thought to bring her into a place of administration?
J.T. Well, yes. She says, "Come, see a man".
But she has the official thought. "Come, see a man ... is not *he* the Christ?" And they went further and said He was the Saviour of the world. It is the Person in the administration that is in mind; how He is going to make effective what is being administered.
Ques. Does the Father give all things into His hand because the principles subsist in Him?
J.T. John himself is the ideal witness in this gospel. He tells the Jews in Jerusalem who the Lord is, and as he sees the Spirit come down he says, "I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God". And then we have this great fact that the
{68}
Father loves the Son. And God gives everything into His hand because He loves Him.
Ques. And does the fact that it is committed into the hands of His Son become the background of the anointing side?
J.T. Well, that is the way it is worked out. First she says, "is not he the Christ?" They say, "this is indeed the Saviour of the world". We have these administrative features.
C.A.M. We reach this by the way of need. But what impressed me was the allusion to the fact that the vessels were filled. There is a fulness to fill the universe.
J.T. Quite so. He is full of what men need so much. He came by water and blood. But He is full of grace and truth. The vessels are filled by His appointment. Then she is filled. "Is not *he* the Christ?" She is filled with the thought of Him. And the Samaritans come round to another thought. So that we are coming into the administrative thoughts of God. They are the subjects of the administration, so that they become part of the administration. "Of his fulness *we* all have received, and grace upon grace".
E.P. Would the thought of the promises of God, "In him is the yea, and in him the amen" (@2 Corinthians 1: 20) enter into that at all?
J.T. I think so. "Glory to God by us". "Me and Silvanus and Timotheus". They were part of the administration. And "glory to God by us" would be in that way. Glory to God by the Samaritans. She represents Christ in you. Christ was in her. She is full of Him.
C.A.M. The very fact that there is a question raised, whether the thing is yea or nay, and whether there exists need, these things seem to have served a wonderful purpose.
J.T. Well, that is your history and mine. God
{69}
met us in our need, on the principle of grace. Grace is that which meets need; and in turn we become part of the administration. So that John says, "one of the two who heard this from John ... finds his own brother Simon", @John 1: 40, 41. He immediately becomes part of the administration. He finds his brother and Philip finds Nathanael.
A.F.M. Do you think that there is a coincidence that He "has given all things to be in his hand" and the Samaritans, having heard and believed, knew that He was indeed the Saviour of the world?
J.T. You can see how their mind widened. She says, "is not *he* the Christ?" They say, "we have heard him ourselves, and we know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world". They go beyond her. "And we know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world". What witnesses they were!
J.S. So that the presentation of the truth would be universal.
J.T. That is how it works. "The Christ" did not go beyond Israel in her mind. Her mind did not travel as wide as the world. It is remarkable that their minds travelled beyond it. A young christian sometimes comes into the thing in that way. They see the position at once.
W.B. It says, "Philip, going down to a city of Samaria, preached the Christ to them", @Acts 8: 5. He would be a vessel, too.
J.T. Quite so. He took up the very thought that she had.
Rem. Where He says in the end of Matthew, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth", does He emphasise the same point?
J.T. Quite so. That is an important point. At the top of the mount some doubted. They were not like this woman. Some of us are not nearly so fresh and vigorous as the youngest believer. He did not stop to prove this to unbelievers. He says, "All
{70}
power has been given me in heaven and upon earth". And then He charges His disciples. "Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations", and "behold, I am with you". That is the position in Matthew.
W.B. Because some doubted, that did not stop the flow of the administration.
J.T. Not at all. He did not stop to correct or rebuke them. It is a very important matter that we have got to go on with the administration. This woman became a part of the administrative side. At first she was the object of the administration, then she became part of it, in that the Lord used her. She was ministering Christ. She went and told the men about Christ. She was really preaching the gospel. And it is more significant because she had come with a vessel and left it, as much as to say, 'That is not the thing at all'.
C.A.M. Perhaps some of our minds, when thinking of administration, instinctively refer to Matthew's gospel. But what I noticed in that reference to it is that power seems to be the great word.
J.T. That is the thing. To make disciples of all the nations. That is not how the thing actually occurred historically. Paul and Barnabas made disciples. Making disciples is an act of power. Later on so-called evangelists emanated from Rome. But that was not the Lord's thought. The Lord's thought was to make them.
W.B. So in the first verse of this chapter, the Pharisees heard that Jesus made and baptised more disciples than John.
J.T. Quite so. A question has been raised about the administrative side there. It is a great administrative gospel. Matthew says, one who gives a cup of cold water in the name of a disciple shall not lose his reward. Not only giving it in the Lord's name, but in the name of a disciple, and then he speaks about a righteous man, too, in chapter 10. The
{71}
Lord says, "He that receives you receives me, and he that receives me receives him that sent me. He that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward", @Matthew 10:40 - 42. That shows how the thought of administration descends to the smallest thing, doing it in the name of a disciple.
A.F.M. It is not forgotten.
J.T. Quite so.
A.N.W. I suppose the little matter becomes an important victory in the soul.
J.T. Very good. It is remarkable how the Lord brings it down to the name of a righteous man.
E.P. Do you mean that the name of a disciple would supply the motive for it?
J.T. That seems to be the thought. Carrying the idea of administration down from Christ to the apostles, and then to a prophet, in the name of a prophet, and then a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man; and then in the name of a disciple. It is to bring the thing down to an ordinary disciple.
E.P. So that the act would really be the act of a disciple.
J.T. Well, it would be. A cup of cold water only; it is to be done in the name of a disciple. It is a very small thing, but the point is the name. All these different persons are *officials*, you might say. Apostles, prophets -- the gradation from Christ down to a disciple. The name holds, and is to be honoured.
R.W.S. How does this differ from John's presentation?
J.T. John works the thing out from instinct. He does not make much of office. So that you will
{72}
notice in verse 27, the disciples come. They had gone into the city. The woman left as they came, and went and told the men in the city. And then it says in verse 31, "But meanwhile the disciples asked him saying, Rabbi, eat. But he said to them, I have food to eat which ye do not know. The disciples therefore said to one another, Has any one brought him anything to eat? Jesus says to them, My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me, and that I should finish his work. Do not ye say, that there are yet four months and the harvest comes? Behold, I say to you, Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest. He that reaps receives wages and gathers fruit unto life eternal, that both he that sows and he that reaps may rejoice together. For in this is verified the true saying, It is one who sows and another who reaps. I have sent you to reap that on which ye have not laboured; others have laboured, and ye have entered into their labours", @John 4: 31 - 38. Now, I think we shall see in this paragraph from verses 31 to 38, that before the Spirit of God finishes the subject of the woman, He brings in the actual servants -- those who were actually engaged at that time, and shows their position. They are in line with all this. There are the fields, white to harvest. You did not sow for that harvest. He is putting it upon us. A young christian who believed yesterday may be fresher and brighter than most of us. The Lord would bring the truth home to us. There is the field, white to harvest. What about the reaping?
Rem. Is it intended thus to expose those who are serving? This woman acts instinctively; she does things on that basis.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. She works from instinct, not from official appointment. She represents John's way of bringing in the truth. But there were those there who had official appointment.
{73}
How were they occupied? They were all in the town buying bread. One might have done that. Not one of us reaping a sheaf today and the fields are white to harvest!
N.W. What was the defect in the administration?
J.T. They were occupied with mere bread. They did not all need to go into the town to buy a loaf of bread. That is brought up to test them several times. They had left the Lord alone.
A.N.W. You were speaking of a day-old christian having a right instinct. What is the secret of the instinct getting blunted? Why is our instinct blunted?
J.T. That is the point. Here we are, and the Lord would say to us, 'Well, where have you been today?' Here is one here. "Lift up your eyes ... the fields, for they are already white to harvest". You didn't sow for it, and will not even reap. But here is a soul here. She has just been converted, and she is off reaping.
J.S. So that their spiritual conception of it was not in line with it at all.
J.T. Quite so. They were putting it off. "Do not ye say, that there are yet four months ... ?" That is what the officials are apt to say. We are apt to say, 'Well, there is nothing much to do. We can do something else. All of us will go into the town to buy a little bread'. That is their attitude. That is what they say, 'It is four months ahead'. But He says, 'The harvest is already here'.
C.A.M. They were going by a calendar.
Rem. Very helpful. They would say, 'We have got to wait a certain time'. Today things are not done on that basis at all. So that nothing is done in a cut-and-dried manner.
J.T. No. John would bring in the living side of things. From the standpoint of administration, it is to be worked out from the persons who are the
{74}
objects of the administration. They immediately become part of the administration, and the official ones are set aside.
Rem. Would you say that Peter was helped in being in association with John? In @Acts 3 he says to the lame man, "rise up and walk".
J.T. Quite so. He was ready there to reap the harvest.
C.A.M. Does this account for the Lord using an agricultural illustration here? It is not like commanding an army. He is speaking about agriculture.
Really, this is something we have to observe that is independent of us.
J.T. It is suggestive of life. The first suggestion of life in @Genesis 1 was the agricultural side. And that is what John is dealing with here. There is the fruit; there it is, already there.
J.S. So that in the opening of the gospel we have, "In him was life ...". Now we see actual development. Is not the key seen in the will of God? My meat is to do the will of God.
J.T. Quite so. "He that doeth the will of God abideth for ever".
Rem. About our care meetings: is there not a tendency with us to put the things to be done on the behalf of appointment rather than on the behalf of those who are willing and ready to do them? When we appoint those to take charge of the gospel, or the money, or whatever it be, we must have a care meeting as to who they should be.
J.T. The point with John is that the work is to be done. Here is a person doing something she is not sent to do at all. Philip is not sent, he goes. So what she represents is the instinct that would lead a christian to do something because it needs to be done.
J.S. The point is to keep near to Christ.
J.T. Well, you can see how she gradually came on here. She says, "Art thou greater than our father
{75}
Jacob?" He had explained that He was greater. He had already said who He was, but she did not take it in. He did not answer that at all. He simply says, "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again: But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life". Now He was dealing with her soul. That was the point. It is a question of grace, dealing with the need that is there. And therefore, she says, "Sir, give me this water". She is becoming interested. The Lord says, "Call thy husband". The moral side is dealt with. And then she begins to talk about worship. She had already said that He was a prophet. Now she is most interested and the Lord is deigning to talk to her about worship. And what we should see is that worship here is a question of the public position in the dispensation. It is not only that man is met in his need, but there is something for God. There must be return to God.
J.S. He had planted in her a well, making her a living fountain.
J.T. Quite so. And, I believe, that is why He deigns to speak to her about worship. All things are in the hands of the Son. He is administrator in the soul. The dispensation requires that God should have something. She is ready for that. And she says to the Lord, "I see that thou art a prophet". She is coming into the thing and seeing it. I wonder if everybody here sees that. There was no New Testament when she said this. That is the idea. And that is the reason why He deigns to speak about worship.
C.A.M. Do you not think it emphasises this matter of prophecy, and the great value of a prophet? It seems to be so stressed; and evidently is in view of worship.
J.T. Well, that brings up the whole question of
{76}
prophecy, our ministry meetings the Lord is helping the brethren on that point. I hope the brethren will go on with it. In the great prophetic book, Samuel, everyone in Israel knew he was a prophet. He is the characteristic prophet. And in the anointing of Saul what comes to light is the prophetic ministry. He says to Saul, 'You will meet a company and they will be prophesying, and you will do the same thing. You will come into the thing, too'. Saul was to come into the service. I believe that is the position.
J.S. Do we see that repeated here? The woman takes it on and goes into the city. There is nothing official. And her work is effective in the city.
J.T. Quite so. She told the Lord He was a prophet, and now she says, 'Do not you believe He is the Christ?' That is the idea of prophecy.
C.A.M. The stimulating thing about prophecy is that a wonderful range of things comes unexpectedly before you and you are delivered from a calendar altogether. It seems to dispense with all that sort of thing.
J.T. The basis of the Lord's remark about worship is prophecy. She is morally clothed.
Rem. The prophetic ministry must have its effect in our souls before we worship God.
J.T. That is the order.
J.S. Would you say the Lord cut across the Jewish calendar in order to bring to light the true worshippers?
J.T. That is the way it stands. We read in @1 Corinthians 14: 23, "If therefore the whole assembly come together in one place, and all speak with tongues, and simple persons enter in, or unbelievers, will not they say ye are mad? But if all prophesy, and some unbeliever or simple person come in, he is convicted of all, he is judged of all; the secrets of his heart are manifested; and thus, falling upon his face, he will
{77}
do homage to God, reporting that God is indeed amongst you". There it is.
C.A.M. The eunuch went up to Jerusalem to worship, and when he got the prophetic word he was not able to do it.
J.T. Quite. He did not worship at Jerusalem.
A.F.M. Would you say that produces self-judgment?
J.T. Well, how can we worship God unless we fall down and judge ourselves? The Lord deigns to speak to her about things that we do not get anywhere else. She says to Him, "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain ...". Now, she had already said that He was a prophet, and the Lord deigns to take her on on this line of worship. "The hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth". That is the whole position as to worship, and He tells it to this woman.
C.A.M. In reference to the matter of the secrets of the heart being manifested, your connecting it to @John 4 is very helpful.
J.T. Well, this is pure grace. The Lord was rising above what this woman was. She sees that He is a prophet.
C.A.M. That seems to be one of the great marks of a prophet. Jonah searched all Nineveh.
J.T. Quite so.
G.F. He "told me all things that ever I did". Does that refer to her life up to that point?
J.T. That was to bring out her whole history. She is like the man in Corinthians, and she falls down and does homage to God. I am only speaking of the actual state of her soul. He knew what was going on in her soul. She had already said that He was a prophet. She sees it. She has not read it out of Scripture.
C.A.M. Clearly she had worship before her. That is the matter she brings up.
{78}
W.N. We do not always seem to recognise the prophet. We might gain by recognising this.
J.T. The man in chapter 9 says, "He is a prophet". She tells Him,"I see that thou art a prophet". He was a Jew and she was a Samaritan.
Rem. And you could not have worship, really, until that takes place. I was thinking of @1 Samuel 10. The men prophesy, and it goes on to say, "And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do as occasion serve thee; for God is with thee. And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will come down unto thee, to offer burnt-offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices of peace-offerings ...". That does not come in until after that.
J.T. Quite. It is a remarkable verse on this subject. It deals with this great prophetic subject. Samuel is one that is known to be a prophet from Dan to Beer-sheba.
E.P. Do you think it is a great point to acknowledge that I have no husband?
J.T. Quite so. You can see how the Lord became her husband. I believe that she represents "if Christ be in you", @Romans 8: 10. She had come to that. He was in her. She had nothing else to speak about. "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not *he* the Christ?"
G.F. The Lord did not reprimand her. He says,"Go, call thy husband".
J.T. That is to bring out the state that she is in. One would just wonder how many of us can say truthfully, 'I see that'. Of course we have the Scriptures to read, but she did not. And she spoke of it. She turns round and becomes part of the administration.
J.S. Completely emptied, she now becomes a  vessel of the Spirit.
J.T. Quite so.
 
{79}
E.S. Is not Abigail like that? I was thinking of how the disciples failed. Nabal, the official side was failing, and she came in unofficially taking things up.
J.T. She discerns David. "My lord", she says.
E.P. She was willing to admit that she had no husband. She came in for a new one.
J.T. Quite so.
A.F.M. Is that why you emphasise the prophetic side in our meetings for ministry?
J.T. That is the end of them if that is neglected. It is the prophetic side that is necessary. It will cause a sinner to fall down and do homage to God.
Rem. We may look for a prophetic word in any meeting.
J.T. It may come in in a meeting like this.
R.S. Is the homage in 1 Corinthians and the worship the same? I wanted some help on it. It is the highest word used in this section.
J.T. Well, it is the habitual word used. It is this very word used everywhere in the New Testament. It means prostration before God.
C.A.M. I suppose the reason we might be so poor in expressing ourselves to God, in some outpouring to God, is because God has not really come into the secrets of our hearts sufficiently.
J.T. The searching out of the inward parts is very important here. Because we call upon all that is within us. So in the types, in the sacrifices the inwards is so much stressed. It is the workings of the affections Godward.
N.W. It is to bring me before God, not only to bring God before me.
J.T. Yes. That is the effect of it. She confessed about her life. That was God coming into her soul.
But then she reverts back to that. God becomes her
{80}
object. The way God comes into my soul is the way grace has come into my soul. It is God made known in Christ. "Come, see a man". That is the new husband. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin".
J.S. Would you see this earlier in Nathanael? The Lord says, "When thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee". He in principle falls down.
J.T. Well, he does. He says, "*Thou* art the Son of God; *thou* art the King of Israel".
Rem. Would you say the substance of @Genesis 24 is seen in the servant of Abraham stooping and bowing down before Jehovah, and then you get the remnant of Rebecca's family willing to let her go? She was ready to go, as the object came into her soul.
J.T. Quite so. She finally comes into the thing herself. "Wilt thou go with this man?" When Isaac comes into view the man says, "That is my master". "If thou knewest ... who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink".
W.N. The thought of worship does not reach the standard it should. The prophetic ministry has not been attended to.
J.T. Well, those are the lines we all need at the present time, to make Himself everything.
W.N. So that prophetic ministry and worship go together?
J.T. Quite so.
R.S. "One God, the Father, of whom all things, and *we* for him". Is that worship?
J.T. That is right. "One Lord, Jesus Christ ... and *we* by him".
Rem. Prophetic ministry clears the ground.
J.T. Yes, it does.
J.S. The matter of bringing it right into the presence of the person -- is not that the point here?
{81}
J.T. Yes. Worship is induced. God comes before you.
W.N. I thought prophetic ministry was more than clearing away. It is a building up.
J.T. Well, yes. God is brought to us. So that in @1 Samuel 19 the prophets are prophesying and Samuel is presiding over them. It is being carried on in great power, so that Saul, a murderer, is brought under the power of it. I believe it is our great stay at the present time when the world is in apostasy.
It is our great stay. Saul comes into the power of it. He comes to take David and slay him, and in doing so he is exposed. Well, we should see how the official servants, the disciples, are not made much of, still the Lord says, "Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest ... he that sows and he that reaps may rejoice together". What a beautiful thing that is, that you are reaping. He that reaps. Well, if the fields are white to harvest, why do not I reap? And you will gather fruit to life eternal. He that sows and he that reaps rejoice together, if you do what your hands find to do. Do not wait to be sent. If the harvest is there, reap it, and you will get life eternal; and then rejoicing together.
Rem. While it is true the Son was sent, He also comes. He came of Himself.
J.T. That is what comes out here. "My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me, and that I should finish his work". He does not give up at all. The disciples were not doing it that day.
E.P. Do you think it brings you intimately into touch with the One who sowed? I was thinking of Paul and Silas in prison. Their hearts were touched by the One who had sowed in that field.
J.T. Yes. And they were rejoicing with Him. We must keep our eyes open for anything that God is doing and reap it.
{82}
Rem. We should not be behind the seasons. We may miss the whole thing.
C.A.M. Evidently the fruit was unexpected. The answer the prophet had to all his words -- the man shows up with the fruits of life.
J.T. When Naomi and Ruth came back to Bethlehem the reaping was going on. Paul speaks of the glad tidings of the blessed God.
{83}
THE ADMINISTRATIVE FEATURE OF CHRISTIANITY (2)
@Romans 5:21; @Hebrews 4:14 - 16; @1 Kings 7:6 - 8
J.T. The part of our subject occupying us last evening is found in the closing verses of @John 3 and in chapter 4. The administrative side of the dispensation founded, as we noticed, in love. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". That is a great general statement covering the position. Then chapter 4 shows how the administration works out in those who are the objects of it. The woman of Samaria being representative of those who are serving, gradually comes to discern the Lord, saying, "I see that thou art a prophet". And she makes inquiry about worship, which the Lord deigns to take up and enlarge upon as if it is part of the great general position in the dispensation. That is, not only is man's need met but God's need is met in this present dispensation. The woman had a need, a great need. She had drunk deeply into this world, but thirsted again. The Lord speaks to her of water, that if one drinks of, he would never thirst. His need would be permanently met. It would be in him a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life, which would allude to his need completely met, and at the same time touching the need of God, so to speak. The divine need is seen in the Lord's remarks about worship. The Father seeks worshippers. So that the need of man and the need of God are both met in the dispensation. And then the woman goes to the men of the city and says, "Come, see a man which told me all things that ever I did: Is not this the Christ?" She becomes a vessel of use in the administration. She has already in principle drunk into the living water, and now gives it to others.
{84}
Chapter 7 shows the fulness of this in the rivers flowing out. But she became part of the administration in conveying the thought of God to the men of the city, indicating that Jesus was the Christ. She had said He was a prophet, now she intimates that He is the Christ. She is functioning in the administration and functioning effectively. For the men are affected by what she says. They say, having come to Jesus, "This is indeed the Saviour of the world". So that the administration works out in an ever-widening result in those who are the objects of it. They come into the thing, and their outlook is widened, in that they say, "This is indeed the Saviour of the world". And in relation to all that, we have the disciples, the only known servants of God, ostensibly, as called out by Christ. They are not doing anything to further the administration. They had gone into the city to buy bread. Apparently they all went, and the Lord was left alone. So that He opens up a word that covers their position. The harvest was already in view and they were not reaping. They said, "There are yet four months". But He says, "the fields ... are already white", the point being, inasmuch as there was a harvest, there should be reaping. It is a word to all of us who are ostensibly servants and how we should be putting our hands to the thing that needs to be done. What is in mind now is to work out the features by which the administration is maintained. It is thought that we might look at the throne, a feature of the house, and at a later reading the priesthood -- the advocacy of Christ. So that we will read first in @Romans 5: 21; @Hebrews 4: 14 - 16; @1 Kings 7: 6 - 8.
We have to look at the throne as conveying divine authority toward us and then in view of the gracious rule that is exercised; and as having a great high priest, we are to view it as something to be approached, "with boldness ... that we may receive
{85}
mercy, and find grace for seasonable help". That is, the throne as it is effective in us in subduing us becomes such that the sense of grace enters into our souls and we have liberty of access to it as a throne of grace. Romans teaches us the kingdom in this sense "so also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 5: 21. The water given according to @John 4 has the same end in view. That is, it springs up into eternal life. It is something in us. Here the reign is with a view of eternal life, too, because subjection is acquired. God is not blessing man in relation to his own will. He is blessing us in relation to the subduing of our wills. So that the passage in 1 Kings intimates that having made the throne room, the porch of judgment which stood in relation to the house in which Solomon dwelt, "he made, like to this porch, a house for Pharaoh's daughter". The house where she dwelt was made like the porch. So that judgment -- the will of God through judgment through the throne -- is effective in the assembly. We have been subjected to the Christ. So there is the disallowance automatically of all our wills. The position of the assembly is subjection to Christ and where she dwells there is everything to denote that her house is according to the porch of judgment. So that that being understood there should be no exercise of our wills, particularly in the things of God. Whatever is manifestly of God is to be submitted to and acted upon, and if it requires sacrifice, sacrifice is to be made, so that it might be acted upon.
C.A.M. I suppose Matthew's gospel shows how necessary judgment is in connection with administration. That gospel seems to emphasise judgment.
J.T. Yes. Say a little more about that.
C.A.M. I thought it would be in line with this matter of judgment. I was impressed with it. I think we are conscious of it, that in connection with
{86}
this wonderful administration, this matter of judgment seems to be a very important one.
J.T. I am sure it is important. The reference to it here in @1 Kings 7: 6 - 8, "And he made the porch of pillars; its length was fifty cubits, and its breadth thirty cubits; and there was a porch in front of them; and there were pillars, and steps in front of them. And he made the porch for the throne where he judged, the porch of judgment; and it was covered with cedar from floor to floor. And his house where he dwelt had another court within the porch, which was of the like work. And he made, like to this porch, a house for Pharaoh's daughter, whom Solomon had taken". I think that the gospel of Matthew is very much like the house made for Pharaoh's daughter. It is made like the porch of judgment.
C.A.M. That helps us to understand why the assembly is treated of in such a remarkable way.
J.T. Well, she is to be heard in matters of judgment. She exercises judgment. Her house is of that kind, where she dwells.
Ques. What do you think the porch of judgment is as connected with Solomon's own house?
J.T. That would be to connect where he dwells, too. So that 1 and 2 Corinthians work out the idea in the assembly. The assembly here has become part of the administration of judgment, as learning subjection. As I learn subjection, I become authoritative. As the assembly learns subjection she becomes authoritative. If I am lawless, I have no moral weight with others.
C.A.M. Yes. That is striking about 1 and 2 Corinthians. So that they both issue in life. I suppose that would be the outcome of all this.
J.T. Quite so. The throne looks out into eternal life. None of the blessing is attached to us in insubjection.
Ques. Do you regard the Lord's word to the
{87}
disciples in @John 4 as to their will? "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me".
J.T. That is the line we are speaking of.
Ques. Were they outside of the will of God in what they were doing?
J.T. I think they were. They could not have been in the will of God because they left the Lord alone. He is carrying on alone.
Rem. To take an indifferent attitude in relation to divine matters is bordering on this matter of looseness and will.
J.T. Well, I think the throne is taken up in @John 14 in connection with the remnant position, although the dispensation began with it. He says, "If ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter". "If a man love me, he will keep my words". "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me". I think the throne enters into all that, because the throne is a symbol of the divine will. It implies that God not only has a will, but He has the means of enforcing it. So that much is made of Solomon's throne. And the prophetic word as to it is that it can be beautifully tempered. So that there can be no complaint of harshness. It said of the king prophetically in @Deuteronomy 17: 14 - 20: "When thou comest unto the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like all the nations that are about me; thou shalt only set him king over thee whom Jehovah thy God will choose: from among thy brethren shalt thou set a king over thee; thou mayest not set a foreigner over thee, who is not thy brother. Only he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor lead back the people to Egypt, to multiply horses; for Jehovah hath said unto you, Ye shall not return again any more that way. Neither shall
{88}
he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away; neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold. And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write for himself a copy of this law in a book out of that which is before the priests, the Levites; and it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life; that he may learn to fear Jehovah his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do them; that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the right hand, or to the left; that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he, and his sons, in the midst of Israel". I think in these verses we have prescribed what only finds a full answer in Christ. And when Solomon did reign he had this throne, a great throne, and a porch, which has a link with his dwelling-place, and Pharaoh's daughter's dwelling-place. So that the idea of rule is through the throne, permeating all.
E.S. Is there not safety to us under this rule?
J.T. That is right. There was no adversary or evil occurrent.
C.A.M. Will you tell us about this matter of the king. It looks forward to Solomon's day and is fully seen in Christ. At the present time, this matter of kingly rule in the assembly, how do you look at that?
J.T. Well, there must be rule.
C.A.M. What I meant was this: are we right in any way applying this to princely features amongst the saints, in connection with a royal priesthood?
J.T. I think it works out in connection with the princes. We get, generally, the thought that there must be rule. So that we see it in the universe. Everything is regulated by law or principle. The whole physical system hangs together that way. Well, God establishes a moral system that emanates from Himself. Then there must be rule. We are told
{89}
a king shall reign in righteousness, princes shall rule in judgment (@Isaiah 32: 1). So that the Lord in Matthew takes His seat on the mount. His genealogy comes down, so as to establish that He is of the royal line, Son of David, Son of Abraham. He takes His seat on the mount, and the disciples came to Him, and He sat down and taught them. There are several mountains in Matthew. This is the mount of authority. "I say unto thee".
So that Jerusalem is the city of the great King. Pharaoh's daughter is brought in. He is the true Solomon, and Pharaoh's daughter is brought in as type of the assembly, in chapter 18, where she is to be appealed to. So that judgment works out from Christ, His throne, to the assembly. And hence she becomes a great agency in the administration.
A.F.M. We are exhorted in chapter 18 to tell it to the assembly. That would be, typically, Pharaoh's daughter. Then as you read further, the porch for Pharaoh's daughter comes last in this section, as if the work of administration were so far executed that it could be faithfully placed in her hands.
J.T. That is important. It all works down into the assembly, into the hands of those who are patterned after Christ; and we see in the coming world of glory that she is the great centre and all law and rule radiates from her. She is learning now.
E.P. "Ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed", @Romans 6: 17. Do the roots of this lie there?
J.T. Yes. The form of teaching was obeyed from the heart.
E.P. I was thinking as you read Deuteronomy that the features of subjection are seen in the One who sat on the throne.
J.T. Quite so. Romans is to work out that principle. The principle of obedience is the basis of anyone of us coming into rule.
{90}
R.S. Does the authority given the overcomer in Thyatira with regard to the iron rod work today in the assembly?
J.T. Well, exactly. The rod that the Lord uses to shepherd the nations. It is a benign, flexible rule, although it is severe. It is a rule that will not tolerate our wills. It is a benign rule, but there is nothing to legalise my will. The best way I can serve anyone is to overthrow his will. And, I believe, that is what is meant. "To him will I give authority over the nations, and he shall shepherd them with an iron rod". It is a benign thing. It carries out the thought of shepherding. He commended that to Peter. But there must be no toleration of our wills. So that it says in chapter 12 that the male son should shepherd all the nations with an iron rod. It is no act of friendliness or kindness to anyone to legalise his will, or whether he can do this or that. The iron means that wills go. But at the same time, love is behind it. I want to shepherd everybody in what I am doing.
J.S. So that the idea of shepherding would be completed.
Rem. And @John 14 would be in keeping with the iron rod. "He that has my commandments and keeps them ...". It is like the iron rod.
J.T. Yes. So that you can understand the rod being connected with the remnant in Thyatira. It represents that part of the church's history which is connected with man's will recognised in religion. The Vatican represents the greatest organisation that there ever has been. It is a growth of centuries and human learning and experience made to serve this thing. So that man's will rules instead of God's will. There is nothing benign about Rome's will. God says, 'My will is not any more flexible, but My will will be exercised to shepherd people'. The Pope is sitting in the chair of St. Peter. The symbol of office represents that shepherd service. But there is nothing
{91}
of the shepherd in it. But the overcomer is given to rule or shepherd the nations with a rod of iron. The assembly is shepherding us all the time, though it will not allow our wills. The principle of eldership is to shepherd the sheep.
Ques. Would you say that it was a very serious matter when Jehoshaphat let down the thought of administration for the moment in allying his throne with that of Ahab?
J.T. Very good, indeed. There were two imposing thrones and the servant of God has to face all that. And he asserts the throne of God. He says, "I saw the Lord sitting on his throne", @1 Kings 22: 19. That is the one that prevails.
R.W.S. What is broken in pieces? It goes on to say, "as vessels of pottery are they broken in pieces, as I also have received from my Father".
J.T. Well, the shepherd is the point. We have to exercise rule of course. "In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus", @1 Corinthians 5: 4, 5. That is bringing up the flesh, but it is that the man's spirit might be saved. He is really being shepherded. If anyone were to go to him and say, 'Well, I think it was too severe', he would say, 'You are no friend of mine, because the shepherding was for the salvation of my spirit'.
A.N.W. What is saved must be subdued according to @1 Corinthians 15. And then the Son Himself will be placed in subjection.
J.T. Does it not say that everything is subdued? So that the throne of God has got the whole power of God behind it, and can never be overcome. But you are exercised with a view of everlasting life. God has nothing but blessing in mind, however severe it may be.
{92}
Rem. Would @Psalm 89 bear out what you say? "Righteousness and judgment are the foundation of thy throne". And then in verse 29, "I will establish his seed for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven. If his sons forsake my law and walk not in mine ordinances ... Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes", @Psalm 89: 29 - 32.
J.T. I am glad you called attention to that because it is a psalm of a very wise man. But not as wise as Solomon. Solomon was wiser. It shows that there was no rivalry or envy with him in the way he spoke of David. For he spoke of David in the main. It is one of the psalms of instruction, that we are to learn from. He is eulogising. He is speaking in the highest terms of the throne of David. All this enters into it. So that we may well observe what is said as you read it there.
-.McC. I may be conscious that I am in the assembly but it necessitates my being subject to its authority. Judgment begins at the house of God.
J.T. Judgment there is not by the house of God. In Matthew it is by the house of God, that is, by the assembly. But Peter deals with the government of God, and he says it will begin there. Conditions would require that it should begin there, God judging amongst His people. "God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints".
E.P. Would the porch of pillars suggest the maintenance of divine principles?
J.T. I think they do. They are distinct things to be observed. Your attention is called by the appearance of a pillar. So I think it is said there are steps. "He made the porch of pillars ... and there were pillars, and steps in front of them". The idea is, apparently, that they were approachable. They are not beyond us. So that all are within our range -- all these things. And there can be no doubt that the
{93}
result of the working out of Pharaoh's daughter's house in Matthew and 2 Corinthians is not destruction but blessing.
E.P. Do you think the pillars would suggest that there is that around the throne that corresponds to it? Paul says, "set those to judge who are little esteemed in the assembly".
J.T. Well, he has come into the system. As I am subject myself to the laws of the kingdom, I become a ruler. "He that ruleth his spirit" is better "than he that taketh a city". Matthew requires that. I have influence over other people if I am subject myself. I have moral weight with others. And so we make disciples. So that you get a person as least esteemed in the assembly -- let him be set over this thing. He is equal to the Supreme Court in Washington. He is capable of judging between brother and brother. I do not believe the ablest Chief Justice could adjudicate amongst the brethren. He that is least esteemed in the assembly -- he can adjudicate between brother and brother.
C.A.M. As we come under this influence we are able to assert it ourselves. In the cross we get that princely condition. When it came to the cross, the Lord was princely in those surroundings. I meant that the most insignificant of us in coming near the Lord could become princely.
J.T. I am sure. So that we had yesterday how great a person a disciple is in Matthew -- giving a cup of cold water in the name of a disciple. It is not that we want to deify one another, but to bring out the moral idea in judgment. If a man rules his own spirit he is better than he that takes a city; and he is qualified for a place in the house of administration.
R.M. Do you think that these pillars would preclude any thought of party spirit? They stood by themselves. They were governed by party spirit in
{94}
Corinth. These pillars stood in relation to each other by themselves.
J.T. That is a good remark. There were pillars and steps in front of them. They would represent principles. They would be approachable, accessible. They would certainly preclude all party action. They were viewed each in his distinction.
Ques. Why is it that the idea of being spiritual or a prophet as a result of keeping the commandments that Paul was speaking of, comes in at the end of the verses that deal with prophetic ministry?
J.T. You refer to @1 Corinthians 14. Well, that is a test of spirituality. "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment". That is the test. The commandment is recognised.
Rem. So that I can begin to see the place that the prophetic ministry has on the road to worship. But in between there must be this question of obedience come to light. I was thinking of what may appear to operate in a word of ministry. In the beginning of Ezra it speaks of the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah. The children of Israel might have forgotten that word. God did not forget it. These things must be part and parcel of the whole system.
J.T. Quite. So that the Old Testament closes with a direct statement as to Sinai, where this principle of the throne and rule began. "Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel". That is laid down as unalterable. And then, "Behold, I send unto you Elijah the prophet", @Malachi 4. I think the Lord is constantly reminding us of this matter of prophecy.
Rem. I was wondering if the steps might connect with the prophetic side. That is, on the road to seeing the great pillars and entering the place where judgment 
{95}
is actually accomplished. Or is that carrying the thought too far?
J.T. Entering into the place of judgment?
Rem. Yes. There are the steps up, which are evidently in front of the pillars, then the porch, then the throne. And what leads me to this would be prophetic ministry.
J.T. Well, the mind of God comes out in prophetic ministry. And, as is clear, the obedience must be present if we are to come into blessing. There must be submission.
C.A.M. I think your reference to the end of the Old Testament is very good because this matter of the prophet was really making way for the throne. And then it refers to the hearts of the fathers being turned to the children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers. This heart-searching matter seems to be emphasised.
J.T. Quite. To have our hearts turned to our children. To have a right heart toward those who are to be influenced.
A.F.M. The reference you have made to @1 Corinthians 14 shows that a prophet was a spiritual person.
The great qualification would be that, to learn and give the mind of God. And such a person would recognise that this first epistle was the Lord's commandment. Now, evidently there were those who took the place of being prophets who were not doing that.
J.T. That is it. If I am a minister in any way, or assume to be spiritual, I must recognise the Lord's commandments. I surely ought to be able to do that.
Ques. Do you think that verse 38 which says, "But if any be ignorant, let him be ignorant" would apply to persons who disregard the word? It is not a question of inadvertent ignorance.
J.T. It is a very remarkable word, and links on to Revelation where you get final judgment which is
{96}
unalterable or irrevocable. This links on with @1 Corinthians 16: 22, where the apostle says, "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha". That would be final when the Lord came. But here he would go further. Here he says, "If any be ignorant, let him be ignorant". Why should that be? That is a very sad thing. It is like apostasy in Hebrews. It is a fixed thing. It is impossible to renew such an one again to repentance. He had tasted of the good word of God and the power of it. He had tasted christianity with all its blessed features, and is calmly giving it up. It is impossible to renew him again to repentance. Let him be ignorant. That would be justice. It links on with Revelation. "Let the filthy make himself filthy still". God says, 'I am going to leave that. That is going on to final judgment'. That is a most solemn thing. I cannot allow my will because we never know when He will say that about me. We cannot point out a person and say that. It is something God knows.
Rem. If it is an issue in the assembly, and the light of the matter is clearly shown and constantly shown, and a person says, 'Well, I do not see it', it may be that they do not want to see it. Any one of us doing that kind of thing may be on the road to this.
J.T. Well, it is a solemn fact. If I persistently refuse the light, God may say, 'Let him be ignorant still'. Things happen, and you have to leave them.
Rem. When you sit next to a person who says he wants light, and you turn on the light, so to speak, and he still does not see it -- would this be equivalent to the lack of the understanding heart you get in Isaiah?
J.T. The solemn fact is that I may go on with my own will, and God may leave it at that. There is such a thing as that.
Rem. Is there a point where I cannot take it in any longer?
{97}
J.T. There is such a thing as that. "If any be ignorant, let him be ignorant".
J.S. "If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great the darkness!"
R.W.S. I would like to ask if an assembly judgment can be wrong.
J.T. You can answer that as well as I. You know that an assembly judgment can be wrong, and can be reversed. @Leviticus 4 provides for that. So that the assembly can be cleared of the evil.
G.F. I wish you would go into that, the remark in regard to the reversing of an assembly judgment.
J.T. Well, if a thing is wrong, it is wrong. If all the assemblies in the world committed a judgment of it and it was wrong, it would still be wrong. God makes me feel that it is right by His presence. It helps me, like a covenant from God. It is to help me in my weakness, but I ought not to need that. If it is right, it is right; if it is wrong, it is wrong.
Rem. And so the house of Pharaoh's daughter is not really displaying the idea of the porch of Solomon as of the throne. It says in @Leviticus 4, "if ... they have done somewhat against any of the commandments of the Lord concerning things which should not be done, and are guilty ...".
J.T. Yes, that chapter makes a gracious provision for it. So that an assembly or a priest or an individual should be released from the effect of it. It is a gracious provision.
C.A.M. That is what seems to make it so important that the kingly or princely element amongst us should retain these commandments -- write them, keep them, and read them.
J.T. Well, I was thinking of that. The king was to make a copy of the law for himself. The priests are ordinarily the custodians of the law, but here is a man who makes a copy for himself. He is in a special place of responsibility.
{98}
C.A.M. And that thing is existent and will be existent until we do not need it any longer.
J.T. Quite.
A.N.W. That is the standard.
J.T. Well, that brings up another matter. We must bow under what is right. And I am responsible to know what is right. Anyone can assert his will, otherwise. The door is open for a million judgments. I saw a letter carefully written the other day, in which the writer said that the brethren, of course, could only act according to their understanding of the matter. But is their understanding right? The law that the king writes for himself is the standard. My judgment is not the thing at all. There is such a thing as right. And I am responsible to know that. So that unless we bow to that, the door is open to everybody having his own will. Is it not possible for brethren to say, 'That is right'? And if I dissent I am bound morally to show why -- to show that there is something defective in it. If I cannot I am out of accord with all divine system. Why are you not satisfied? Can you not tell us? If you cannot tell us, say nothing and bow.
A.S. So that having diverse judgments is nothing but Open Brethrenism.
J.T. Quite so. And that is what the enemy is seeking to do, that is the level that the enemy is constantly endeavouring to bring in amongst us -- that I have a right to my own judgment.
Rem. If a brother says, 'I do not just go with that judgment', that brother is really out of fellowship though he is still breaking bread.
J.T. He is not functioning as to the system, if it is the assembly. That is in accord with the porch of judgment. I want to function in relation to the throne. And I must understand the throne. The will of God is to be understood.
R.W.S. That makes Josiah's action a spiritual
{99}
one -- when the book of the law is found, and all that follows.
J.T. Well, exactly. How he was affected by it! Now we ought to look a little at our approach to the throne. "Having therefore a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast the confession. For we have not a high priest not able to sympathise with our infirmities, but tempted in all things in like manner, sin apart. Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help". This is another side of the matter that we ought to understand, the idea of approach. I am not terrorised by it.
J.S. Does the fact that sin having reigned and given place to the reign of grace, give rise to this?
J.T. That is the thought. Sin has reigned, now God has set up a throne that is grace. And sin is not to have dominion over us because we are not under the law but grace, with eternal life in view. Hebrews takes up the throne in this way in relation to the great high priest who has passed through the heavens.
Having Him I can draw near to that. Here it is the throne. I have learned the power of grace in my soul. So that whatever need I have got I can ask. I can draw near with boldness. When Esther drew near she had to stand outside until the king held up the sceptre. But here you use boldness. The more liberty you take the better.
W.N. The approach points toward the subjugation of my will.
J.T. Well, unless my will is subdued I cannot draw near. The thought of iron is there, too.
A.N.W. Mercy in need, and faithfulness when we need subduing.
J.T. Yes, indeed. The idea of faithfulness must be always present. Even though I am subdued, I
{100}
must search my heart lest there be a selfish thought there.
C.A.M. This great priest was really on the throne.
It says that it is Jesus, the Son of God. As if there was not a single object to deter us.
J.T. Quite so. It says He is sitting as a priest upon His throne.
A.F.M. So that the affections are set. "Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help". Grace is enthroned and if we approach, we prove the value of it.
J.T. Yes. We get the sense of who the Person is, that great High Priest. The official side is in mind here. He has passed through the heavens. Creatures cannot pass through the heavens. The third is the limit for the creature. But here is One who has passed through the heavens, that is an assertion of the Lord's deity. A well-known Man, Jesus the Son of God, has passed through the heavens. His deity is asserted. His qualifications are that He is able to sympathise with our infirmities, being tempted in all things in like manner, sin apart. That is, His moral quality is seen here. His deity is that He passed through the heavens; His official place is as great High Priest, His relationship is as Jesus, Son of God; His moral quality is that He was tempted in every way as we are, sin apart. "Which of you convinces me of sin?" That is His moral quality down here.
We need not be afraid. He knows us well.
R.W.S. Is the covenant linked on with this? Is it distinctive, or is that to aid me in boldness?
J.T. You get the idea in chapter 8, and then the idea of approach in chapter 10: 19 -- it is in the power of that covenant that we draw near. It is a question of drawing near to God. We are dealing here with the throne, and Him who has to do with it. He has gone beyond the heavens. That is His deity. But as to
{101}
His personal relationship, He is Jesus, the Son of God; and morally, tempted in everything, sin apart. The nearer you get to Him, the more you feel how sympathetic He is. He is there to encourage us. But will will never be brooked.
Rem. When Peter said, "Depart from me", he really did not understand this. It was not the line of departing, was it?
J.T. Quite so. But still, he fell down at Jesus¬ knees. Instinctively, he felt that that Person was gracious. He discerned that He was a priest.
C.A.M. Yes. It is remarkable that the priest senses the person, not the words. He understood Peter better than he understood himself.
J.T. I suppose Peter would be the best to tell us about it -- his life history -- how he had to do with Jesus. I would love to have heard him. I can understand Paul staying fifteen days with Peter. I think a young person should get as near as he can to persons knowing Jesus.
Ques. Was that the beginning of @Acts 15?
J.T. That was earlier. He stayed there fifteen days. He could tell him about Jesus. Of course, Paul knew Jesus, but not in the sense that Peter knew Him. Peter had such breakdowns.
E.P. Paul could say the same thing. I obtained mercy because I did the thing ignorantly in unbelief.
J.T. Quite so. But he did not know Him in the peculiar way in which Peter knew Him. The Lord entered into his house first according to Luke. Luke gives you the priest. The Lord came into his house and his mother-in-law was ill. His mother-in-law got the blessing, but he did not.
E.P. Would you say that the priesthood is connected with what He is as Man?
J.T. Oh, yes. A Son is priest. Sonship implies manhood. Peter missed it. His mother-in-law got the blessing, but he missed it. It was in his boat he
{102}
got the blessing, according to Luke. Luke would emphasise Peter's relation with the priest. It says of him, "he fell down at Jesus¬ knees". He had a consciousness that that Man cared for him.
-.McC. You would be impressed with the holding fast in chapter 4: 14. It necessitates my seeing the great high priest. I must have that good in my soul to be able to hold fast. It requires power.
J.T. Yes. It is holding fast to your confession. That is not my opinion, it is the confession -- what is manifestly the truth of God.
Ques. What did you mean when you said He sympathises with our infirmities and not our wills?
J.T. Well, that is manifest. That is what the iron rod means. It is inflexible in regard to our wills, but it is shepherding all the time. He says, 'I know your feelings and I am ready to shepherd you. I have been there Myself. I sympathise with you'. "For we have not a high priest not able to sympathise with our infirmities, but tempted in all things in like manner, sin apart. Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help".
A.N.W. Being able to exercise forbearance.
J.T. Quite so. Well, our time is up, but perhaps the brethren will follow along better if it be suggested that we pursue this subject tomorrow in connection with priesthood. It is a question of how the administration is to be maintained, and how we are to be maintained in it. So that the last subject would be priesthood, but more particularly, advocacy; both as applied to the Lord in heaven and the Spirit here below. It is the same thought. It is four times applied to the Spirit in John's gospel; once applied to Christ in John's first epistle.
G.F. Do we approach the throne as an individual?
J.T. It is the individual that is in mind. I should not exclude the thought from our meetings for prayer.
{103}
N.W. How do you understand, "tempted in all things"?
J.T. Well, just as it states. All things with which we are tempted. What the enemy uses to tempt us, to induce us to give up the confession. The enemy sought to induce Jesus to give up His confession -- to divert Him from God and bring Him around under his own influence.
C.A.M. Quite so. That is what comes up. "If thou be the Son of God" -- twice it comes up in that connection.
{104}
THE ADMINISTRATIVE FEATURE OF CHRISTIANITY (3)
@Hebrews 2: 16 - 18; @Hebrews 5: 5 - 10; @Hebrews 7: 26 - 28; @1 John 2:1, 2; @John 14: 15 - 17
J.T. Our subject is the administrative feature of christianity, and how it is to be maintained. Priesthood and advocacy have a large part in the maintenance of the administration. They are, indeed, part of it. We will read @Hebrews 2: 16 - 18; @Hebrews 5: 5 - 10; @Hebrews 7: 26 - 28; @1 John 2: 1, 2; @John 14: 15 - 17.
This scripture in @John 14 is added because it links the Holy Spirit with our subject, the word 'comforter' being the same as 'advocate' in John's epistle. But the first part to be considered is the priesthood. We mentioned yesterday, in relation to @Hebrews 4, the boldness of access which we have to the throne of grace. The high priesthood of Christ stands in relation to the house, the throne. So that it was brought in yesterday, but the thought is to look at it more extensively, and to see how the Lord's priesthood sustains the house of administration. And what helps in the types is that the Lord is seen in @Exodus 21 in the exercise of love, in the type of the Hebrew bondman. Jehovah had said "them that love me" in chapter 20 and in chapter 21 we have this type of Christ as showing love. It is said, "we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us". So that we have One saying, "I love". And when He says that we look for the way of love. We are to serve one another by love, and love enters into the subject of priesthood peculiarly. It is fundamental with regard to this subject, as it is fundamental with regard to the great subject of administration. "The Father loveth the Son". Here it is the Son loving the Father. "I love my master, my wife, and my
{105}
children". So that we have the way of love introduced in the type after we are notified that there are lovers of God. We have One who says, "I love", and then we have the way of it. He laid down His life for us. And we are to lay down our lives for the brethren. That is the way of it. Hence the bondman accepts death in type. His ear is bored through, alluding to his intelligence. Hebrews says He was heard in that He feared. Priesthood implies manhood. Manhood is fully seen in servitude. It is a question of what is heard. So that his ear is bored at the door-post, and he professes to abide a servant for ever. Then in chapter 28 He introduces Christ as again seen, not as a bond-slave but as a priest, One who would serve in a more dignified way. So it is not to serve Me as a slave, but as priest. And that raises another question which leads us back earlier in Exodus. The service is to be by the son. "Let my son go". When the actual service is to be performed God's request is for the priest. The sons of Aaron are included as well as Aaron. They are to be robed in a dignified way for this service. And that is what Hebrews takes up.
C.A.M. It is an interesting matter about the ear, and the being heard. You were connecting the digging of the ear with hearing.
J.T. Quite so. That is the meaning of @Psalm 40. 'Ears halt thou digged', alluding suggestively to incarnation. Becoming incarnate, the Son was here, taking the place of hearing. Satan would take Him out of that position. But the Lord says that "Man shall not live by bread alone but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God". It is a question of the ear being ready to hear what God has to say.
C.A.M. Yes. The priests have to do a lot of speaking. It would seem to follow that.
J.T. Yes. And he was to hear. The anointing included the ear, particularly corresponding with the boring of the ear.
{106}
A.N.W. Would the service of bondman be up to the brazen altar and the service of priest from there on?
J.T. That is good. Of course, we have here the actual service at the altar, connecting with priesthood. That is, that He might be a merciful and faithful high priest to make propitiation for the sins of the people, in that He Himself has suffered. He suffered on the altar. He was the offering priest. As you touch the altar you come to the priestly side.
He was a bond-slave entirely devoted to the will of God, even unto death.
A.N.W. He offered Himself without spot unto God.
Rem. What did you have in your mind when you spoke of the thought of the son underlying Exodus?
J.T. Well, the word to Pharaoh was, "Let my son go, that he may serve me". That is the primary thought of God. But when God asks for a servant He does not use the word 'son', he uses the word 'priest', pointing to the fact that we are still in an environment that is marked by evil and the exercise of will, and that is what priesthood is for, that God might be served under these conditions. It suggests one who hears. So that the Lord says He does not do anything of Himself. What He sees the Father doing He does. The Father reveals everything to Him. It is only on the principle of hearing. He does not speak of Himself. He emanates from God; and hence priesthood involves training and instruction. Not that the Lord needed this. He knew all. But He knew man's place; and everything emanates from God through Him.
A.F.M. Do tell us why in @Hebrews 10, @Psalm 40 is translated to mean "a body hast thou prepared me" instead of, 'ears hast thou digged for me'.
J.T. Well, that would be equivalent. How does the psalm read?
{107}
A.F.M. @Psalm 40: 6, "Sacrifice and oblation thou didst not desire: ears hast thou prepared me". I think that is translated in Hebrews, "A body hast thou prepared me". Does that emphasise the thought that He had taken that place? The whole body was set for hearing.
J.T. That is it. The ear being bored or digged or hollowed out -- the language is to convey thoughts. These words 'digged' or 'hollowed out' mean simply that the Lord took a body, took a bondman's form, took on humanity. And He says to the devil, in manhood, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God". So in the prophet He says, "He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed. The Lord Jehovah hath opened mine ear", @Isaiah 50: 4, 5. It is a remarkable thing that the Lord should take such an attitude, and it ought to appeal to us, that we might speak a word in season.
N.W. "God ... has spoken to us in the person of the Son".
J.T. Quite so. Over against the prophets, here is One here who has the feelings of a man. So that there, in the first chapter of the epistle, it is to bring out who the Speaker is. "God ... at the end of these days has spoken to us in the person of the Son". The article is omitted in the original to show that it is a divine Person in sonship. "By whom also he made the worlds", and he goes on to speak of His greatness. But in chapter 2 He is on our side. And so it says, "For he does not indeed take hold of angels by the hand, but he takes hold of the seed of Abraham. Wherefore it behoved him in all things to be made like to his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things relating to God, to make propitiation for the sins of the people; for, in that himself has suffered, being tempted, he is
{108}
able to help those that are being tempted", @Hebrews 2: 16 - 18. Now we have Him on our side with feelings like our own, sin apart. So that He can sympathise with us. And I think that the ears being digged alludes to incarnation. John used it properly when he said, "the Word became flesh". That is incarnation; the Word becoming flesh. But the psalm would stress the hearing, taking the position where He hears. So that God has One here great enough to convey all His thoughts, but feeling enough to sympathise with us as hearing the things.
E.P. Would there be any connection between the thought of digging and hollowing out and learning obedience by the things which He suffered?
J.T. Well, there is a link there. How entirely human He was! He learned obedience. The learning is experimental. God cannot be said to experience obedience because He is not man. But Christ became Man, and experienced obedience. So that He learned from the things which He suffered, and then it adds, "having been heard because of his piety". He was a pious Man, infinitely so. Yet God accredits Him with it and gives Him a hearing. But the great thought in His having an ear is that He should hear God. So that it comes to us first of all in the Son, and then in One who can be touched with the feelings of our infirmities.
Ques. Is the idea behind this priestly administration that we should take on the same features?
J.T. That is the intent. That is, you come into the benefits of the thing, the benefits of the priesthood.
Rem. I was wondering if you would get an exemplification of the practical working out of this in Paul's approach to the Corinthians. He was as a workman amongst them. He associated with them, and was able to help them in that way.
J.T. Yes, that is good. You get to know what people are by associating with them. Jonah entered
{109}
a day's journey into the city to know what kind of place it was. And then he cried. Paul worked as a tradesman in Corinth. He had come to know what was there. So that divine help comes to persons through one that knows them. As much as to say, I have been through the thing, and I can see that you deserve this. The principle is there. How perfect it was in Christ. As becoming Man, He moved about in this world and saw it as it was, and speaks accordingly.
Rem. That makes a prophetic word all the more solemn.
J.T. Quite so. One thing in ministering is to know the people you are ministering to, what they have to contend with, what their environment is. So that Paul makes more of that in regard of Corinth. He determined not to know anything among them save Jesus Christ and Him crucified. Divine communications come through the man that knows.
G.D. This priesthood is available to the seed of Abraham. What kind of persons are they characteristically?
J.T. It is to bring out the human side, I suppose; taking hold of the seed of Abraham. It was already sanctified. The Lord did not come into corrupt humanity. It was the seed of Abraham, already sanctified. He was "holy, harmless, undefiled". The incarnation was infinitely pure. I suppose He takes up the seed of Abraham in that connection.
Mary was on that line, and she is taken up. Joseph, too. The seed of Abraham has a place spiritually.
It is not corrupt humanity. God knows how to take up something. The seed is there -- holy seed.
J.S. Is it characteristically those called out?
J.T. I suppose so. It is not the ordinary corrupt humanity of Sodom. It is what already has been prepared. He has come in in that way.
Rem. Like @Romans 4. Those that are of Abraham,
{110}
on that line of father, whether they be gentile or Jew. Or are you confining it to the Jew?
J.T. Well, here it is the seed of Abraham. It alludes to Mary, the Lord's mother. The word in Matthew is a unique word. "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham". It is a unique word. Not the ordinary word at all. It alludes to that kind of generation.
Jesus was seen at the end of the line. God looked at that line, and took care of it in that way. You can see how important that is. "Of whom was born Jesus". Mary was His mother, and Joseph was His reputed father. It is a line under divine care, but still as human as any.
Rem. Is that why you get the generations in Matthew?
J.T. Yes. Everything is divinely handled and certain ones are eliminated, so that the line is kept pure.
Rem. And as you were saying, He is at the end of the line.
J.T. It shows how the line was under God's eye; and then the Lord's conception and birth. Luke gives you that side. He shows how it is preserved, how holy everything was. "The holy thing", meaning that it was substantially holy.
C.A.M. So that humanity in the mind of God seems to impress you with the fact that it is preserved all the way through; whatever journeys, from this place to that place; and eventually to Christ.
Ques. Is it a creational view of humanity, or based on humanity?
J.T. We are created of God. That never applies to Christ. He is not a creature at all. He is a Son, though.
N.W. "In all things to be made like to his brethren", does not suggest union with humanity.
{111}
J.T. No. He has taken on humanity, but thus cared for.
W.B. Does God introduce the family line with Abraham -- a special thing?
J.T. Quite so. That is the reason he is given the name 'father'. He is first called 'high father', meaning that he is morally dignified. God made him that. He would not be ashamed to be called his God.
A.N.W. You were saying, while there are some shut out, there are some brought in.
J.T. Those who have manifested the fruit of God's work. So that He takes up Abraham in Mesopotamia before He changed his name, as if he were morally dignified. And, He says, Your name has been 'high father'. Now it is to be Abraham -- 'father of a multitude'; because I am Almighty. "Walk before me, and be thou perfect". Not simply like Enoch, but walking before God. Enoch and Noah walked with God. He is the first one that walked before God. God sees all that happens in walking before Him. That is where the seed comes in; no other than Isaac. It is a holy seed. "In Isaac shall thy seed be called".
Ques. Will you distinguish between Matthew's presentation and Luke's, where he goes back to Adam?
J.T. It is all under the care of heaven. Outwardly, you might say, it might easily have been destroyed. But it cannot be destroyed. "The power of the Highest shall overshadow thee", @Luke 1: 35. God is there to look after everything. He who made the heavens and the earth can look after that.
G.F. What is the difference between walking before God and with God?
J.T. Walking with God is taking up companionship with God. He is not now questioning you so much; it is your selection. That comes in in @Genesis 5. Enoch made that selection when Methuselah was born. Children require that you should
{112}
make that companionship. Give up all other associations. Noah was the same. He was perfect in his generations. He walked with God. But to Abraham He says, "walk before me". He did not say that early. In @Genesis 17 He says that, as if He had already proved Abraham. God says, I am the One and you are the other. God enters into a covenant with him. God's eye is on him all the time.
A.F.M. The thought of 'high father' precedes the thought of the 'father of a multitude'?
J.T. Well, I think it does. A man is not entitled to have a family on the low level. If he is a high father, he will baptise his children. He will lift them above the level of this world.
Rem. At that point is where his name is changed.
J.T. Yes.
G.F. He will command his house after him.
J.T. Quite so. That is good. The fact is that Abraham becomes a judge. In chapter 17 God comes to him and carries on a conversation with him with regard to the setting aside of the flesh. So that Jehovah went up and then came back to him in chapter 18, and there is the wonderful event of Abraham entertaining God. And then the question of judgment comes up. Is there anybody in the world that can judge? Is there anyone that can discriminate between good and evil? Abraham can. He says, You are the Judge of all the earth. God says, Abraham can judge, because he ruled his house after him. "To do righteousness and justice", Abraham is the source of that. Abraham says to God, You are the Judge of all the earth. Chapter 18 brings in that side.
Rem. If our houses are not right there is something wrong in our judgment.
J.T. Quite so. Judgment goes with the patriarchal side. He discerns between good and evil, not only for himself but for his house. I will make him My friend, God says.
{113}
E.P. Does priesthood come in in that connection? Judgment is about to be rained on Sodom, and Abraham assumes a priestly attitude.
J.T. Yes. He is really a priest there. He is interceding on the ground of righteousness. He does not want anything else. And that helps us with regard to our subject. Priests are clothed with righteousness. The first thing to see is how the Lord is on our side, taking on Abraham's seed, and so feeling with His brethren, because it is His brethren here; and He is able to sympathise in that He Himself has suffered. Having been tempted, He is able to help those that are being tempted. For it is only the two or three that He was with. It is the great principle that is being worked out. He is helping those that are tempted.
E.P. Do you get a touch of that in Paul, where he says to the Corinthians, "God ... will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able to bear"?
J.T. Exactly. He knew how far to go with them. He did not put any more on them in ministry than they were able to bear. Priesthood means I know what the brethren here need, and how to help them.
C.A.M. You can understand him starting with the exceeding greatness of the Person, and how amazingly great that makes the thing.
J.T. Yes. In chapter 4 we have this great priest over the house of God. He can sympathise with our infirmities, being tempted in all things in like manner, sin apart. And then in chapter 5, "Thus the Christ also has not glorified himself to be made a high priest; but he who had said to him, Thou art my Son, I have today begotten thee". Now we come to the order of it. Whilst Aaron is in mind right through, Aaron does not represent the order. It is another order of priesthood, that is, Melchisedec. "Who in the days of his flesh, having offered up both supplications and entreaties to him who was able to save him out of
{114}
death, with strong crying and tears; (and having been heard because of his piety;) though he were Son, he learned obedience from the things which he suffered; and having been perfected, became to all them that obey him, author of eternal salvation; addressed by God as high priest according to the order of Melchisedec", @Hebrews 5: 7 - 10. Now we are on another great platform, the platform of order and eternal salvation by one who has been perfected. That is the second time we get this word. He has taken on another kind of humanity. That is the humanity that is in the mind of God, and that is in view in salvation.
A.N.W. Is that the meaning of 'perfected'? That He is in a position never to change?
J.T. Yes.
Rem. I was thinking of the acacia wood -- does that refer to this order of humanity?
J.T. Well, acacia wood is a type of Christ carrying things. You get other woods in the temple, but the idea of wood is attached to Christ in type. He showed Moses wood. He is of another order morally, as in the flesh here. He is cast into the water there. The idea is carried through into Solomon's day, what is dignified.
C.A.M. I want to ask you about this matter of the order of Melchisedec. The order precedes the functioning of it.
J.T. It brings up a very important side of our subject. It came in in @Genesis 14.
A.N.W. Actually linked with Abraham himself.
J.T. Just so. It is to bring out the superiority of Christ's priesthood over the Aaronic. It is marvellous the way the scripture is employed; just to bring out the superiority of our priest.
Ques. Is it the thought that we should start with the Melchisedec side?
J.T. I think all the service is on the Aaronic
{115}
principle. Melchisedec does not refer to the sympathetic side at all. It is to bring out the superiority of our priest. "Without father, without mother, ... abides a priest continually".
J.S. One who is not subject to death.
J.T. Personally, He is immune. He did not need parentage like Aaron. He is without father and mother.
C.A.M. In order to bring out this greatness primarily, this matter of order, the matter of need does not come in as yet.
J.T. It is a question of getting the greatness of the Person. The actual way that He teaches us is in sympathy. It is afterwards that you come into the idea. So that you do not get the Melchisedec order as early as you do the sympathetic side. You get it in chapter 4. That is like the dignified side we come back to, as we prove the sympathies of Christ.
J.S. It is a heavenly order.
J.T. That is the idea. The description is in the beginning of chapter 7, "For this Melchisedec, King of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from smiting the kings, and blessed him; to whom Abraham gave also the tenth portion of all; first being interpreted King of righteousness, and then also King of Salem, which is King of peace; without father, without mother, without genealogy; having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but assimilated to the Son of God, abides a priest continually". So that it is a continual priesthood. He does not die. Not that He has not died. He has gone into heaven. It is the priestly state that Christ is in.
Rem. In chapter 5: 5 it says about Christ, "Thus the Christ also has not glorified himself to be made a high priest; but he who had said to him, Thou art my Son, I have today begotten thee". Is there glory attached to this?
{116}
J.T. Certainly; this epistle is built up on those two psalms. "This day have I begotten thee". That is what is alluded to here, to bring out the deity of Christ, and His immunity to death.
A.N.W. But why is He first saluted as Son before He is saluted as priest?
J.T. To bring out the Person. The Son is more than the priest. The Son is God. He is saluted as Son in the second Psalm. "I this day have begotten thee", in verse 7; and "in another place he says, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec". The sonship as taken in the Psalms is wider in its bearing. It is political as well as priestly. The Son is everything. The One who is owned as Son is the priest. He is a priest for ever. Everything attaches to Him. But it is the permanency of the priesthood. He is a priest for ever.
Ques. Why is that?
J.T. It is just the way God brings in things to help our minds. It means the permanency of the priesthood. It does not go so far as sonship. Sonship is wider.
C.A.M. Sonship underlies all the gospels.
J.T. Quite so.
F.C. Is the thought of Melchisedec inscrutable?
J.T. Yes. You may say that. "Without father, without mother". He comes on the scene abruptly and disappears abruptly. This chapter tells us all there is about him.
J.S. Is it in regard to the humanity of Christ, lest we should think He is a Man of earthly order?
J.T. Quite so.
A.N.W. The Melchisedec order comes in first. God secures what is His.
J.T. Quite so. He remained that for ever. So that when you come to chapter 7, "such a high priest became us, ..." the blessed God would bring out the greatness of the saints.
{117}
C.A.M. Yes. The first thing would tend to take us out of ourselves. The greatness of Melchisedec -- the words used -- all tend to make you feel this is something far exceeding myself. That seems to help a soul.
J.T. Yes. And the word is to deliver the people of God from man-made priesthood. Christendom is founded on this sort of thing. And Melchisedec is to get into my soul what that word means. That means that all this sacerdotal system that is around us is simply wiped out completely in my mind. Here is a priesthood that was preconceived and is to abide for ever. And it is to deliver us from sacerdotalism.
A.F.M. Is not this priesthood Aaronic priesthood? Does it not endear Christ to our hearts as priest? Do we not go on to appreciate Him as after the order of Melchisedec?
J.T. I am sure it does. So that the types in Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy deal with the Aaronic side. But the Melchisedec side is brought in first. So that we should have in our souls the greatness of our Priest. But then, let us not discard the functioning of a priest. What is said about Aaron is to be understood. The Scriptures make Aaron the basis of it. How he serves!
W.B. Do you connect sympathy with both? He came to Abraham after he returned from the battle with the kings. Was there not sympathy there, too?
J.T. Well, there would be. But the point made here is not that. Consider how great this man was. The point is how great he is. He is said to be King of Salem. It was a question of kings once. There were nine kings. But here it is the King. The real one comes and he brings in life. He met Abraham returning from smiting the kings, and blessed him. Abraham gave him the tenth portion of all. And then we are told what this name means, King of righteousness, King of Salem, and then "without father and mother, without genealogy; having neither
{118}
beginning of days nor end of life, but assimilated to the Son of God, abides a priest continually".
Ques. What does assimilated to the Son of God  mean?
J.T. It is to bring in @Psalm 110, what that psalm means. He is the Son. This person is assimilated to the Son of God. The Son of God is a wider thought.
This personage represents it in one sense. He is a great personage, and he delivers our souls from the whole sacerdotal system. Abraham the great patriarch was less than this great man. Melchisedec was great. Abraham paid him tithes. The priestly tribe paid tithes to this great man. It is for the Jewish mind.
C.A.M. He was greater than Abraham, and it is shown in the fact that Abraham gave him tithes.
E.P. Do you think this idea of the priesthood enters into conflict in the testimony? It says in @Psalm 110, "The Lord ... will smite through kings".
There is the thought of Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, then the establishing of the King of righteousness and peace.
J.T. Yes. The thought of smiting through the kings. You must smite the kingship. The sacerdotal system is based on kingship. The whole system has to go.
E.P. You feel how these principles work out.
Abraham came up out of the slime pits. As coming up out of those conditions, Melchisedec met him.
Melchisedec brought forth the bread and the wine.
J.T. Quite so. And another thing that comes out is the idea of persons. Abraham was fortified by Melchisedec about the idea of persons instead of property. The king of Sodom wants the persons.
Abraham and Melchisedec stood for persons. It is a question of persons. This epistle is working out the greatness of persons. The people are so great; they need a great high priest like this.
{119}
E.P. In these difficulties we come to value the souls, not the things.
J.T. Just so.
A.Pf. "Neither beginning of days nor end of life". Would that make it an eternal priesthood?
J.T. That is right. Here the testimony is that men die. But this man lives for ever; so that it is an abiding priesthood.
Rem. The word in chapter 7: 16 is, "who has been constituted not according to law of fleshly commandment, but according to power of indissoluble life".
J.T. Quite so. That is the way God works the truth into our souls. It is Christ as risen from among the dead in the power of life.
Rem. We are quick to lay hold of being sanctified.
Do you not think we are slow to take in the glory of this One?
J.T. Time has nothing to do with it. It is superior to it. It is above all power of corruption.
-.McC. Would you say a little about our attitude toward time and our attitude in the eternal state?
J.T. I do not say that it would be altogether out of sight, but sonship is the thought. Priesthood comes in between because of conditions. The point is, "Let my son go, that he may serve me". The last book of the Old Testament brings it out. "They shall be unto me a peculiar treasure, saith Jehovah ... and I will spare them", @Malachi 3: 17.
C.A.M. It ought to help everybody in connection with deliverance from religious system -- what God thinks about the persons.
J.T. Yes. This chapter stresses it particularly.
"Such a high priest became us". That is to bring out the greatness of the saints. They need such a Man as this. You might say He needs us, but we need Him, to elevate our souls as to our greatness in the mind of God. "Holy, harmless, undefiled,
{120}
separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens".
Rem. Say something about that thought "higher than the heavens".
J.T. Well, it is a remarkable word. The heavens are for height, we are told. They represent that thought. The earth is for depth. The Lord went down to the depths. We are to measure the height, depth, breadth, and length -- it is the four dimensions. We get it in Ephesians. But here you have what goes beyond the heavens. The heavens are for height. For the creature, heaven would be the acme of height.
J.S. In Ephesians He ascended far above all heavens.
R.W.S. "Separated from sinners". What does that mean?
J.T. That means what He was in a moral sense down here, that is apart from sin. He passes to higher than the heavens.
R.W.S. I thought of Luke's presentation of Him, and then this verse, and wondered how it worked.
J.T. Well, it is morally -- the tabernacle is a type of Christ in the wilderness, the means of excluding evil.
C.A.M. It is remarkable -- the expression "higher than the heavens". The One who was in that uncreated sphere came into a measurement condition. Had He not come down, nothing would ever have gone up. It seems to magnify all this theme of measurement.
J.T. Quite so. How He measured everything! Now He is in His own creation in a moral way. He is infinitely apart from sinners. Every person He came in contact with -- what came out! How He judged So that the whole thing is weighed and measured according to God. It is to bring out His Person. Separated from sinners is what He is down here. As a Man He had to do with sinners. But there was infinite distance between Him and sinners. Still He
{121}
eats with them. "This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them". That was true, but He was infinitely apart from them as sinners. He came to seek and save them. "Higher than the heavens" is an allusion to His personal greatness.
J.S. "That he might fill all things" in Ephesians.
J.T. Yes. He "set himself down". It is His own action. So that our souls may be filled with the greatness of this Person.
Rem. In entering the untreated sphere, does He enter that as Man?
J.T. I think so.
Rem. Do you think that in @Luke 7 the idea of measurement comes in there? "Her sins, which are many" -- He has them all measured.
J.T. Quite so. You get the idea of measurement right through. Everything is weighed.
Rem. "Out of whom went seven devils".
J.T. You get it right through the gospels. We have not touched the subject at all because it is so immense. It brings us into priesthood. Peter brings us into it -- "a holy priesthood", he says, "to offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". We become part of the system. And our prayers are that we are part of the system, as already benefiting from the system. The word translated 'advocate' is used five times. It is translated 'advocate' here, and 'Comforter' in John's gospel. It is used four times in John's gospel and once here. It is touched on in chapter 14 where the Lord is going to die. He brings in this appellation of the Spirit. He says, "another Comforter", meaning that He was one down here. While He was among them, He served, now He is going away, and there was to be Another here. We are not going to lose His patronship. The Holy Spirit takes care of that. The Spirit of God is looking after matters, He maintains us here. He looks after us in a meeting like this. He puts it
{122}
all together, and makes it all profitable. He is in charge of the matter. He is alongside of us, and looks after the assembly as anyone might look after an expedition. The Holy Spirit is here looking after matters. We could not have the testimony without His patronship. But the Lord is up there. If anyone sin, we have One up there. It is the maintenance of the dispensation. The priest refers to God, but the patron is with the Father, to maintain the dispensation. Whatever happens to any one of us, the Lord looks after it altogether. Even before it happens, He knows about it.
A.N.W. Why does it come into view with regard to sin?
J.T. Well, it is because the thing is so urgent. Many are overwhelmed if anything happens, and do worse. The power of sin is terrible. Satan would make you do more. Peter denied the Lord, but he did more. He denied Him with oaths and curses. But the Lord said, before anything happened, "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not".
R.W.S. What does He do with the Father?
J.T. Oh, it is a wonderful way divine Persons have of conversing with one another about matters. The Lord spoke to the Father here. Has it ever occurred to you that They converse about you?
R.W.S. No. That never occurred to me.
J.T. Well, They do. The Lord speaks to the Father here about the saints. They occupy the whole prayer in @John 17. "The men which thou gavest me out of the world". About that young man that sinned. What is to be done about this? The Lord can always point to Himself. The One who is there on our behalf is the provision for our sins. He says to God, 'You know what I have done'. That is the moral right He has. He can tell God about that.
A.N.W. And in that regard He is the righteous.
J.T. Quite so. God is bound to respect that. The
{123}
Lord has finished the work of redemption for the whole world.
-.McC. What you said regarding Peter -- while he was cursing you would say, 'I do not see any faith in such blasphemy'. But there was faith.
J.T. It is the best illustration I know about advocacy. The Lord says, "Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat". Satan despised them, and to the universe they were nothing at all. But "I have prayed for thee". And when the time came the cock crew.
-McC. The "you" is plural.
J.T. Yes. But the "thee" is singular. And the Lord says, "I have prayed for thee". The cock crew and He looked at Peter. And Peter wept bitterly.
A.F.M. You have put a new thought on the sifting of Satan. I always thought the wheat was valuable.
J.T. What Satan thought was that there was nothing there. I do not think that Satan had in his mind there should be any wheat at all.
Ques. Was the look a priestly look?
J.T. I suppose advocacy was part of the priesthood. The prayer preceded and now He looked. It shows the kind of thing advocacy is. He does not say anything, He looked.
C.A.M. Yes. I can see the urgency in taking care of the thing. If nothing is done, the next thing will be worse. This matter of Satan is a very interesting thing.
J.T. The book of Job is the opening up of all this. The sons of God were together and Satan would ridicule the thing. 'They are not any different. You let me at them'.
C.A.M. The whole situation was changed. So that the Advocate above in addition to the Holy Spirit here below seems to be necessary to the extent that Satan is still there.
{124}
J.T. He is the accuser of the brethren yet. It brings out the wonderful economy that there is. An Advocate up there, and one down here; John brings out four times over that there is an Advocate.
A.F.M. So that there is no reason, if we are overwhelmed, to remain overwhelmed.
J.T. If Peter had been left alone, he may have murdered somebody.
C.A.M. He would have to be put out of fellowship.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. We need the priest with the discerning eye.
J.T. Vigilance is another thing. The idea of vigilance attaches to Christ.
A.N.W. I was thinking of the evidence of faith seen in that Peter caught the Lord's look.
J.T. Quite so. A child, if he has done something wrong, does not like to meet your eye. But Peter did not evade that.
J.S. Was it as a merciful High Priest He appears to Simon?
J.T. That is to bring out the character of the dispensation. That is what they were saying at Jerusalem. "The Lord is indeed risen, and has appeared to Simon", that great sinner.
Ques. Is that the time He appeared to Simon in @John 21?
J.T. @John 21 is later. The apostle Paul gives the order. He appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve, and after that was seen of above five hundred brethren at once. The saints seemed to know the meaning of that. He is a great sinner, but the Lord is the Advocate. He appeared to that man.
Rem. He went out from the presence of the Lord weeping. That would be some evidence of faith?
J.T. Well, the work of recovery had begun.
Rem. The leprosy is all out.
J.T. Yes. It took a long time.
{125}
C.A.M. It is interesting that Peter seems to be representative in that way.
J.T. Yes.
J.S. In @Luke 24 the appearing to Simon is the subject of the conversation.
J.T. It is really the gospel; the appearing to Simon and the breaking of bread. "He was made known to them in the breaking of bread".
R.W.S. I wanted to ask, could I exhaust His advocacy by sinning again and again? It says, "if any man sin", not 'when a man sin'.
J.T. "If any man sin" -- but John says before that that I am not giving you any licence to sin in what I am going to say. "My children, these things I write to you in order that ye may not sin; and if any one sin, we have a patron with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins; but not for ours alone, but also for the whole world", @1 John 2: 1, 2. You talk about advocacy, and a person might take licence. Well, you might be lost anyway. John says, 'My children, I am writing now to you things that are needful, but it is that you should not sin'. There is no licence at all.
-.McC. Should I "continue in sin that grace may abound?"
J.T. Quite so. It is a terrible thing to say that.
If I continue in sin, what does that prove? If a man is filthy, let him be filthy still.
C.A.M. That seems to take the thing outside of the range of the present.
J.T. Yes. John says,"There is a sin unto death". Now, he says, I do not say that you should pray for that. We have to understand that.
C.A.M. I can see that there is something outside of the dispensation.
J.T. Yes. We have to be discerning about the government of God.
Ques. Why did the Lord speak as He did to
{126}
Pilate, "he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin"?
J.T. Well, it shows that there is perfect fairness. Satan will get the worst; then the beast, and the false prophet. God is perfectly fair. They will not all share the same judgment.
J.S. So that the beast and the false prophet are cast alive into the lake of fire.
J.T. All these things are to be observed. "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" "He that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin". He was not exonerating Pilate.
Rem. And so He gave Lot an opportunity for all his children. As Judge of all the earth, He exposed their position there.
J.T. Abraham was thinking of Lot all the time.
He did not have anything but a righteous person in mind, ten righteous persons.
C.A.M. He was judging all the earth. The Lord showed Pilate that He was, too. Pilate thought he was judging, but the truth was the Lord was judging Pilate.
J.T. The whole scene comes under judgment at the cross. And the remarkable thing there is that three persons come up from the enemy's camp and justify Jesus: the thief, Pilate's wife, and the centurion.
{127}
CHRIST IN US
@John 14:20; @John 1:35, 36; @John 4:28, 29; @John 6: 66 - 69; @John 9: 35 - 38; @John 12: 3
My subject, dear brethren, is Christ in us. These verses treat of this subject, John presenting it more fully and more varied perhaps than any other. One of the lines of thought pervading John's ministry is fixity, having the end in mind, at least the Spirit having the end in mind, when there would be a great up-turning, thrones shaking and falling and ancient institutions rocked to pieces, a turning of the world upside down. This great ministry had in mind fixity for the Lord's people. Those who believe are to be like mount Zion, are to be like the earth, in that sense which God has founded for ever. And so the Lord in this verse in chapter 14 speaks about a day, "that day". It alludes to the day of the Spirit, for fixity in the sense in which I am speaking of it is not simply by faith but requires the Spirit. The Lord had this in mind in introducing this great subject of the Comforter. He proceeds in the passage to speak of certain results of His presence. The world did not know Him, did not see Him, but the disciples should see Him and they knew Him, He dwelt with them and should be in them. The Lord therefore, dear brethren, marks off the saints, in the thought of the disciples, sharply from the world, for the world did not see and could not know what the disciples saw and knew. We are marked off sharply from the world in the Lord's mind. The apostle tells us that the Lord has in mind in discipline that we should not be associated or identified with the world even publicly in the judgment of God, for "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen
{128}
asleep". How many of the Corinthian saints would be the subject of concern! Look around on the sick ones and those that had fallen asleep. Think of them, the word being that they should not be judged with the world. The Lord is concerned that no governmental action of God should be forced to identify His people with the world. Sometimes in His service here He had to speak to His disciples and the multitude as if there was no difference, "O unbelieving generation!" (@Mark 9: 19), as if He included them all, and the disciples were just occupied with defending themselves against others and the poor boy afflicted by demons was unhelped. So the Lord marks us off here sharply, as I said, and "In that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you", @John 14: 20. The Lord is anticipating the day in which this fixity should be known to us, to the saints. It is to be taken abstractly in the verse read because the Lord does not say, In that day ye shall know that I shall be in my Father; no, it is the present. It is a fixture, as any fixture is in the creation, in the mind of God. There are great fixed principles in the creation, without them the creation could not subsist, and this verse, as I understand it, is in the Lord's mind, such a thing as that. The day was coming when the saints should know it, not by investigation, but the presence of the Spirit and the accompaniments of that presence should bring out this great fact that there is a great spiritual fixity that no earthquakes or storms or upheavals can touch. And the mention of it, dear brethren, is to the end that we should come into it. I mean by knowledge. I proceed now to show the varieties in which the idea is seen in John; how Christ is in believers, the variety of features in which He is in believers.
I take up John the baptist first as he is one of the ideals of the Spirit in this gospel. Let no one think that the end of the dispensation may not develop
{129}
features of the work of God as great as at the beginning. John belonged to the previous dispensation and there was no one born of woman greater than he. The Lord says, There is no one greater than John the baptist, and yet He says one of the least in the kingdom is greater than he, that is, he does not come up to the level of our dispensation. "From the days of John the baptist", the Lord says, "until now, the kingdom of the heavens is taken by violence", @Matthew 11: 12. It could stand it. No institution can stand violence more and maintain itself, but it is not violence in an adverse sense but in a friendly appreciative sense,"the violent seize on it". John the baptist set out that thought of energetic condition amongst the people of God. Lethargy is abhorrent to John. He is a man of doing, he is a man of action, a man that will make the most of what is available to him. He appropriated Christ as far as he could. This evangelist leaves him saying, "He must increase, but I must decrease. He who comes from above is above all. He who has his origin in the earth is of the earth, and speaks as of the earth", @John 3: 30, 31. Christ came from heaven, John accepts his earthly setting but he himself knowing of the heavenly. The Spirit of God shows how he laid hold of it, how he valued that, the heavenly Man, and rejoiced to hear the voice of the Bridegroom; his joy was fulfilled, he was not complaining. The evangelist John does not mention any of John the baptist's weaknesses. He omits telling us that he sent a message to Jesus questioning whether He was the Christ. He leaves him saying that his joy is fulfilled. Would that that should be taken on by every christian! for christianity is not to promote a joyless people. Let me assure you that christianity is intended to promote joy. Paul says, "Rejoice in the Lord always: again I will say, Rejoice", @Philippians 4: 4. John the baptist laid hold of that thought.
{130}
I want to show the feature in which Christ appears in him at the outset. Much, of course, is said about him and by him in the chapter that I cannot touch upon. The point I wish to bring forward as foundational in the structure I would seek to build up in this address is that Christ was in John sacrificially. He calls Him the Lamb of God as he sees Him. Earlier he said He is "preferred before me, for he was before me", @John 1: 15. He said also he was not worthy to stoop down and to unlatch His shoe. But when he sees Him coming to him he says, "Behold the Lamb of God". It is a question of movement. The sacrificial thought is conveyed in movement. When Adam gave names to the creatures you may be sure the sacrificial idea would be there. Noah was to know the clean from the unclean creatures. Doubtless their names would carry down something to him as to this and there can be no doubt that the lamb carried with it a sacrificial thought, "the Lamb of God". Adam could not connect any creatures specifically as above others with God, but now we have the "Lamb of God". John is able to designate Him as he sees Him coming to him and so it is that every believer foundationally has some conception of Christ coming to him. It may be we have not thought of this. When he saw Him coming to him he said, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world". It was the movement undoubtedly. What is said of John is to bring out his qualities.
How alert he was in all his sensibilities! So when he saw Him coming to him he says, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world". What a thought! That is to say, Christ was in him in that way. How essential that would be, for what was John's ministry, what was the ministry of any save in the light of this great transaction, the taking away of the sin of the world -- not putting it down by military power yet, but taking it away. It is in the
{131}
character of the Lamb, taking away the sin of the world. That, dear brethren, is the first thought, and then as he stands, for I believe the standing in verse 35, of this great servant signifies that a Greater had come in to take on the service of God. So that it is now a question of standing and letting a Greater take on the service. This is the thought, it is practical. If a greater appears in one's vision the spirit of John would lead you to give way to him not to rival him. It is a question of God's ordering and He knows better than we. He selects his men, but Jesus stands out pre-eminently, John says, "preferred before me". That is a question of God's mind. If one is preferred before me it is for me to take a second place. John the evangelist was always ready to do that, too, always 'Peter and John'. I believe he learnt it from this great idea of John the baptist. "First, Simon, who was called Peter". John recognised that, so he is standing now and admiringly looking at Jesus as He walked, not now coming to him but walking, for it is sacrificial dignity in the walk. As in the book of Proverbs gaits of creatures like the lion and the horse and so on, indicative of God's intent in each one -- Adam, no doubt, saw that and named them accordingly. God never altered a name given by Adam. God would be delighted in the instinct and intelligence in Adam, as head. He named the creatures according to what they were in the mind of God. You can see them coming to Noah and how Noah would value them. They came two by two into the ark. What intelligence was manifest! What a sight for heaven! As they come two by two, with perfect understanding, as you might say, of the need of propagation in the new world, as it were, "male and female", it says. The new world is to be replete with life all according to the original thought of God, nothing by accident. So this walk of the Lamb is very beautiful for it calls for the exclamatory
{132}
word here, "Behold the Lamb of God!" by one in whom Christ is in this sense. He is there in a fixed way in John and John calls attention to Him. We have often noticed the astronomical characteristics in John and this is one of them. A great planet may call attention to something greater, it denotes the position of something else. So it is that John denotes something else from himself. He is not shining in his own glory but for the glory of Another. Well, that is the first great thought a foundational one, and if we are to come into this great matter of Christ in us it is to see that He is to be apprehended sacrificially.
In the case of this woman of Samaria my thought is that He is in her prophetically. If He is in me sacrificially, if I apprehend Him in that light and cherish the thought and would not give up for worlds that thought of His being in me, I owe all to Him on that ground -- sacrificial ground; then the next thing is that I must be searched as to whether there is anything incompatible in me. For if He is to be in me sacrificially surely it is due to Him that there should be no rival thing in me, nothing in me to dispute His place there. And so the woman in the course of the conversation which we have sought to dwell upon profitably, she says to Him, "I see that thou art a prophet", @John 4: 19. It is a question of perception now and surely all the power of perception that we have is called into action if Christ be in us. Paul says, "if Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin" -- all that is negative, "but the Spirit life on account of righteousness", @Romans 8: 10. That comes out in @John 4, a question of the Spirit and of a believer in Christ discerning, perceiving that Jesus in serving her is a prophet. If He has to deal with the sin of the world, all the magnitude of the thing, He is certainly going to deal with it in me and will not tolerate it in me. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin", that is to say, it is the
{133}
sequential thing, it is incompatible that it should be otherwise. "The body is dead", meaning it has ceased to respond to the natural desires of the flesh. And the Spirit is life, a positive thing in view of righteousness, now there is to be movement. It indeed implies that I am in the body but I do not go into that side. This woman in @John 4 is the best example you can get of Christ in the believer; the body is dead. She is searched through and through and she has not a word to say in justification of her whole course, it is exposed to her and she abominates it. "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not *he* the Christ?" Christ is in her. Her body is dead, she left her waterpot, but took the waterpot on herself, went back herself full. The Spirit is life in view of righteousness. If there was never a righteous act in her history there is now going to be. The Spirit is life and if Christ be in us, dear brethren, there will be righteousness. It is the order of God and if Christ be in us the body is dead, it has ceased to respond to the desires of the flesh. The body is dead. And "they that are of the Christ have crucified the flesh with the passions and the lusts", @Galatians 5: 24. She goes back into the city, the men have no influence over her any more, she has power over them for good. She left her waterpot, as much as to say it is not an external thing after all, but she herself is a vessel for the Spirit of God. A mighty triumph, now, Christ in her. She is full of Christ. As she went back into the city I believe her face would be aglow because she had met One who could meet all her soul's difficulties, her whole history was told and she is now a vessel because He is in her. Instead of other men (she had had five husbands), one Man now, "that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God", @Romans 7: 3. Christ is in her and she makes it known so powerfully that the men are moved and obey, they immediately
{134}
go to Christ. "Is not *he* the Christ?" she says. Now I go to Peter and the third phase is that Christ is in Peter here as the Holy One of God, an allusion, I believe, to Aaron who is called of old the "saint of Jehovah", @Psalm 106: 16. It is now time surely to think of serving God. The matter has been touched in the conversation between the Lord and the woman of Samaria so that the instruction is accumulative. Now it is in Peter's mind but first he says, "thou hast words of life eternal". Christ is in him in that light, that He has "words of life eternal". All must come to futility apart from the great abiding thought and blessing of eternal life. There is nobody else to go to. If I follow a leader, even like Methuselah, he would die. The man would come under death. There must be the great matter of eternal life. It would have finality and permanency in view, and then he said moreover "we" meaning himself and the others -- for the Lord addresses the twelve, a great administrative number -- and Peter answers saying, "we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God", as you might say the true Aaron of God. What service we are going to have with such an Aaron as that One who has the words of eternal life! He does not terminate by reason of death. No, our Priest lives in the power of indissoluble life. "Such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens"; and the writer to the Hebrews says, "We have such a one high priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens; minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man", @Hebrews 8: 1, 2. What services we shall have! The Lord is helping as to that, too, in the most encouraging way, as one has opportunity of seeing it, as the Lord is helping us as to the service of God and if we are to understand it and take part in it we must understand 
{135}
this feature of Christ in us as the Holy One of God. It is a fixed matter that the service of God proceeds in those who serve Him in spirit and truth, those who boast in Christ Jesus and have no confidence in the flesh and worship by the Spirit.
The next is chapter 9. What is to be observed is Christ is in this man, who had once been blind, as the Son of God. The context shows that the Lord had in mind that He should be in this man in this character. A point comes in our histories when the Lord says, 'I have come into your matters definitely and I want you to understand that I am to be in you in a certain relation. It is essential that it should be so'. He came into this man's circumstances at a given point. He did not come in before. He opened his eyes by a certain process, but we hear no more of Jesus speaking to him until he is cast out by the religious men of the world. Then He says, as it were, 'I will come in now to your circumstances'. When He heard that they had cast him out He finds him. I want the brethren to think of this and see if it does not fit in with your experience. The Lord says constantly, "am I now come". In Joshua it was at a given point at Jericho where it was needed. Much had preceded the incident and much had preceded this incident, too, in the man's history. So it is much precedes in each of our histories, when the Lord comes in in this specific way and says, 'I want now to be in you in a certain relation. It is essential to your present welfare; it is to your blessing and essential to My testimony that I am to be in you as the Son of God'. What a thought that is! He says to him after finding him, "dost thou believe on the Son of God?" That is the question asked by the Lord. I do not think there is one in this room that the Lord would not ask that question did He have the opportunity. The man is an outcast religiously; the Lord is honouring the fact. He honours every little bit of
{136}
suffering for Him, but when one is formally excommunicated because he is faithful to Christ, that is a great matter to Him. The Lord says, 'I want to consolidate that'. This man would never seek to get back into the associations out of which he had been cast. He says, 'I will hold him where he is', as Aaron's speaking held the children of Israel in the wilderness. The Lord would help you in the outcast's place. He will support and fortify you in it, consolidate you in that position. That is the point here. He is to be in this man as the Son of God and that makes the man for ever a fixture. "Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?" @1 John 5: 5. He is to be in this man as the Son of God and that makes this man a victor to be qualified against all attacks. After excommunication they think that they have lost something and they may hold out a bait to get him back but the Lord says, 'I will hold this man'. I will consolidate this victory; He says, 'I want to be in you as the Son of God'. The man says, "who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?" I am ready for that. Thank God He is helping greatly on this point. It is because I believe some are ready for it. This man is ready for Him. The Lord loves when we are ready for a great feature of the truth which He would bring to us. The Lord says, "Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee", thus crediting him with soul history. There is much earlier in the chapter more than we can name ourselves. You take the men of faith in @Hebrews 11, there is not one perhaps in that whole list who would have said in his days that he was a man of faith. It takes years to bring it out, so here the Lord says, "Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee. And he said, Lord, I believe". John's way is to make real believers ready for every feature of the truth. I do not believe this man would have ever made any headway had he
{137}
not accepted this new great feature of the truth -- the sonship of Christ. He believed and not only that but he worshipped Him. The Son of God is God. He is an Object of worship and faith discerns it, the man worshipped Him. Now you can see, dear brethren, how all this is constructive and it is intended to make real christians, real believers and real worshippers too. For now we have the subject of worship in chapter 4, minister of the sanctuary in chapter 6, and a worshipper of the Son of God in chapter 9, the Son of God in a man and he is a worshipper.
I come now to the last phase, that is Mary of Bethany. Christ is in her as you can understand in all the features of which I have been speaking and she adds the thought of affection; that is, she is the great lover of Jesus and what can all these features be, dear brethren, aside from this -- from a real genuine admiration of Jesus, the supreme Object of our hearts? Mary's history shows that as regards her it was Christ and Christ only, so that as the facts are stated here we have the sequential adverb repeated. "Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment". She took it. Martha was serving, Christ was in her, too, but not in this way. She had a different, a shallower apprehension of Christ than Mary, although the Lord greatly honoured Martha when He came to Bethany on a previous occasion. Martha met Him outside and He did not go further; He stayed there until Mary came there, showing that He valued Martha and would not allow any preferential thought in regard of the saints. For He loved Martha and Mary and Lazarus, they were all lovable, but then Mary was more lovable and that is what we might do well to think of. There is, dear brethren, such a thing as lovability for the divine eye, the increase of the traits of Jesus under the eye of
{138}
God. I become more and more lovable and I think that Mary became more and more lovable. She never was more lovely, I venture to say, than she was at this moment.
Now you see the movements; she took the pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, "and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment". You can see how this exceeds all that we have had, for the fact of Christ being in her leads to the filling of the house with odour. What a contributor she is to the service of the house of God! For that is the thing being led up to in John. We have the subject of worship in chapter 4, minister of the sanctuary in chapter 6, and the worshipper of the Son of God in chapter 9 and we have the house filled by this worshipper, filled with precious odour. The Spirit of God dwells on this in these verses. I believe, as I said, that Mary was never more lovely in the eyes of Jesus. The Song of Songs helps us as to these mutual love matters, how lovableness is seen both in the male and female speakers. The female speaker describes the object of her affections. She is not afraid or ashamed. She does it beautifully, finally she says He is altogether lovely, supremely so. You cannot add to it. But then he says wonderful things about her, about the prince's daughter. So again in @Psalm 45 one of the great Maschil psalms -- a teaching psalm -- the word is, "So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty", that good thing, then you are more lovely as you leave your family relations, forsake your father's house and your own people. So long as you fail to be weaned away from the natural there are blemishes, you are not quite so lovely as you might be unless you have done this. As you abandon all these you are more lovely, "So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty". Is it not attractive, dear brethren, to abandon all that causes blemishes? We know how much is expended
{139}
today on beautification of people's persons, removing natural blemishes, but why take on blemishes? The Lord shows how to remove them. He delineates the kind of beauty that He loves. I think Mary represents all that. She is beautiful in the eyes of Christ and He defends her. We have spoken today of the cloud by day and the fire by night; it is a matter of protection. What is so valuable as the tabernacle, as His saints are under God's eye? What is so valuable must be protected by the cloud and the protection enables God to have a residence there. The cloud is on the tent in the first reference and then the glory filled the tabernacle, that is the divine residence. What is inside involves all the beautiful texture of the fabrics and the gold and the beautiful embroidery -- all that is within. The glory filled all that. "The king's daughter is all glorious within". I believe Mary of Bethany is fit for the finest palace of the King and she is so valued in the King's eyes that He protects her. One begins to criticise her, she knew something about that. Her sister had criticised her before. Alas! for the bitter criticisms current amongst us. But now there is the criticism of Judas, and the Lord graciously extends the wing of His protection over one so valuable. He says, She has kept this until the day of my burial. She must not be interfered with. I believe there is no danger on these lines. We shall be divinely protected by God against the attacks of the enemy and then we shall be thus secured for God that Christ may be in us in all these features, and so fixity is understood and it goes on into eternity where the glory is to be "in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages".
{140}
HOUSEHOLDS IN THE NEW TESTAMENT (1)
@Genesis 18: 1 - 11; @Genesis 19:14; @Genesis 7:7; @1 Samuel 1:20; @1 Samuel 3:11 - 13
J.T. I was thinking as our brother was reading the scripture as to how the scriptures approach the subject of households in the New Testament. Paul seems to be the vessel through whom the subject is introduced properly, and how it arose from his being invited into a house. If one lived in Abraham's time, and were invited into his house, one would find order there. But Ishmael was there. There is a slight discrepancy there -- I mean to say, Ishmael was there, and when Isaac was born he was mocking. In the New Testament the apostle is invited into a house and no one on earth could be a better judge of a household at that time than he. The householder says, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there", @Acts 16: 15. Now that seems to be the start of the thought in the New Testament from the standpoint of apostolic ministry. The apostle is one capable of judging a house. He is invited in on the ground of the householder being judged by him to be faithful.
A.R. Do you mean faithful in the measure in which she has taken in Paul's ministry?
J.T. The householder's heart was opened by the Lord. The Lord opened her heart to listen to the things spoken by Paul. And she was baptised, and then she says, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house". Now, that seems to be an excellent start for the thought. The householder has had her heart opened by the Lord to attend to the things spoken by Paul and she accepts the divine requirement. Now we have in that chapter, @Acts 16, the subject remarkably opened up; as if the apostle had such congenial circumstances in Lydia's house that
{141}
all believers¬ houses must be secured. The next one that comes up is the jailor. Paul talked about his house, as if the thought arose from what he had found in Lydia's house. He carried it in his mind. How the Lord met with it in His service here! He met with the assembly in principle. He found the jailor and that set things moving. So that the thought would be to get a concrete example of a household.
A.F.M. Do you think a little stress might be laid on the word 'when'? "When she had been baptised".
J.T. Paul is the one the Lord used to open it up. See if Abraham's house came up to Lydia's. There does not seem to be any Ishmael here. I am stressing Lydia because she is the first household mentioned to be baptised. The man most qualified to judge is Paul, and the next opportunity he has of helping a soul, he says, "thy house".
Rem. We feel the need of being helped on the matter.
J.T. Well, if I come here to Chatham, the subject is good, the next thing is the house. What house am I to go into here, to start this matter? Come into my house, that is the next thing. If I get good entertainment there, the next place I go to, I want to get the believer's house.
Rem. It is remarkable how the verse is quoted in christendom: "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved". The better translation is, "thou and thy house".
J.T. There are two "thous". "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house" (verse 31). The first "thou" is as a saved person. That is, my own personal salvation must be settled first. The second "thou" links me with my house. It is not one stroke. I am saved first, and as a saved person my house will be brought in.
{142}
A.N.W. That is emphasised with Lydia, because she was the one that attended to the word. But in baptism she carries the household with her.
J.T. Quite so. You will follow what was pointed out, that there are two "thous" there. The first "thou" is my own matter, my own salvation.
A.Pf. "And when she had been baptised and her house".
J.T. Quite. The head is distinctly separate. They said to the jailor, "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved". That is one thing, the next thing is, "thou, and thy house". Salvation for yourself first. It is as a saved man his house is saved. They are not saved together. The man is saved first, and then you can count on God coming in.
Rem. So Abraham has a wonderful transaction with God prior to chapter 18. It is remarkable what is going on in his own soul.
J.T. Quite so. He had an Ishmael there. You must not forget that. It is a terrible element in the house. The truth is that Abraham was not saved in the full sense of the word or he would have had an exercise about it.
A.P.T. Is there any adjustment needed in Zacchaeus? You recall the scripture in Luke where there was some difference in the Lord's mind, in Zacchaeus wanting to see Him and the Lord coming into his house.
J.T. The Lord did not seem to have any hesitation about going into his house. He, rather, presents it to Zacchaeus as a premium. "Make haste and come down, for today I must remain in thy house". It is a premium. I do not think the Lord had any hesitancy about it. As soon as the Lord is in the house He says, "salvation is come to this house". The man is saved. The Lord was there and salvation had come to the house. The second "thou" in the jailor's
{143}
case implies that his own matter is taken up first. It is the believer's house that is saved.
N.W. What does it mean for the man to be saved first?
J.T. It means his salvation. "Thou and thy house".
N.W. But you have more in your mind than merely saved in the ordinary sense of the word.
J.T. It is always an open matter. It is applied as already effective. "To us that are saved" (@1 Corinthians 1: 18); it is a progressive thing.
A.R. Whereas in Abraham's house, he had Sarah and Hagar, and when the boy was weaned Ishmael mocked. He was interfering with Paul's ministry and had to be cast out.
J.T. Quite so. There were two elements there. They were interfering with the state of the house.
Rem. Does that fit in with @Acts 16? The first "thou" was there. It only enhances what you say about the "thou and thy house". Ishmael was there because of Abraham's failure. Is not your thought the moral adjustment of the head first?
J.T. That is right. And Abraham had come to the idea of salvation in chapter 18, but still Hagar and Ishmael were there. So that there is a serious discrepancy and it only enhances what we are saying Get the head right first.
Ques. Are the moral qualities seen in that Lydia attended to the things spoken by Paul? Does that lay the basis for it?
J.T. That is the beginning. "And a certain woman, by name Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, who worshipped God, heard; whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul. And when she had been baptised and her house". The thought is left with her first. When she had been baptised, not when she and her house had been baptised. The thought of the head is there. As
{144}
you say, the head must be right. When the apostle has to say to the next person that needs salvation, it seems to me he carries the thought with him of what he enjoyed in the house of Lydia. "Having gone out of the prison, they came to Lydia" (verse 40).
Rem. On her side she constrained them. There are only two occasions where that word is used. In @Luke 24 they constrained Him.
J.T. Quite so. How perfectly at home he would be there.
A.R. Is it your thought that Paul has in his mind the thought of the assembly? It is worked out in households first.
J.T. I think that is the way it stands. The fact that he brings it in, as if he would secure the house; and then it goes on to say (verse 32) that "they spoke to him the word of the Lord, with all that were in his house. And he took them the same hour of the night and washed them from their stripes; and was baptised, he and all his straightway. And having brought them into his house he laid the table for them, and rejoiced with all his house, having believed in God". It seems to me that the apostle would say this is a complete victory, following up what we enjoyed in Lydia's house. This is a complete victory.
We have this man's house. "Having believed in God ...". He is like Abraham. It is the full position of the believer.
T.W. Might this matter of the household work out where the husband is an unbeliever? Would the principle work out that the household might be for the Lord as in Lydia's case, if her husband were an unbeliever?
J.T. We do not know about her husband. Where the husband is an unbeliever it is extremely difficult.
T.H. In view of the apostle coming to the Corinthians, he seemed to secure entrance there by means of the households of Chloe and Stephanas; and it
{145}
seems that he had households in his mind all along in his ministry.
J.T. He is the household man. He introduces the matter, and evidently from having experienced the thing. What a great thing it is.
B.P. Is it significant that baptism has such a place?
J.T. It is. Paul says, The Lord did not send me to baptise, but to preach the gospel. "I baptised also the house of Stephanas, for the rest I know not if I have baptised any other". As if, besides baptising Crispus and Gaius, that were the one thing he would do.
C.A.M. This matter of the "thou" is a very interesting thing. When we have to do with a house -- even the Lord had to do with a house -- it seems to be an important thing as to what the head of the house is personally. We are to respect the work of God in the children.
J.T. I think there is a word in it. It seems to be the thought of God to secure the head, to have to do with him, and then his house.
W.F.K. Sarah takes the initiative in casting out Hagar and Ishmael.
J.T. That helps as to salvation being in the house.
Abraham is hardly equal to the position. He would have retained Hagar and Ishmael. He was hardly saved in that sense, although one would be slow to say much. It says, "he will command ... his household after him". Things would get right. The house would not be right till then.
A.S. Sarah would represent the subjective side. Evidently there was a work of God going on in her soul regarding Ishmael.
J.T. Quite so.
A.F.M. The word 'saved' occurs in @Exodus 14. "Thus Jehovah saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians" (verse 30). They were in that
{146}
way delivered out of Egypt. Is not that the object in salvation? Referring to Hagar and Ishmael, they were of Egyptian origin. Would not salvation today be entire separation from the world?
J.T. What is Egyptian has to be cast out. The word 'cast' is to be noted. It is a strong word. There is no allowance of Egyptian principles in the house. That is what makes Abraham's house so precarious. Although he would command his house after him, there were those elements there and Sarah had to take the lead in the matter. She represents the subjective element. She represents the wife and she is a good example as to how a wife may put things right.
A.R. It does not say that anything had to be cast out of Lydia's house, or the Philippian jailor's house.
J.T. No.
R.W.S. Why is this set out in a condition other than husband and wife?
J.T. Because so many houses are like Lydia's, where the husbands are dead or the like. God takes account of it. It is a difficult matter. It made it all the greater triumph. "Whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul". That was the right way to meet that condition. It is the same sort of thing in chapter 18, and tests Paul about the people that were there. He saw what was needed to open her heart; not simply to hear the gospel, but to attend to the things Paul said.
C.A.M. I was impressed with what you were saying. It seems to be such an answer to Satan in this section. You were referring to the fact that God had something in this place. Here is a woman that was giving her ear in the right direction, even if she did not have a head, and listening to the apostle.
J.T. By listening to him she would get the mind of God. He spoke about the household, too.
B.P. The man was in his mind when he saw the
{147}
vision of the man of Macedonia standing, and saying, "Pass over into Macedonia and help us".
J.T. It seems so. It would be a great test to the apostle that the one outstanding convert was a woman. But being a woman, she becomes a head.
She attended to the things spoken by Paul. She is a householdly woman. There is nothing said about her house, or her children, but she would be capable of managing a house. Come into my house if you reckon that I am faithful. That is wonderful as to the humility of the woman.
Rem. In the beginning there was Eve, who was not, perhaps, subject to Adam in recognising the head. In the first house in christianity we get those recognising the head.
J.T. This is the one the Spirit of God takes up to record for us.
E.B. Why do you think it is that God selected a jailor?
J.T. Because his office would make him a very hard man. These cases are cited so that we might not be discouraged in hard soil. He is the last man you would think of, the way he treated the apostle Paul.
E.B. He was not being a head to his house.
A.S. This characterised the assembly in Philippi, "no assembly communicated anything to me in the way of giving and receiving save ye alone", @Philippians 4: 15.
J.T. They were on the giving line.
T.H. When Elisha met the widow he says, "what hast thou in the house?" @2 Kings 4: 2. Would that not be most helpful?
J.T. The Old Testament helps to elucidate the New. His master had to do with a house, too. Elijah tested out the head of the house. "Make me thereof a little cake first", @1 Kings 17: 13. Are you ready to make God first and yourself second? No one can be head aside from that.
{148}
B.P. Would the ultimate of that be having the assembly in your house?
J.T. Well, that is a great point. Elijah tested out the head of the house. She was a widow, taken up, you might say, like Lydia. He is sent to Zarephath and he finds her gathering sticks, preparing to eat the little she had and die. A very poor case, but how well she turns out. She entertains the prophet. In fact, the word used is 'maintains'. "I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee". And she does. Now with Elisha in @2 Kings 4, as he begins his ministry, there is another widow. The house is brought up again, and the next woman is the Shunammite. She has a house, and when the son dies he walks about in the house, as much as to say, 'Is there anything in the house that is the secret of this boy's death?' The Scriptures are full of it, only let us get a concrete example in christianity. The head of it invites the great servant on the ground of his own judgment of it, for after all what does God think of my house? That is the idea. I am there on God's terms.
-.McC. One is impressed with the character of Lydia's invitation. Not only to come into her house, but to abide. If I asked a brother to come into my house, I would be sure that there was nothing there that would be out of accord.
J.T. If his eye has to rest on novels, it is no honour to him at all. So that the service of God is to be in the house on divine terms.
Rem. So that we may speak a word in that house about something.
J.T. There is liberty there.
A.T. Does 1 Timothy run concurrently with this ministry? The apostle says, that if anyone aspires to exercise oversight, he must know how to conduct his own house well. If I had a radio in my house, I would not be conducting my house well.
{149}
Rem. Putting it in the attic is not casting it out.
J.T. The word 'cast' is very striking. In @Exodus 15 we have Jehovah showing Moses wood, and he cast it in. That is what is due to all that is sinful. Cast it, use force.
A.R. When Paul went to the Philippian jailor's house he "spoke to him the word of the Lord, with all that were in his house". He is speaking the word of the Lord.
J.T. Quite so. It is always a question of authority when you bring the Lord in. And what comes out is that the jailor rejoiced. He is so pleased with all that came to him. He "rejoiced with all his house". They all joined in.
A.F.M. It says, "with all his house". Would they all share?
J.T.. That is the point. The word 'house' -- the whole house is in it.
Rem. With Lydia it is her intelligence first, and then her affections. She first heard and then the Lord opened her heart, as if the Lord valued her intelligence.
Ques. Does it not emphasise the love side in the jailor's household? He lays the table. It is a service of love.
J.T. The jailor is doing a woman's work. He lays the table. It is to bring out how thoroughly serviceable he was. He would do anything for these men.
B.P. Was not that commendable?
J.T. Yes.
Rem. The jailor's wife is included in the house.
J.T. If there was a wife.
Rem. I thought that she would be in the background on account of the head being saved. She would take the second place.
J.T. Quite.
Ques. Do you not think there is a lack of inviting the men of God into our houses?
{150}
J.T. The servant of God represents God.
C.A.M. I was very much impressed with that. You cannot patronise a servant of God. It is a remarkable test when a servant of God comes into the household.
A.T. That woman in Kings makes room for him. He is not an ordinary visitor. There are certain classes amongst the people of God. There are those worthy of double honour.
J.T. Quite so. You see what she says about him in @2 Kings 4: 8. "And it came to pass on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a wealthy woman; and she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was, that as oft as he passed by, he turned in thither to eat bread. And she said to her husband, Behold now, I perceive that this is a holy man of God, who passes by us continually. Let us make, I pray thee, a small upper chamber with walls, and let us set for him there a bed, and a table, and a seat, and a lampstand; and it shall be when he cometh to us, he shall turn in thither". That is the way she looked at it. He would be passing by. The Lord comes before us, His servants come before us; do we not discern them?
Rem. "She said to her husband". We do not want to do this independently.
J.T. She discerns who he was. "I perceive that this is a holy man of God".
A.R. She put the boy on the bed of the man of God. She saw that there was virtue in him.
J.T. Quite so. That brings out the servants of God are not to be patronised. Lydia is the great model for us. She appeals to the apostle, it is a question of your judgment of me, whether I am worthy.
R.W.S. He resisted. He did not say, 'I will not come'. But she had to force him to do so; as if she might never get another chance.
{151}
J.T. The Shunammite is the gainer, as was the other widow in Elijah's time. They are all gainers. Wherever the servants of God are accorded their place, we always gain.
Rem. And on the contrary the locality may suffer on account of not doing that. It is because they needed it in the place. They needed the servant there.
J.T. God knows that, too. God says to Elisha, "I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee".
A.Pf. The Lord invited Himself to Zacchaeus¬ house. Is that the contrast you find?
J.T. Just so. The Lord knew Zacchaeus would be glad. It was an honour.
T.H. He "received him with joy".
J.T. Quite so. "Today salvation is come to this house".
T.W. Would you say something about @Luke 10 the son of peace in the house?
J.T. That is a good suggestion. That is a word for the servants. If they go into a house and the son of peace is there, their peace shall rest upon it. It is an important thing to have a right base. That is the idea of Lydia. That was Paul's place. He did not stay with the jailor; she is the son of peace.
J.C. There are two houses here in Philippi.
J.T. We must get concrete evidence of this in Chatham.
B.P. There were six houses in Toronto where the breaking of bread could be held.
J.T. The son of peace is a matter of importance. You come to a town to serve. It is a great matter where you are going to lodge. You do not want to be hampered. Hence the Lord says, "If there is a son of peace there, stay there".
Rem. If there is. As though there were certain moral conditions connected with it.
{152}
J.T. Lydia is the thought. Paul went back to Lydia's house. That was his base.
C.A.M. In connection with this matter of the son of peace. As you say, when a servant goes into a place, he does not want to be hampered. This matter of salutation enters into all that. One of the things that greatly restricts in connection with this matter is that in some houses salutation is not properly considered. You are hampered if the house was not godly in its salutation. If you found those there that you could not greet, you are hampered. Would you go with that?
J.T. I do, indeed.
Rem. Would that show that there are not those peaceful conditions in the house? If I am having people in my house whom I ought not to have, there is something that is wrong there.
J.T. Quite so. I think Elisha walking in the house is the point to notice. The boy died. Why has that boy died? God gave him and yet he died. Is it because the conditions in the house were not suitable to bring him up for God?
Rem. Evidently they were not right. The father sent him to the mother.
J.T. The father seemed to be powerless. Why did he not look after the boy?
A.R. He says, "my head!"
Rem. The matter of going to and fro in the house seems to come after he had begun to work on the boy.
J.T. It looks as if he were saying to himself, 'Are the household conditions right? Is there a skeleton in the cupboard?' Something that is secretly working to damage the young.
A.N.W. The Lord definitely put some young people out of the house before He raised the young girl.
J.T. Quite. They had flute-players there. That was nothing to have in the house.
{153}
A.T. He did not put Peter's wife's mother out. You were saying that he put certain ones out of the house. I was wondering if there was another way of touching it.
J.T. Quite so. It was only a malady. He cured her. She was a good case. The Lord is ready to help at any time.
Rem. In Martha's case, the Lord was finally unhampered there.
J.T. Finally. She not only criticised Mary, but the Lord Himself. She received him, but it was very chilly inside.
-.McC. If you are invited to our town, and there are several homes open to you, and they are equally desirous to have you, what would the test be?
J.T. These visits are contemplated, so that God goes before, and you find a Cornelius or a Lydia whom God is actually working in. That furnishes a base for His operations.
-.McC. And you, as the invited, would discern that?
J.T. I should.
Ques. Whom would you approach in the house where moral conditions are not right?
J.T. The head.
Rem. Help us on that. The Lord spoke to Jacob, "Arise, go up to Bethel". He commanded his household.
A.N.W. In regard to commanding his household, it says in @Genesis 18: 19, "For I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice, in order that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he hath spoken of him".
J.T. Just so. You have in your mind the difference between the children and the household. I think the household is wider. It includes all that are under the head. Children have a special place. The 
{154}
household includes the servants. It would include the whole order of things under a head.
A.N.W. Everything that he has a right to control.
J.T. Quite so. Take Abraham's house. The oldest servant of his house, the one that was sent out to seek the bride for Isaac, there is the suggestion there that he belongs to the household.
A.F.M. Would you mind saying something about the service of the sons of the widow, and of the sons of the prophet, as to how they were brought in?
J.T. I think the time is up. We will follow on with that tonight.
{155}
HOUSEHOLDS IN THE NEW TESTAMENT (2)
@Hebrews 11:7; @1 Samuel 1: 20, 23 - 28; @2 Kings 4:1 - 7
J.T. The burden that is on the hearts of many parents, which I gather from one and another, is how young ones are to merge in the assembly. They come along in the truth and then desire not to go further. The thought is what instruction Scripture gives, where the responsibility lies when it descends particularly on children. It would seem as if Noah in this respect would fit in as a man who appeared in a crisis. The world of that day was at its worst, and judgment was in the mind of God for it. What exercises he had! He was moved with fear. That is the comment of the Spirit of God, in the New Testament, and in the end of chapter 6 and 7 of Genesis. He was moved with fear and prepared an ark for the saving of his house. His exercise was for his house. And then another thing is the number of households that are headless, in the sense of the man being head: some not in the truth, others not living; how the wife may act, and how she would be responsible so that the gain of the household should not be lost to the children, and correspondingly, that the assembly should not suffer. In the case of Hannah we have the husband living, but the exercises are all hers as regards the child and the desire then reached.
A.L. Is Noah a type of what we had in the previous reading? It says that he walked with God.
J.T. That is right. The carrying out of what we had. The need was in his house. He had come into it already.
Rem. Would you say in Hannah's house the husband's affections were divided? He had two wives.
{156}
J.T. Quite. He had a great opinion of himself, too. He said, "Am not I better to thee than ten sons?"
A.R. In reference to the first scripture that was read in Hebrews, do you think the possibilities of the household are very great? Noah judges this world in the building of the ark, but it is a generation for another world coming up.
J.T. Quite so, and if that is to be there must be a going in. The word was to him. The ark should be built and then Jehovah says to him, "But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt go into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons¬ wives with thee". That is an understanding between a head of a house and God. There is no command directed to the children. It is all to Noah, and then it says in verse 7 of the next chapter, "And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons¬ wives with him, into the ark". And then it is said in verse 13, "On the same day went Noah and Shem and Ham and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark"; and then in verse 16, "and Jehovah shut him in". These verses show that there is a going in to be there. The ark may be taken to be a type of the assembly as going through, carrying the precious things of God, the persons, to establish another world. There is to be a going in each by himself, all under the command given through the head.
A.P.T. Following out the thought of going in, in verse 7; in chapter 8: 18 they go out. Is that your thought: the positive result of going in?
J.T. Well, exactly. They go in and they go out.
The going out is under the Lord's direction, too. On the renewed earth, not to seek one's pleasure but into a new world.
A.F.M. Look at that verse in @John 10, "I am the
{157}
door: if any one enter in by me, he shall be saved, and shall go in and shall go out and shall find pasture" (verse 9).
J.T. The idea is there. There is the thought of going in. The point is the door. "If any one enter in by me, he shall be saved". Christ is the door. Well, that fits in with @Genesis 6 and 7. Salvation depended on going in.
B.P. Would you say that Jacob as a young man learned that it was the gate of heaven?
J.T. That is good.
C.A.M. I was struck with the expression used. It was really of the nature of a crisis. Our protection in a crisis would be our going in. There is a tendency in a crisis to be occupied with all kinds of things outside; whereas, really, the only safe place is inside.
J.T. Quite so. The Lord alludes to it. In the day that Noah entered into the ark. That was an epoch. That is really a crucial matter. Young people go on to a point and then determine they will not go in. They want to retain their liberty, but the enemy only seeks to get them into bondage.
Rem. It says they go into the city in Revelation and after that it says "without are dogs". Would that correspond with what we have to deal with today? What is inside and what is outside.
J.T. "Without are dogs". "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life".
Rem. A person may be in the room, but you speak of being in the thing experimentally. In fellowship would be the step inside, would it?
J.T. Exactly. Paul says, what have I to do with judging those outside? It is what is inside. You get it running through Scripture, and with Noah you get the thought not only of his house. "They went to Noah into the ark". They all looked up to Noah. It is the work of God. We have to reckon on that.
{158}
You might think Noah would say, 'Well, look at these creatures. How are they going to come?' He cannot sit somewhere to catch them. Well, you must trust to God to move in them or they will not come. That is a word to the parents. It says in verse 8, "Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowl, and of everything that creeps on the ground, there came two and two unto Noah into the ark, male and female, as God had commanded Noah". How did that happen? It was God.
Rem. There was a period of seven days in verse 4. Jehovah says, "For in yet seven days I will cause it to rain on the earth ...". It was a very short time for that whole creation to get in.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. That seven days would be a period, would it not? A period of time in which the Lord would work.
J.T. Quite so. You can count on that. Noah would know them. He did not name them. He might think, how can I expect them to come? They are not said to be wild or carnivorous, but what a test that would be to him. He says, not one of the men around will come. But the beasts and fowl and creeping things came, God saw to that.
J.S. It is a very great encouragement to faith, to see the movements of the creatures to the ark. Two by two, male and female.
J.T. Quite so. It casts you upon God. If He does not do that, you cannot expect it. There are no young people mentioned in connection with the ark. They are all mature. He could not say to Shem, 'Do this or that'. Yet Shem was amenable. He did exactly as he was told, and in regard to the cattle, they all came. Noah, you may be sure, would be very much cast on God.
J.S. He who gave them being worked in them.
J.T. Quite so.
{159}
J.T.Jr. Why do the sons of Noah come first?
J.T. They are next to him in intelligence. Their names are given. They are in separate households and yet he is head of them. But they come nearest to him in intelligence.
A.N.W. Are you implying that he had more to do with God about Shem than Shem had direct?
J.T. I should think so. We read of the God of Shem later. Doubtless, he was a godly man, but it was all put on the head. The direction was to Noah.
B.P. Noah found favour.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. So there is fruit Godward. His sons come into view.
J.T. Quite so. In chapter 9 they are blessed, so that there is a link with God, but all issuing from Noah's personal exercise. He walked with God, and he was perfect amongst his generations.
T.H. Would you mind helping me in that he was warned oracularly?
J.T. That is a credit to him. The word 'oracular' would mean that he was a man capable of receiving it in that way; God did not have to go out of His way. Samuel did not discern God's voice at the outset, but Noah did. It is an honour.
A.P.T. Is there any thought of headship in John's gospel? In verses 38 and 39 of chapter 1 it says, "Rabbi, ... where abidest thou? He says to them, Come and see. They went therefore, and saw where he abode; .." and in chapter 4 you get the same thought with the woman. I was wondering if there was any thought in the gospel.
J.T. That is right. You get so many examples of persons in whom Christ was. If Christ is in me, He is my Head. He was in John the baptist sacrificially, and that is how he spoke of Him. He says, "Behold the Lamb of God!" And the two disciples heard him speaking, and followed Jesus, and they say to Him,
{160}
"Rabbi, ... where abidest thou?" They called Him Teacher. John called Him that. They did not call Him Lamb. They spoke rightly. They said, We need to be taught, we need more teaching. They called Him Rabbi. We are told in the scripture that that is what is meant. They needed teaching, and, of course, there is not one here who would say he did not need to be taught.
A.R. In @Genesis 7 the great feature of headship is seen in Noah.
J.T. Quite so.
A.R. He is head of his wife and all the creatures are coming to Noah.
J.T. There is no suggestion of rebellion at all in the ark, nor is there a suggestion of children. When we think of the young people merging in the assembly we must not think of them as children. No one has a place in the assembly except a man. The idea must be in the man. Maybe the brethren do not think that is right. What do you say about that, Mr. W.?
A.N.W. I think that is right. They are not in view in Jordan, whereas in crossing the Red Sea Moses says, "We will go with our young and with our old".
J.T. When we come into fellowship in the book of Numbers it is from twenty years old and upward. All in fellowship are to be men.
Rem. They are supposed to be able to think for themselves and do for themselves.
J.T. So that we do not say, He is a wonderful boy. If he is in fellowship he must be a man.
J.S. Is that what in meant in @John 1? "Thou shalt be called Cephas".
J.T. Quite so.
J.T.Jr. The babes were in Corinth.
J.T. Paul says, "I ... have not been able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as to ... babes in Christ".
H.A.S. What about the lambs in @John 21?
{161}
J.T. John in his epistle classifies us as children, that is, when he says,"My children". It is a dignified thought. They are little ones, but not in the sense of being unable to speak for themselves. The principle is, "He is of age". Twenty is of age. He is of age spiritually. He might be only thirteen, but he may be of age.
T.H. So, in the house some of our offspring take their place with us in fellowship -- it would be quite different from those who have not taken their place.
J.T. They are brethren now, and it is to be understood that they are brethren. Samuel, in the second reference to his ministry, wore a linen ephod. That would not suit at the football game.
Rem. He would have to take it off or not go to the football game.
A.P.T. It requires great spiritual ability to sit down at the table with your wife and your daughter but at the same time they are your sisters. It requires great spiritual power to understand that.
J.T. A man does not look at his wife in the assembly as his wife, she is his sister. "Let them ask their own husbands at home", where the relationship belongs.
A.N.W. Six of the apostles were brothers, that is, three pairs of brothers.
J.T. So that spirituality was required if they were to answer to the mind of God.
A.R. You would expect young people to speak for themselves.
J.T. In New Zealand we had great difficulty because the brethren in one place were all composed of one family, and in due time the sons had to deal in discipline with their father.
C.A.M. That is a very interesting thing. It seems to involve this matter of headship, the atmosphere of a house. If the work of God in the child is not properly recognised, and you have a kind of domineering 
{162}
condition there, disaster will come to that house; and it will take place just as you say. It seems as if the work of God in the child must be greatly respected.
J.T. Quite so. @Genesis 6 is to show us that of every creature, two and two came into the ark. They came to Noah.
Rem. The official priesthood was breaking down in Samuel.
J.T. That is the next thing to look into; I can see in Noah's case, how God worked with him; the Lord worked with the creatures, we can reckon on that. Aside from it nothing can come about for God. In Hannah's case we have a household. The head is really not head, although he loved Hannah, which is to his credit; but then the exercise was all hers. He did not discredit it, but the exercise was all hers. And the instruction now is for sisters who have husbands who are not in fellowship; as to how they are to work the thing, and as to whether they are able to contribute to the house of God through their families.
H.A.S. That is a very important question with us in Chatham. Some of our sisters feel it very keenly that their husbands are not with them, and how can they carry on and win their children when their husbands are opposed to them?
J.T. Do you not think the instruction in Samuel helps?
H.A.S. Very much.
J.T. The official priesthood was corrupt, but in this first chapter that was not noted. Things were outwardly normal. They all went to the special meetings at Jerusalem for the sacrifices, and the sons of Eli were there. They are even called priests of Jehovah, for God is not yet exposing him. What He is showing us here is the exercise of a parent. Whether it touched the state of things or not, her exercises were intended to meet the great end in the service of God.
{163}
J.S. She was evidently with God.
J.T. Evidently.
A.R. Throughout the occasion in Shiloh, the Spirit of God is pleased to single out one sister.
Ques. How many do you think were at Shiloh?
J.T. A large number.
Rem. Our numbers are not so very large.
J.T. Quite so. There is one woman among all that large number. Her exercises were calculated to meet the current need.
C.A.M. It says in Corinthians, "For what knowest thou, O wife, if thou shalt save thy husband?" As if it would be a sort of constant exercise. I would like to ask about the very last sentence of this first chapter of Samuel, as to the pronoun used. It says, "And he worshipped Jehovah there". Are we right in thinking that that is to indicate that Hannah's godliness had the most wonderful result in the man?
J.T. I think it shows what an influence she had. She was the real priest in Shiloh. I think what is meant is that she influenced Eli. He was a man of that kind. She came up to Shiloh with the boy and the bullocks and the wine and told him she was the woman that prayed. She influenced Eli, so that her influence led to worship.
R.W.S. She did not have in mind the Sunday-school idea, or the young peoples¬ meetings. She wanted to present him before Jehovah.
J.T. She brought him up with offerings that referred to full manhood; not a pigeon or a turtledove, but it says, "she took him up with her when she had weaned him, with three bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a flask of wine, and brought him to the house of Jehovah to Shiloh; and the boy was young". But she was thinking of manhood. She had a man in her mind.
Rem. I heard a brother say that the reason the young people were not getting on in their souls was
{164}
because they did not have young peoples¬ meetings. This would offset that.
J.T. The Lord is helping on that point. The idea of separating children negates the manhood thought. Manhood is shut out for the moment. I have been where they had young peoples¬ meetings and the assembly meeting next door. Manhood is shut out. The boy is young, but in Hannah's mind, she has great, mature thoughts. How is he to be in the house of God save in view of being a man?
Rem. In the wilderness it was one omer of manna every day. There was no division of the manna.
J.T. The youngest child got the same amount as the father, showing that the divine thought is the same for all.
A.R. This woman starts at the highest offering and brings three of them.
J.T. Quite so. And a bottle of wine. She has the right thought. It really refers to Christ. It stimulates God, speaking reverently.
T.H. I thought Zacchaeus would be that kind of man. He had a little wine. He received him joyfully.
Rem. One bullock was offered.
J.T. Quite so. What is to be dwelt upon here is what was going on in her mind, what that boy was in her mind. That child brings out her priestly mind.
T.C. How do you account for its being called the house of Jehovah? I was wondering whether it was still the tabernacle.
J.T. Oh, it was. The tabernacle was set up in Shiloh.
A.N.W. In connection with the manhood thought, can you not recognise it with the growth?
J.T. She had man in her mind. One day she would have to make a great suit for him. He was to be a man; so that the Lord says that a woman has joy because a man is born.
-.McC. As a parent, my exercise ought to be to 
{165}
furnish material for the assembly instead of giving them an education in the world.
J.T. Quite so. And that your children are not any different from others. There are those who think their children are swans, when they are only ducks. They all have to come in for the governmental dealing of God. There is no use in anyone thinking that his child is any different. "That which is born of the flesh is flesh". And here Samuel did not know the Lord.
Rem. In connection with our children: they need to be converted even though they are brought up in christian households.
J.T. Certainly. Samuel did not yet know the Lord; so that a child may serve but God says, 'He does not know Me'. You must look for God dealing with the child. The best training will attain the desired end.
Ques. Would you say the child recognises God's voice?
J.T. She had to wait for that.
W.N. The Lord says in the gospels, "lead them to me". She brought him there.
J.T. Yes, and she had weaned him first. She never claimed to influence him there. She brought him to the house of Jehovah. She says, he is lent; but she meant that he was never to be recalled, and yet she is always accredited with him in Jehovah's mind. She is never lost sight of.
Rem. Say more about not knowing the Lord, when he appeared to be such a wonderful boy.
J.T. It is to show that the child was taken up in relation to the faith of the parent, and that his service is taken up from that point of view. There is nothing different, nothing incongruous about him. In chapter 3: 1 the boy ministers to Jehovah before Eli, as recognising the order that is still there. In verse 18 of the previous chapter Samuel ministered
{166}
before Jehovah, a boy girded with a linen ephod; and in verse 26, "And the boy Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with Jehovah and also with men". In chapter 3: 1, "And the boy Samuel ministered to Jehovah before Eli". Then in the end of chapter 3 we have the man. It says in verse 19, "And Samuel grew, and Jehovah was with him, and let none of his words fall to the ground. And all Israel, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, knew that Samuel was established a prophet of Jehovah".
A.R. Confirming what you said, the idea of the coat was that there was growth, whereas with the linen ephod there was no growth.
J.T. Quite so. There is no idea of it being too big for him, or too small for him. A priest must be a man.
Rem. It is remarkable that Eli says to him to say, "Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth". He earlier did not know the Lord.
J.T. Quite so. Eli put words into his mouth, but he does not completely use them.
Rem. In Samuel's time a vision was not frequent, and things were going out. Is that not in utter contrast today?
J.T. You mean that there are communications  now?
Rem. Yes.
J.T. Quite so. A vision was not frequent, the  word of Jehovah was rare.
A.P.T. Is it important to read the Scriptures in the morning? There is a necessity for morning reading and prayers. It is a fine thing. These cases are due to a lack of this.
J.T. That may be. Where the word of God is brought in in the house by the head the household takes on a character in which God is honoured. Every creature of God is good, and you are impressed as you start the morning with the idea of God in creation and in redemption. It is a very great thing to start
{167}
with reading and prayer. It says the creatures are sanctified by the word of God and prayer. It is delightful to God in a man of faith.
Ques. How far would we go in giving the child an opportunity in the midst of such conditions? Samuel did something.
J.T. Give him scope. Do not say to him, 'It is not for you to speak'. Samuel acted as priest before he knew the Lord, but he is coming into it. As soon as Jehovah speaks to him, He tells him about Eli and the terrible condition in the priesthood. He does not treat him as a boy.
Rem. That is very helpful, because sometimes in a wilderness setting, the tendency is to keep things from our children; but we could well understand that in the tests of the wilderness, when the fathers were going to war, that matter would be discussed.
J.T. Quite so. The children ought to be brought up as men. Do not make them believe they are too little, because they know that well enough.
-.McC. If a brother gets on his feet the first time and makes a mistake in addressing divine Persons, would you rebuke him?
J.T. You would show him the way of the Lord more perfectly. You would not rebuke him.
-.McC. There is a way to do it.
J.T. Do not tell him not to do that again. Instruct him.
Rem. And in that there is a stimulus to the saints.
J.T. Samuel has been ministering. He ministered to Jehovah, yet he did not know Jehovah. That is he is allowed to do that, as before Eli. And then the next thing, he speaks to Jehovah and receives a communication. Now notice, it is not the boy Samuel, it is Samuel. That is the well-known man. Remember, this is written long after. It is the man now, but then he is still a boy, but he has got an
{168}
ephod on. That is in the mind of God about him.
You are to think of him as a man.
E.B. Would you say that Samuel was more priestly than Eli?
J.T. Well, yes. But Eli is not exposed yet. He is still the high priest.
-.McC. So that I have small children, but my vision is to see them men, mature, for the assembly.
J.T. The first child born into this world is called a man. And that is intentional, that is the idea. "I have acquired a man with Jehovah". A woman rejoices that a man is born into the world (@John 16: 21).
A.Pf. I would like to ask a question with regard to children in one family being brought up the same way, and yet coming out so differently; some have taken their place and others are going into the world.
What is the reason?
J.T. You might say that is true in almost every family. In almost every family there is one child that seems to cause more concern than others, and it is to turn the parents more to God. Hezekiah turned his face to the wall. 'Jehovah, I can do no more. It is You now, or nothing'. That is what God is looking for. You can do nothing, but God can do everything. If we just say, 'Let it go at that', nothing happens. But when you take it up with God, God will hear and will do something for you.
B.P. Job says, "I know that thou canst do everything".
J.T. Quite so.
A.P.T. David had to feel the trial of a wayward son. The most attractive is usually the worst.
J.T. This one is not coming along, God has something to say to me in that. The great point is, let the parent take it to heart and get to the Lord about it, and some day God will give you the feeling that He has heard you. In regard of Mr. Pf.¬s remark, Hannah knew that the Lord heard her. It says in
{169}
chapter 1: 17, Eli said to her, "Go in peace; and the God of Israel grant thee thy petition which thou hast asked of him. And she said, Let thy bondwoman find grace in thy sight. And the woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more as before". She was conscious that God had heard.
Ques. Would you mind saying what the setting of @Exodus 2 is?
J.T. You mean Moses¬ mother and father? How far they went to preserve the child! And God sent a saviour, for really, Pharaoh's daughter is a saviour. She was not a characteristic daughter of Pharaoh. She was a saviour, answering to the exercises of Moses¬ mother. God provided her.
-McC. I suppose every one in this room prays. You were speaking of God hearing our prayers. Is that normal? Should we have that consciousness normally?
J.T. I cannot say that I can say that. There are many things that you ask for and ask for and ask for. God encourages you to keep on asking; but a moment comes when you say, 'I am heard this time'. Now, Hannah had this in mind when she named her child. She says, "Because I have asked him of Jehovah", and his name means, as we know, 'heard of God', or, 'asked for of God'. It is one of the most comforting things I know of: the sense that God hears you.
Rem. Praying with prayer would be a special kind of prayer.
J.T. Quite so.
A.R. You are not only thinking of the boy in praying, you are thinking of God.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. Abraham said, "Oh that Ishmael might live before thee!" That would have been a poor thing if it had been answered.
J.T. Think of a man like that being thrust into
{170}
the presence of God! Sarah says, 'Cast him out'. She had a right thought.
Ques. What have you to say about Eli's looseness? He restrained them not.
J.T. That is a sorrowful thing. It was too late now; he came too late. He said to his sons in chapter 2: 24, "No, my sons, for it is no good report that I hear: ye make Jehovah's people transgress. If one man sin against another, God will judge him; but if a man sin against Jehovah, who shall intreat for him? But they hearkened not to the voice of their father, for Jehovah was minded to slay them". But then before Eli said this, it says, he "was very old". Why did he not say it earlier? Why did the parent leave it so long? The children grew hardened.
Why did they not hear it before? Where were his eyes? He is an object lesson for parents in letting things go too long. If we are right with God, they will not become hardened. That is an outcome of a long course -- Jehovah was minded to slay them. Now we come to the sons of the widow, they help her with the vessels.
A.F.M. Do you think that they were encouraged to help with the vessels as under Elisha?
J.T. You notice that they go in and shut the door. The prophet says, "shut the door upon thee and upon thy sons, and pour out into all those vessels, and set aside what is full. And she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her sons"; that is, we get them inside with her. This is a spiritual transaction.
A.R. He says to her, "what hast thou in the house?" That would correspond with what we had this afternoon.
A.F.M. It is a contrast to what we had this afternoon.
J.T. She had the Spirit in principle, but did not value it. She did not realise how the children might 
{171}
be brought into it; the development of the Spirit in the house. She shut the door and they are shut in together, and the vessels are filled in that setting.
Ques. What does that mean?
J.T. Shutting out all else.
Rem. Like the ark.
J.T. That is right, shutting out all else.
T.H. Would the idea of a prophetic word coming to us be helpful as to the door being closed?
J.T. The idea of closing the door is shutting those in who are to be helped spiritually. "The doors shut ... through fear of the Jews". It runs through Scripture. It shuts out what is inimical.
J.H. This house seems to be in order. "What hast thou in the house?" She has nothing save a pot of oil; the house seems to be in order.
J.T. Quite so. She had influence with her sons. They were carried with her in what she was doing.
Ques. Is there anything in the thought of the neighbours? She was able to go to the neighbours and borrow their vessels.
J.W. She did not do them any harm. The fact is, she had an asset, and that was capable of being enlarged itself. The process is shutting the sons in with yourself and the vessels. The idea is eliminating fleshly things, it is @Romans 8.
J.S. It was really empty vessels that she borrowed.
J.T. Quite so.
A.R. What about her debt? She has a creditor to pay. She is to pay all her debt with this.
J.T. It is the righteous requirement of the law.
Rem. When the vessels are filled, the Spirit of God dwells in them.
J.T. They are able to pay all the debts and live besides.
J.S. So that she becomes morally wealthy here.
J.T. Quite so. The rich woman in Shunem.
 
{172}
A.P.T. There are two prophetic words to her one for the borrowing, and the other for the selling. I suppose we get more help as we go along.
J.T. Quite so. So that the opening up of this is @Romans 8.
A.F.M. We might help our children on this line, not only in praying but in leading them on in their exercises as to what is of the flesh and what is of the Spirit. In helping them, we help ourselves. We help our children in bringing these things before them.
J.T. Bring them into the thing, into spiritual enlargement. Children are usually not very happy to be shut in with their mother, but they are here.
A.D. Elisha says, "thy sons", the woman said, "my two children".
G.W. Is it right for us to have debts; to buy on credit, on the instalment plan?
J.T. This is a parable. It is a type of a christian as seen in @Romans 7, unable to meet his obligations; in @Romans 8 he is able to meet them in the Spirit.
It is a type. Scripture says, "Owe no one anything".
A.P.T. You would not want your children to sit down to a meal if you did not pay for it. It is the practical side as well as the spiritual touch.
Rem. The neighbours might be the other meetings enlargement comes from visiting other meetings.
J.T. Quite so, linking on with the neighbouring meetings.
N.W. So the young men in the house would be impressed with the continuity of that pot of oil.
J.T. They would never forget this transaction. See how little you have spiritually become enlarged.
N.W. The riches of God's inheritance in the saints.
B.P. Would it be right for the sister to have reading and prayer with the children if her husband is not with her?
J.T. Why should she not?
{173}
Rem. Children might attempt to bring in something. She is told to shut the door; the parents shut the door, not the children.
F.C. Does the head of the house enter into this?
J.T. Well, he was a prophet, she makes a point of that. "A woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets cried to Elisha saying, Thy servant my husband is dead, and thou knowest that thy servant feared Jehovah"; so that he is honoured by her.
F.C. I was wondering if the husband would have an effect on the wife.
J.T. It would seem so. She speaks well of him. She says, "thou knowest that thy servant feared Jehovah". He is mentioned in this way to show that he was a godly man. Probably she profited by that.
J.H. She knew the good qualities.
E.B. It would appear that this woman was a bankrupt, but apparently she was not.
J.T. She had some assets, and she is enlarged. If we are with God we will not be bankrupt. She had found Christ.
{174}
THE TRUTH OF THE BODY IN ITS BEARING ON THE SAINTS (1)
@Romans 12: 4, 5; @1 Corinthians 10: 17; @1 Corinthians 12: 12 - 27
J.T. It is confidently hoped that the Lord will bless our inquiry into this subject at this time: first to see the application of the body to the saints in a public way as in that setting by faith, for the Spirit is not mentioned in @Romans 12. It is a question of our public relations; and what would mark us off from ordinary bodies, for there are many such societies, is the fact we are one body by faith. And it is in Christ; one body in Christ. "Thus we, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other" (verse 5), with a view to carrying on practical service for mutual good. There is manifestly the means of help amongst the saints. We are not left to operate at our own expense. There is a means of help, manifestly; so that we have the gift of prophecy in that service. And then in @1 Corinthians 10, following the same line, we are committed to the breaking of bread, and are, being many, one body as partakers; as a matter of our committal to the position; so as to attach our uprightness and honesty in the fellowship. And then in chapter 12 the truth seen in relation to the Spirit as vital power; baptised in the power of the one Spirit into the one body and all being made to drink into the one Spirit; so as being merged together and set in the position, the truth of the body might work in an automatic way, so that we appear to be Christ's, so much so that we are *the* Christ. The idea is the Spirit; the drinking consequent upon it. That is what I had in mind.
A.R.S. In the early days the truth of the one body was really dwelt on. Mr. Darby brought in how
{175}
the body was here upon earth and the Head in heaven.
J.T. That is the final thought that we come to in Colossians and Ephesians; and, of course, as it was then brought out, it is a question of the recovery of the truth and the great position of the assembly. What is always so needed is how the brethren come into this matter practically.
Ques. Would it be a matter of the responsible side? Perhaps this afternoon you had more the side of privilege.
J.T. Well, it would work out that way in Ephesians. The body is for the expression of Christ as Head. The assembly is mentioned first as the great general thought that is to prevail, but it is His body for the expression of Christ.
A.R.S. That is quite important; for the expression of Christ.
J.T. It is; and I think it brings out the necessity of our coming into it in a practical way, so that we might be available for this very position, that Christ is in expression, Himself, in us. So that Romans is the beginning from our side; Ephesians is the full thought. It is a very initial thought in Romans. "One body in Christ".
A.R.S. If we are to get real benefit, we have not only to hear what you are saying, but we have to assimilate it, take it in; so that it might come out in us.
J.T. Quite so.
A.P.T. While the truth of the body had not yet been fully revealed, why is it said, "why dost thou persecute me?" @Acts 9: 4?
J.T. Well, just to draw attention to the fact that they were His body. It is the first announcement we have of it, the Lord regarding the saints as Himself. It is a very forceful way of bringing the thing to attention; the allusion being to the saints whom Paul was dragging before the tribunals. It was all
{176}
very practical. So that as I am thinking of this now, it is a question of how I go into the houses of the saints; when I meet them on the street; they are Christ. That is the great general thought. But Romans is the doctrinal side, so that we have to pay attention to how it is presented.
Ques. Does the fact that the body having many members and all these members under the control of the Head suggest sympathetic and intelligent service to Christ and one another?
J.T. That is how it comes out here. It is more the status, the setting in Christ. We have not the Head here. The question arises whether we are ready to serve one another, the services that we may render to one another. We start with the truth of the body.
Rem. Would you distinguish between the thought of members in @Romans 12, and @1 Corinthians 12; the way it is to be taken in both chapters?
J.T. It is the same thought. "Thus we, being many, are one body in Christ". It is a question now not of members of Christ yet, but of one another. Romans would consider how we look at the saints, so as to serve one another.
A.R. And as serving one another we look at them in Christ.
J.T. That is the thought. I think "in Christ" is our status. It is a delivering thought. We are not a body as freemasons are. We have this position which really takes us out of the world in a moral way. The link is in faith; so that we are taken at once out of the realm of human understanding, and yet it is in the eyes of men. We are to serve one another, we are objects to one another; so that we are to owe no one anything, but love. That is the obligation that stands.
C.A.M. I suppose the use of the word 'body' in that way is used differently from the way it is used
{177}
in the world. A body of people means nothing more than a group of people. Here it impresses you that it is used following all the teaching in this epistle as to our own bodies.
J.T. That is the way it would work out. The book being a foundational book, it is intended to lead us there, but on the divine foundation. And so when we come to this chapter, what is in mind is to present our bodies a living sacrifice; and the thought of the body is taken up and applied to the saints, so that it becomes very practical; and then the point is to serve. As it says, "But having different gifts, according to the grace which has been given to us, whether it be prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith; or service, let us occupy ourselves in service; or he that teaches, in teaching", etc. (verses 6, 7). It is a question of how I am to serve the saints, and I am to clothe them in this way as one body in Christ. I am already come to an understanding about myself, and in this chapter my body is to be presented a living sacrifice so that I now follow the thought in serving the saints. I clothe them with this great thought.
A.R. I was wondering as to the idea of accept ability. It would help me to understand the truth of the position that all the other saints are acceptable to God in that sense.
J.T. I think it is included in the thought of one body in Christ. It is not yet members of Christ, but each one members one of the other. It is the brethren as I regard them. I can see this truth considers the idea of proximity in our localities, whether we are recognising those that are near, and whether we are governed mutually by this thought.
E.P. Would that come out in the apostle Paul in the way Ananias served him?
J.T. One can see what an important member he would be. The Lord had told Ananias about Paul;
{178}
what great thoughts He had as to him. How the brethren would be impressed with the importance of this member, and that he should be served properly. There was no loss in Damascus. The saints are to be viewed in that light. They are not going to suffer anything on account of me.
A.B.P. Ananias laid his hands on him.
J.T. Ananias would clothe him with the Lord's own word to him. On the other hand Saul would remember that this brother is a member of Christ. He is Christ in character.
A.F.M. They were also rendering a good service to Paul in their mode of his escape from Damascus.
J.T. I think they were. They let him down carefully. They would think of the preciousness of the contents of the basket. He alludes to it himself. And it was through a window; his outlook would not be blurred by what they were doing.
C.A.M. There were likely two sides that would strike Saul: that he had been doing violence to that body so precious to Jesus, and this slow education of how he formed a part of it.
J.T. He would remember the words of the Lord when He spoke to him first. "Why dolt thou persecute me?" Well, this brother, Ananias -- he is recognised. I must regard him in that way. He laid his hands on him and said, "Saul, brother". It would be the Lord's touch.
Ques. Is it not a question, too, of showing what an office is? Ananias would have to learn what his office was and Saul his, as members.
J.T. That is the way it would work out. Ananias would have his own thoughts about Saul, and Saul would have his thoughts about Ananias. Saul's thoughts about Ananias would be governed by what the Lord said to him, and so with Ananias.
J.H.E. Would you say that in order for this service to be rendered to Saul he had to be submissive?
{179}
It was a basket that they carried away the dead in. Some brother may not be submissive enough to go into the basket.
J.T. He says it was through a window. His vision would not be blurred by their action.
C.A.M. He was a spy now. He had ways that were necessary to a spy condition of things.
J.T. Quite so. It was over the wall. He certainly had them in his heart as the two spies of Jehovah had; and that is applicable to all of this. But we have to speak carefully, because we do not mean to be opposed. We pray for those in authority. We are ordering things in faith. Not that I am applying it literally at all. It is now in a moral sense. We pray for them, but our faith implies the reversal of things as they stand.
J.H.E. What you say is brought out in the next chapter. "Let every soul be subject to the authorities that are above him".
J.T. No man that has faith would overthrow the government of any country. His principle is faith. These things will happen in the future, but we are praying for the authorities now. Faith anticipates what is going to happen. It is when the Lord comes.
Rem. The apostle would seem to bring before us the character of the sacrifice.
J.T. Your body is beneath on the altar of God and the sacrifice is never to be recalled. It must enter into what we say now. I am thinking of others.
A.R. Paul never gave up the idea of setting the thing out as a model. He says, "if even in abundantly loving you I should be less loved". Kind, affectionate to one another, that is the idea.
J.T. That is what the chapter would be. I can clothe the brethren in this way. How Ananias would clothe Paul because of what the Lord said to him about Paul; and Paul would clothe Ananias in the same way. The two thoughts would meet. These
{180}
two men had the Lord's word in their hearts. They are able to take account of each other.
J.S. How one can serve another.
J.T. You can see how tenderly he dealt with him.
A.B.P. Does Paul exemplify that in the end of the epistle when he salutes the brethren at Rome?
J.T. That is good. How he kisses the brethren with a holy kiss; how he saluted the brethren. It is very prevalent throughout this last chapter and it is in keeping with what we are saying.
C.A.M. You think of the few in that city of Damascus and the wisdom that delivered them; really that wisdom worked out bodywise in that place.
J.T. Well, I think so. This brother would be regarded as a member. I believe the Lord would put it in their mind in Damascus to treat this brother according to what the Lord had said about him to Ananias. In Paul's mind it was there from the Lord, so that he would view any kindness shown him at Damascus in this light.
J.W.D. Do you not think there is a tendency among us to consider that because I am in fellowship I am entitled to the service of others, but yet I do not serve in relation to the body? A general principle is, I am under obligation to serve another on the principle of faith.
J.T. Exactly. Ananias certainly accepted obligation. His mind was different about Saul. He thought he knew better than the Lord; so ready we are to trust our own judgment about things. We can never know better than the Lord. So that the Lord put obligation upon him. It says, he "is an elect vessel unto me", @Acts 9: 15. Well, Ananias has all that in his mind; so the obligation was there, and the service was in keeping with it, and I think it went right through in the attitude of the brethren in Damascus until the time when they let him down in
{181}
the basket. It did not hinder his outlook of things; he was let down from the window.
Rem. It says he was with the disciples certain days in Damascus. It would seem that he stayed there temporarily before he began his service, and after that he entered on service.
J.T. Quite so. He lived with the brethren. Ananias was faithful with him. "Why lingerest thou? Arise and get baptised, and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name". It was the outcome of the Lord preparing Ananias to serve him. The Lord is working with each of us; these are examples. He worked with these brothers that they might serve each other. If we are in the Lord's hands we will be helped by Him to serve one another right.
Rem. It is as if each brother was responsible to the other.
J.T. Quite so. "Each one members one of the other".
R.W.S. It says in @Acts 22, Paul speaking says, "Ananias ... coming to *me* and standing by *me*, said to *me*, Brother Saul" (verse 13).
J.T. Very good. Coming to *me*, standing by *me*, and then said to *me*. How sensible he was of this brother, Ananias! How well he served him! Indeed, he calls him a devout man. We should not have known much about Ananias if it were not for Paul. He knows how to speak well of the brethren.
J.S. Do we see in the Lord's approach to Paul the exercise of the power of the kingdom for the perfection of the body? I was thinking that that would be seen also in Damascus in connection with perfection for care of the vessels. He was let down through a window in a basket.
J.T. So that Saul said, "What shall I do, Lord?" He recognised the Lord. And then the exercise of the power of the kingdom dominates all that we get in Romans. He is over all that is being done kingdom-wise; 
{182}
for in chapter 14 we are told what the kingdom is. He is putting the brethren into an administrative line, so that the saints will get the best service from one another. And I believe that that implies that I begin with the brethren that are nearest to me, even though it be a subdivision in the city. It is a question of how we serve one another. The meeting would depend on this in the kingdom administration.
J.T.Jr. Is that seen in @John 11: "Loose him and let him go"? Would that be a local matter?
J.T. That is good. The Lord could have done that. A word from Him would have removed the grave-clothes; but I think the idea is implied in the Lord saying, "Loose him and let him go". Is not he worth letting go?
A.B.P. When Saul was let go from Damascus he essayed to join himself to the brethren at Jerusalem, but they were afraid of him. Were they remiss?
J.T. Quite so. They were not afraid of him at Damascus. There might be some there saying, 'I do not know whether you should give him too much liberty yet'. But the Lord says, 'Let him go; he can be trusted'.
Rem. Ananias is not afraid of Paul any longer. He said, "Lord".
J.T. Quite so. Well, what we are saying now as to Lazarus and as to Paul's place at Damascus would help us in @1 Corinthians 10. The body there implies confidence in one another. It is not so much the point in Romans; the point in Romans is to serve one another, and how I am to do it. I am not patronising them. I am not patronising my hand when I treat it, it is part of myself. It is to get into the mind what the saints are; not only one body, but one body in Christ. They are worthy of the best service we can render.
J.W.D. It is also to be intelligent service. There are certain divisions of service; not only an obligation
{183}
of service but certain things are to govern the way I serve. There would be a set system of spiritual service set forth in a general way.
J.T. Quite so. So that you have here the list, "having different gifts, according to the grace which has been given to us, whether it be prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith; or service, let us occupy ourselves in service; or he that teaches, in teaching; or he that exhorts, in exhortation; he that gives, in simplicity; he that leads, with diligence; he that shews mercy, with cheerfulness", @Romans 12:6 - 9. That is subdivisions, as you said, enter into the idea of intelligent service. That is what is needed. So that whatever it is let us occupy our selves; there is no need for idleness. If there is a general thought in that way to serve the saints, there will be plenty of opportunity. Occupy ourselves in it.
A.R.S. Do you not get an example of how you ought to serve by the way the Lord served in @John 13? He took a towel and girded Himself. He was among them as One that served.
J.T. Very good.
A.R.S. You do not come in and lord it over the brethren, but you get down and serve them.
J.T. Quite so. The Hebrew bondman is really the basis of this chapter. The ten words (see @Exodus 34:28) are given in @Exodus 20, and Jehovah says, "thousands of them that love me". And then chapters 21, 22, 23 and 24 are all a question of the new relation in which we are set, that is, the covenant relation; and really it amplifies what we are talking about. You must begin with the thought of the bondman in @Exodus 21, it is not an enforced thing; he elects to be in it, he is pleased to be in it. It is his own election because he is entirely governed by love; he loves in every way; he is happy in the position of the bondman. Now as you run on to the
{184}
types, you will find that that lowliness is clothed with the greatest dignity (see @Exodus 28). The priesthood is really based on that, so that we lose nothing by taking the attitude of the bondman. It is the secret of true service; the more we go on in it, the more we are adorned with dignity from heaven.
C.A.M. Those passages dealing with all the damage, you would wonder if that service was going to work in these things. You might be surprised to see the glorious garments at the end.
J.T. Yes, really it is the same idea. The person who is the bondman is Christ and the priest is Christ. So that it is a question of serving by love; "by love serve one another", @Galatians 5: 13.
E.P. That would give force to the epistle to Corinth: "So also is the Christ".
J.T. Exactly. The idea of anointing is dignified.
Ques. In the allusion to @John 13, what would be the force of our Lord rising from supper and girding Himself with a towel and washing the disciples¬ feet?
J.T. That would be taking a bondman's form. Philippians tells us He humbled Himself, taking a bondman's form. It is not merely exterior attitude, it is what He is in His mind, in His affections. In @Romans 12 he beseeches by the compassions of God. It is a question of what God is towards the saints.
A.R. Does it work out that you understand your measure? You are thinking soberly so as to be wise. How lowly the Lord could become! We might think we are more than we really are.
J.T. Quite so. So that the measure God gives is from the divine side. We are not to be in each other's way. It is according to the proportion of faith; what one's measure is.
J.W.D. It seems in the opening of this epistle he presents himself first as a bondman before his apostleship.
{185}
J.T. Very good. So the believer is a bondman in chapter 6.
A.P.T. I was wondering if @Genesis 14 would fit in with your thought of the brother. Melchisedec served Abraham in bringing forth bread and wine. Is there priestly service in that? The main thought was the recovery of Lot.
J.T. All that comes in in relation to the recovery of the brother. He brought forward what was needed, and that drew forth from Abraham a proper recognition of that service. There should be no lack of mutual recognition of dignity in one another. The assembly is no place for communism. According to the God of measure, here is the greatest personage; consider how great this man was; but he was serving Abraham. But Abraham paid him tithes; he respected the dignity of the King of Salem, the King of Righteousness, and the King of Peace.
J.S. Apart from love we would not be morally clothed. I was thinking in christendom we have plenty of clothing seen, but there is no love. They are not morally clothed.
J.T. Quite so. I think what was said about Melchisedec and Abraham ought to help us as to how we regard one another; what God has made each of us; the distinctions that God has been pleased to make. Abraham was a great man. He had accomplished a great feat, one of the greatest feats that one could think of. Outwardly the odds were against him; the number of kings, the distance; these kings were experienced in victory, they had conquered large territories -- Abraham with his trained servants pursues these men and overcomes them. "From smiting the kings" (@Hebrews 7: 1), he smote them. He is certainly a great man. And God had made him great, and he is going to be greater, but there is a greater than Abraham and he recognises that. Naturally, he would overlook that. There was a greater and
{186}
that was the priest of the Most High God. The Most High God was the possessor of heavens and earth. He gave him tithes of all. It is the Spirit of Christ. The measure that God gives to this, that, and the other one in the assembly are right; they are according to heaven.
A.R. The more we recognise the greatness of this thing you are speaking of, the more the knowledge of God will grow, whether in the district or in my heart.
J.T. That is right. The salutations bring out what distinguishes each. Some more and some less.
J.W.D. Is that the thought of the proportion of faith? Why do we not recognise these greater things? Is that the reason for the matter of the proportion of faith not being understood?
J.T. I think that is right. There is a sort of officialism that takes no account of divine distinctions, what God is doing. He distinguishes this, that, and the other one. Not all had the same distinction, but the apostle discerns each one and mentions what it was that distinguishes each one. The proportion of faith bears on that; whether I am moving in that myself, and whether it is recognised.
J.W.D. Abraham was spiritually successful, was he not? He had faith for the exploit that he set out to accomplish and he was successful in it.
J.T. Quite so. But here is a greater. What were Melchisedec's exploits we do not know. The Spirit of God does not give us his history. It is what he was. He is King of Righteousness; he was King of Peace; and priest of the Most High God. It is what the man was.
J.S. We see Abraham in the flush of victory; he could take account of this great personage.
J.T. Well, that is the point. You may give an address and feel very successful, and when you step down from the platform you may think, 'There is not another like me'. But that is a mistake. Therefore, 
{187}
Abraham is ready to recognise the superior dignity of the King of Salem.
J.W.D. How am I to become regulated to recognise another's superiority, spiritually speaking?
J.T. It is the attitude of your mind. You never allow yourself to live in superiority to others.
A.P.T. Peter gives us a good example of how he arrived at it. He says, "Our beloved brother Paul".
J.T. Quite so. He saw there was something beyond him; and I believe Paul would say the same of Peter. He says, I am "less than the least of all saints". It was the attitude of his mind. We must not think he was not real in these remarks. I want to learn how to be able to say these things truthfully.
J.S. How moral greatness really shines in service!
J.T. Quite so.
A.R. And you were speaking about Troas in @Acts 20, there were many lights in the upper room. Paul spoke.
J.T. They would fall in with that, I am sure; though we have the names of distinguished men that were there.
A.B.P. Would you say the attitude of mind helps? "The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister".
J.T. That is it. Those milch kine we have spoken of in 1 Samuel, they were tied to the cart; they lowed as they went; they felt the thing, but they go on and on to the stone in the field of Joshua the Bethshemite, and there they are offered up as a sacrifice. That is the idea; to be "poured out as a libation".
A.F.M. What we have been speaking about is according to our chapter. In verse 10 the apostle says, "as to brotherly love, kindly affectioned towards one another: as to honour, each taking the lead in paying it to the other", @Romans 12: 10. That is really the result morally of our being one body in Christ.
J.T. That is the point. If we are able to clothe
{188}
one another in that way, according to the measure of faith that God has apportioned. The one that has the most proportion will recognise it in the others most.
Rem. I should not be hindered in any little service.
J.T. Quite so. I am free about him; he is fit for fellowship; he can be trusted wherever he goes. And that, of course, leads us to our passage in @1 Corinthians 10. The idea is not here to serve one another, but it is a question of fellowship. The bread which we break, is it not the fellowship or the communion of the body of Christ? That shows us all that enters into that great thought. The Lord's own body. How trustworthy He was! That works out into our being one body; and as partakers of that one bread; and hence the truth of fellowship follows, that we are trustworthy.
Rem. Does not @Mark 3 help us as to the peculiar way the Lord Jesus values the body? His brethren and his mother without were disturbed by what was internal. The Lord says, "whosoever shall do the will of God, he is my brother, and sister, and mother" (verse 35).
J.T. That is what we are at now. That works out with each of us, as to whether we are concerned about the will of God. It is not serving one another, exactly; but that we are moving in the will of God and entirely trustworthy.
A.F.M. What is the connection between the taking of the loaf and being morally of the body?
J.T. The connection is from the Lord's body; the fellowship of the Lord's body. "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ?" That is the basis of what he says. "We, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other". That is, we are committed to the thing of our own selves. For fellowship is our committal to the thing, it is my own action. But
{189}
what I come into is the body of Christ, and that means the will of God.
J.W.D. What do you mean by the will of God?
J.T. I am alluding to @Hebrews 10, "by which will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all" (verse 10). We have come into the thing that way, but then @1 Corinthians 10 is my committal to that. So that "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ? Because we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf" (verses 16, 17). And then it goes on to say about Israel after the flesh. We are obligated to one another. That implies fellowship, not to serve; but whatever we do we are obligated.
J.S. So that in putting forth our hand to break the bread, we are actually saying we are in the thing.
J.T. We are partners in the thing.
Rem. Verse 17 would be transferring the thought of the body to the saints.
J.T. Yes. "We, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf". It is what we are doing. And hence the teaching is to bring out that you are to be trustworthy. Because you are influencing all the others in what you are doing. Well, now we come to chapter 12, the Lord's supper intervenes in chapter 11; His self-sacrifice and love, and the blood of the covenant; so that chapter 12 is service in the assembly. It is not service in general, as in @Romans 12, it is service in the assembly. Spiritual manifestations; the saints are viewed now as the Christ. "For also in the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body, ... and have all been given to drink of one Spirit". So that the exterior members now are brought in, the actual members of the human body, and are caused to speak; so as to bring out what we may be thinking about.
{190}
A.R. It is not the members speaking to Christ, it is one member speaking to another member.
J.T. The first is a complaint. The foot having the most arduous duties says, "Because I am not a hand I am not of the body". It is a brother complaining in that position.
A.B.P. "Dost thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone?"
C.A.M. The idea of the organism is so definite; the members are the persons, the eye is a person.
J.T. You mean a normal christian?
C.A.M. What impressed me was in Romans you are looking at the person as a member, but here you are looking at the work and the apostle is thinking of the person.
J.T. Quite so. The foot says, "Because I am not a hand I am not of the body". Well, that means my part is more onerous than others, and I elect not to belong to it. It is a selfish thought.
Rem. The foot is the extreme end of the body. It is the farthest away from the head.
J.T. Look at what I am doing; the burden I am bearing.
A.P.T. Is the body viewed here as an organism or an organisation?
J.T. It is an organism here. It is the Spirit that is a power in the organism, not the public side so much as the inward side of things.
Rem. In verse 28 it is the organisation.
J.T. Yes, the word'assembly'might be organisation in a modified way. From verse 12 to verse 27 it is the organism.
Rem. It is remarkable in Romans and Corinthians the idea of the head is left out, to test us as to how I am working out christianity relatively, what I think of another member in the body.
J.T. That is the idea. We are tested as to what the foot says of the hand. I am thinking of the
{191}
brethren. Well, later the apostle says that this comparing themselves with themselves is not wise. That is the idea. The point for me is that I am baptised in the power of one Spirit, not with water. It is a heavenly action. I am set in the position by the Spirit, I have drunk into that, I have committed myself, I have said I am satisfied with that; and then why should I begin to complain? It is the Spirit of God that has done it.
A.F.M. According to this the members are not only set in the body but are all divinely regulated.
So that one member would not compare with the other member; each has some responsibility on his shoulders.
J.T. It is the Spirit's action. We have all been baptised in the power of the one Spirit. It is an act of power. He has set each of us in his place. I am not to complain any more.
J.T.Jr. Would Martha represent that when she complains about Mary?
J.T. That is the thing.
C.A.M. In the gospels Luke would really be on the line of the body, Matthew on the line of the assembly.
J.T. That is good, that is helpful. Martha was complaining; the complaint was the brethren were not doing anything. And she was complaining not only against her sister but against the Lord. Well, what God would lay upon us is to get the mind of God about things. That is more important than a missionary journey. Mary was getting the mind of God.
J.S. The truth set forth in chapter 12 here, that is the power of being baptised by one Spirit into one body, involves that personal distinction would disappear.
J.T. Quite so. It may be there, but merged in the power of the Spirit into one body.
{192}
A.R. So that in Romans, as I discern the status of the member in Corinthians, I begin to discern the anointing of the member.
J.T. That is the point. That is what we want to carry with us. In chapter 12 it is a question of the dignity of the saints in service. You do not want to rob the Lord of that. So that verse 27 says, "Now ye are Christ's body, and members in particular". You do not lose your identity, but you are members; collectively you are that, you are the Christ. Each has his identity, members in particular, but it is Christ's body.
A.R. Does that anointing of the body here correspond with the Christ being anointed and ascending to a new order of things?
J.T. That is the point. Is there anybody who had been in it, who elects himself out of it? I may say, 'I can do more by getting out', but you are electing yourself out of the greatest thing in the universe, and I cannot do better by electing myself out of it.
Rem. The functioning of one depends on the proper functioning of all.
J.T. All depends on the other.
Rem. Would Luke's ministry fit in with this ministry? The point of those two going to Emmaus was that they must get back to Jerusalem.
J.T. Quite so. That was the setting.
Rem. You were speaking about complaining; I was wondering if @Psalm 40 would help. "Sacrifice and oblation thou didst not desire: ears hast thou prepared me. Burnt-offering and sin-offering hast thou not demanded; Then said I, Behold, I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me -- To do thy good pleasure, my God, is my delight" (verses 6 - 8). It was getting the mind of God on the thing.
J.T. Very good. That all enters into Hebrews and 1 Corinthians.
{193}
A.R. As in the body do I understand that I have come under the hand of God as my natural body has come under the creational mind of God? I have my place in the body according to the mind of God.
A.F.N. It is wrong to excuse oneself of responsibility in the body.
J.T. One who does that becomes lawless. As Jude says, a wandering star, clouds without water. There may be a show in it, but that is what it is.
A.F.M. He would go into darkness personally.
J.T. I am sure he would.
J.W.D. This is a very practical matter in all our local meetings. Do you get the remedy for it here?
Does the truth of the remedy come out in this chapter? This complaining condition -- do we have the remedy here?
J.T. The Spirit has baptised us in the power of one Spirit into the one body. It is an act of power, and then we have all been made to drink into one Spirit. That ought to set us up on both sides. I am set in the assembly sovereignly in power, and I find what satisfies me in it. Because if a person says, 'I want to have a freer hand', he is not satisfied. He is selfish.
J.S. So that one who elects to go on in it is in the will of God.
J.T. And anyone who does not is dislocated, and is affecting the whole position. Hence the importance of this chapter. "Now ye are Christ's body, and members in particular". My identity remains. I am part of the greatest thing in the universe. Why should I elect myself out of it?
E.P. "The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places", @Psalm 16: 6. The infinite satisfaction the Lord found in being in that place.
J.T. Very fine. In this setting where we are baptised in the one body, the lines are fallen so that I am in pleasant places.
{194}
Rem. You regard this matter as forcing an issue as to the foot and the hand.
J.T. That is what the apostle is aiming against. There were those that were aiming at what they did not have. So you can see how he is seeking to regulate the saints.
Rem. In chapter 12: 15, "Because I am not a hand I am not of the body, is it on account of this not indeed of the body?" Does that bring out how indispensable each is?
J.T. Quite so. So that if you elect yourself out because you are not a hand you suffer loss, and the brethren suffer loss.
{195}
THE TRUTH OF THE BODY IN ITS BEARING ON THE SAINTS (2)
@Ephesians 2:12 - 16; @Ephesians 4:1 - 16
J.T. It was thought that these scriptures would serve to bring the subject before us in Ephesians, and that we should not overlook Colossians. The passages referring to the body will be known to us, particularly the one saying that the head should be held fast. It is enjoined that we should hold the head, because all the nourishment comes from the head; so that the body should make increase. But what is suggested at first is that we might look at the passage in @Ephesians 2, then chapter 4, and then perhaps in @Colossians 1. But the object of the readings is that the saints should see the practical side of the truth of the body, so that we should not be merely theoretical in referring to it but seeing how it works out, as we had this morning, in our relations with one another. So far we have got to the thought of the relation of the body to the Spirit, giving it the dignity of the anointing. One body in Christ in @Romans 12 takes us out of the range of ordinary societies in this world; but Corinthians contemplates the body as the anointed vessel. So that there is not only unity before the eyes of men, but dignity; rising to the thought of Christ's body -- indeed, Christ in the sense of being anointed; an allusion to the saints as anointed called the Christ, a term that is applied to the Lord Jesus and only in a limited way to the saints. And then the thought of Christ's body, we being Christ's body and members in particular, so that each stands out in his own individuality yet publicly in the anointing. Now in this passage in Ephesians we have the thought of the new man in view of the body and the reconciliation. It is a very practical side of the truth we are
{196}
considering, the saints being reconciled not simply to one another but to God, and the means of this reconciliation is the cross. The position is the body, the means is the cross. The fourth chapter will bring out just how the unity of the Spirit is to be kept, the basis of it being that it is one body, one Spirit, and one hope of our calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all. That the Christ having ascended has given gifts to it and that the body should be edified, so that the truth should be held in it. That is the final thought that is in mind. The body is seen as that in which the truth is held, held in love; and thus the body edifies itself.
A.P.T. Is verse 13 a contrast to verses 11 and 12?
J.T. Quite so. "But now in Christ Jesus *ye* who once were afar off are become nigh by the blood of the Christ". That is a present thing for us. One has particularly in mind "For *he* is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of enclosure, having annulled the enmity in his flesh, the law of commandments in ordinances, that he might form the two in himself into one new man, making peace; and might reconcile both in one body to God by the cross", @Ephesians 2: 14 - 16. So that an end is reached in this section for God; that is, reconciliation of warring elements; not only by the cross but in a certain position; that is in the body.
C.A.M. Would you say that it is a leading thought about the body and what the body contained as well as the matter of expression, I mean as a vessel?
J.T. Yes. Please enlarge on that.
C.A.M. Well, in the early part of the reading, you were emphasising the fact that a leading thought about the body is expression. It seems to involve what is included in this wonderful corporate idea. Does the new man relate to what is morally contained in this?
{197}
J.T. The passage begins in verse 11, showing what we were as gentiles, and as it has been suggested in verse 13, "but now in Christ Jesus *ye* who once were afar off are become nigh by the blood of the Christ. For he is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of enclosure, having annulled the enmity in his flesh, the law of commandments in ordinances, that he might form the two in himself into one new man". Now these are all items on the way to results for God, by reconciliation of warring elements. What preceded led us to this; the reconciliation of warring elements, not simply towards one another. That is taken care of in the oneness in Christ. Reconciliation of both in the body, what is for God in the one body in the sense of warring elements reaching this position -- reconciliation to God by the cross. It is the only place you get such a drastic word as to reconciliation -- by the cross; as if in this position brethren who once were opposed to one another are now in the body; but in it as reconciled to God by the cross. There is not a warring element left. The cross is the most drastic thought. There is not an element to disturb us left, in that each one of us is reconciled to God, but in this position -- the body. It deals with all that is disturbing.
A.R. Do you mean a vessel now, reconciled? Not so many christians as in Corinth, but a vessel reconciled. Not a whole assembly reconciled.
J.T. The warring elements reconciled in that. It is not that the body is viewed as reconciled, but that these once antagonistic elements are in that position. It is not the body reconciled, but these elements have reached that position, and are seen there as reconciled to God.
J.S. These warring elements reconciled in the body.
J.T. That is the idea. The body never needed reconciliation, because when you reach that thought 
{198}
you have what is of God. The body is of Christ. The idea is what is so antagonistic to God is now seen in reconciliation in the cross, but in this position. That so enhances it.
C.A.M. That helps. These conflicting things would be brought to silence for ever in the cross, and then you have this wonderful thing of glory and beauty every day. Is that right?
J.T. Quite so. The same identity is there seen as entirely pleasing to God.
W.B-w. The enmity -- does that refer to the distance between one another?
J.T. Quite so. What was contained in ordinances  -- the law of commandments in ordinances. That is, that which shut the Jews off in such relations has been removed in the body of His flesh. The cause of the enmity has been dealt with in the body of His flesh.
W.B-w. That is mentioned twice: in verse 15, "having annulled the enmity in his flesh", and in verse 16, "having by it slain the enmity".
J.T. By the cross He has slain the enmity. The flesh, I suppose, is the death of Christ, but the cross goes further than that. It is God's abhorrence in that sense of the enmity.
J.S. Do we see the termination of the warring factions in the cross?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. The persons are positively reconciled to God. He is looking on the assembly, on the body, in that way. It is entirely pleasing to Him, not a warring element left.
J.W.D. You are regarding the body as a positive spiritual formation, and what was effected in the cross as something that was done absolutely there for Him.
J.T. The flesh, I suppose, would allude particularly to the Lord's death, as it says, "annulled the enmity in his flesh". The cross is an added thought, meaning that God has dealt with this because of the enmity that
{199}
is abhorrent to Him in this drastic way. The cross has a place in all these epistles, but a more extended and comprehensive place in Ephesians as dealing with adverse things radically, so that there is not a vestige left.
A.F.M. For the great end in view of the two, that is Jew and gentile, all might be set aside entirely in the death of Christ in view of unity coming in. You notice the thought of one body in verse 16 and then the thought of peace, and glad tidings of peace coming in. Is that to effect unity for God; that all that defies would be entirely judged?
J.T. I think that is it; and in a radical way. The thing is dealt with at the roots. Causes of differences between us that arise simply from the flesh or from pride, if we judged them in this light we would see how abhorrent they are. They are so bad that the cross alone can deal with them.
A.B.P. Were these elements present at Corinth, and so the apostle had to bring in the cross?
J.T. Just so. He speaks of "the word of the cross". He stresses that he only knew Jesus Christ and Him crucified, because of conditions that were again lifting up their head at Corinth. The cross may be used vaguely, but the word of the cross makes the thing intelligible. You see what is meant. It is not the literal thought of one being crucified, it is the mind of God in it.
R.W.S. The blood of the cross in Colossians, what does that refer to?
J.T. @Colossians 1: 20, "by him to reconcile all things to itself, having made peace by the blood of his cross". That is the same thing, only the blood, I suppose, brings in the atoning side as the life, given up sacrificially on the cross. The blood of His cross, that is, the cause of the disturbance is dealt with radically, it will not be brought up again.
{200}
W.B-w. Enemies being reconciled by the death of His Son, is that another thought?
J.T. That is to bring out what the cross cost God. He gave His Son. I think the Son is brought in several times in Romans to show what it cost God. He spared not His own Son.
C.A.M. The body in itself, I think you said, does not need reconciliation. Those that are destined to form part of this wonderful body have known something of good and evil. That great question that God has taken up -- would you say that that preceded our being brought into this great blessing in order to understand what great cost it was to God to bring about that blessing?
J.T. I think so. Romans brings out that side. It was the death of no less a person than His Son. "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh", @Romans 8: 3. He spared not His own Son, to bring out the cost of securing this end. But in Colossians -- the blood of His cross -- it was a question of the Deity effecting this, as perhaps will be noticed. Chapter 1: 19 says, "for in him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell, and by him to reconcile all things to itself, having made peace by the blood of his cross -- by him, whether the things on the earth or the things in the heavens. And you, who once were alienated and enemies in mind by wicked works, yet now has it reconciled in the body of his flesh through death; to present you holy and unblamable and irreproachable before it". The blood of His cross would be the atoning side; the blood -- but it is the blood of the cross. That is the severity of the judgment. Christ's crucifixion is ours, and reconciliation is, therefore, dealt with more radically here and in Ephesians than in Romans. It is the cross, so that there is not a vestige left of the things that caused the
{201}
enmity that was so abhorrent to God. The thing is dealt with radically, and the reconciliation is in the body where it is sustained positively because of the gifts to the body.
J.T.Jr. You mean that the body is like the body of Jesus? Is there a correspondence here in this body?
J.T. I think that is right. It is out of Him. So that He says, "why persecutest thou me?" It is the body viewed in the abstract condition. I think it is important to see that reconciliation is brought about by death. Some think it is the work of God in the person. The work of God enhances the thing, but the idea of reconciliation is the result of the death of Christ according to sacrifice -- the blood of His cross.
A.F.M. Is the point emphasised in @Colossians 1: 22, "yet now has it reconciled in the body of his flesh through death"; is that not a very searching expression?
J.T. Quite so. The blood implies death. The  wording has its own meaning.
A.R. Would you say that the new covenant in the second letter to the saints at Corinth is to bring about reconciliation in a public way, whereas this is to bring about reconciliation in an internal way?
J.T. Quite so. What we have had so far in Romans and Corinthians treats of the body in its public relations. Here the bearing of it is what is for God; reconciled to God, as it says. It is what is for God -- the saints looked at as one body. And I think the brethren would do well to consider this, because of what is so abominable to God: causes of hatred, causes of feeling arising from the flesh, causing distance amongst the saints, often unspoken. If things were spoken out they could be dealt with.
They are not dealt with. The cross deals with things radically.
Ques. The scripture that says, "God was in 
{202}
Christ" -- does that mean His death or what He was here?
J.T. That is what He was here. The idea of going into death brings in reconciliation. That is announced in Luke before He died. Christ is the point of reconciliation, meaning that in a Man there is entire satisfaction to God. Not that Christ ever needed to be reconciled, but He established in His own Person here as a Man the basis for reconciliation. God says, 'That is My mind for all'. One that has been reconciled by the death of His Son is the person that heaven greets as pleasurable to God.
C.A.M. So that we reach that wonderful expression of reconciliation by way of the cross.
J.T. That is how we come into it. Romans brings out what it cost God, but when we come to these spiritual epistles, Colossians and Ephesians, God is dealing with the thing more radically. It was all in the death of Christ. But the wording of Scripture has to be noticed. The cross is more than the death of Christ, it is death in that way. Death would be suffering as regards atonement, but not suffering as to dealing with the thing in our souls. The cross is for us, the mind of God in it as regards us, that everything should be dealt with radically -- my feelings must be dealt with.
C.A.M. We seem to take a slow journey to get to this point -- the bearing of the cross on our souls, but God always reaches it by a very short route.
J.T. God dealt with everything in the cross of Christ; but then, see what He has had to do in bringing us to that. Corinthians is the "word of the cross", then we have the "blood of his cross", and then we have reconciliation by the cross.
J.H.E. God would say, "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone". That is the way.
J.T. That is burial, really, that you might have a
{203}
new growth. It is needed for dealing with things in our souls in the roots of them. So that the thing is finished; things are settled ostensibly, and then presently you see they are not settled. The same old root is springing up again, but the body is a sort of environment in which the root has no means of growth. The cross has been brought in.
A.F.M. Could you introduce that in @Luke 15 by the father kissing the prodigal, and the son being in the house? Would that show that all had been definitely and eternally met?
J.T. That is right. And that is what is so needed. So far we are with the brethren, but -- well, that 'but' is the root. Why should we not be in the body characteristically, where everything is pleasing to God, all the enmity is slain?
J.S. You were saying that Christ here in the days of His flesh was the basis of reconciliation, but because of what is in us the cross is a necessity.
J.T. It is the cross of Christ -- His crucifixion is turned round and made ours. God says that is My mind about you. I have got to come to that.
J.T.Jr. Is it the teaching of the brazen serpent?
J.T. That is good. That is an equivalent thought. "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up". The allusion is to the cross.
J.T.Jr. The serpent is the root of it there.
J.T. Quite so. Things are dealt with at the roots.
A.P.T. The word 'enmity'. It says, "having by it slain the enmity". Does it link on with @Genesis 3? Is there any relation to that?
J.T. That was enmity between the woman's seed and the serpent. Is that what you mean?
A.P.T. I was wondering as to the word 'enmity'  -- it is not really the persons, but getting rid of this enmity.
J.T. Quite so. That is what I was thinking.
{204}
There may be much that is unspoken, things that have to be dealt with. For instance, much might be brought in in Ephesus. The Jew may have retained much of his old feeling against the gentile. Well, after all he is a gentile; and the Jew may be retaining his own distinction and yet professing to be in the body. The apostle says, 'These things have to be dealt with radically', and God has slain the enmity by the cross. That implies transparency, because if things are spoken of, then we know where we are. There should not be an atom of distance.
Rem. It says that Cain spoke with his brother, and after that it says he rose up and slew him. Is that not the very opposite of what should occur when brethren speak to each other?
J.T. Well, he may have had murder in his heart. Abel, no doubt, had spiritual feelings, and must have felt that. You may have the feelings and say nothing about them, awaiting an opportunity to rise up and slay.
W.F.M. So that the Lord speaks of being angry with your brother in @Matthew 5; then he speaks about being reconciled to your brother before you offer your gift.
J.T. Quite so. That helps us. The Lord shows in what you say about your brother, calling him a fool, how dangerous it is; showing that we must think of the brethren rightly, and speak well of them not only to their face but any time.
D.P. When the apostle wrote to Philemon about Onesimus, did that bring about reconciliation as you speak of it?
J.T. Quite so. But it comes on here to reconciliation before God. I am sure they were reconciled when Onesimus got back. I suppose it was the Colossian meeting. When Onesimus got back Philemon would greet him as a brother, a brother beloved. 'He left you a slave, now he is going back to you via Rome from heaven, a brother beloved;
{205}
and you are going to have him forever'. Well, you had better be on good terms with anybody you are going to have with you for ever. We cannot have differences in heaven, because God would be displaced. There is not a vestige of the enmity left.
C.A.M. He was really going from Romans to Colossians. All that Roman part had been dealt with in Rome.
J.T. You may be sure the Roman epistle was gone over with the brethren in Colosse. Onesimus is going to be with you for ever, you want him as a brother beloved. Do not let anything be between you.
C.A.M. He got this reconciliation that is mentioned in @Romans 4, now he is going to this reconciliation that was known in Colosse.
J.T. That is it. The idea was to be known for ever.
A.R. The good roots are in Ephesians: "rooted and grounded in love".
J.T. Exactly; no other roots.
Rem. Were you thinking of the truth in this chapter? Is it a question of truthfulness as to how we really think? The Jews would be making much of judaism and bringing it into the assembly.
J.T. Well, that is what I am thinking of. How the Jew would bring in his point of view sitting down with the gentile. 'Well, after all he is a gentile; he has not the same status that we have'. That is the point here. That root is dealt with.
A.R.S. If brethren at their home believe in the one body of Christ, and believe in the headship of Christ, how is it that they are not all together?
What have they done? Have they resurrected the enmity that was slain?
J.T. Well, there is a multitude of things, much enters into all that. The line we travelled this morning leads up to this. We have come to the recognition that we are members one of the other, and we are in the same fellowship one with another, and there
{206}
should be loyalty to each other. And then that we serve in a dignified way. But now when you come to Ephesians what God intended was in that supreme work of His through Paul, that the full thought should be seen in the body. That the most diabolical opposing elements are brought together in entire freedom from their old feelings; and all sense of pride -- all that is dealt with never to spring up again. The cross has dealt with it in the roots of it, and the body affords the soil for other growth than that.
E.E.H. Is that the great lesson taught in the vessel let down from heaven when Peter was on the roof praying?
J.T. Quite so. It came down from heaven. Ephesians has that in mind. The body is out of Christ; it is Himself. We are bone of His bone and flesh of His flesh. Peter saw that. He did not bring out the truth of it. He needed to get that truth as a basis for his soul, as Paul got the basis in his soul.
A.R. 'Thy cross has severed ties that bound us here'.
J.T. Good. But then we go a little further here. The enmity slain between us, we are brought in as entirely pleasing to God in this setting. There is not a feeling between us. There is not an adverse feeling harboured amongst us.
Rem. The apostle says in Corinthians, "*Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men, being manifested to be Christ's epistle ministered by us, written, not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God", @2 Corinthians 3: 2, 3.
J.T. That is what the saints are as an epistle of Christ. That follows the first epistle, where the cross is brought in.
W.B-w. "I am crucified with Christ". That is one model among them, not only for them, but in him, Christ living in him.
J.T. Quite so. "To whom, as before your very
{207}
eyes, Jesus Christ has been portrayed, crucified among you".
W.B-w. That is your point, the effect of the cross in us, removing all these fleshly feelings.
J.T. Quite so.
A.R. There is difficulty earlier between Paul and Barnabas because Barnabas wanted to take Mark with them. How would that fit in?
J.T. The cross is needed. Barnabas did not have his full place. God slew the enmity.
A.R. You mean that if Barnabas had used the cross he would have gone on with the apostle?
J.T. Quite so. They would never have separated.
Rem. The reconciliation is already effected. It is looking backward. It is not something that appears when I come into the assembly.
J.T. God has effected the reconciliation in Christ's death. It is something to be received in the gospel. But in these epistles God is showing how it works out, how brethren from all parts are brought together without an atom of distance between them. And God says, 'I have done that; I have reconciled both in one body by the cross'. Well, if the brethren are ready to proceed to chapter 4, we shall see how this subject that we are on works out into unity, practical unity in the Spirit. It is essential to the maintenance of unity, not simply local; Ephesians is dealing with matters generally. We have the injunction to "walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye have been called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, bearing with one another in love; using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace. There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all", @Ephesians 4: 1 - 6. That is the great general position of unity. Then the next thing that the Lord has
{208}
provided is the gifts; teaching for the saints. So that now we are to proceed in this subject in relation to teaching; how the saints are to hold the truth.
N.W. Would you say the Lord's movements generally make way for the heavenly calling to be enjoyed in the body?
J.T. That is right. That is in mind. We are viewed as having been raised up together and made to sit down together. All this matter is dealt with, then differences are dealt with. We are certainly not to go up with feelings against one another.
C.A.M. Speaking about that again, do you not think there is a tendency with us to want to settle this thing and have it paraded without really having the meaning of the cross bear on the thing at all? God will not allow the thing to be paraded until it is settled in the light of the cross.
J.T. Quite so. The thing has to be seen as abhor rent. It has to be seen and judged as to what it is. God says, it is so bad I have slain it.
C.A.M. It will not die of itself. That is the thing that is so abhorrent. It is the cross that is needed.
J.T. 'The cross is My thought of all that', God says. He has nailed it to the cross.
J.H.E. There were those at the last Supper that did not seek to slip out easily. They said, "Is it I?" There was self-judgment.
J.T. Very good. That is the way to reach this. Is it I, not, Is it she, or he? Is it I? When we come to chapter 4, it is the same outlook we have in relation to the brethren universally and keeping in step with what is going on among the brethren universally. The basis of that is unity in the body, in the kingdom, and in the universal domain of God. There is room made for teaching, so that there should be the truth -- holding the truth, that we should arrive at the truth and hold it in love, so that the body should be self-building up in love.
{209}
Rem. Is that why the apostle gives us 1 Corinthians chapter 13 before chapter 14?
J.T. Quite so. Love comes in. The unity and the ministry are related. So that we have ministry in chapter 14. Here ministry is connected with gifts. What an exalted thought it is!
A.P.T. It says in @1 Corinthians 12: 28, "God has set certain in the assembly". In this chapter in Ephesians it is an ascended Man. What is the difference?
J.T. It is to bring out the provision God makes. How exalted is the idea of gifts, and what flows from it! It is not simply a question of power as we often speak of gift, but that the persons are in mind. "First apostles; secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers; then miraculous powers; then gifts of healings; helps; governments; kinds of tongues", @1 Corinthians 12:28. So that you get the place in the mind, but in Ephesians they are here for a purpose; for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ"; until a condition of things is arrived at where the truth is held in love. That is what God is aiming at. You have something that edifies itself in love and makes increase.
Rem. Why is it that the apostle speaks of himself as a prisoner in the Lord? You called attention to the unity of the Spirit and the apostle as addressing the saints tells them that he is a prisoner in the Lord as being under God's direction.
J.T. Quite so. As a prisoner in the Lord he was not a prisoner in Rome because of any wrong he did. It is in the Lord. You will notice in chapter 3 it is a prisoner *of* the Christ; *of*. In chapter 4 it is a prisoner *in* the Lord.
Ques. What is the distinction?
{210}
J.T. God has held him from going where he might wish to go. The Lord took him to Rome. The Lord had him here a prisoner for certain reasons. These epistles were in God's mind. It is not a prisoner of the Lord in chapter 4, but in the Lord; and therefore there is a good basis there for practical unity. "Using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace", and "holding the truth in love". That is the point, and all that follows is to bring out this thought of the fulness of the divine mind in teaching, so that the saints should have the teaching, and hold the truth in love.
A.F.M. Is the full-grown man first arrived at by us before we come to the self-building of the saints in love?
J.T. That is right. If you do not have the full-grown man the teaching unbalances us. I do not want to hinder it as a babe. The full-grown man must succeed the idea that we have in the first sixteen verses.
W.B-w. You get the threefold unity in verse 4; the unity of the kingdom, the body, and the universal unity -- three great thoughts. Those are essential before we get the teaching.
J.T. That is right. The unity in connection with the body: one Lord, one faith, one baptism; and then one God and Father of all. The saints related to the body and the exaltation of Christ; the gifts coming down. What a great thought it is!
A.R. If we have faith we will understand that He has led captivity captive. The enemy is held in check, so that this might go the right way.
J.T. The enemy is overcome in principle in the resurrection and ascension of Christ; but the gifts are to bring the overthrow of him in deliverance to the assembly.
J.W.D. This self-building up in love, when do we realise that?
{211}
J.T. I think, as we make room for this teaching. It is a question of the teaching. You may have a gathering where you have no gift. They are never given in the local setting, so that it is a question of the brethren in a locality benefiting by it and growing up in it. If we are men sitting down, we shall edify one another, even though there be no outward gift. To every one of us is given grace and thus we shall edify one another.
Ques. Does this contemplate David as having ascended, bringing Israel with him to a very high elevation?
J.T. Taking the giant's head with him is that the whole matter was settled. Now it is the working out of it.
W.B-w. David reigned so many years in Hebron and so many years in Jerusalem. Would that unite the saints?
J.T. The unity was brought about in Hebron. It effects unity.
A.R. So that you have here what corresponds with @Psalm 16; an Israel where evil is kept entirely under control by Christ.
J.T. Quite so. Samuel directs Saul to the hill of God. You ought to have a feeling about that; and what came out was the prophetic ministry at the hand of God. And here you get the prophets, bringing God in.
W.B-w. Would the assembly meeting represent the hill of God?
J.T. Quite so. As in New York where there are so many meetings, I believe the aim should be to get together as a whole as often as possible, to get the full thought of God in the place. He is there Himself to meet all opposition. One has often seen it, that these meetings settle matters.
C.A.M. It is striking in that connection that this matter of the prophets comes in after this emphasis
{212}
is laid on unity. That is what you were stressing.
J.T. That is right. The idea of obligation, to "keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace" is augmented by the gifts, so that there would be growth amongst the saints and that there should be no longer babes amongst us, but those who hold the truth in love. The truth; no room for anyone saying, 'That is your mind, but not my mind'. We do not want that; we want to get the truth.
Rem. We need help in distinguishing gifts in a brother.
J.T. That is what comes in here. The gifts are to bring in that, to bring in the truth in power, so that the saints should have it. All this modernism is refused, you know too much for that. The truth is in your soul. It is the full position of the assembly here. It says in verse 7, "But to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ. Wherefore he says, Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men. But that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things". That is a wonderful position. "And *he* has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints; with a view to the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ"; that is, He would fill every believer in detail, by gifts and pastoral care, so that there might be growth amongst us; and then the stimulus of it all is Christ. "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ; in order that we may be no longer babes". So that the babe condition should vanish; and thus there is the growth.
{213}
In any meeting where these conditions exist there is edification. I believe a prayer meeting involves edification.
A.R. If I am sitting in the enjoyment of this I am being built up.
J.T. Quite so. That brings every saint into it. "From whom the whole body, fitted together, and connected by every joint of supply, according to the working in its measure of each one part, works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love" (verse 16). I suppose this is a condition in which saints wish to be taken up to heaven.
C.A.M. Do you not think one thing that ought to encourage us is the fact that this truth as to the Son of God has been stressed and clarified? If you have a wrong thought as to the truth of the Son of God, you could not really understand this chapter.
J.T. Say more.
C.A.M. Well, the question is as to whether this thing is seen today. There are various marks that the Lord is bringing this about. One of the things that seems to encourage us so much is the stress laid on the truth of the Son of God, do you not think?
J.T. I do. Not unexpectedly, as you might say; or without preparedness. It is as if the Lord did it Himself. The brethren have taken it on. I believe the truth has been clarified, the saints are coming into it; undoubtedly with a view to translation -- that conditions might exist that please God. It says of Enoch before he was translated that he has this testimony that he pleased God. I believe the thought of sonship brings that in peculiarly.
Rem. It is the economy of the Father and the knowledge of the Son of God, as if without this thought your faith would not stand.
J.T. Quite so. The unity of the faith is the component part of the faith.
A.F.M. I think the remark made regarding the
{214}
Son of God was very helpful. It was to this effect that Satan tempted the Lord. "If thou be the Son of God", calling it in question. And then the Lord says, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God". What were you saying about that?
J.T. Well, the Lord replied in alluding to man. Satan brought in the sonship of God, as if to imply that sonship was not manhood.
A.F.M. It appeared to me to be a most wonderful thing, as if the whole secret of the thing lies in what Satan said and how the Lord replied.
A.R. You mean as understanding the truth of the Son of God it transfers the thoughts from earth to heaven, taking on another world?
J.T. It does indeed. How the truth of sonship affected David when God pointed out to him how the house should be built by the son! He went to the house of God at once and sat down, as if to say, 'I see what is in the mind of God'. And he uses such beautiful designations of God in that setting.
W.B-w. The full-grown man and the fulness of the Christ. How do they link on with the Son of God?
J.T. "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man", that is, via that way -- via the unity of the faith and the knowledge of the Son of God. These two things are essential to reaching this point.
We arrive at the full-grown man on that line. "At the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ"; that is the standard. The way is marked out, the gifts are there. It is a question of manhood.
J.S. A certain finality arrived at.
J.T. I think the gifts help us in that.
T.H. Would the queen of Sheba be an example? She arrived at the thought "Happy are thy men".
J.T. Quite. And the way he went up to the house of the Lord.
{215}
J.W.D. Say a little about the assembly having the testimony that it pleased God in relation to Enoch.
J.T. I think that the truth of sonship is what aids in that, augments it. Because when God announced His pleasure in man, it was, "This is my beloved Son". That is what is effecting the idea. It is in the mind of God. We have this testimony that we please God. When David went in and sat down he was in line with God.
J.W.D. I think that is wonderful.
J.T. It is. The first book of Chronicles shows how that is worked out, how Solomon comes in, subsequently sitting on the throne with David. All these things with the number twenty-four in 1 Chronicles bring out the order of the service now, so that the saints should know how to serve Him in the assembly.
A.R. David came in and sat before the Lord. Do you think he came to finality in his soul?
J.T. Yes. He takes up the thought at once. He knew what it was to be indignant. When God smote Uzzah he was indignant. He might have been indignant, too, when God set him aside in relation to the building of the house, but he was not. He went in and sat before Jehovah.
W.B-w. In 1 Chronicles do we gather with the gifts all in operation?
J.T. That is right. We get the age reduced in the levites, so that there is a wide scope for ministry; that God should get the most.
W.R. You see the sons of Levi merging with the sons of Aaron.
J.T. Quite so.
A.P.T. The truth seen in the Ephesian epistle really is the highest thought, because if you will notice in the first verse he speaks of the faithful in Christ at Ephesus. I was wondering if there was anything in that. "I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God".
{216}
J.T. Quite so. The whole assembly was developed at Ephesus. It would appear that conditions there warranted it.
Rem. This idea of the full-grown man, is that praise?
J.T. Well, it is what is in mind for each of us. It is not for heaven. It is what is down here.
Rem. There is no growth in heaven. It is all down here.
J.T. It is a mistake to talk about growth in heaven. There is no end to eternity; what are we going to come to then? God is a God of measure.
F.C. Do I understand it is an individual thought?
J.T. It is. "Until we all arrive". God has all the saints moving together in the truth. You are not going to wait for me. You go on yourself. "Until we all arrive". Ephesians is aiming at that all the time. Enoch is the leading man in @Genesis 5. He is the outstanding man. The seventh from Adam is the outstanding man.
A.B.P. Does he not come into it with the apprehension of sonship also?
J.T. Quite so. The three hundred years only led to his knowledge of God. He got more and more pleasing to God.
{217}
LORDSHIP, THE COVENANT AND THE FAMILY
@1 Corinthians 11: 17 - 28; @Hebrews 8: 10, 11; @Ephesians 3:14 - 21
J.T. The first scripture, it is thought, furnishes us with what pertains to the Lord in the service of God. It is the only scripture in which we have the term "Lord's supper". In all the references to the Lord's supper, the title "Lord" is very prominent; so that it is what may be termed the dominical section in 1 Corinthians, dominated by the thought of Christ's lordship. In @Hebrews 8, 9, and part of 10, it treats of the covenant; and what appears in the verses read is that God says in verse 10, "I will be to them for God, and *they* shall be to me for people". Then in Ephesians the apostle bows his knees to the Father, "of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named". The passage is paternal -- the Father, who has to say to all families; naming each according to what it is in His thoughts and counsels, and what it is characteristically. So that under these three heads we may consider the question of the service of God in the assembly and what is appropriate in relation to each.
R.W.S. What is implied in the dominical side?
J.T. It is the Lord's particular realm, He is dominant; that is what I was thinking of. We may, perhaps, consider that first. We have the Lord's supper -- and the Lord's day, as we have often heard, in @Revelation 1. They bear on one another. The two terms are related and only appear each once.
C.A.M. I suppose one great importance in recognising the thought of "Lord" would be that surrounding this setting here, there is a possibility of adverse things. Would you say that?
{218}
J.T. That is what I think. That is what helps us to see why the dominical side is first, because it is a question of authority and subjugation, excluding all that is contrary; so that in chapter 10 we have the Lord's cup and the Lord's table, and that He is not to be provoked to jealousy. We are reminded that He is stronger than we are, so that God is notifying us at the outset that He has means of dealing with all that is contrary; so that there should be no insubordination inside.
W.F.K. Is lordship connected with the kingdom?
J.T. Quite so.
A.F.M. When you speak of inside you mean the saints?
J.T. Exactly; so the need of being subject. God notifies us at the outset that all else is inadmissible. We are told what is outside the city in Revelation; nothing that defiles is allowed inside.
A.N.W. Following the verse which speaks of the Lord's supper, the better rendering reads, "For each one in eating takes his own supper before others, and one is hungry and another drinks to excess" (verse 21). It seems to confirm what has been said.
J.T. Yes. It robbed the occasion of the application of the title of the Lord's supper to it. They allowed their own wills; party spirit inside robbed the occasion of its proper dignity.
A.B.P. I suppose if we do not subscribe to what the Lord does, He would say to us, "Friend, how tamest thou in here not having on a wedding garment?"
J.T. Quite so. The king came into seethe guests he sees what is there.
J.S. Would not the Lord's day introduce His lordship?
J.T. Well, I thought so. The term is very similar as it regards the dominical side, the dominance of Christ; both as regards the Supper itself and the
{219}
day, so that there are two things working at the same time. The day denotes His authority as well as the Supper.
J.S. We begin with the day and that would be our stepping-off stone.
J.T. Quite so. The day begins earlier than the Supper. Therefore, it prepares us for what is coming.
Ques. What difference do you make between the scriptural use of Lord's day and the first day of the week?
J.T. In the first day of the week the stress is on the word 'first'. It is the beginning of a new order of things. It is inaugural, looking towards eternity. We have it in @John 20, and in @Acts 20. In John's gospel it is connected with the Lord coming in, the disciples being within; and in Acts it is connected with the breaking of bread.
Rem. Do you think there might be a transitional period in which we move from the one to the other?
J.T. I think that is good. The Lord's day begins in whatever way we view it. We may say at twelve midnight it begins, so that it ought to enter into our thoughts and calculations, having in mind that this great occasion belongs to it. Whereas in regard to the first day of the week in its proper application, the force of the word comes in in relation to the spiritual side of the matter; for @Acts 20 is the breaking of bread. It is not said they came for the Lord's supper, but for the breaking of bread. The breaking of bread is remembrance of Christ; "in remembrance of me". It is Luke's side of the matter. And the first day of the week enters in its full force when we are on the spiritual line properly after the Supper, for it is @John 20. He stresses the first day of the week. Both the Supper and the Lord's day are in a time setting, but the first day of the week introduces what is eternal; it merges in what is eternal. The first day of the week is the eternal thought.
{220}
A.T. You were speaking some time ago of the assembly meeting in @Luke 24. Would that help in regard to what you have now? "The Lord is risen".
J.T. That is good. It belongs to the Lord's supper. We were speaking about the breaking of bread. They came together in assembly, the eleven, which really is in accord with the Lord's supper; the Lord's authority in the apostle. They were gathered together; whereas John does not say they were gathered together. The proper translation says, "where the disciples were" not 'where they were gathered'; it is the persons.
Rem. Do you think that the earlier verse in @Luke 24 "and to enter into his glory" would refer to what comes under Him on the Lord's day, such as @Psalm 24?
J.T. Well, His glory certainly enters into the first day of the week. It is what He has, now, here below.
C.A.M. Speaking about the matter of the Lord's supper and the first day of the week, would it not be right to say that the Lord's supper, while it is a remembrance as you were saying, involves a close of a period? The idea of supper is at the end of something, whereas the first day of the week introduces the glorious covenant. I was thinking it helps to introduce what is coming soon; like the Sun of Righteousness.
J.T. Quite so, the great outlook that we have. I think @John 20 stresses that more than any chapter that we have.
W.B-w. I was thinking of Mary of Magdala; she was at the tomb while it was yet dark. Would she represent the spiritual side?
J.T. Well, I think she does. The whole chapter is spiritual. Peter and John discerned by what they saw in the sepulchre that the Lord was risen. It says John "saw and believed". The state of the sepulchre, the position of the clothes and the napkin
{221}
appealed to their spiritual understanding. They did not see the angels, Mary did. They did not see the Lord Himself; Mary did. But they believed without these things. They believed before the Lord was seen and before the angels were seen. They believed because of the condition of the sepulchre. You only get it there.
C.A.M. The last sights of earth; those material things have such a wonderful voice that you would like to be observant. Those are the last things we shall see.
J.T. Quite so. They saw the position of the cloths -- the word is 'cloths' really. They were separate ideas; not one piece, but separate ideas.
They were cloths, linen cloths. Peter saw these, and he saw the napkin folded by itself in a separate place; and yet Jesus had gone. Others thought He was stolen; Mary Magdalene did; but it does not appear that Peter or John thought that. They were more spiritual, perhaps not so affectionate, but more spiritual and that is what is needed for that place.
J.H.E. Because of that it was given to Peter to have the first appearance.
J.T. That is what Luke says. He appeared to Simon. We have no actual record in the gospels; we have what is said in @Luke 24. The appearance to Simon is not described; Paul tells us that it was so. Mark says He appeared first to Mary. Luke recounts that the saints were saying that He appeared to Simon, but it does not say that it was the first appearing. The first thing we get about him is that he entered into the sepulchre; he investigated and was capable of deducing from what he saw in the sepulchre that the Lord was risen.
W.B-w. What did that convey to him? What spiritual thought did the napkin being wrapped by itself convey to him?
J.T. The napkin was just one thought, but I
{222}
believe what it conveyed to him was that the linen cloths were not detached. They were cloths, but they were not detached from their original position; they remained in that position. The Lord had come out without affecting the material side at all. He did not have to take away the stone. He rose and left the tomb without affecting the physical side. I think that is like the beginning of the forty days, the great spiritual order of things appearing. I believe Peter and John were spiritual enough to take that in. If He had been stolen those wrappings would have been detached. The only difference was the wrapping of the napkin. It was folded in a place by itself.
J.S. I was wondering if you would regard the condition in which the sepulchre was found as comparable with Revelation.
J.T. I think they saw a spiritual order of things.
A.F.M. What do you think of John? His name is not prominent as offering any help for the inside of the sepulchre.
J.T. It says, "Simon Peter therefore comes, following him, and entered into the tomb, and sees the linen cloths lying, and the handkerchief which was upon his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but folded up in a distinct place by itself. Then entered in therefore the other disciple also who came first to the tomb, and he saw and believed"; John saw and believed. Then it says, "for they had not yet known the scripture, that he must rise from among the dead. The disciples therefore went away again to their own home" (verses 6 - 10). It seems as if the two disciples ought to be linked up with the believing, both having gone in.
A.R. I was wondering if the linen cloths lying and the napkin lying folded by itself is representative of what is to remain on earth; a spiritual order of
{223}
things. It represents something orderly; the linen speaks of purity.
J.T. Yes. I think what is conveyed is that the linen cloths were not disturbed. The napkin was disturbed; the handkerchief was folded in a distinct place by itself. Some hand did that because of the Person's head that had been there. The head would denote the dignity of the Person.
Ques. Would the cloths refer to His body?
J.T. I think so. The wrappings cover the whole body.
A.R. "Where the disciples were" would indicate an orderly state of the saints. They were not disturbed when He came in and appeared. In @1 Corinthians 11 there is a disorderly state.
J.T. Well, that is good. The state of things at the Supper was such that the apostle says, I cannot praise you. They were not right.
Ques. The handkerchief is in a distinct place. Would that refer to the headship of Christ?
J.T. I think so. Whoever folded it and placed it aside did so reverentially.
A.N.W. Have you any mind who did it? Was it angelic?
J.T. Angelic, I think.
C.A.M. The Holy Spirit in John just touches on it. He is giving an intimation of what is going to happen later on -- this matter of headship.
J.T. I think John touches on the spiritual side. He is giving an account of himself and Peter. They were affected spiritually by what they saw; at least he was. The Spirit of God stresses the thought of investigation, of going into the matter fully. They went to the sepulchre and looked into it, and saw these things. "He saw and believed".
J.S. I should have thought the linen cloths not being moved is that the movement is wholly spiritual. Later on in the chapter the doors were closed. It
{224}
was not a question of opening the doors. The Lord comes in.
J.T. I believe John is more important in teaching of spirituality than any of the gospels.
J.S. The clothes would not have to be disturbed.
J.T. Some of us were speaking last evening about the resurrection -- with what bodies do they come; and what instruction stands related to it. But the instruction here is spirituality. These disciples, especially John, were affected. He believed by what he saw; by the position of these things.
A.R.S. Does seeing always precede believing?
J.T. Well, so far. But this very chapter says, "Blessed they who have not seen and have believed" (verse 29). The apostles were eyewitnesses; that was what was essential to apostleship. They were eyewitnesses of His majesty, as Peter says (@2 Peter 1: 16), and Paul says, "have I not seen Jesus our Lord?"
@1 Corinthians 9: 1. Physically, he saw Him; but we have not. And although it was essential that they should see Him physically, literally, to be witnesses; there is more to be attached to believing without seeing. "Blessed they who have not seen and have believed". That is an additional thought.
T.W. We have a right to enter into that. It is not beyond us.
J.T. That is it. It is not beyond us. Matthew would not suggest the thought of the disciples¬ going into the tomb because the angel was there in power sitting on the stone; but John makes much of this investigation.
R.W.S. Had you any thought of the spices being omitted? They are bound up in the linen in verse 40. They are not mentioned as having been seen. Is there a point in that?
J.T. I think the point is the position of the wrappings. That is all that is mentioned; because it is a question of how the Lord lay, how He lay physically
{225}
and that these things were as they were. There is no distortion of the exterior.
G.McPh. Do you mean that there should be no struggle in our souls to rise to what is spiritual?
J.T. No struggle at all.
A.F.M. The angels sit at the head and the feet where the body of the Lord had lain. What was the instruction of the fact of Mary being there? Was there anything beyond that for faith?
J.T. "Mary stood at the tomb weeping without. As therefore she wept, she stooped down into the tomb, and beholds two angels sitting ...". (verses 11, 12). That is what she saw. She apparently gained nothing from the position of the wrappings; it was a further thought. It seems to be on somewhat lower ground, although one would not like to say anything about Mary Magdalene; but at the same time her mind was that someone had taken the Lord away; and I believe that John determined that that was not so. He believed that there was a spiritual transaction.
J.S. It was necessary that these things be seen and recorded.
C.A.M. Perhaps they noticed that there was a strong difference between this and the resurrection of Lazarus. In his case the clothes had to be removed.
J.T. That is helpful. The Lord had to direct them to remove the clothes; and that is what I think affected John.
Rem. It is graveclothes in @John 11; referring to the difference you are making between these and the cloths.
J.T. He came out bound hand and foot with them. It is another thing altogether, and I think the contrast enters into what we are saying.
C.A.M. Do you think in that way the coming into life of Lazarus might possibly suggest the way the earthly people of God will come into great, strenuous
{226}
matters; whereas with the heavenly saints 'no struggle' seems to be a very marvellous thing?
J.T. Well, that is good. Ezekiel shows that much transpired. The bones are dry.
C.A.M. There is a noise.
J.T. Yes. A rustling, then the flesh comes on, and the skin.
A.P.T. What we have been having together here so far, does it not appear that there is the necessity of this being substantiated in our souls particularly in view of who would proceed in assembly service in connection with the breaking of bread?
J.T. That is what I thought we should get at the difference between this and the Lord's day, which is an external idea and would correspond with Matthew. The angel came down with all evidences of power and authority and sat on the stone, as much as to say, 'Who can touch this?' The matter is open and settled. Heaven had to do with this; the authority of heaven. I believe that is Matthew's side; and John's side is to bring in the spiritual, and that is what we ought to get at -- the transition from the external position, for it has its own importance in testimony here, to the spiritual position that does not affect the external. You move into it; it is not physical. It is something that John represents himself: "he saw and believed". He was spiritual enough for that.
Rem. Do you think that we have been possibly not making enough allowance for Christ's place as Lord at the beginning of the meeting?
J.T. I think we have not made enough room for all that enters into that side of the truth; what is dominical. It covers the Lord's supper and the covenant.
A.B.P. Would this confirm in our minds that He is supreme? He was supreme even in death, and He 
{227}
came out and would impress upon us that we cannot touch Him except in a spiritual way.
J.T. That is what John emphasises, the spiritual side; we need to bring out Matthew's side, the authority of the Lord. So that everything that is not in keeping with the assembly is excluded; even if it be in our own hearts. The dominical side is to subdue and shut out all that is inimical to all that is suiting with this service.
Rem. It is not exactly the Lord in heaven; it is more His presence in our midst according to @Luke 24, as adjusting ourselves in relation to our lives.
J.T. As He comes in, you mean. Yes; but even before that, before we leave our houses; very early the idea is there, that it is the Lord's day. The angel come down symbolises that.
C.A.M. Bringing Matthew's gospel into it is a striking thing. In this matter of the day you really come under the ordinances of the heavens. These commandments -- they all substantiate in your soul,.
J.T. So that we have that very expression in Job. They are ordinances, and they symbolise what you say, the authority of heaven; and you must be ruled by these. As you get up and move about in household matters, it is the Lord's day. It ought to be the same every day, in a sense, but it is accentuated on the Lord's day because we are looking on to this great service. We are looking on to that and we want to approach this great matter in subjection and self-judgment.
J.S. Do you think the change of the weekly calendar has been overruled by God with this in view?
J.T. Quite so. It was a gradual thing. The synoptical gospels do not make so much of the first day, but John would say, 'Never mind, it is the first day of the week. We are beginning something new'.
A.F.M. Ought we not in America to be benefited by New Zealand and Australia? By the fact that
{228}
they already have gone through this exercise, and we as in the body ought to be affected by it.
J.T. Quite so. We have abundant evidence that a breath might come ten thousand miles in a second; how much more what lies in the Spirit of God! The Lord's day is very long.
A.P.T. We do not need the radio. It is superfluous. We are dealing with what is spiritual.
J.T. Quite so; greater material than the physical universe affords. The Spirit of God is a Person. He is here and there at the same time; so that an impulse in New Zealand -- it is seventeen hours before New York -- well, an impulse so far ahead affects us.
On the Monday, too, the power of prayer is on all day Monday, from early morning. Well, you say, we are talking about physical things; but it is not so.
We are talking about spiritual things.
A.R. It would mean that our meetings ought to be more spiritual than those in the East.
J.T. Well, we have an advantage.
Rem. I was wondering if your reference to @Acts 20 does not help. It says they were gathered together for the breaking of bread and Paul was discoursing until midnight and Eutychus falls down and is revived before the breaking of bread, and then they talked.
J.T. Quite so.
N.W. That went on till daybreak.
J.T. Quite so. The discourse went on till midnight, and then they broke bread, and talked until daybreak. I think what we are speaking of is very important for the brethren to take in. For we have been brought into a wonderful position, and John shows us the transition from what is external, which ought to be right, and then what is spiritual. So that the Lord is known spiritually; not in the midst of *them*, but in *the* midst. It is in the midst of the great spiritual realm.
Rem. When a brother gives thanks for the bread,
{229}
does He come in as Lord at that point? Give us the reason why, and what should be done in the meeting at that point.
J.T. Well, He is the Lord; John says that. Peter and he were together in the boat, and John says, "It is the Lord". The Lord was standing on the shore, and He was looking after them; He had a fire of coals; He was thinking of them. Now, if He comes in as you suggest, He has to attend to our condition; what there may be there in the meeting. So that He has us with Him without our being trammelled with outside matters; difficulties, or pressures, or feelings, anything that would interfere with the service would come under Him then.
Rem. Really, we cannot proceed to the covenant until the Lord has charge of us. He has to have us under His control.
J.T. That is right. He comes in in that way; @Luke 24 is the example of all that, how He behaved amongst them to adjust them.
A.R.S. In @Acts 20, why was the breaking of bread put off for such a long time?
J.T. Well, it is not set down there as an example for us, that we should have a long discourse about the breaking of bread. It is because the thing was not understood; that is what is meant. However long Paul speaks, wait on him. Get his mind before you break bread so you know how to do it. Even the twelve did not get the instruction as to how to do it. He says, "I have received of the Lord".
Rem. That seems to be the point in this chapter. He gives them credit for coming together in assembly, but not for properly breaking bread.
J.T. That is why he brings it in here as having received it from the Lord.
A.F.M. Is there not a thought in Paul standing up to minister; it was needed for the saints on
{230}
prophetic lines? Paul was moving on with further things to communicate.
J.T. I have no doubt. Although they came together for the breaking of bread it was a long time until they did it. Do not do it unless you listen to Paul.
A.N.W. I was wondering if it would not be on apostolic lines rather than prophetic lines.
A.F.M. He did it as an apostle.
A.R. The Lord Jesus coming in to the Supper as Lord, would that break up our wills? Everything is regulated.
J.T. It is whatever He sees; and if He is discerned. One says, "It is the Lord". Well, then it calls us to attention. What will I do? So that subjection is the great thing then.
W.B-w. It took Peter a long time when he heard that, because it says he girt his fisher's coat about him and cast himself into the sea. It was quite a long process.
J.T. I think the way he moved gives an inkling of how the testimony of the Lord among us should affect us. It is a great occasion when the Lord comes in. Peter wrapped himself in his fisher's cloak. If it is the Lord I must change my dress. He put on his coat; that is the idea. We need to perk up. It is a great occasion and we need to be in accord with it. The Lord is there as Priest to help us.
Rem. It is often said, *we* receive the bread from the Lord's hand, but the apostle says, "I have received".
J.T. Quite so. Paul received it and he has given it to us.
R.W.S. The first day is mentioned in this very epistle in connection with the collection for the saints.
J.T. It seems as if that comes in for right feelings. So that the box is on a higher plane than the authority of the Lord. It is on the first day of the week.
{231}
A.R. Why did the apostle bring in the Lord's supper to meet local need?
J.T. To show them that what they were pretending to do was not really so. They were assuming to be partaking of the Lord's supper but their condition was not suitable. This is not it, but we must find out what it is; and he proceeds to tell us.
A.B.P. After he says, "I have received of the Lord", he says, "the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me",
@1 Corinthians 11: 23, 24. How we should get into our minds the preciousness of what has been delivered to us.
J.T. Well, we can hardly stay much longer on the question of the lordship of Christ. We have just touched on it. But Hebrews shows the part the covenant has. We have a whole chapter in Hebrews about it. We have chapters 8, 9 and 10. It is a great subject, this matter of the covenant. It begins with "We have such a one". He summarises in the first verse or two of chapter 8, and then he reaches the idea of the Minister of the sanctuary. That is what is in mind. And then he comes down to the covenant so as to bring us into this thing, that we might be in accord with Him in this great matter of the exercise of His ministerial place as minister of the sanctuary. And what comes out is the Lord saying, "I will be to them for God, and *they* shall be to me for people" (verse 10).
C.A.M. "We have such a one" would correspond with the fact that the Lord is there. The great thing is the matter of God.
J.T. That is what comes out. The Minister of the sanctuary; but it is a matter of God, not the Father; the Father is not mentioned in Hebrews at all in relation to us save as disciplining us; the Father of
{232}
spirits. So that we are on rather lower ground in what we are speaking of now.
A.N.W. Is He before us as Priest now or is He Mediator?
J.T. The chapter begins with a summary of what had preceded: "a summary of the things of which we are speaking is, We have such a one high priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens; minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man" (verses 1, 2). We have Him and that would mean that He attends to us in all that we need. As it says later when we are enjoined actually to draw near, that is one of the things we have and He is available to us in relation to what He has in mind. He is over all the matter and it is for us to see now the place the covenant has. He is the Mediator of the covenant.
W.B-w. Does mediatorship come before you before priesthood in this section?
J.T. Well, I think priesthood is before us always.
"Having ... a great high priest" in chapter 4, we draw near to the throne of grace; it is the greatness of His Person; and then in chapter 10, "Let us draw near". I think He is there to minister to us in that sense; being Mediator of the covenant is an office that He fulfils, too. He is always that, and that would mean that He brings it to us, and reminds us what the love of God is to us. "I will be to them for God, and *they* shall be to me for people". We have a God and He has a people.
C.A.M. So that you are far beyond any possibility of any party spirit now. "All shall know me". We are all filled with the knowledge of God.
J.T. That is it. We have passed on from authority, although I think it is still dominical. Any thing that comes up must be subdued; but then God is there.
{233}
A.R. Is that why it says, "Giving my laws into their mind, I will write them also upon their hearts" (verse 10)?
J.T. You can see that. In @2 Corinthians 3 that is the link.
T.H. In the reference to being written in the heart, the idea of the intelligent person comes into view; and in this passage the mind comes before the heart.
J.T. I think that is good; but what has just been touched on is to keep the thing going. Now we have reached a point where it is the knowledge of God. It is not now the knowledge of the Lord, not the authority of the Lord; but the knowledge of God. What do I know of God in this section of the service, God in the covenant? Because I must differentiate between God in the covenant and God as Father.
A.P.T. Is the service maintained as to lordship and now as to God -- both settings in relation to time?
J.T. Quite so. The covenant is in relation to time.
A.F.M. How do we address God at this juncture? With regard to the covenant-making God, are we free at that juncture to address Him?
J.T. I think so. We are drawing near to God in our souls, and as knowing Him we differentiate with regard to Him; what He is in relation to the covenant, and what He is in relation to eternal counsels and purposes.
C.A.M. So that as you say, of course, it relates to time still. I was wondering whether up to this stage of the meeting you have in mind that there are the least and the greatest. There are those whom you would respect, those who have a great knowledge of God.
J.T. Quite so. All the people were in the giving, but when you come to David and Solomon it was the king and the princes. And hence, if a man has a
{234}
greater knowledge of God he will be able to contribute more liberally.
C.A.M. That helps me, because it seems to me that in the early part of the meeting it is right to have great respect to those who have a great knowledge of God.
J.T. I think we should. David and Solomon would say, That brother has more and you must recognise that, you must make room for him; not that he would be pushing himself at all.
A.P.T. This is more the Jacob side. It says in the same epistle, "Jacob ... worshipped on the top of his staff", @Hebrews 11: 21. It is experience and the knowledge of God.
J.T. Quite so. He went on to that; he reaches that point; he passes on in that way. He worshipped leaning on the top of his staff, meaning that his experience entered into that.
G.McP. Would it be normal for the spiritual to take the lead?
J.T. Well, David and Solomon make much of the king and the princes, whereas with Moses it is the people. We must make room for growth and the knowledge of God. "All shall know me". How much do I know?
J.H.E. Does Thomas help as to growth? He was not there at the beginning, but then he says, "My Lord and my God", @John 20: 28.
J.T. He did not get beyond Christ. Understand, I am not making little of that, because Christ is God, but it was God in that way; God in that Person. But we get beyond that, because that Person is alongside of us, and we are worshipping another Being. The knowledge of God helps us to differentiate between divine Persons. One of the Deity can come down and be our Leader and One remains in the absoluteness of the Deity.
C.A.M. It is from the little one to the great one.
{235}
A.F.M. So the brother might fulfil the same service, where there are a scarcity of brothers in the meeting; or he might be privileged to give thanks to God in both characters as Father and God.
J.T. I think in Ephesians we have it set out. The apostle is filled now with the thought of the Father. It is not the lordship of Christ. The lordship of Christ is usually military in Ephesians, whereas in Romans it is kingship in relation to the kingdom. I think we can distinguish between the king and the military leaders. This is the richest chapter because it is a parenthesis in order that Paul might let out what was in his heart of the mystery. 'That you might know what I know about it'. So he reaches this point, and says, "For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father", @Ephesians 3: 14. It is simply the Father that he has in mind, and he says He names every family in heaven and on earth. It is not the whole family, it is every family in the heavens and on the earth. He is really dealing with one family, that is quite obvious. If we now draw near to the Father, it is a matter of a family that He names; and therefore the thought of God will help me to see that I must differentiate between the covenant and the family and speak to God in connection with the family that He has named.
G.McP. Does the thought of God pertain to the priesthood in the service of His house and the thought of the Father to the thought of sonship?
J.T. Quite so. 'Sons of God' is the final thought; what the Deity is is finally in our mind. All is according to His counsel, and of course, the character must be in keeping with that. I must be in keeping with that. How am I going to speak to this Being, this great eternal Being? The final thought is God. "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages" (verse 21).
"That God may be all in all". I want to understand
{236}
now for the moment it is the Father. He has named us in relation to His eternal thoughts. We want to be in keeping with that. Paul says, I bow my knees because of this. It means I must be strengthened with might by His Spirit. It is the Spirit in another way, it is the Spirit of the Father.
J.T.Jr. Is it necessary to know the Spirit in that way in its different settings beginning with @Romans 5?
J.T. Say a little more.
J.T.Jr. The love of God is shed abroad (chapter 5). In chapter 8 it is the Spirit leading on to sonship, and then here the Spirit leading on to the Father.
J.T. Quite so. It is a wonderful thing to be strengthened in the inner man by it. It is not only strengthened, but strengthened with *might* by that Spirit.
C.A.M. Is it in your mind that prior to the Spirit of His Son, the Spirit of the Father, it is the Spirit of Christ? We come into it by adoption, would you say?
J.T. Quite so.
A.N.W. Our priest and minister is now before us.
J.T. He is now there as the Minister of the sanctuary. Officially He is Minister of the sanctuary, but then He is the Son, too. It says He is the "firstborn among many brethren". He is there in that capacity. It is a family matter. The official side is receding and we are coming into the family.
Rem. Is the Lord moving from the headship line to the line of family relations?
J.T. That is the thought; the first-born among many brethren. We are to be conformed to His image.
J.T.Jr. The family which sin never touched.
J.T. Quite so.
J.S. Would it bring spiritual life?
J.T. It is not as the covenant-God now but the Father. We are able to say Father; God viewed as the final culminating thought in the Deity.
{237}
J.H.E. Would there be a little touch in the naming of Joseph's sons? Joseph took his two sons and Jacob named them.
J.T. Well, there is something there. He is putting them on the level of Reuben and Simeon. The meaning of the word 'Reuben' is a son; so that we are now in the family. It is a question of being there characteristically, and how to speak to God in that relationship.
A.R. I was wondering if you would say something more about the Spirit -- the Spirit of the Father that is in me, that helps me to know the Father.
J.T. Well, it is the Spirit of the Father in the sense of power. It is by His Spirit in the inner man that you may know. That is to give you capacity to know the breadth and length and depth and height. The Spirit of adoption is not shut out.
C.A.M. Your stressing that matter of the Father as a sort of inner thing helps me. It seems to give character to all the range of things that you are going to enter into now.
J.T. Quite so. We are now in the family; and the great end of the family is God. God is to be all in all. Not 'all *and* in all' but "all *in* all". That is He is not all to me objectively, but He is all *in* me. Whereas in Colossians Christ is everything in the new man, but this is a greater thing; this is the eternal thing.
G.McP. In the light of the assembly, as the truth is worked out amongst us, is that what we reach in the assembly?
J.T. It is the order of assembly service; what is dominical and what is family. We are now speaking of God first, as the Father, who names the families, the saints, the church; and then finally, as God; that God may be all in all. The whole scene is God.
Ques. Is that the knowledge of God, God being all in all?
{238}
J.T. The knowledge of God begins at the incarnation.
A.R. The thought of God is not the covenant-God but the eternal-God.
J.T. Quite so.
W.B-w. Referring to the part of the meeting where the Lord comes in "in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". He is Minister of the sanctuary there.
J.T. That is right. He is leading us now.
Rem. The Lord is said to be in our hearts in this chapter. Does that mean He is now taking a position in relation to the assembly?
A.F.M. I would like to get that thought expanded in connection with Ephesians and Colossians; God all in all. It is the thought "all in all", as to whether that is subjective in my soul or whether it is what characterises everything in which He is the great centre.
J.T. I think "in all" would mean the family in mind. Of course, in @Ephesians 4 you have a further thought. "One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all" (verse 6). That is universal. Well, I think it alludes to the saints.
This verse says "in us all". That is what the epistle is dealing with. Of course, if we enlarge it to the universal thought it brings all the families together in the same thing, which perhaps is not in the apostle's mind here. The final thought is that God is all in all.
He is objectively all to us but He is in us too, filling us. Filled with all the fulness of God. It seems also to make allowance for the universal bearing. In the universe of bliss He certainly fills all subjectively, and fills all the families in some sense.
E.T.B. Would you say that it is only the assembly that has this thought of God as Father?
J.T. Oh no, I should not say that; He has been known as Father on earth. That is the way Matthew
{239}
brings the thing in as to the place the Father has. What is Matthew's view? He brings God in immediately, but he connects the Father with ordering things here. John treats the Father with Paul on the highest level. "My Father and your Father ... . my God and your God", @John 20: 17. That is the final setting of the matter.
J.H.E. It is really John that gives us the economy of the Father and the Son.
J.T. Quite so.
C.A.M. It really brings you to the end of the Bible.
J.T. It does. Quite so.
Rem. The Lord had this in mind in His prayer in @John 17. Would that not help us to understand this further?
J.T. Well, I think that is right. "That the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them". Here it is the Father's Spirit.
G.McP. God being our dwelling-place from generation to generation.
J.T. Yes, that would all enter into this.
{240}
SPIRITUAL PERSONALITY
@Romans 7: 25; @1 John 5: 10 (first clause); @1 Timothy 4: 13 - 16
I wises to speak tonight about individuality, that is, in a spiritual sense. We really begin on that principle to attain to what is in the mind of God for us, and also for Himself. As the boards of the tabernacle had each an individuality, so each saint begins with this if he is to attain to the great design of God for him, and for Himself. The great design in Exodus was the tabernacle. That was for God. He said, "And they shall make *me* a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them", @Exodus 25:8. So each item has its existence separately, and as regards the boards which represent more fully what I am speaking of, they were made standing up. It is the divine thought that individuality in us implies an upright position, and the balance that is necessary to it.
And this brings up the matter of the material, the wood out of which the boards were formed; so that we begin in the wilderness with the wood, which is the great abstract thought of what I am speaking about. Jehovah *showed* Moses wood. It alludes to a kind of humanity that has to be shown. The world knows it not; the world knew Christ not. That is, it did not know Him really as to the nature of His humanity. And in regard of that, dear brethren, we have to speak of Christ's humanity as it was and as it is. The humanity as it was was unique. There never was a man like Jesus before, nor since, nor ever shall be! There never was a Man like Him in that humanity inclusive of the condition. There are those before and after like Him morally, but not physically. He was alone -- a unique kind of humanity.
Perhaps we have not thought of that, but if we do
{241}
think of it, it will arouse considerable reflection, and contemplation, and meditation: that there was a Man here for thirty-three years -- only Himself -- only like Himself -- not one before, or then, or since, or for ever! It was a kind of humanity all of itself -- perfectly man, in every respect a man, yet unique; a Man so as to accomplish redemption, to set aside the condition of flesh and blood as before God and to replace it with another kind of humanity; not that which He took on in flesh and blood but one of which we have spoken today which is spiritual and yet physical; spiritually physical -- flesh and bones, not blood.
That is really the idea of the boards. They all spring in that way from that, so Moses is shown wood. Ordinary men and women walking about do not need to be shown to us; they are there if you have eyes to see them -- millions of them. But this wood was shown. It was there but not seen, not known. God showed it to Moses and Moses cast it into the waters. Morally the same Christ that went into death is the One that came out of it, but He has come out of it as another kind of humanity -- actually another kind -- a kind in which we have part. Had He remained in the humanity He took, He would have remained alone in it. He laid down that kind of humanity, and has taken up humanity of another kind. And in this humanity He is not alone, thank God! We are all in it. Much fruit, many grains, developed out of that one grain of wheat that fell into the ground and died.
Now the boards were made out of that. The link is that that kind of man could be handled by another. No one is really in christianity who cannot be handled by another. The tendency is that I handle others and am unhandled myself! That is not christianity! This wood is cast into the waters by Moses. It speaks of the Lord here in perfect subjection to the will of God. Whatever that will requires, I should be available and amenable.
{242}
That is the thought, dear brethren, and I wanted to enlarge on it: first in Romans -- how we enter on individuality spiritually. I am an individual, a whole being -- tri-partite, as it is called, but a whole being. It is not without significance that it is so, that man is spirit, soul, and body, and intended to be so far self-contained. So in Romans in this sentence I read, "I myself", is the thought. Who am I? Every one of us is conscious of his existence, that it is "I myself". Not simply 'I'; that would be enough to express individuality but not conscious individuality. It must be "I myself" to convey that fully. Now I have to analyse that, and in order to do that I have to learn to judge; that is, to be master of the institution, for it is an institution. Every human being is an institution, if you understand, and God intends him to be that spiritually. So it is "I myself".
Well, if I sit down or stand up or lie down, I think of myself. And alas! how much there is of useless self-occupation! But I must begin that way. It implies introspection -- the chapter is intended for introspection, that I might look in and see things as they are inside. God and myself alone can do it; God can do it better than I, but I can do it, too. And instead of the corrupt condition that is described, the almost inscrutable and inexplicable condition where contrary elements are at work, I arrive at the point when by introspection I see an ordered condition inside of me. This is the beginning of spiritual individuality, and what the speaker stresses is, "I myself with the mind ...". He has found that out; he has a mind and with that faculty, he says, "I ... serve God's law". That is, the character, the order of the condition of the institution, is established. There is much filling in and filling out, but there is the framework of spiritual individuality.
God must rule, and not simply God. You say, He does rule me. But the point he makes is God's law.
{243}
That God has made laws is the next thing to see. He has graciously deigned to enter into law-making, and this initial analysis enables me to see that I am making headway according to God. Out of the maze of which the earlier verses speak I have come to clear daylight. I am making headway. I see this point that "I *myself* with the mind serve God's law". That is his resolution; it is a fixed matter in his mind.
Now there are those who speak about being subject to God but make little of the law of God. If it were simply the rule of God by His own personal influence, that would suit; but it is not that. God is pleased to make laws. The universe is full of laws, the physical universe. There are those who think they know a great deal about these laws but they do not know it all. The laws that work in one's own physical being are not known. As a matter of fact, there is very little known by the human mind in regard to the physical system of things, the physical universe and the living creatures in it. The law permeates everything and aside from it, disregard of it, is disaster, physically or morally. So that the beginning of spiritual individuality according to God is "I myself" in my consciousness; not simply 'I', but "*I myself*". I have come to that point; I am making headway and I am not content if I am not making headway. It is continuous while I am down here.
Well now, one could say much about that. The next chapter opens up how one is sustained, the filling in, but in what I have said so far is just a skeleton, but all the parts are there. There is the filling in and the filling out. Filling in is constitutional, filling out is ornamental, and God intends both. He intends a constitutional condition suitable to Himself and an ornamental condition, a testimonial condition. The testimonial condition is not inside, but outside, what is seen. So that, as I said, chapter 8 is the filling out. You emerge from chapter 7, the part to which I have
{244}
alluded, which is a most distressing experience and yet a needed one, until you arrive at clear daylight. It may be only twilight but you see everything; not yet perhaps in the full light of which Paul speaks, "above the brightness of the sun", but certainly in light in which all objects are seen. You see them. I hope all you young people are following what I am saying, because it is essential to christianity that each develops in individual spirituality, and then collective. There is much that is apt to be just extraneous matter, hindering the operations of the Spirit in the body. Not that I would be exclusive, nor that I would shut out the young, but be sure you have the Spirit! What the saints of God have had to endure from persons in our midst who have not the Spirit is beyond words! God would have watchmen on the walls so that none should be admitted who have not the Spirit.
So chapter 8 is the filling in and filling out of all this ego; I, the ego; myself, the consciousness of that; really a person conscious of himself. Now if I examine into myself, what are my inclinations? What are my propensities! What would I like to have just now? I would soon find out just where I am, making headway towards the world? But if I say, "I myself with the mind serve God's law", I am making headway Godward. The great principle of law formulated by God, whatever form it may take, if it be of God, I must submit. My spiritual continuance depends on my submitting to the law of God, "I myself" in my own consciousness, to serve the law of God. I serve it; He has made it to be served. If He formulated a principle or law, for they are synonymous (let us not be afraid of the word 'principle'), He has pleasure in the thing being fulfilled, or 'served', as it is here. Of the Lord Jesus in manhood, it is said, "he hath magnified the law, and made it honourable", @Isaiah 42:21. That
{245}
was His specific law, here it is God's law. There is not a circumstance in which man could be found that is not ruled by law, nor even in eternity shall we be exempt from it. The Son Himself is to be subject.
Then, as I said, there is the filling in and the filling out so that there is a man here constitutionally according to God, and ornamentally according to God, so that he testifies to the glory of God! I have been thinking lately, and I should like to understand it more, how much Luke says about God being glorified. One should take that into his mind, into his heart, that the whole point is that -- that God is glorified. Persons who are made well by the miraculous power of God in Jesus glorify God. That is the end. And so it is that, in beginning to serve God's law, I am glorifying God. I am serving the law -- His law -- and He is pleased with me. I am in my orbit, if you understand what I mean. As soon as I disregard law, God's law, I am not in my orbit.
So that, referring back again, the kind of humanity in Exodus is cast into the waters. It is subject to being handled by another who does it for a purpose. And see the effect of it -- the waters are made sweet. If I avoid being handled according to God, I shall never make anybody sweet. It is in coming under the will of God that I minister to men.
The epistle of John gives us the inside in a more pronounced way, and I shall just touch on that part of the verse I read: "He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself". Please note that I am not intending to lead any of us here to be self-occupied. I am endeavouring to bring out spiritual individuality, and how it is reached according to God. So that "He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself". It is *the* witness, the article is there. Now this is a very interesting matter and I beg of you to look at it in this way. The passage
{246}
is a most interesting matter and an essential matter to what I am speaking of, to have the witness in yourself. He has the witness in himself, says the apostle John -- the one who believes on the Son of God. I wonder if every one in this room believes on the Son of God? It may be there is someone here who does not, because it is not the same as believing on the Lord, or even on God. Believing on the Son of God in John is a great matter. The others are, too, but he stresses this point -- the Son of God. And in approaching this matter of the witness in oneself, he tells us about Jesus. "This is he that came by water and blood, Jesus the Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that bears witness ...". It is the Spirit that bears witness.
"For they that bear witness are three: the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and the three agree in one". They witness to one thing -- they are perfectly agreed. It is one of the important threes of Scripture. Scripture is full of threes. First of all it is said, "And it is the Spirit that bears witness".
The three agree in one thing but the Spirit by Himself is the active witness, the others are passive witnesses.
They stand there as great facts, witnessing constantly to man, but the Spirit is the active witness. The Spirit of God is here in constant activity, serving God and then serving the saints, and He is the active witness to this great matter as to the water and the blood. From verse 6 to 12, we have the word 'witness' about ten times, and that in itself ought to remind us how important it is. In the passage I read, the witness is in the christian, in the person who believes on the Son of God. You ask, Why do you make that difference between believing on the Lord, or on God, or on Christ, and the Son of God? I will tell you. The Son of God is the Inaugurator and Sustainer of another world. That is the idea. One who believes on Him has his back to this world. He
{247}
wants to bring you into another world, He wants you for it, and the introduction to that is faith in the Son of God -- Jesus in that light. I hope everybody here believes on the Son of God. You say, I do. But then, do you understand what it means? Where are your desires? That tests out whether you really do believe on the Son of God, and if you do, you have the witness in yourself, but if you do not, you have not the witness.
The witness in yourself -- what a wonderful thing that is! Every day and every night and every moment, something there is telling me of something else. It is the only subjective witness in the passage; the others are all objective thoughts. That is what I look at and it governs my view, my outlook, my faith. I do not rest in what is inside; I rest in what is outside. My faith is in relation to the Son of God but the witness is in myself. "He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself". What independency that affords one! Not independency of will but independency of this world. Spiritual individuality involves that every believer reaches the point of independency of this world. He is now fit for another one, and he is fit to be linked up with others in another one. He is material for another one. As I said, we have the suggestion of witness about ten times in these six verses, a remarkable thing. And the final thought in them in regard of witness is that the witness that God has, the great universal irrefutable witness that God has, is not simply the Bible, but "that God has given to us", as christians, "eternal life". You have the witness in yourself; you are delivered from this world, and God says, I have you now as My witness; I have given to you eternal life. "And this is the witness, that God has given to us eternal life; and this life is in his Son". That is God's witness. Most christians today, missionary christians and the like, would make the Bible the
{248}
testimony of God. The Bible is authoritative in a verbal sense. You can read it, it is authoritative.
But then, alongside the Bible we have these people who have eternal life. Have you ever met them?
I am putting the thing so that you will understand what I mean. God began His testimony in this world with persons who had individuality. Every one of them had a name; "the crowd of names", as it says.
It means that, in spite of there being a crowd, you can pick out every one of them severally. You can say, That is Peter; that is John. Every one of them is distinguished. The idea is life. What God had in mind was persons who were living. This is the witness. It could not be set aside -- a witness of living persons, every one of them had an individuality, a distinction, but all were together in affection. Do you want to be outside that set of brethren? Division is a denial of that. "The crowd of names" were in the upper room; they met there. You would find they are all witnesses, but John puts them together and he says, "this is the witness, that God has given to us eternal life". "And this is the witness, ..." You will find a comma after that clause, speaking grammatically, which proves what I am speaking of: that the witness is in the persons but in a public way, that these persons have eternal life. They are living. Love is the very life of the saints. Love says, I would not be without a real saint. Love in me would say that. I would not be without a real saint in time or eternity. They are all needed. Every name denotes life; it is a question of life, persons who are living. "And this is the witness, that God has given to us eternal life". It is not hidden, it is not a theory it is a real thing. It was a real thing in early days -- it could be seen -- and God says, That is My witness. The Lord says to Saul, "why persecutest thou me?" They were 'Me'. If Saul went into a Christian house in Jerusalem, that is what he found. He found
{249}
life, and he dragged those Christians away to the tribunals. They were of that kind of wood -- they were amenable to persecution. They were "led as a lamb to the slaughter"; they were like Jesus. But there was freshness and vigour and joy of heart. Let no one talk about his Christianity whose face is not lighted up! Sometimes, of course, there is depression and sorrow, and it is seemly to express it, but the Christian is to rejoice the more. Philippians says that, it insists upon that. Let no one talk about his Christianity whose face does not light up sometimes! We were speaking last night about the glory of the stars, the glory of the sun, and of the moon. Where is that glory? It is not in the long face. It is in brilliant, shining faces, life reflected in the face, in the countenance, that is glory. It is really the shining out of life, what God has given unto us, that wonderful thing called eternal life, and the believer has his own witness to it. Does everybody here belong to those people? I should not elect myself outside of those people! I want to be among them in the glow of life. God says, That is My testimony; it is irrefutable. Who can overthrow it?
And it is to be seen. "God has given to us eternal life". The point is that it is in Christ, "... and this life is in his Son". That is the position of it. We have the thing in enjoyment and reflection so that it is a testimony here.
Now, to complete my thought, I will go to Timothy. What I have to say at the close concerns a servant.
These two epistles were written to a servant. A servant is tested by someone being away, someone that has to say to him. Paul had to say to Timothy.
One would like to have heard Timothy talk about Paul! One would like to have heard a conversation about him between Timothy and Titus! Now Paul intimates to Timothy in the second epistle that he had to do with him, even the laying on of his hands.
{250}
He had to do with his gift. No one is worth much as a christian who does not desire a gift, not for his own desire or ornamentation but for the benefit of others. And this young man was in the mind of heaven in this sense. It does not say that he desires the gift but heaven thought he could use it. And so there was the prophetic word going before. We get that in chapter 1: 18: "This charge, my child Timotheus, I commit to thee, according to the prophecies as to thee preceding ...". Then he goes on to say, "in order that thou mightest war by them the good warfare". I want every young man here to think of that, the prophecies preceding. You do not come up as a gift as out of the ground overnight. There is that which goes before, "the prophecies as to thee preceding". That might help you to go to war, to war a good warfare, because unless you are tested out in warfare you will not be able to serve well. The exercise of gift requires the accompanying qualities or development of military ability. The prophecies have that in mind. What can I do without a sword? The sword and the trowel go together, according to Nehemiah. He built up, not with the sword, but with the trowel. But I must have the idea of a good warfare, of standing up against the enemy, for he will surely attack me if I have a gift at all, even if I have not used it. The Spirit comes and anoints, and then you may look out for conflict. So that the prophecies going before are to teach the servant to war a good warfare. It is commendable; it is divine. And then, that the presbytery have laid their hands on you. Prophecy does not need any evidence; it goes before. Cyrus was prophesied about before he was born. Prophecy knows of itself what is coming, but the presbytery do not, that is, the elders. They have to see. If I am to serve as a gift, then I must look out that they are there, that they lay their hands on me. They may say, That
{251}
young man has been marked off; he is warring a good warfare. He comes to the care meetings and takes a stand for the right. He is not governed by feelings. A man that brings up his feelings is a disgrace to the divine warfare! And I have never known that young man, one of these presbytery would say, save that he was on the right side. He has always stood up for the right. He has laid his feelings aside and is waging a good warfare. But he has a gift, and that is this verse. Do not neglect it!
How did he get it? The presbytery laid their hands on him. How humbled they would be if that gift were not used! It is given to be used, and it is not given for you, but for others, and it must not be neglected. So that the word here is, "Be not negligent of the gift that is in thee, which has been given to thee through prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the elderhood", @1 Timothy 4:14. See the prophetic word pursuing this young man! He is marked off by prophecy, that is from God. God has His eye on that young man. He has waged a good warfare on the principle of prophecy and now he has a gift on the principle of prophecy, but he has the brethren with him in it. It is greatly needed, that gift, so much in the mind of God about you, that you should have it and that it should be used. Do not neglect it! And then the apostle says, "Till I come", as if the Lord would say, 'Till I come'. That is the point. The Lord is away; He is not here to prod you as I am, but He is doing it through me. And He is telling you, I am not here Myself (and if the Lord were here He would speak more authoritatively than I am speaking), but I am giving you to understand that I am going to hold you accountable for this matter! All I can do, however, is to suggest the thing, that it is until the Lord come. That is the objective. Till the Lord come, keep on. Do not neglect that gift! It is needed, as I said.
{252}
I wanted to just finish with the things that accompany this gift, what a young brother or sister is to be engaged with until the Lord comes. "Give thyself to reading", it says. This may be public reading or it may be private reading. There is the subway in New York City; there is the train from here to New York City for those who travel to work. This verse has these particular opportunities in mind. How are they used? It might be public reading or it might be private reading, but "*give thyself to reading*"!
Then "to exhortation", he says. The youngest of us can exhort. A child may exhort its parent and save the parent. I am not saying that is altogether what is here. This goes further. In verse 15: "Occupy thyself with these things; be wholly in them, that thy progress may be manifest to all". "Occupy thyself with these things", the number of things that are being opened up is widening every day! We can look back years and compare the limited range of divine thoughts unfolded then with what we have today. What a range the Lord has opened up to us to live in, and the word is, "Occupy thyself with these things; be *wholly* in them, that thy progress may be manifest to all". You say, I do not mind what the brethren think: But I do. In a certain sense you may say that rightly, because brethren may say too much and assert their influence too much, but we cannot ignore what they think, if we are to save them. They are honourable, you know; there are none like them, and how am I to appear in their eyes? Am I today what I was yesterday? That will not do, "... that thy progress may be manifest to all". The saints say, That young man is growing. There is something going on of God. Then it goes on to say, "Give heed to thyself". That is particularly what I had in mind; and then, "and to the teaching; continue in them; for, doing this, thou shalt save both thyself and those that hear thee".
{253}
"Give heed to thyself". Take heed to your gift, of course; do not neglect that, but do not neglect yourself! Take heed to yourself, your ways, your motives. If I am going to preach or speak to the saints, what about my walk and ways? Is it apparent that I am going on with God? It says here, "... thou shalt save both thyself and those that hear thee". You are to save yourself; it is a question of service, of a servant, and of his ways, his practices; how he lives, how he occupies himself, but particularly he is to take heed to himself. "But youthful lusts flee ...". Think of a great servant like Timothy having to be told that! Flee them! There are those things that are most dangerous for you. See that they do not get at you! "Give heed to thyself". One has often been impressed with the sad endings of some great servants of God; one could name many. And it is a warning to us while we are young to take heed to ourselves as to certain propensities that we are conscious of, anything that militates against me. Lay it aside. If it is a temptation, flee it! Get out of its way, because others are looking at me. If I have a little ability to serve the Lord's people, others are looking at me. So that the apostle is concerned about this servant, that he should save himself and that he should save those to whom he ministers; that one is what he is. "... as with the people, so with the priest", @Isaiah 24: 2. As soon as a man is recognised as having any little ability in ministry, he is watched. People say, He does it, I can do it. "Give heed to thyself and to the teaching; continue in them; for, doing this, thou shalt save both thyself and those that hear thee". Thank God for those who hear! There are not many who hear today, relatively very few, but those who do hear, save them! That is what all this ministry is for. We need saving every day, and ministers are to be models, as this servant is told to be -- "a model of the believers".
{254}
PROPHETIC MINISTRY
@1 Corinthians 14: 37; @1 Samuel 3:19 - 21; @1 Samuel 7: 3 - 12
The thought of prophesying has become an important feature among the Lord's people, and this chapter in 1 Corinthians illustrates what such ministry may effect. We read in verse 22 that prophecy is not for them that believe not, but for them that believe, and in verse 24, "But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all: And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth". A very important effect of ministry is that it presents the Lord to our hearts; in a sense the Lord is present in it.
The idea began early; for instance, in Enoch, who, though not called a prophet, is spoken of as prophesying. He prophesied concerning the wickedness prevalent in his day, and of the Lord coming with His holy myriads to execute judgment.
According to @Psalm 105, God took special account of these ministers in the early days, of those spoken of in Genesis: "Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm". They were but a few, and despised, but they were God's prophets and God protected them. "My prophets", He called them, and they were not to be molested. They went from one kingdom to another, but they were under His eye, when men generally had elected to dismiss God from their minds. In His wonderful grace in those days He provided prophets to bring Him in, in spite of man's efforts to keep Him out. So today the enemy has succeeded in keeping nominal christians away from God. The opposition is a skilled matter, and it is aimed at keeping God out, whereas the prophet is intended to bring God in.
{255}
The idea of the prophet runs throughout the Scriptures, beginning in Genesis with Abraham and others. In Exodus God delivers His people by a prophet -- "And by a prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved", @Hosea 12: 13. This shows that the effect of prophetic ministry is to deliver God's people from the world and to preserve them for His pleasure. This gift should be cultivated, not despised, for the apostle Paul says, "Despise not prophesyings", @1 Thessalonians 5:20. Some might say, What is the use of his speaking, he is only a young christian; but Paul would have us not despise it, but make the most of it. It is an important matter; in meetings of this character we are not to despise what there is, for the Spirit of God says we are to make the most of it; whatever there may be is divine provision. On the other hand, those who have ability in this way should get to God about it and be ready to give out what they have. God will never fail us as we see the need for ministry. Covet the gift, make the most of it, enhance it, for the Lord provides all these things for us.
It is a striking thing that the first great female minister was Miriam and, as her name is mentioned in Scripture, she is called a prophetess. She is seen with her two brothers leading Israel out of Egypt. Her name is given and she is called a prophetess, showing the part that sisters may have in bringing in the mind of God -- it may be in following up ministry in the way of conversation. Sisters have an immense place in the service of God. Miriam sings, and the women of Israel sing, and Miriam answers them. The women followed her, she had influence. One of the most important things in these days is sisterly influence for God. Sisters must take it to heart if the assembly is to move forward intelligently and feelingly. Four young women in the New Testament are spoken of as prophesying; they brought in
{256}
God in what they had to say. The assembly should have the door open for God, and if I have it on my heart there will be an open door.
In this chapter the thought of the new covenant is preserved, and then the way of surpassing excellence, which is mentioned first in chapter 13. "Love never fails". How can you prophesy without love? It is the way of surpassing excellence; hence, that being mentioned, the next thing is, "desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy", @1 Corinthians 14: 1.
The next thing is to see how the prophet is controlled, and how he is known. He is to be recognised, as the apostle says, "let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. He is not a free-lance, not a man to go here and there preaching as he wishes, but he is under control. This epistle is for assembly government and order, and so, if a man is spiritual or a prophet, he is to be tested by the things brought out. Paul is known in this way, and what he says has first place. He is spiritual, and what he says is recognised. The things that I write, Paul says, it is the commandment of the Lord. That is the test. There are many who assume to be prophets -- really they are false prophets -- but there is the test by which we may know who are really prophets of God, those who bring God in. The things that the apostle wrote to the Corinthians were the Lord's commandments. What a great thought that is -- conveying the authority of the Lord in these great matters! Then he says, "But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant", @1 Corinthians 14: 38. If I do not see, it is my blindness. If God is working in my heart I do see it. The secret of my heart is manifested, and I fall down and acknowledge God, that He is there, not simply in heaven, but that He is amongst the saints.
Now Samuel represents all this because he is a representative prophet. In this chapter, @1 Samuel 3,
{257}
the idea is that a man develops normally. We are to grow here, not afterwards. We grow here to the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ. A man assumed to be a prophet is marked by this -- he goes on. Paul says, "Who has stopped you?" He did not stop, he went on; spiritually he sees more today than yesterday. Heaven looks for this growth, and we are to look for it in one another, and in our own selves. Of course no man can add to his stature, but he must see to it that he is learning, and by self-judgment.
So I draw attention to the fact that Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him. That is a very fine example for us. A man whom God is supporting is growing, and he will be conscious of it. What a great thought it is, that God is with a man! He said to Joshua that He would be with him wherever he went. It was the same thing with David and Daniel, and here Samuel brings God in, and then it says, "the Lord was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground. And all Israel from Dan even to Beer-sheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord", @1 Samuel 3: 19, 20. It is an immense thing in these days to have someone with the mind of God; an immense thing in any meeting or district, the more the better. The Lord gives them a place in the affections of the saints; they are prayed for, and are ready to give help whenever opportunity offers.
The next thing is that this prophet is to be kept fresh himself. "And the Lord appeared again in Shiloh: for the Lord revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the Lord". The ark had not yet been taken and God was still with His people according to the position of Shiloh, and those who are in the place are kept fresh by appearings. God would have it in that way. If we are able to serve in any way, let us get to the Lord, and He does not fail
{258}
to disclose Himself in some way. It may be that we cry out at night in prayer. We have some little inkling that the Lord is showing Himself; we are maintained in freshness, and the next time we speak it will come out, and others recognise it. Furthermore, this revelation is "by *the word of the Lord*".
The word alludes to the intelligence of a person, not simply for his affections, but to act upon his mind. In fact, the truth is that christians have the mind of Christ, the faculty that God works upon. The prophet receives the word and knows how to give out what he knows, not everything, but what he should be giving out in power, for it is the word of the Lord.
In chapter 7 we see how it is worked out. Samuel spoke unto the whole house of Israel. From chapter 4 we do not see Samuel again until we come to this chapter. The Lord was working out something else in relation to the ark. Now the time comes that Samuel speaks to all the house of Israel; he has the ears of the house of Israel. God never fails to give that to the servant who lays himself out for it. Samuel said, "If ye do return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines. Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the Lord only", @1 Samuel 7: 3, 4. This is one of the most striking results of prophetic ministry, and it is universal. Where things are not right amongst us, the effect is to shut God out by man's mind, as at Corinth. The prophet insists upon God coming in and having His place. If God is coming in you must deal with these abominations, whatever they may be, and there are many amongst us -- such as links with the world, and sharing things in common with the world.
The effect is to be immediate, and then he says,
{259}
now that self-judgment has taken place: "Gather all Israel to Mizpeh". He would not have them gather until they had judged themselves, and the evil associations had been dealt with. Now they can come together to Mizpeh. "And I will pray for you unto the Lord" (verse 5). He prayed as well as prophesied; these things go together. "And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have sinned against the Lord". They went further than putting away idols; they poured water on the ground, poured it out before the Lord; not, as the wise woman said, never to be gathered up again; it is to be gathered up here, and Samuel came in at that point to prophesy.
"Samuel *judged* the children of Israel in Mizpeh"; the word is not condemnatory, but for adjustment. Samuel was one of the judges in fact. It is a great matter to have this service carried on amongst us when matters come up for judgment, and the saints are put right by it. The things that would hinder are thus settled to the satisfaction of all, the conscience brought into it. He judged Israel in Bethel, Gilgal, Mizpeh, and Ramah all the days of his life. God honoured him from Dan to Beer-sheba, but here the point is that they were gathered together in self-judgment and acknowledged their utter weakness. Sin has been dealt with, differences are smoothed out, and the brethren are happily together, for they were all judging themselves. Samuel says, If you are judging yourselves, I will help you; I will settle that for you. Differences between this person and that person are straightened out, so that they are together happily and move on in the truth of the assembly.
Then it comes out that the Philistines attack under such conditions. God is working out His great thought for the assembly, and the enemy will attack that. So we find that the lords of the Philistines
{260}
went up against Israel. We have experienced something of that -- great attacks made upon us by the big men of christendom. They do not like the saints coming together happily. Satan does not like it, and he attacks at once. "And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto the Lord our God for us". They knew that this man would be heard; they knew by experience that God heard Samuel. "And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt-offering" -- a most intelligent way of approaching God, for there was no instruction as to a sucking lamb before. There is intelligence entering into all this, the right thing being done, a wonderful picture of the effect of ministry. The sucking lamb is offered up, and it says, "Samuel cried unto the Lord for Israel; and the Lord heard him. And as Samuel was offering up the burnt-offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel: but the Lord thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were smitten before Israel", @1 Samuel 7: 9, 10.
The revival of interest in these meetings for ministry will surely be attacked, as also the public position generally; but if things are carried on in heavenly fashion, in the sense of the acceptance of Christ before God, God will defend that, for it is precious to Him. Israel was not saved by human instrumentality but by the thundering of God.
It is when the Philistines are attacking that the *men* of Israel come to light. They are no longer children, or babes, but formed persons. "And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the Philistines". That is a point reached; it is full growth. They are no longer babes, but men spiritually, and available to God for conflict and victory. So they reach a landmark, which is always so when God has His place, the servants have their place, and
{261}
prophesying has its place. Important landmarks are reached and we can look back and be encouraged by them. "Hitherto hath the Lord helped us". He has done it in the past and will do it in the future.
{262}
ACCURACY
"For this reason every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old", @Matthew 13: 52.
No one should make up his mind that this belongs to others and not to him. It is not so intended. You should take that to heart, to do your part as a disciple to the kingdom of the heavens. That is to say, you are no longer a free-lance doing as you will; you are brought under rule, not simply because of what you are told, but through discipline you are brought in as one who has been discipled to the kingdom. You are a disciplined person, as Enoch of old. A great portion of our difficulties is through want of teaching by discipline in the school of God, for the scribes of old learned in this way and were valuable men. Every man of that kind is like a householder. Matthew makes more of householders than any other evangelist. The truth of the household is what supports a man more than anything else. The householder is a scribe, he is a literary man, he does not swallow things down, he is taking them in. He can unfold them to you gradually.
Take a man like Aquila, or a woman like Priscilla, or a man like Apollos of Alexandria. The latter knew only the teaching of John, but he knew it correctly. There was not slipshod instruction with him. He wanted to know the thing as it was. Then Aquila and Priscilla took this brother to them and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly. They were correct, they were not slipshod in the way they took on instructing him.
I am speaking now very soberly of the importance of being correct in what we allow in the way of instruction
{263}
in our spiritual education. Let me inquire into things, like the Bereans, of whom it is said they "searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so", @Acts 17: 11. They were correct people, not slipshod. 'Is this just so? Is the passage quoted correctly?' In looking it up you get to know the Scriptures better. There is hidden treasure in the Scriptures. I am speaking now of accuracy. Say what is there, do not add to it, let Scripture have full force. That is how the scribe recorded things. He was discipled to the kingdom of the heavens. I would like to hear him speak, for he would be sure that all he said to you was confirmed by Scripture.
The scribe is a person whose writings must be accurate; he has treasure, and he tabulates things; he does not mix them. He brings out of his treasure new things and old things, but he brings out the new things first. I believe a man like this, discipled to the kingdom of the heavens, would bring out Paul's things first. It is really the light in which all Scripture should be read; hence, if it is a question of the Lord's supper, Paul discoursed until midnight. Whatever he has to say, he must have time to say it; but if any go to sleep they suffer by the government of God.
So this householder brings out of his treasure things new and old. He has the treasure in view, all this glorious ministry. The new things are first, and then the old things, for the old things have their place. You must not discredit the Old Testament; no scribe would do that, he makes much of it. The old things are hidden treasure, and the new things are brought forward for the good of the Lord's people, by being accurate as disciplined and instructed.
{264}
SPIRITUALITY IN LEADERSHIP
@1 Corinthians 2: 15; @Judges 6: 19 - 24; @Judges 9: 7, 8, 21; @Judges 15: 15 - 17
I Have in mind to speak about spirituality, particularly to show how that in the Old Testament it was seen in relation to leadership amongst the people of God. It was early lost sight of in the history of the assembly, but the Lord took great pains to leave a spiritual state behind when He ascended up to heaven, the forty days were to that end. He could have gone up to heaven immediately He rose from the dead, but He remained here for forty days. Those days were occupied in spiritual movements by Him, intended to be educative, intended to impress His own spiritually, and particularly those who were to serve, and all the saints, of course, for He appeared to five hundred brethren at one time, but particularly those who were to serve and lead the saints.
So, in Mark, which evangelist stresses the thought of service more than the others, we are told He appeared to two, and "in another form", we are not told what that form was, but it was *another* -- as if to suggest that what form He may take at any time is left open. Mark is the only one that mentions this and no doubt he has in mind those who were to serve, and in serving, if acceptable to God and profitable to the saints, this will put them in the place of leadership in some sense. The idea of a leader is not simply that one can answer questions in a Bible reading, but one who goes on in service and suffering, whom others can emulate; a leader is one who goes before in a spiritual way, acceptable to God and profitable to men; such give a lead.
The Lord would give such servants to understand that He may show Himself according to His wisdom,
{265}
for they will need such support. To the greatest of His servants (the apostle Paul) the Lord indicated that He would appear to him from time to time, and He did, and when the apostle needed it, too. When he was greatly pressed at Jerusalem, the Lord appeared to him. Those of us who serve may in some measure count on such advantages, nor should we continue in any freshness in leadership save as we avail ourselves of them.
We are told in @1 Corinthians 15 that after His resurrection the Lord appeared unto Cephas, as if the apostle would impress the Corinthians with spirituality. He had already told them he could not speak to them as unto spiritual. The Lord had first appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve, then to five hundred brethren at once, then to James, then to all the apostles, and last of all to Paul. The Lord took occasion to impress them with His own movements as risen from the dead. No people previously ever had such an experience -- a Man risen from the dead moving as entirely unrestricted by material conditions. Peter said, "Us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead", @Acts 11: 41. The Lord took pains to tell them that "a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have", @Luke 24: 39.
In Judges we see men educated spiritually, and we see how they took in the divine thought: Gideon, Jotham, and Samson. Gideon was well employed and an angel appears to him and instructs him; and some of us may be well employed and yet need spiritual instruction. Apollos is an example of this (@Acts 18: 24 - 26). Gideon was threshing wheat in the winepress, and doing it well, no doubt, using the flail as well as anyone in limited circumstances, always a wholesome experience for young servants. One may be well employed and serving in difficult circumstances, but nevertheless stand in need of education, so as to serve in a spiritual way. Gideon is honoured
{266}
in that the angel came and sat over against where he was working, and we may be sure that in any little service pleasing to God that is what happens. Heaven is taking account of this and when that thought comes into the soul of a young servant it has a lasting effect upon him.
Most interesting things follow, and in them we can see that Jehovah was intent that this young servant should become spiritual; the conversation took that turn. God would give the servant to understand that He is taking account of him, also giving him an opportunity to express himself as to his antecedents and circumstances generally. This brought out the state of Gideon's mind, and what followed afforded remarkable spiritual instruction, which would affect Gideon henceforth. Spirituality is not merely having the Spirit, but in being formed by Him according to what God is as presented objectively in Christ. God being thus apprehended, the Spirit works in the believer and there is a subjective effect marked by spirituality. The Lord's statement that God is a spirit enters into this great feature of the truth; also His statement as to the new birth, that that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. John has in mind to build up a constitution for the last days, and only these great basic facts received by faith will suffice. God is a spirit, and what is effected in us by the Spirit is 'spirit'; it is not *the* Spirit, but the character or kind of result, and through redemption known in the believer and the Holy Spirit received, spirituality is developed. All this is in mind in the manner in which God comes before Gideon, with the result that he is set up in liberty with God; every word that passed was to this end. Gideon says to Jehovah, "Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee". It is now God and Gideon. That is how individuality -- free, holy relations with God -- develops
{267}
in a christian; he comes to understand it is God and he. In a similar way in @Genesis 17 Jehovah says to Abraham, "It is I", the time had come for Abraham to come into such dignified and yet reverential terms with God. It was now Jehovah and Abraham, so that he was said to be the "Friend of God". This thought of individual relationship began early; it appears in Enoch as his first son was born, and it says he walked with God. His example should be borne in mind in thinking of our eldest sons. Similarly Abraham and Isaac went together. Abraham was not going to seek university honours for his son; he was going to offer him up; morally it was the finest walk conceivable as Abraham and Isaac walked together to mount Moriah. As regards Enoch, we find Cain's world had that name, too. The world borrows from christians. It is as much as to say, we have what you have. 'Enoch' implies one taught or disciplined, and the world can say, We have such, too. Thus the world carries on and makes itself attractive.
Enoch would have intimate relations with God as his son was born, the finest desire that could come into his heart. Enoch walked with God. Abraham was directed to walk *before* God and what follows is a conversation between God and Abraham; and "God went up from Abraham". He left Abraham here and He went up. But Jehovah came back, according to the next chapter, and Abraham entertained Him. No doubt Gideon had this in mind -- that similar holy intimacy had been enjoyed earlier, and hence he desired the heavenly Visitor to stay while he fetched refreshment. He was, so to say, on easy terms -- not irreverent -- but free, holy terms with God. He was making acquaintance with the One he was to meet later, and it is most important to do this at the start and to call upon God. He will never fail you in a critical time -- in an address or any such service, for perfect love casts out fear.
{268}
Jehovah answered Gideon saying, "I will tarry till thou come again". Think of God, the Creator, the upholder of all things, waiting thus on His creature God is there, setting His prospective servant at such ease in His presence. What Gideon brought must have taken some time to make ready. He had to find the kid and kill it and prepare it, also the unleavened cakes. Yet he had such liberty with God that he could ask Him to stay, and God said He would stay. Many of us are legal and fail in confidence in God when we need His help. Gideon would never forget this occasion. The lesson learnt would enable him to call upon God in the crisis he later experienced. This was a spiritual matter implying his secret relations with God and would ever be a source of strength to Gideon. What follows is that the angel comes in mediatorially (verse 20), as if he said, I have waited for you, now I want to teach you how to be spiritual. He directed Gideon as to what he was presenting, and then the rock was introduced. It is most important that in our service we should be on solid ground. We are told elsewhere that the Rock is Christ, what Christ is as Man before God. The angel says, "lay them upon this rock". Everything is where it should be. This is the school of God and the young servant is learning. Then it says of Gideon, that he did as he was directed without question. The believer is to be on a sure basis in what he is doing. And so it follows that fire came out of the Rock; power to consume the sacrifice is a further thought. What will Gideon now do? Has he taken in the great thoughts presented to him in such a gracious way? He says, "Alas, Lord Jehovah!" He has dropped from the sense of confidence seen in verse 20, and this is very common. But Jehovah says, "Peace be unto thee: fear not; thou shalt not die". Gideon, assured, builds an altar to Jehovah, calling it Jehovah-shalom. That represents what came into the man's soul; it
{269}
marks definite progress. He has reached a point he had not reached before. He is restful and confident in the knowledge of Jehovah of Peace.
Referring to chapter 9, what I have read is all we get of Jotham's service. What we are told is enough to indicate that he must have been with God. He was a remnant of a family, just one left, but he knows just what to say, and he says it, and evidently said it to be heard. He chose his position, delivered his message and fled (verse 21). Where did he flee to? We may have to perform such a service, but it must be in the right place and expressed in the right terms, then you can leave as he did. Jotham was evidently spiritual, he went to Beer and continued to dwell there. A great service was rendered, but was he fully equal to it? It was a remarkable address, full of spiritual matter, and evidently delivered with feeling, for he "cried". Then he went to Beer, which would allude to a well -- figuratively the Spirit. Thus recognising the Spirit, Jotham would be sustained spiritually and equal for further service. A principle in spiritual ministry is that it is followed up and made effective by God: here it is said that on the men of Shechem came the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal (verse 57). It is said of Samuel that none of his words fell to the ground. Words that fall in honest and good hearts do not fall to the ground. The real depositary for spiritual words is the heart of the saints, and so God saw to it that Jotham's message did not fail. God rendered back the wickedness of Abimelech which he did to his father in slaying his seventy brethren.
Turning to chapter 15, it says of Samson, that he found a new jawbone of an ass. This was at a very critical moment. What Samson had been doing on the top of the rock Etam we cannot definitely say, but no doubt he was gathering up strength from God. He was in the presence of mighty foes and they were
{270}
shouting against him to overwhelm him, but Samson found what he needed, something fresh, the word 'new' is fresh or moist, meaning that the ass had been recently slain. It refers to the death of Christ, always fresh in testimony, never old or stale. In a truly spiritual man the things of Christ are never old or stale. God never fails those who trust Him, and here we have an example of what God is to His servants. Spiritual education enables the servant to draw upon God in a crisis. So he supplied Samson with this weapon, and with it he slew one thousand men. This was a fresh matter and really every service should have that touch. It is freshness as much as the words in ministry which touches us. What Samson says of the jawbone is also fresh. These lines, verse 16, which he composed were not premeditated -- he speaks in poetic language. He is speaking of what he had done, and how ready he is with his language: all indicating freshness and power -- so essential and effective in the service of God. And then when he has made an end of speaking he casts away the jawbone. Well, I think if some of us had that jawbone, we might take it home and put it in a glass case -- that is, something to point to at any time, but having spoken about it in freshness he threw it away, as if to suggest that he would not use it again. Nor would he put it among the antiques of his family! He had done with it. But he called the place Ramath-lehi, for a testimony, to be taken account of by faith, entered into it.
Then the passage says that Samson became thirsty "and called on Jehovah ... . And God clave the hollow rock which was in Lehi, and water came out of it. And he drank, and his spirit came again, and he revived. Therefore its name was called En-hakkore, which is in Lehi to this day". It is all a question of freshness; Samson had secured a great victory, but in the next service he will want something else.
{271}
The incident affords a striking spiritual example, especially for those engaged in the service of God; also an example as to how divine help is immediately available as called upon by faith. As we call upon God in a crisis He will not fail us.
{272}
THE ROOT AND OFFSPRING OF DAVID
I would speak now of the Lord's faithfulness in testifying and sending His angel, and then the response. Further He says, "I am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come", @Revelation 22: 16, 17. He is speaking now of what He is to the erring church. He sent His angel to testify, but He says, "I am the root and offspring of David". He is now appealing to a movement that He has brought about in some, however few. It is normal characteristically of the assembly, that the assembly knows who Christ is. The Lord has been challenging us in recent years as to who He is. He says, 'I am the root of David' and 'the offspring', too. It is as if He would say, Do you understand? He challenged some opposers as to David calling Him Lord, "If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?" @Matthew 22: 45. They could not understand that. The church can answer that; it is His deity, dear brethren. You know how the creed has cast a shade on the deity of Christ for about fifteen hundred years. The saints have been under a shade, their minds have been beclouded as to the deity of Christ by the accepted creed of christendom saying that He was begotten of the Father before the foundation of the world. That has cast a shade on His glorious Person, but the church normally does not hold that. John did not hold that, his gospel contradicts it. There is no begetting in past eternity; it is here on earth -- "This day have I begotten thee" (@Psalm 2: 7) -- that is in time as a Man below. The assembly understands that. John represents normally the understanding of the assembly. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". That is the
{273}
statement, the enemy cannot get rid of that statement, it keeps Christ before the saints in His true dignity and deity and we are to hold it fast, on the other hand glorying in the fact that He has become a Man, which opens up the side for us to be His brethren for ever. 'The root of David'  -- and 'offspring', which is His humanity. His Person is unchanged and unchangeable. He has taken a new condition, but He has not changed His Person, He remains who He is. "Before Abraham was, I am", as He said. He is the root of David, but He is the offspring, and moreover, the bright and morning star.
May the Lord move our hearts as we think of it, as He presents Himself in this way. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come", The Spirit takes the lead. When the failure took place in Thyatira, the Lord addressed Himself to Sardis as One who "*has* the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars", @Revelation 3: 1. What a great fact that He *has* the seven Spirits of God! The Spirit has asserted Himself in these last days and in asserting Himself He has made everything of Christ. As Christ presents Himself in this way the Spirit says, Come, and the bride says, Come -- there is a perfect lead. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God", @Romans 8: 14.
Then there is the word John adds, thinking of the saints and the gospel, for the gospel was near to John's heart. In the main he wrote to assert the deity of Christ, but you get statements in John that you get nowhere else about the gospel. So here, "Let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely". It is as if the coming of the Lord would suggest that. Every true lover of Christ would say, Let us tell everyone about Christ! "Let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely".
{274}
PERFECTION
@1 John 1: 1, 2; @1 John 2: 14; @Exodus 16: 16 - 18
J.T. These scriptures contemplate perfection, and it occurred to me that the Lord would cause profit from our consideration of the subject from the standpoint of divine counsels, and of our part in the assembly Godward now, and our part in the testimony manward. The Scriptures show that in all these settings the full thought of manhood is in mind; as indeed the babe state, the infantile state, is only contemplated as a necessity to full growth, and generally it is under reproach. In Ephesians, while the actual babe state is owned, yet it is spoken of in a reproachful way, and we are reminded that it should no longer exist -- "that we may be no longer babes",
@Ephesians 4: 14. The Scriptures show that God, in the beginning of His operations in Genesis, made everything perfect; there is no idea of infancy, whether in relation to the earth, the lower creation, or man; all was perfect; there was no idea of development in that. If there is to be further development, as, of course, there must be -- seeds are sown, children are born, it is not to something unknown, but something already known. John had this in mind in his first letter; he calls attention to what was from the beginning. There is no suggestion of any improvement on that, or development in it.
I suggested the passage in Exodus because it shows how God's mind is expressed as to what we are to come to, if we are not there yet, in the measure of our food. The omer was for the old person as much as for the babe; it was an omer for a person, so that whether we are men actually or potentially, that is how God regards us, according to the full thought of His mind. If I am not a man actually in full development,
{275}
I am so potentially in the mind of God. In ministering to me God has in mind that I should be a man. I am not to remain in the nursery; I am not to remain a babe; for that would be a reproach. The full thought has been brought out. It is a matter of history; everything is known. The omer was laid up before the testimony -- that is, the ark; @Exodus 16: 33, 34.
H.H. Is it your thought that, speaking from the epistle of John, things have already reached their perfection in the Lord Himself? Everything has been produced in its perfection in the Lord Jesus, and that is the standard which the Spirit of God would have before us all.
J.T. That is what I understand. To use an illustration: God did not make an egg, He made a hen; He did not make an infant, He made a man.
A.T.S. It is God's thought that *men* should multiply and fill the earth.
J.T. That is the idea -- men; and then the first child born is called a man; Eve called Cain a man. "I have acquired a man with Jehovah", @Genesis 4: 1. All that follows up to Noah is to bring us to that, Noah representing it as no one previously represented it -- I mean morally, for Adam could not be improved on in his own order. When Adam failed, God began to work on the moral line; and Adam was the image of Him that was to come. So that Noah answered to it more than any in his day; and what you find with him is that everything is full-grown. The world after the flood, as at first, began with perfection, in this sense there was full-growth.
W.C.G. So it says, "Noah was ... perfect amongst his generations", @Genesis 6: 9.
J.T. Yes; it is not said of anyone else before him. God begins to work, and He works in relation to Christ. He is the Model. So that as many as received Him were entitled "to be children of God,
{276}
to those that believe *on his name*" -- that is, the full thought is in His mind -- "who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God", (@John 1: 12, 13), born in relation to that great thought.
H.P.W. John begins his epistle with what the apostles heard and saw. To apprehend the Lord in this way it is really necessary that the ear should receive hearing and the eye receive sight, which were both lost at the beginning.
J.T. So that the new hearing and the new sight are in order that we might hear and see what is from the beginning. That, in truth, is what John has in mind, that we might have the full divine thought. The 'name' in the gospel implies things that are set out in the Person, and in the beginning of the gospel we have "those that believe on his name" (@John 1: 12), and then at the end -- "believing ye might have life in his name", @John 20: 31. Every line of Scripture, I might say, stresses this thought God begins with perfection in Christ -- infinite perfection; so that we are not going on to something unknown; it is what has been, and what has been according to this competent testimony of the apostles, as John goes on to say, "that which we have seen and heard we report to you". The "fathers" in chapter 2 are the full result, so that John has nothing to say to them in the way of exhortation or rebuke, but simply, "ye have known him that is from the beginning".
H.M.S. Will you tell us why in the first three verses of the epistle we have the expression "that", not 'He' nor 'Him', but "that"? We do not get 'that' in the gospel; why is it here? And why, having said "that" in verse 1 of the chapter, does John say to the fathers: "*him* that is from the beginning"?
J.T. The use of the neuter pronoun is to call attention to the substance that was there; it is what
{277}
is in Christ: that is the primary object of that verse. This shows that christianity is not an ethical system, such as had existed in the East, and exists today. Generally speaking, all religious systems, aside from christianity, are mere theories, though there may be a certain amount of consistency of conduct. The use of the neuter pronoun means that there was infinite substance in Christ as to what is spoken of. "*That* which we have heard, which we have seen". It calls attention to the fact that the thing in hand, that is life, was actually there. It was not to be a promise, something that would occur in the future; it was actually there in a Man, moving in and out amongst men, who *was* the life. The life was there. "In him was life", and it was there substantially. As the angel said to Mary, "The holy *thing*", @Luke 1: 35. That means that He was substantially holy. And so as to the life, He was substantially that. There is no doubt about it. That is the point, that the saints should know life as a reality, that it had been heard and seen and handled. "That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled". It is all to call attention to the character of what is in christianity substantially and eternally; it involves life that is eternal.
Ques. Is it the thought of what the Lord was characteristically as Man in distinction from what He was personally as in Deity?
J.T. Spoken of as "*from* the beginning", His manhood is in view; as in absolute Deity He is "*in* the beginning", @John 1: 1. He had opened the ears and eyes of the apostles so that they heard and saw and contemplated life in Him. The allusion is to Christ in humanity, and what is *from* the beginning -- that is "the beginning" from John's point of view, what He was as He began to minister in manhood.
H.P.W. In that connection, is that why the detail
{278}
of the manna is given? It is said to be small and round. Is that a kindred thought to what you have in your mind?
J.T. Yes, it refers to Christ here in everyday life. The description of what it was, and the taste of it, is somewhat different in Numbers from what it is said to be in Exodus, but not very different. When they complained of it God made no attempt to make it anything else but what it was. There is no attempt in the description in Numbers to make it anything different from what it really was. There was nothing in it to appeal to the natural taste.
M.C. What is the thought in connection with "our hands have handled"?
J.T. It is that He was a real Man in flesh and blood condition before their eyes here. In resurrection after He arose, He was still a real Man. It was a great reality to the apostles; so they were not viewing Him as at a distance; many had heard Him and seen Him who had not handled Him; but the apostles were competent to speak of handling Him, especially John, because he lay in His bosom.
Eu.R. Christianity is set out in a glorious, living Person; One whom the apostles knew in that way?
J.T. Yes; they knew "him that is from the beginning". There is no change in Him; there may be change as to the condition of His humanity, but that is not the point; it is the reality of His humanity that is in question. The fathers had come to that.
H.H. It is very important that we should appreciate the thought of perfection so that God might be rightly represented on the earth now.
J.T. Yes, God is working to bring us all up to His ideal. All these meetings we have, which, thank God, are becoming more and more frequent, and, I believe, profitable, are to the end that we should be "no longer babes". We wake up to the fact that we have been babes, acting like babes, as the Corinthians
{279}
were, but we give it up, and see that it is not God's mind, that He is ministering food so that we might not be babes, and that the food He is ministering to this end is the same as that which He is ministering to the most spiritual, for it is only the manna; He makes no attempt to make it any different from what it is. People may use mortars and such like, and seek to make it to their taste, but God is not altering it, He is not attempting to indicate that it is any different from what it is; it is just what it is. Indeed, in @Exodus 16 there might be a question-mark to the end of the chapter: "What is it?" We shall never arrive at the end of that, but there is an omer for everyone. It is a question of everyone eating it, and eating the measure of it.
D.McI. Is it that we should "be conformed to the image of his Son", @Romans 8: 29?
J.T. Yes; the Lord has no other thought for any of us, and all these meetings and ministry are to that end, that the saints might come on and be no longer babes; so the ministry should not be divided into compartments and grades. The school of God is not like a grammar-school with different classes. There is the same food for all. Not, indeed, that there is not milk and strong meat; there is; but God indicates from the outset that if He is ministering anything to our hearts it is because He wants us to be men. It is not a class of babes with a babe-teacher.
Eu.R. Do we see in @Revelation 21: 3 that God has reached His great end with regard to men generally? "The tabernacle of God is with *men*".
J.T. That is the thought, not with babes, but "with men". The Lord says, speaking to the Father, "the *men* whom thou gavest me", @John 17: 6. They were not men in the sense in which it speaks of fathers here in @1 John 2, for they had not yet received the Spirit, nor was redemption yet accomplished; but they were men potentially. The Father would not
{280}
give the Son anything less. He does not give Him babes; He gives Him either those who are men actually or men potentially. So the Lord speaks of "the joy that *a man* has been born into the world", @John 16: 21. Christ is presented in the gospel of John in fulness, and if I have believed, I believe on His name; that means all that is set out in Him. To divide up the saints into compartments or grades, as in a school, because of some being infants, is wrong; the idea is that I am in company with men. I get the divine idea; and it is a remarkable thing that a boy instinctively speaks of doing things like a man, and that ought to be promoted in him.
Ques. Would you say that the fact that the apostle Paul addresses the children in the assembly at Ephesus shows that he has that before him, that they feed on the same food, and grow up together with the men?
J.T. Just so.
H.P.W. Will you say more about that, because it says of the Lord that He "advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men", @Luke 2: 52. Will you say a little about growth? You spoke about all eating the same food with the object of arriving at manhood, at full growth.
J.T. It is important to remember that in connection with what is said in Luke about the Lord it is *literal* manhood that is in mind, not spiritual; I mean, we cannot compare a young christian with the Lord. What is said in Luke's gospel as to Christ is to bring out how perfectly real His humanity was, that He passed through all the stages of humanity. To make that to correspond with the growth of a young christian would hardly do; it would rather reflect on God personally. It is only to bring out that His humanity is genuine, that He passed through all the stages proper to humanity. In testimony He began at the age of thirty years; indeed He was
{281}
conscious of sonship earlier (@Luke 2: 49), but it was when He began to be "about thirty years old" that heaven publicly noticed Him. He could have come into manhood as at the age of thirty, instead of coming in as a babe. There is nothing impossible with God. Adam was never a babe, nor a boy; he was made a man; and Christ could have come in thus if it had been the will of God, but it must be brought out that His humanity was genuine. He came through all its stages and touched man at every point. The testimony, however, presented in Him to men, as pleasurable and as anointed, is in full manhood.
Whilst all eat the same spiritual meat and drink the same spiritual drink, yet there is milk and strong meat, which is to be observed. Yet an old christian uses milk; thus the general food is the same. Whether meat or milk, there is no other food that God has for man, but Christ. It is only a matter for discrimination in ministry. There is no thought in Scripture of specialists for children, nor for old men. You have the Lord Himself taking the children in His arms; and you have Paul feeding the Corinthians with milk, and you have Peter alluding to new-born babes; but then these are the most spiritual, they are not specialists for children; in fact, the person who can feed children best is the most spiritual you can get, as in the case of the Lord, and in the cases of Paul and Peter.
H.H. When Paul says to the Corinthians, "we speak wisdom among the perfect" (@1 Corinthians 2: 6), does he imply that they were not full-grown, that the Corinthians were not perfect? But if that is so, does he not give them very advanced ministry in @1 Corinthians 15 -- "the second man, out of heaven"?
J.T. The whole epistle gives strong meat in a suggestive way; he tells them plainly that they were not able to receive it. He says, "I have given you milk to drink, not meat" (@1 Corinthians 3: 2), and he
{282}
determined to know no man among them "save Jesus Christ, and him crucified", chapter 2: 2. When writing to them he speaks of something beyond; he speaks of "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard", chapter 2: 9. He does not depute some other brother to do it; he does not suggest that some other brother should go up to Corinth who might look after young christians. He does it himself, and he is the most capable of doing it.
W.C.G. Does @Colossians 1 help: "Christ ... whom we announce, admonishing every man, and teaching every man, in all wisdom, to the end that we may present every man perfect in Christ" (verse 28)?
J.T. Just so. That shows again that scripture presents the best thoughts for all. The returning prodigal got the best robe at once. There are not different grades of robes. Samuel had his robe new every year, which calls attention to the rapidity of his growth. You could not say to him, 'that we be no longer babes', because he graduated so quickly. God takes account of believers as potentially men, and the Lord's remark about a man being born into the world shows that God has nothing else in mind.
Ques. Have we the combination of the two thoughts in @Ephesians 4: 13: "until we all arrive ... at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", giving the divine thought in its fulness: then, too, "the full-grown man", being the suggestion of movements on our part in the way of growth to it?
J.T. That is right. So ministry to the young is right; this very letter of John ministers to little children, young men, and fathers, but they would all be together. He is not deputing a less spiritual brother to look after the little ones; he is doing it himself. The apostle John could feed them better than most; he had seen the Lord Jesus take the children into His arms; Luke says they were infants.
{283}
Ques. Does Hannah bringing the new coat for Samuel every year suggest the need of new clothes for us?
J.T. Yes; he was no longer a babe. There is no idea of a stunted condition in Samuel, but see how quickly God can use him to convey His mind -- indeed, to become the depositary of His thoughts. It is very remarkable how quickly Samuel was used of God. The contemplating of 1 John especially is important. Many heard the Lord and saw Him, but how few contemplated Him! Moses said, "I will now turn aside, and see", @Exodus 3: 3. It is the idea of the appropriation of what there is, and in the appropriation of what there is one assimilates it and becomes like it. The young men are persons who are strong. It would imply spiritual youth. A man converted at eighteen would not be a 'young man'; he might be only a babe spiritually. It is persons of spiritual youth who are referred to, who are set in the testimony, persons of spiritual vigour and levitical age.
E.L.M. @Hebrews 5 seems to link up with the thought of full growth. "Solid food belongs to full-grown men, who, on account of habit, have their senses exercised for distinguishing both good and evil" (verse 14).
J.T. Yes, "on account of habit". The Hebrew christians had not gone ahead. "For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have again need that one should teach you what are the elements of the beginning of the oracles of God" (verse 12). That is pretty much a description of the mass of christians today; that is their state; they need to be taught the elements of the beginning of the oracles of God. That service is largely given of the Lord to those who have light as to the assembly, to seek to bring the saints generally to principles -- to first principles and to all principles. So the writer points out that milk belongs to a babe, and strong meat to a full-grown 
{284}
person. The book clearly intimates that that is what they should have been. It is virtually saying, It is a shame that you are babes.
Now can we go on to the truth of the assembly if the saints are not discerning between good and evil? That is why the great mass of christians do not discern what is involved in human and religious organisations. There is no ability with them to discern between good and evil. The first great thought is to get our brethren and teach them the principles of the oracles of God.
F.A.P. Whilst we may not reach the state of fathers according to John very early, we should desire to leave the babe state early.
J.T. We should consider it a reproach. A person may have been converted only a few days, but the types in the gospels show that the persons are made *whole*, not partially whole. The gospel rightly received means that potentially the person is a man. As *whole* it is a question simply of growth.
Eu.R. For us, does that involve the exercises of @Romans 7, and the Spirit being free in the soul?
J.T. Just so; it must be a complete cure; there can be nothing else. You have the idea in your mind of the gospel; as Paul said, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations", @Galatians 1: 16. That presents the divine thought. No one can tell how rapidly a person may come into manhood. Take Paul as illustrative of this: he became a man in a few days. He preached Christ as Son of God immediately.
M.C. Do we get an instance of that in connection with the man who received his sight in @John 9? He came to the knowledge of the Son of God and worshipped.
J.T. How long did it take him? You could not reckon it in hours. Listen to his speech: first his
{285}
neighbours come and say, How did you get your eyes opened? He tells them what the Lord did, and he says, "I saw" (verse 11). He relates the historical facts to them. Then the parents are challenged, and they say, "He is of *age*: ask him" (verse 21). That is not merely literal: it is spiritual for us. He will answer for himself. Listen to what he says to the Pharisees in answering for himself. You never heard of a man answering more wonderfully under such circumstances. The Pharisees challenge him a second time as to what the Lord did to him. To them he says, "I see" (verse 25), not "I saw", as he said to the neighbours (verse 11). He does not speak historically to the Pharisees. There is no use in bringing up historical facts to the leaders of christendom, for such leaders would all know history; and they would tell you about the church councils of the past, but that is nothing. It is what marks me *now* that counts, that I am a full-grown man. That is what he meant when he said, "I see". They did not see, and so they cast him out. He points out that it had never been heard before since time was, that anyone opened the eyes of one born blind. You would think from the way he talks that he was an instructed man, yet he had been blind from his birth, he had had no opportunity of being instructed. He says, If this Man had been a sinner God would not have heard Him. They cast him out saying, "Thou hast been wholly born in sins, and thou teachest us?" (verse 34). And the Lord, when He hears that they had cast him out, finds him and says to him, "Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God? He answered and said, And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him? And Jesus said to him, Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he. And he said, I believe, Lord: and he did him homage" (verses 35 - 38). There is the *man*. He is full-grown. It seems to have been a very short time; the thing happened so quickly. See what happened 
{286}
at Jerusalem in @Acts 2: three thousand were converted at the first great address; and what is said of them shows that they were grown men: "they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers" (verse 42).
H.M.S. You spoke, at the beginning of the meeting, of this maturity in three connections.
J.T. Yes, first in relation to the counsels of God. He has nothing in His mind but men, and in giving the disciples to Jesus He gave them as men. Then in the assembly, service is not carried on by babes but by men; by those who are priests; though in regard of priests the age limit is never given; it is given for the levites, not the priests. A man who takes part in the assembly is a proved man. Aaron sets forth the great idea. The priests were the sons of Aaron; and Aaron himself is the great prototype. He was advanced in years. God knew him (@Exodus 4: 14). Paul says, "if any one love God, he is known of him", @1 Corinthians 8: 3. A priest is a lover of God, and speaks of Him.
H.M.S. Does @James 3 belong to this subject? Because there a man who can control his tongue is said to be "a perfect man, able to bridle the whole body too" (verse 2). And then James says, "Therewith bless we the Lord and Father" (verse 9), which I suppose would be the highest exercise of a man's body. Is not that the priesthood?
J.T. Very good; I think it corresponds with, "if any one love God, he is known of him". God would, as it were, salute him. Not that God does not know everybody; but He calls you by name. He greets you. He said of Aaron, "I know that he can speak well". He spoke to God.
Ques. There was a time when the manna ceased and they went on to something else. Will you say a word about that?
J.T. It is just Christ in another way -- "the old
{287}
corn of the land". The difference is that the manna is what He was here in flesh and blood in our circumstances, and the old corn of the land represents what He is in His own circumstances, in His own sphere, in heaven. "The Son of man who is in heaven", @John 3: 13. The fact that He left it for a little while does not interfere with it; that was His own place.
Ques. God "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2: 6. Is that where He is reached in His own sphere?
J.T. The old corn is what He is as indigenous to heaven. "The Son of man who is in heaven" -- a very remarkable statement, and one that always holds true. I suppose the men are there for a testimony to that, that there should be a witness to what He is up there -- a marvellous thing; and that we shall share eternally. You can see therefore how much the manhood thought is essential -- "the *men* whom thou gavest me", the Lord says; and then He asks that "they also may be with me, that they may behold my glory", @John 17: 24.
Rem. Joseph selects five of his brethren to present them to Pharaoh; @Genesis 47: 2.
J.T. They were all potentially suitable, but not actually, and he made his selection. The Lord makes His selection, too. He made a selection of three of His disciples when He took them up to the mount of transfiguration. It was that there should be competent testimony as to what took place up there. There were eleven competent witnesses as to the Lord's supper. There were three competent witnesses as to what was up on the mount; so we have the heavenly things brought down. But then Paul went further; he was caught up to the third heaven. In the assembly we have the testimony of what is higher still.
{288}
Ques. What is the connection between what you are saying, and knowing "a man in Christ"?
J.T. That is Paul himself; he had the thing continuing on in him. The thing was there. If you met Paul and talked intimately with him, you would find out he was a man in Christ. The deeper you got into the knowledge of Paul, the more you would find what he was as a man in Christ; and although he could not utter the things which he heard, they were there in his soul. I suppose Paul helps in the idea of a treasury. According to the pattern which David had by the Spirit, the temple -- or the house -- contained treasuries (@1 Chronicles 28: 11), meaning that all the saints are viewed as able to keep secrets. They value things and treasure them up. They do not cast them before swine.
Ques. In connection with @2 Corinthians 12: "I know a man in Christ", what is the bearing of "fourteen years ago"?
J.T. He conveys in that remark the idea of a treasury, one who contained treasures, who could keep them without speaking of them, which is a practical matter. In ministering to people one does not tell them all one knows. One considers the people to whom one speaks, making a careful analysis before the Lord in relation to what would feed His people, and then giving that to them. That enters into it. How great a thing it was morally that a man could keep such things in his mind, for apparently he never spoke of them.
H.H. You get other instances: Paul did not disclose at once what he knew about the rapture; and in regard of the Supper he says, "I received from the Lord", @1 Corinthians 11:23. These are some of Paul's secrets: the secret of the rapture, and of the Supper, and the man in Christ.
J.T. I think all that underlies the idea of the mystery. We form part of the assembly, if we are
{289}
anything at all -- that in which are hidden "all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge", @Colossians 2: 3. We ought to learn to keep secrets, keeping things because we feel they are of value. They should not be allowed into unhallowed hands or minds, because people will only turn them against us.
The third thing in mind can be seen in the Lord Himself: He began to be about thirty years of age. That is the levitical age, the age of true manhood. God would present the perfect thing to bring about perfect results. In @Numbers 15 in regard of service Godward it says that if a man brings "a burnt-offering or a sacrifice for the performance of a vow, or as a voluntary offering, or in your set feasts, to make a sweet odour to Jehovah", he was to bring with it a quantity of things, such as fine flour mingled with oil, and wine. It was all to be measured. Then if a person brought a ram, something larger than a lamb, there was to be increase in the measures of the accompanying things; and if he brought a bullock, the measures were to be increased again, which means that the idea of manhood must go forward; it must be there before God. If I turn round to speak to men the same thing is true: the idea of manhood must be there, for God would set out in the vessel of the testimony what He intends to bring out in those ministered to. So the Thessalonians became followers of Paul -- it was commendable in regard of them -- and then also of the Lord; @1 Thessalonians 1: 6. The apostles got their first thoughts from the Lord Himself.
Ques. Would it not be a great incentive to the labourer to labour in the sense of results being brought about characterised by perfection?
J.T. One is practically very humbled, without complaining of the brethren, that there is so much of the child or babe state, evidenced in the readiness to be taken up with what is fanciful and just novelty;
{290}
and there is such a poor understanding of principles and things which have cost other men much that we might have them. There is such a poor appreciation of our heritage, the heritage being so wide -- I mean, the heritage in relation to the law, according to @Deuteronomy 33: 4: "Moses commanded us a law, The inheritance of the congregation of Jacob". That is, our heritage in relation to the principles of God governing us -- assembly principles; they are a heritage and one feels humbled that they are so poorly understood. I believe the Lord has to go a roundabout way -- and He is doing it in love -- to bring before us the things we are brought into, and each one should be concerned about understanding them, and standing for them, and suffering for them if need be -- for the principles that govern the fellowship -- and which govern the house of God.
{291}
AN AFFLICTED AND POOR PEOPLE
@Zephaniah 3:12,13; @Isaiah 37:31; @Malachi 3: 16, 17; @Luke 2: 25 - 38
These scriptures furnish us with instruction about what we often speak of as the remnant, a subject that runs through the prophets, and indeed through the whole Bible. The idea began early and what marks it, especially as early as Genesis, is the idea of waiting, Jacob saying, "I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord", the idea of waiting for something, not indefinite or theoretic waiting, but waiting for something divinely promised. We have spoken of Saul the king today; he failed peculiarly in that ability to wait for a divinely-appointed time: he would do something before it instead of waiting. I need not say that, in suggesting the idea of a remnant, I am not speaking of the literal remnant of Israel, although that is the great burden of the subject; I have in mind the few that there are today who may be so styled. Names are given to persons, God gives names to persons and things, and Christ gives names to persons and things, and faith is marked by the same thing, by naming aright persons and things that are presented to it. So that we are to understand what is meant by this term 'remnant', and, as seeing its traits large and small, to be able to discern them and to clothe the persons accordingly with the whole thought; we are entitled to do that. We must read the history of the assembly in @Revelation 2 and 3 -- which is the only accurate and only reliable history of the assembly which is available -- in that light. There are many histories written, but these two chapters are the only really reliable history of the assembly that is extant, and it is incumbent on us to read these chapters in that light, the Lord Himself
{292}
embodying its history in those two chapters -- seven brief epistles to the seven assemblies which were in the province of Asia, and in the fourth epistle, that is, the one to Thyatira, the Lord formally alludes to a remnant, "Unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira". He formally recognises a "rest", that is a remnant, for that is the thought in it. And, as we come down to the sixth letter, that is the one to Philadelphia, He clothes that remnant with the whole thought, that is the whole idea of the assembly, and tells her He is going to make certain to come and worship before her feet -- a remarkable thing! The Lord, in the Scriptures, strictly bans any worship on our part of man as such. The whole book of the Revelation has in mind that God is to be worshipped; when John fell down and would worship the angel the Lord sent to show him the wonderful things that are disclosed in the book, it says the angel forbade it. He said, "See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the prophets ... worship God". Peter forbade Cornelius to worship him, whereas his professed representative today expects to be worshipped, but Peter forbade it and said, I am a man like you. But the Lord says to Philadelphia, I will make certain to come and worship before thy feet -- a remarkable thing that He is able to do that persons who say they are Jews and are not, but do lie, they are of the synagogue of Satan, and yet the Lord has power to make them do that. It is not that they love the saints viewed in Philadelphia; they do not, but the Lord compels them to do it, showing the power He has in that book against those who might be the foes of the assembly. He says, "I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know ..." not, that you may know -- she already knows, but that *they* may know -- "that I have loved thee". He advertises the fact to them, compels them to know that He loved this assembly.
{293}
So that the remnant is clothed with the whole thought of the assembly by the Lord in that sixth letter. The words used are as plain as possible, as intimating that He has the whole assembly in His mind in view of a literal coming, "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". He has no less than the whole thought, and He makes promises to her, too, which every one here ought to recognise and ask the Lord to fulfil them. For instance, He says, "I ... will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". I will keep you from it, He says. I often quote that to the Lord and tell Him that is a promise and that antichrist cannot appear in our time; there may be many characteristically so, but not *the* antichrist. But then we are to quote that promise to the Lord, He loves to have us do it. "I also will keep thee", He says, "from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth" -- not simply world-dwellers, but earth-dwellers are to be tried by this terrible thing that is coming in. The Lord promises to keep us out of that, and, at the same time, to advertise to the religionists that do not care for us at all that He loves us -- that they may know, He says, "that I have loved thee". What can be more comforting than that! Well now, having said so much to focus the thing on ourselves -- I mean persons who are characteristically of the remnant -- I want to show certain traits of it that you may understand it more clearly and understand that you are in it; without making any boast of it, having the sense in your soul that you belong to those whom the Lord would have everybody know that He loves; not secret love, but love that He compels everyone to know.
Now the first thing I want to point out is in Zephaniah, that Jehovah says that He leaves in the midst certain ones, that is, it is a question from His
{294}
point of view that I am living here in this town, for instance -- it is not an accident. "I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of Jehovah". It is not, as I said, an accident; I am not here simply because I may have been born here, or have my work here in this town, but I am left here by the definite arrangement of God -- left here. And a number of things arise in one's mind as one thinks of that as to where one may be, whether he has taken matters into his own hands, looking for a better position, perhaps, better circumstances -- it is very common with us to do that, and in some cases it may be God removing a brother and sister and his family to some other part; but He says, "I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of Jehovah", that is, as it were, God calling attention to a certain kind of people that He leaves at a certain time amongst the responsible professors of the truth in this world -- "I will leave in the midst of thee ...". And then we are told that the remnant of Israel "shall not work unrighteousness, nor speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth". These are traits of those people, Jehovah says, that I am leaving in your town, so to speak, or in your city or in your district. Now think of the consideration there is in that; think of the gain there is in every village and town and city and country where such are. I leave in the midst of thee such a people. They are different from the persons alluded to under the pronoun 'thee' -- these refer to responsibility publicly, responsible persons -- that God leaves certain ones in their midst. That is the first point I want to make. And, secondly, they trust in the name of the Lord -- not simply in the Lord, but in His name, that is, the name involving what He is, involving the Spirit here and other things that lie in the Spirit -- these people trust in that. They do not
{295}
form, in that way, a part of the community; they are distinct, but they are a great advantage to the community, God intends them to be a testimony to Him in this particular setting. He says, I have left them there -- "I also will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord". They are an afflicted and poor people; we do not like to be that. I know well enough it is what we would seek to get out of, to get out of affliction and to get out, of poverty; but Jehovah left them because of these features. A people that are afflicted and that are poor, whether it be literally poor or spiritually -- that is poor in the sense in which the Lord was poor -- He was the poor Man; "This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him". He had none of this world's goods; but His poverty lay rather in that He had nothing at all, there was nothing He could join in, no ordinary conversation, no ordinary business enterprise, no ordinary society or guild, or anything that goes to form this world; the Lord could not have anything in it at all. It was not that it was wrong, but He could have nothing to do with it at all, He was poor, it ministered nothing to Him, and it says, "Blessed is he that considereth the poor", and He tells us what a gain it is to any who do that -- an afflicted and poor people and they trust in the name of Jehovah. Look into their houses and you will find that they have their Bibles to be seen and they are well read, and their children read their Bibles -- they read it with them. You will find that the children ask their parents questions, and their parents answer them, not in the sense in which a Sunday school teacher answers her pupils, they are answered as part of the system, as holy, as in the precincts of the house of God; they are answered in a spiritual way, and they grow up in that -- they are an afflicted and poor people but they trust in the name of Jehovah, they bring God in at
{296}
every point. "The mystery of piety is great". Think of the range of wealth that belongs to these people, they trust in the name of Jehovah. And then, the corresponding effect is that they do not tell lies, they are not back-biters, nor are they false accusers. They are different, you see, they are practically and essentially different; and moreover, "Neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: but *they* shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid". One might venture to apply all this latter statement to a meeting like this. We are here, no man forbidding us, not a single whisper of disturbance. To what can we attribute it, but the name of the Lord? Whatever political disturbances there may be in the world, international or otherwise, it is marvellous how the brethren are kept and will be kept. The decision is in their hands, as it were, as to the whole matter. It is the whole matter, this matter of the remnant that God has left down here bearing the traits of Christ. They shall feed and lie down, it says, and none shall make them afraid. The meetings for prayer are becoming increasingly interesting. I heard a young brother the other day, only fourteen years of age, and he was praying about the international difficulties in Europe; he was praying to heaven, and heaven heard him, too. The young are brought into this, they become priests in early life, so that we feed and lie down and none make us afraid. We are trusting in the name of the Lord.
Now that is one great feature of the position. The next is in Isaiah, "The remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward". Now notice they are escaped here, not left, that is, it is another point of view; that is we are in the position as left here, it is as escaped ones, that is, we have escaped the corruption that is in the world, we have escaped the religious machinations, the religious associations in which we
{297}
were held, and this involves that we have made our decision to leave what is evil. You know how Lot was enjoined to escape and he barely escaped, and his wife looked back -- what a warning to us escaped ones or those of us who are escaping! Maybe there are those here who have not escaped yet, you do not belong to this class yet, though you may be a christian. Your very life hinges on getting out of these evil associations. And then what marks the escaped ones is that they take root downward, that is to say, we are going to stay -- not here on earth, we are not earth-dwellers -- "Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up". These are plants of the Father's planting, and the meaning is we are going to stay in the testimony, we are not going to be carried away with every wind of doctrine, we take root downwards and bear fruit upward. We read in the New Testament of being rooted and grounded in love; and that is what comes out in these meetings, the love that is amongst us, and the young people take root in it, they say, We are going to stay here; the Father has set us here, we are plants of His planting and we are going to stay here, taking root downwards, founded in love, and bearing fruit upward -- that is the second thing, meaning that there is something for God now, bearing fruit upward. All this works out in a practical way in the assembly, for that is the holy enclosure which God has down here in the power of the Spirit in which there is fruit for God. Romans develops this, that we might serve in newness of spirit and not in oldness of letter; we have escaped that, we have left that. We want the new thing, to bear fruit upward, with new songs in our mouths, for God puts a new song in our mouths. In Zephaniah it says He joys over us with singing, too, He has part in it; He is so pleased with the brethren in those circumstances.
Well now the third feature is in Malachi, that is,
{298}
the Spirit of God turns the thing round now; there is another view and a very beautiful view, one of the most beautiful views you can get. It refers to a certain time when very naughty things were happening amongst the people of God. God is making great promises, too, in this chapter -- I will open the windows of heaven -- ready to do anything for His people, as He always is. "Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it", He says elsewhere. "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, ... and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it". That is God's attitude, and we are proving it, too, in a little way. But "Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another" -- this is not ordinary table talk which sometimes is damaging to the saints; foolish conversation and jesting which are not convenient are to be abandoned, but this sort of conversation is heavenly converse -- "they that feared the Lord spake often one to another"they are all on the same footing; the circle of brethren described here sit down together, maybe in a brother's house, at his table, for there is no respect of persons -- I mean, "they that feared the Lord", that is the class in mind, it is the remnant under this heading. Then they "spake often one to another" -- we are not told what they said, but heaven heard. One of the most interesting things to me is the activities of heaven that Scripture indicates, and how earth is the great theatre of operations now, and how heaven is attracted by what is going on; and here is a company of brothers and sisters in a town that fear the Lord, and they are at a brother's house or in the meeting room, they are speaking to one another and heaven hears -- it says, "The Lord hearkened, and heard it", that is, He leaned His ear over, so to speak. Think of that now, think of an action like that on the part of God.
{299}
What did they say? As if He just leant His ear -- the sound was distinct. He said, I have heard the cry of Sodom and I have come down to see that I may know -- God comes down.
Well, how different this is, it is not a cry, He hears from a company of brothers and sisters who fear the Lord; they are speaking one to another in a heavenly way, their voices betoken it; hush, this is important, heaven would say; God hearkened and heard -- He is not deaf, He hearkened and heard. And He liked what they were saying. How testing that is as to any matter, any time, that we are in holy converse, for God hears, He likes our voices, but then He likes our words when they are in the power of the Spirit, our conversation is a matter of interest above, dear brethren -- not exactly what they were saying here, we are not told what it was, but the Lord heard their words, and He says, I will put that down in a book. The use of the word 'book' is interesting -- "book of remembrance". It is not that the Lord would forget what they say. He does forget things -- thank God He does, it is one of the comforts of every true saint that God can and does forget; never remember again, is said of the believer's sins before he is converted. But now He has another book here, it is a book of remembrance written, it says, for them that fear Jehovah. Some of us may not, you know, for there is a great deal of lightness among the young -- one notices it -- they go off and do things they know they should not, they take up ways they know they should not; that shows the absence of the fear of God -- there is no fear of God before their eyes in that particular matter. It is for those who fear the Lord this book is written, and it says, "They shall be mine" -- it is what they are to God, that is the point made, not as left here now, but what is heard up there, what is pleasurable up there. How one would love to look into that book of remembrance! And then it
{300}
says, "They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels", they will have a place. What a rich collection there is up there, a collection of jewels. What are these jewels? The fruit of the work of God worked out in exercise and pressure -- "when I make up my jewels". And He goes on to speak about sonship, one of the most precious thoughts that run through Scripture. "They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him"that is the end of the Old Testament. We begin early with the thought of sonship -- the direct word as to it applied to Israel in @Exodus 4: now we have it in these people who know how to speak to one another; they are not babes, they are men developed after God; they are sons, they know how to speak to one another. One has to be trained to speak among the brethren. I do not mean to speak as I am speaking now, but to speak in holy converse. One of the great items we come to in Hebrews is "the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven" -- we come to that; we want to know how to behave amongst them, to speak amongst them.
Now finally in Luke what I want to show is the thought carried through to the New Testament; the same remnant, but Christ personally now, not in Spirit only. Christ was here in Spirit as early as Noah, really here, the Spirit of Christ as man, but not personally, He was still in the form of God; but now He is in the form of Man, or as a Babe, and as such, He is amongst the remnant, so that there is great advancement now, but they are equal to it. The idea is that God is moving on all the time, and, as we progress, we are moving on with God. God has come in now in Christ in a Babe -- marvellous thought! 'Nor yet in triumph passing', as the hymn says, 'but human infancy' (`188:4) -- but nevertheless the Person
{301}
was there. And what comes out in the remnant in Luke is beautiful intelligence surpassing by far anything I have touched on yet. Indeed the truth of the body is intimated in the delicate passing through of holy sentiments in the first chapter. As the salutation of Mary fell on the ears of Elizabeth the unborn Babe leaped for joy -- think of that! What an inscrutable medium of feeling in those women, one the prospective mother of our Lord, the other the prospective mother of John the baptist. What a remnant that was -- not only of Israel surely, far more, a nucleus of the assembly, the very fine feelings of the body already there. Mary went, after the conversation with Gabriel, with haste to the hill country of Judaea to her cousin Elizabeth and she entered the house and saluted Elizabeth. It was the mother of Christ, as Elizabeth said, "the mother of my Lord", for she says, "As soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy". And so it is that, as the body is understood and we are linked up in refinement in the power of the Spirit in the most delicate mediums and bonds, every joint and every nerve will fill its niche; any voice conveying Christ in any way passes through and thrills the whole body. That is the remnant in Luke. And then Mary contributed in remarkable intelligence -- but I cannot go into that. I only wanted just to call your attention to this, dear brethren, a most precious jewel of the fact of truth -- not the truth in words; but the fact of truth -- of the refined relations that were there in the body of Christ. "Now ye are the body of Christ".
Do we not know it? Each one should know it; the vital eternal relations in which we are set as members one of another, members of Christ, called the body of Christ.
Now in Simeon and in Anna we have the full thought of this as the remnant. Simeon was characteristically a man in Jerusalem, as we have often
{302}
noticed; that is to say, Jerusalem stands for the testimony, it was in the mind of God and throughout Luke it stands. "Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem", it says, "until ye be endued with power from on high", @Luke 24: 49. The idea remains -- we have come to Jerusalem above but the idea remains. So Simeon was a man in Jerusalem and he was in the power of the Spirit of God. You do not get that so put in the remnant features I have spoken of, but here is a man moving in the power of the Spirit of God, he comes by the Spirit into the temple -- that is not simply sitting down in the meeting room or in the assembly outwardly, coming in by the Spirit is a great thought, and he took the Babe in his arms"the holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God". A visible Christ, not now Christ in Spirit as in the Old Testament, but a visible Christ here, the Word become flesh. Well, He is in the arms of Simeon, the remnant has Him in intelligence, a man in the Spirit. It is only a man in the Spirit can take the Babe in his arms, he is fit to do it, and he blesses God. He says, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation" -- he is a worshipper in the temple, never was one more so in all the history of the temple than that man, and he is able to tell about Him, to give a full thought about Him in relation to gentiles -- ourselves. "A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel". He is able to tell us about Him.
And then finally -- the details are full of precious instruction and light now -- Anna comes up at the same time, and we are told how long she had been married -- seven years she had lived with a husband from her virginity, and Simeon is an old man, too, about to depart, but we have not his history -- he is just a man of Jerusalem. Now we have this woman's history, all is to distinguish her in our eyes; she
{303}
came up at the same hour, one of the greatest things about her is her energy, and that is one of the features I should press amongst the brethren. I do not know how old she was, maybe a hundred and five years old, but she came up that hour; she came at the right point, she did not miss it -- we are told, "She coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem". She came in at the right time, but what is the secret of that? She was always in the temple characteristically, that was her home, as it were, and she did not miss it. Absentees from the meetings miss a lot; it is no feature of the remnant to be absent from the meetings, but the very contrary. The beginning of the assembly is presented in this way, this great event that happens is shared in by all and no one can afford to miss the great things that occur constantly amongst the brethren; hence the importance of being with the brethren, assembling ourselves together, not forsaking it. The idea in the remnant is that we speak often, and one is encouraged  -- and one knows perhaps more than others because of getting about so much -- by the remarkable increase of interest there is in the coming together of the saints often. Do not miss any time in which there is the possibility of a divine intervention. It is not once a year now, as it was at the pool of Bethesda -- it is constant, as the opportunity offers; there is divine intervention. We cannot afford to miss them. "She coming in that instant", and she was ready for it, ready for the great event, and she gave thanks; that is, it was a thanksgiving time, and she "spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem".
That is all, dear brethren, and I hope that no one will miss the application of the truth in these practical ways in which I have sought to present it.
{304}
GOD'S SEAL AND THE BELIEVER'S SEAL
@2 Corinthians 1: 21, 22; @2 Timothy 2: 19; @John 3: 33
These scriptures treat of the idea of a seal. The first is that believers are sealed by God. Secondly that in His foundation there is a seal; the foundation of God has a seal. This does not allude to the foundation of the earth, but the present building of God. Then thirdly, that the believer has a seal himself and sets to it that God is true; that is, in all his matters he indicates that his principle, his belief, his fixity, is in the fact that God is true. I have in mind to speak of these three heads and the general subject of seal, scripturally understood.
In 2 Corinthians the apostle Paul is stressing his desire to be with the brethren in his affections and to carry them with him, so that he identifies himself much with the Corinthians, stressing that they were bound up in the same bundle of life which is a needful thought for every one who ministers, or professes to minister, the truth that he is primarily with the brethren, one of them. It is said that we are to know our measure, to think of ourselves not highly, not above what we ought to think, but as God has dealt to each a measure of faith. It is in virtue of this fact of measure that God gives to each that there is the possibility of mutual working, indeed of the truth of the body being developed among us, for the divine measure has in mind that everyone fits -- otherwise there would be dislocation. If each is to fit according to his own estimate of himself, it is likely that all will be misfits, and we can have no body, we can have nothing of the body of Christ concretely save as there is the recognition of the divine measure; that is accurate. As the members of our bodies are measured by the Creator, so in the spiritual body, the body of
{305}
Christ; we can only fit as we accept the divine measure, and we are to know it. "As God has dealt to each a measure of faith". Whatever may develop practically in us will agree with that; it must agree with it. So that we are to be on our guard not to have too high an estimate of ourselves, otherwise we shall not fit and we shall damage our usefulness. Were we so many individuals, so many units, that would not be necessary, but in the organism which God has in mind, the most delicate of all in the universe, there must be measure. And so the ministers are to work and all of us are to work according to the measure of faith which God has apportioned to each.
So Paul, I believe, is aiming at this in this letter, that the brethren might understand that he is truly one of them, one that can sit down with his brethren. I have no doubt that he would be glad to listen to another speaking of Christ. He speaks indeed in this very chapter of himself and Silvanus and Timotheus preaching the Son of God in Corinth. Whether they preached in separate rooms at the same time or whether they preached one after another, I cannot say, but I have no doubt that if anyone such as Silvanus or Timotheus preached the Son of God and Paul were in the audience, Paul would be his best listener. He would sit down with his brethren, and join in with them. Indeed, he tells them that they could all speak one by one, the point being edification, not clericalism; his ministry abominates clericalism. His aim is to make the saints fit in and that he himself should fit in in the body. So that he says here, "He that establishes us with you in Christ" -- the great apostle Paul is putting himself with the Corinthians"and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts".
God did it for the least in Corinth, the least true christian in Corinth, as He had done it for the great
{306}
apostle Paul. We are established by God in the anointing and in the sealing and in the earnest of the Spirit. So that, when Luke records that the brethren at Troas assembled to break bread, he says "we" -- "We being assembled" -- not 'We and Paul', but "we" including Paul. This enables us to see the fruitfulness and remarkable power of these words, "less than the least of all saints", and "ourselves your bondmen for Jesus¬ sake". Now that is what runs through this epistle, and he brings in great elements of the truth to support him, such as the new covenant and reconciliation and new creation. These things applied to him as they did to the least in the assembly at Corinth. "But we all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". The apostle stresses that right through, and this statement comes in in the instruction, that is, that God has sealed us. God had sealed Paul with the Corinthians, meaning that anyone who saw Paul at any time would see that he belonged to another, that he was not his own; nor did he consider for himself in his ministry. Indeed, the rights that belonged to him as a minister of Christ he waives: he says so in the first epistle; so that he was a real practical christian as well as the great apostle, perhaps the greatest lover of Christ, too. In every gift he excelled. Perhaps his personal example as a christian stands out as much as any other feature of this servant of Christ -- what he was, as he says, "my ways as they are in Christ". He belonged to Another. His point was that he did belong to Another. He renounced selfishness and that is really how the seal is seen, for it is not a symbol worn on the breast or in the forehead or in the hand; the seal of God is moral. It is in one's demeanour; it is in one's walk and ways.
So, dear brethren, that is the first thought that I
{307}
would seek to impress, the divine seal, the seal of God on the christian. The point is that it is God who has done it. In Ephesians he says, "In whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise". His point here is that God did it. God has stamped the believer for, as I said, it included everyone in Corinth as well as the apostle. He has stamped the believer with His seal and that implies right of ownership, not only that others must not take me on and use me, or misuse me, but that God alone has a right to the christian, and He is very jealous as to him. He is very jealous as to any disregard of His rights either by the person who is sealed or by others who may take the sealed person for their use. It is a very incongruous thing to see a person who is sealed by the seal of God in the employ of another, in the sense of being owned by another. "Ye are not your own", he says elsewhere, "for ye have been bought with a price: glorify now then God in your body". So that there is jealousy on the part of God, the rightful Owner of the christian, the seal testifying to it. If the person himself misuses himself, denying the rights of God in him, or if another does, if he allows another to do it, if he allows another to subjugate him to his will, as it says of Satan, "who are taken by him, for his will", God is jealous. In fact, it is one of His names and it has to be therefore observed. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than He? Any disregard of His right challenges His ownership and arouses His jealousy. And although we may find many reasons to our satisfaction for selling ourselves to others or yielding ourselves to others instead of to God, God will one day raise the question with us. He has long patience, but He will one day raise the question with every one of us as to His rights. The epistle to the Romans is the great doctrinal book as to this, and it begins with our members and finishes
{308}
with our bodies, with the whole thought -- bodies they are presented a living sacrifice. The fact that they are living involves the seal. The seal involves life, for in Revelation the seal is the seal of the living God. It is the stamp of life in the midst of death -- death morally. Moral death is prevailing; the world was never more marked by it since Pentecost than now. The book of Revelation is full of the thought of moral death under the figure of blood, the blood of dead men. Very gruesome thought! And so, one would urge this, perhaps dwelling a little on it because we are drawing near to the end and the enemy works on the principle of urgency because his time is short. We are told in Revelation that he understands his time is short. It seems that according to his nature he must go on; he never desists; he never withdraws his hand. He will come to something according to his infernal desires and if his time is short he will urge it more. So that things are moving very rapidly; no one can fail to see it, and the world is turned upside down. The rich are not oppressing now: it is rather those who are in the place of the poor. The sea is the figure; he who is coming rises out of the sea. It is ability to control the masses, and that is the antichristian element. It is prophetically so, and it is so now. It is not great statesmanship or great military ability. We have had that; but that day is past. It is ability to control the masses. Satan is moving on those lines and moving very rapidly, and we have to challenge ourselves whether we are in the current of that or against the current of it. We shall have a rough time as against the current of that, but that is the testimony; that is what is involved in the position. God puts in His claim. It would seem that God is acting as a man that is asleep, but He is not, as in the Psalms. He is ever active according to the Spirit in an outwardly small way but in a very real way, and producing very real products, too,
{309}
representative products, and we want to be among them. So that, ownership by another must be repudiated for God will take you up, you may be sure.
We read in Revelation of the rise of the antichrist, but he is not active today. Let nobody deceive him self. He is not working today. People are quick to name things, but we are in preliminary times. God is showing us how quickly things can happen. This powerful man will have his number, his own number. It will not be a divinely apportioned number or measure. It will be his. I suppose he will value himself, and I have no doubt he will be received at his own valuation, and Satan will support him, and men will see what they never have seen in this world, and partisan ownership is the principle, supremacy over the masses. That is the principle and that goes on. It seems that God lets it go on; but as it goes on the reality of God's work will show itself and some will take it up -- there is no doubt about that -- and will suffer, and they are highly honoured according to the book of Revelation: "And the souls of those beheaded on account of the testimony of Jesus, and on account of the word of God" in that day will stand amongst the most honourable of God's people in heaven but, as I say, God will allow the current of things to go on and His work will show itself; and presently He takes direct issue with the current and pronounces the most terrible woes on all those who have the number and the mark of the beast. Make no mistake about that: God will take account of that.
Now as to the seal: anything that disputes the rights of God in the christian either as to what he is morally or physically must be refused, the ownership is God's. He is bought with a price; he belongs to God; he is to glorify God in his body. That links with 2 Timothy where we have the foundation. We are told elsewhere in Scripture that if the foundation be destroyed what can the righteous do? The foundation 
{310}
is not destroyed but it is surrendered, it is ignored in the general mass of the christian profession. What is going on is not on this foundation. The great operations in the public body are not on this foundation, but the foundation is not destroyed, dear friends; it exists, and hence the righteous can do something, thank God. There is a way made for the righteous. Perhaps nothing in Scripture is more emphasised than righteousness from the outset. The Psalms are full of the thought, how God regards the righteous. There is a way made for the righteous by God according to this epistle. It is really the way for the righteous. If I am a righteous man I follow it; so that it is the leader in this epistle -- follow righteousness. There is a way made for you to do it. It may involve suffering and I am afraid it will, but the way is made, and what underlies that is the foundation of God stands. It stands. It is immovable.
The seal on this foundation has two sides as we have often remarked. I speak of it now because of the idea of a seal. You look at it. You look at the foundation of any human religious organisation on the earth; take the Jewish system, the Romish system, and others; go over all of them one by one they may claim to be on this foundation but they are not. Each one of them has its own foundation, its own peculiarities, its own tenets; these are stamped upon it. The seal of God is not stamped upon it. The foundation of God has a seal and every one who is of God understands it. The scriptural idea is understood by reading the seal. The first one is that "the Lord knows those that are His". If I love the saints I am comforted by that. However few there may be at a given time that part of the seal is readable by everyone there. I am not literalising the thing, dear brethren; it is a question of what is spiritual. In any city or town, sitting down with the brethren who know this foundation, you say, 'I think of this
{311}
one and that one'; it may be a relative, a parent, a child, a son or daughter or neighbour; 'I am sorry they are not here'. We are not really christians practically if we do not make a remark like that. We miss our brethren. We only know a few that are absent. In speaking to the Lord at any time with a few of the saints, at His supper, we find liberty in telling the Lord that there are a good many in the town that are absent; the Lord would say, 'I know'. The Lord feels it and He loves us to feel it, too. He would say, 'They are indelibly on My breastplate'. He does not forget one, He would say, "Were not the ten cleansed? but the nine, where are they?" Perhaps there are those here who have benefited from the death of Christ according to the gospel and who have never responded to His love. "Where are the nine?" "Were not the ten cleansed?" But then, there is one who has returned to glorify God. The Lord loves us to think with Him, and that is one of the sides of the seal on the foundation. The more of this there is the more one is assured that it is the foundation of God.
Then the other side is, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". Well, those present have done that. "All Israel that were present", to use the Old Testament phrase, have done that. All those in this town who meet on the Lord's day to answer to His request are amongst those who have withdrawn from iniquity. It may be that there are those here who have not done that. The Lord has a voice for you. "Let every one who names the name of the Lord ...". That is a matter of consistency. You may name the name of the Lord -- no doubt you do -- every christian does; you may do it amongst christians but perhaps not amongst the ungodly. It is amongst the ungodly you must do it. It is a strong tower and as naming it, if you stay here, that is, amongst the ungodly, you will say, 'I cannot
{312}
stay here any more; there are those here who do not name that name'. So that you are missing this side of the seal. You are covered in the first, that the Lord knows you; He knows where you are; He knows your down-sitting and your uprising. He is knocking at your door. He has knocked at your door. It may be that you have heard Him knocking, but you have not heard His voice. It is not simply to hear the knocking but to hear His voice and open to Him, and He comes in and sups with you. Are you doing that? I do not believe there is one of the Lord's people on earth that has not had a knock from Christ. We may have heard the knock but perhaps not heard the voice; you have not heard His voice in it. It is the voice in it that tells us it is the Lord. Shall I let Him remain outside and His locks be wet with the dew of the night, or shall I open to Him? "If any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me". And when you are supping with Him you have left iniquity. He will not allow you into His realm if you have not left iniquity in your heart. He may come in and sup with you in order to touch your heart, and then vanish as He did at Emmaus, all to get you out of those circumstances in which His name is dishonoured. He says to the church at Philadelphia, "Thou ... hast not denied my name". And so, as He sups with you, and you see something of Him in His consideration for you, you say, 'Well, I think I will move'. Heaven is deeply concerned when a real Christian begins to move in answer to the knock, in answer to His voice. It is the voice of Christ. It is the voice of my beloved One that speaks. You say, 'I cannot stay here; He cannot stay here'. Why did He vanish from Emmaus? It was not His place. He wanted them back. He wants you; He wants us. It is the hearing of His voice, so that as coming to where He sups, to where you may sup with
{313}
Him, you find this seal, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". It is a divine seal and it marks the immovable foundation of God; thank God for it! All the enemy's ways, within these latter years particularly, have not moved that foundation one iota. It stands. "He built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he hath founded for ever". It cannot be moved, so that there is a way for the righteous. That way is to be among those who are doing according to the Lord's desire where, "I will ... sup with him, and he with me". The Lord would have us to understand what it is to sup with Him. It is not that I am here to speak to unbelievers or lukewarm Christians -- of course, if there are any, I hope you will hear the Lord's voice, that the Lord is saying to you that He wants you to sup with Him. He is waiting for it.
Well now, finally, there is this seal that every Christian has; that is, those that have received the testimony. These words, I apprehend, are the words of John the baptist. In these verses in chapter 3 of John's gospel, John is speaking about Christ, and he is outstanding in his ability to speak about the glory of Christ. In the gospel of John he is brought forward as a model for us, and he is speaking about Christ here. He says, "He who comes from above is above all. He who has his origin in the earth is of the earth ... . He who comes out of heaven is above all, and what he has seen and has heard, this he testifies; and no one receives his testimony". "Above all" does not mean that He is exalted in heaven, but he is speaking of Jesus here below; He is above all. That is a great thing to get into our souls. It delivers us from men. It is a question of His personal greatness as down here, as come down from heaven. John saw that, and he says further, "What he has seen and has heard, this he testifies; and no one receives his testimony. He that has received his testimony has set to his seal
{314}
that God is true". We shall come back to more of these words of John the baptist. In 2 Corinthians God seals us: it is a question of who does it. In 2 Timothy it is God's foundation. In this passage in John it is God is true and I set that to my seal.
To be illustrative, it is as if I were to put it on my business documents, all my letterheads, all my business letters, on everything that represents me; on everything that I own or that I do it is manifest that my principle is, among many other things, that God is true; and, dear brethren, that is not any advanced truth, as we say; it is the gospel. It is introduced in the gospel. In the epistle to the Romans, the teaching epistle, it says, "Let God be true, and every man false". Even if I have to be branded in that way, let God be true. If anything comes up in my history among the brethren, "Let God be true, and every man false; according as it is written, So that thou shouldest be justified in thy words, and shouldest overcome when thou art in judgment". That is set out in Romans, so that the believer in the gospel begins with that: "Let God be true". And then, let us seal our things that way. Everybody that comes into my house -- my seal there is, "God is true"; in my business, "God is true"; in all my relations, in all my manner of life, "God is true". That man represents God. The writer's point here is, "He that has received his testimony" -- that is, the testimony of the Man that is here from heaven, the testimony of Jesus -- that man sets to his seal that God is true. That is what God requires at this time, that we commit ourselves to that, and it is the antidote to lying. One said, "All men are liars", and in truth it is so. It is remarkable how naturally we are disposed to lying, to deceive even in a small way. If anyone discredits us we deny it. But there is the seal, "God is true". I have set to my seal that God is true. I do not want to be different from God. If I
{315}
am different from God I am not representative of God, and one is representative of God if one is truthful. That is so essential now because the enemy is working on the principle of lying; men think nothing of deception. We read of statesmen in the future speaking lies at one table. Men think nothing now of speaking lies. There used to be some honour but now it seems to be disappearing, and of course, it works down so that we are insensible to the discredit of the business application of untruthfulness or deception. We have stressed in John's writings, "He that practises the truth". He is not only saying the truth, he is doing it. "He that practises the truth comes to the light". He comes to the light. You need not be afraid. If I am doing the truth I love the light. "Every one that does evil hates the light" for it is that which makes manifest. As doing evil I hate it; it exposes me; but God is in the light. Let us walk in the light as God is in the light. If we do we have fellowship one with the other. Well, I am speaking now about doing truth; I come into the light; my deeds are made manifest that they are wrought in God. God loves that. God would cause the light to shine on every one who is doing the truth. It is a question of the testimony: he has the seal that God is true, and the new man is created in righteousness and holiness and truth. That is all I had to say, and I commend it to you, these three points, and in a practical way the seal that God is true.
{316}
ANGELIC SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE OF GOD
@Judges 2: 1 - 5; @Judges 6: 11 - 24; @Judges 13: 2 - 5, 15 - 23
J.T. These scriptures are presenting the angelic service. They speak of the Angel of Jehovah, but what is chiefly in mind is angelic service representative of God, and in that sense of service rendered to God or on His behalf. The angels were, according to the book of Job, present as the earth was created.
In scriptural records, servants are generally representative of God, characteristically so. So that in our first scripture here we read, "And the Angel of Jehovah came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I made you to go up ...". Jehovah speaks. Although the Angel speaks, it is Jehovah. The service rendered here is to remind us of departure from very great bondage, and in consequence of this, the lower disadvantageous position is to be taken up. We may have to be content with lower, narrower, circumstances. Still there is some result, for the place to which the Angel came derives its name from the same judgment. That is, he came to the place named "Bochim", meaning 'Weepers'.
It will be understood that the aim is not to occupy us with the angels themselves, save as they represent what is to do, that is service representative of God, and it is so.
W.H. Is it your thought that the first feature in the service is that there must be recognition of the public departure and breakdown on the part of the assembly?
J.T. That is the thought, presenting, as you know, the same judgment. That is, the place of the rolling away of the reproach of Egypt -- Israel entering on to Canaan, the land of privilege. This Gilgal represents
{317}
a moral correspondence to it. If God will bring us into the place of privilege, there must be the corresponding moral conditions. These are represented in the rolling away of the reproach of Egypt, presented here. The privilege of God cannot be attained apart from the disallowance of the flesh.
W.H. What had you in mind in referring to lower ground, that is its application to us today?
J.T. Well, the Lord said, as we know, to Ephesus, "Thou halt left thy first love". The Lord did not propose to restore her to that, to what she had left, and we can only come into the first principles and privileges, as intelligently we accept what was. They called the name of the place "Bochim", 'Weepers'. The Angel came to that place. He left Gilgal. The voice to us is that whatever privileges are to be had, there is to be maintained the putting off of the body of flesh -- "the *body*" of it. In principle there shall be no legalised condition of the flesh. Generally it is legalised. The flesh is legalised all round, religiously, circumcisionally. Gilgal means legality of the things of God. There is to be no allowance of the flesh at all. The word of Jehovah is, "I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you to the land which I swore unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my covenant with you; and as for you, ye shall make no covenant with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall throw down their altars, but ye have not hearkened unto my voice. Why have ye done this?" They were to make no covenant with the inhabitants of the land -- that is no recognition of them at all -- nothing with them at all.
H.B. In @2 Timothy 3: 14 Paul says to Timothy, "But thou, abide in those things which thou hast learned, and of which thou hast been fully persuaded, knowing of whom thou hast learned them ...". Is that preservative?
J.T. Quite so -- continuing the thing. In Colossians, 
{318}
the thing is more prominent. Colossians is continuing on the maintaining of circumcision, that is, the disallowance of the flesh. The word is, "Why have ye done this?" God would challenge us as to things in the world, any recognition of its altars.
Ques. Why is it that the Lord speaks by an angel to them, instead of through Joshua?
J.T. You are assuming that Joshua is now alive.
Rem. Yes.
J.T. I thought that he had gone. The book opens with "after the death of Joshua ...". I think the inference is that it is on the principle of the book of Revelation. The book of Revelation is the "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to shew to his bondmen what must shortly take place; and he signified it, sending by his angel, to his bondman John". The communications to the apostles were by the Spirit, so that the communications through angels mean in our dispensation that this same thing had happened.
F.W. This word of the angel is to the people of God as such. The other two references are to individuals. Do you think that the departure was to be met in its beginnings here?
J.T. Well, this is how the departure is to be met. The next passage, that is chapter 6, is the nation here, how God raised up deliverers, how they recognised their moral qualities. So that we have the question in mind as the angel is mentioned. "And an angel of Jehovah came and sat under the terebinth that was in Ophrah, that belonged to Joash the Abi-ezrite. And his son Gideon threshed wheat in the winepress to secure it from the Midianites. And the Angel of Jehovah appeared to him, and said to him, Jehovah is with thee, thou mighty man of valour". The man whom God would use as deliverer is in mind and the appearance of the angel is to involve really Gideon's
{319}
own condition, some instruction as to the service of God. Gideon says to him, "Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee. And he said, I will tarry until thou come again. And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid of the goats, and an ephah of flour in unleavened cakes: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out to him under the terebinth, and presented it". Now Gideon did this himself. So that whilst he is in view as a deliverer, as it is stated, he indicates that he is under the ministry of God -- and there should be deliverance, and there are deliverers. The service of God is in mind -- something for God -- not simply deliverance of the people, but it is something for God.
G.H.C. Would the weeping, as suggested in chapter 2, make way for this in Gideon, do you think?
J.T. I think so. In this clause in verse 7, we have a further thought on that same line. It says, "And it came to pass when the children of Israel cried to Jehovah because of Midian, that Jehovah sent a prophet to the children of Israel, who said to them, Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel: I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage; and I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drove them out from before you, and gave you their land, and I said to you, I am Jehovah your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell. But ye have not hearkened to my voice". Now I think that verse calls attention to the fact that it was not to a man, or servant, God spoke in chapter 2. Here, it is. It is first of all that -- a prophet, making way for God to come in in this remarkable way in angels, and that the man in mind to be a deliverer is a man who has some thought of serving God, and of ministering to God. That is, there is much today without any
{320}
thought of what is to be for God, whereas Gideon represents a person who is thinking of God, presenting something to God; and the prophetic ministry is very significant because it is just what God is now stressing.
F.I. You mean that it is what God is stressing with us at present.
J.T. I think so. That is, what is to be for God. So that we have much in the Acts, many instances of conversions, and that is for God, but in @1 Corinthians 14, the prophetic ministry is brought forward as peculiarly resultful for God, that is resultful in the sense that a person comes in where the prophetic ministry is carried on. He falls down. The secrets of his heart are made manifest, and he is judged of all. He falls down and worships God. That is the real result. I think Gideon corresponds here. He says to the angel -- the angel does not propose it -- he proposes it, "Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee". Do you think that is a significant fact as to how the work of God is going on today?
F.I. I do. I think in what you are referring to -- @1 Corinthians 14 -- the adjustment is brought into the man, and then that leaves him to take up the service of God. That is what you are after.
J.T. That is right. He is a worshipper immediately.
Rem. The apostle speaks of the Thessalonians having turned from idols to serve a living and true God.
J.T. The word is not simply serving man, but ministering to God, and in view of this, if we have a desire to serve God, He gives instruction. He shows us what to do -- that the service is not carried on in the ordinary religious way. It says in verse 20, "And the angel of God said to him, Take the flesh and the 
{321}
unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock and pour out the broth. And he did so. And the Angel of Jehovah put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes. And the Angel of Jehovah departed out of his sight". So that God comes in if we are to worship and to serve Him. He comes in to instruct us what to do.
F.I. What is the significance of the difference between the flesh and the unleavened cakes? Why are those two things brought together?
J.T. The flesh would be Christ as our sacrifice. Christ our passover has been sacrificed for us, therefore, let us keep the feast of unleavened bread, and that is to show the condition we are in, the state we are in. So that we have the direction in the flesh and unleavened cakes for God, poured out to God. They are associated, the flesh and the unleavened cakes. What is in mind is that it is Gideon's state, and God accepts what he makes and He uses it. That is, He comes within his range.
G.H.C. Have you any thought as to why the directions of the Angel came after Gideon presents it? First of all there is his presentation and then the direction of the Angel. Would you help us as to that in relation to the service of God?
J.T. Well, in Leviticus, it is a question of requiring what is to be brought on the day of atonement. But in Exodus, if a man bring an offering, that is whatever he brings, if it is within the range of the law, then it is accepted. So here it would seem as if Gideon's offering is accepted and not only accepted, but the Angel directs him what to do with it.
H.B. Do you mean that this rock is his state of soul?
J.T. His state of soul is seen in his offerings. It is a significant word, extending back into the earlier
{322}
books, and suggests the foundation of God, that the foundation is there. Things are continued on that principle, that we are on the firm foundation of God.
W.H. We can speak of "our rock" according to Deuteronomy.
J.T. Just so. And Gideon had that state -- everything in his offering. So that when young people are converted to God, God comes before them and they would bring an offering. Well, if it comes within the range of the offerings, it will be accepted. That act is to represent us as to the law, the principle governing the service to God.
Ques. Does that come out in connection with Abraham meeting the angels at the tent door? He offered a suitable offering to them, but Lot only offered the cakes. He had no kid. There is nothing indicating what is here.
J.T. Well, that is very similar.
Ques. Or, do you think this might be more connected with the assembly setting which we have in Gideon?
J.T. Yes, only I would take it that Gideon represented Levi, who read his Bible; and now there is a divine Visitor before him, so that we go back to the beginning and Gideon is seeking to move on the line and record what he did. He asked the angel to tarry as Abraham did. Abraham asked them to remain under the tree until he brought what he did, and made it for them. They said, "So do as thou hast said", and they waited for him. I think it is very touching that they did. How patient God is waiting upon us until we are ready to serve Him!
F.W. Does the waiting of the Lord upon him bring confirmation for him with regard to what the Lord had for him to do?
J.T. One is to consider the exercises of Gideon all the time, while he is preparing these things. Think of the grace of God in His ways with you. I think
{323}
it ought to encourage all of us, especially the young, that whatever they have to bring out, if it comes within the range of the law, it will be accepted. I think the Lord's heart is toward His young people for the first time beginning to offer.
A.S. Is there any significance in his putting the flesh in a basket and not in a pot?
J.T. I think it is the principle of a vessel, as the woman of Sarepta had the oil in the cruse, and the meal in the barrel. That is, you are not slovenly. We are to keep our vessels in order, in holiness, so that the thing God values is in the right setting.
Rem. The pieces of the offering would be set in order.
J.T. The Angel says, "Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth". He did so. He did what he was told. It is on this rock. It is a sure foundation. What we are doing is right.
T.T. The broth here seems to be an addition to what we get in the Corinthians. In what you quoted from @1 Corinthians 5, it is the passover sacrifice, for us, and then the unleavened bread, but where does the broth come in?
J.T. I think that is 2 Corinthians. I think it is an allusion to essence. I suppose it is an inscrutable allusion, if you understand what I mean. The thought is of an essence. The broth is the essence of the meat. Gideon brings them. He does not throw the broth away. Everything must be brought. It was an offering. It will, I suppose, be the essence of the meat or the flesh.
W.H. Would that suggest some recognition on the part of the offerer of the greatness of Christ -- what He is personally?
J.T. I think so. It involves spirituality. It is what is poured out. We have constantly much allusion to what is poured out. Paul even spoke of
{324}
himself as being poured out. I think it is dealing with the essential things and there is nothing left.
All is there. All is brought.
Rem. Like David pouring out the water.
J.T. Well, that is so. It says, "pour out the broth. And he did so. And the Angel of Jehovah put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes". It does not seem as if the essence or the broth is consumed. It is there -- all the richness of it is there. What pervades in the service of God is what we are enjoying. What heavenly joy is the pervading note that goes with the concrete expression of our worship.
R.McA. Would that indicate, too, that it was Jehovah who was speaking to him? He asked for a sign. In verse 17 he says, "skew me a sign".
J.T. I think so. He would be conscious of it.
The Angel of Jehovah departed out of his sight, and Gideon said, "Alas, Lord Jehovah! for because I have seen an angel of Jehovah face to face ...". And Jehovah stopped him and said, "Peace be unto thee fear not; thou shalt not die". We often need that.
We pray to be able to take part in the meeting, but when it comes to the real test of having to do with divine fellowship with God, well, there are very few of us quick to do even according to @Luke 24. The saints were not equal to the divine presence, but God instructed him, and it says, "Peace be unto thee fear not; thou shalt not die". And then Gideon builds an altar to Jehovah. So that he made ready.
W.H. All this service would work out within the limits of His covenants, I suppose. Is not the tendency in christendom to ignore the elements of covenant in the first communication of the angel?
J.T. Yes. I should like you to say more about that.
W.H. I was wondering if this was a matter of
{325}
great encouragement to us that deliverance comes in in coming to the covenant of God, and working within its limits, so that God secures a portion, eventually.
J.T. So that we certainly are in very narrow places today, and it is ours to bow to it. According to our faith, according to what we are to God, He gives us light as to what to do with our offerings.
G.H.C. Would recognising what Paul says of the commandment of the Lord in Corinthians, make room for the ministry of the second letter?
J.T. I think that is good. We should not have the ministry to speak of unless we acknowledged the departure now.
Now, the third reference. -- The attention is called to the failure of the male side. The appearance of the Angel is a sign to a woman -- to a wife. God is reminding us in this that brothers are sometimes behind -- not altogether, because Manoah is recognised here. His wife's name is not given. His is. So that he is recognised. The man is mentioned first by the name, Manoah, "of the family of the Danites", but the Angel appears to his wife. She tells her husband, and is true to her understanding. She says, "his appearance was like the appearance of an angel of God, very terrible". That shows that she had certain spiritual understanding, whereas we are told our measure. "Manoah knew not that he was the Angel of Jehovah" (verse 16). That is, he was less discerning than his wife. He had less spiritual understanding, which I would take it, may be the lack of leaders.
F.W. Do you think it involves there may be hindrance or lack of ability to distinguish when the Lord is speaking and to whom He is speaking?
J.T. Just so. And then the thought that comes out is, whereas the wife discerned at once, for she says, "He was like an angel of God, very terrible", yet she does not seem to be disturbed, and I believe he speaks to her in a very feeling way. He says,
{326}
"I pray thee" -- a very respectful way. He says in verse 4, "Now beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong drink". That is the Angel of God, although he may speak in this way, yet she says, he is very terrible, which of course, an angel of God could not be.
W.H. It would be an encouragement that God is not limited to the leading brethren. He works in relation to His own thoughts and the state of the saints.
J.T. Yes. And even when the Angel is gone, his wife is ahead of her husband still. She says to him, "If Jehovah were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering and an oblation at our hands". He is the head of the house, yet he has failed as to what is happening, whereas she knows. She reasons from what God is that if He receives a burnt-offering at our hands, He will not kill us. A very beautiful idea.
Ques. Would the house of Chloe in the Corinthian epistle suggest the thought of the woman again?
J.T. That is very good. It is the house. Quite so.
Ques. Is it a good feature to recognise her house?
J.T. Showing that she understood recovery. The woman is acknowledged in Timothy.
F.I. Did she not emphasise what was shown to her? I suppose what comes in later is constantly under the eye of the Spirit, moving in fresh thoughts and lines to the saints so that there should be a furtherance of things.
J.T. We do well to listen to the brethren at times, because they may be ahead of us. He did listen to his wife, but his state comes out. He betrays himself. He says to the Angel, "we will make ready a kid of the goats for thee". He said moreover, "What is thy name, that when thy word cometh to pass we may do thee honour?" He is not receiving the word of God as it is. It has not come home to him, whereas the woman did receive it.
{327}
G.H.C. Have you anything in your mind as to the kind of deliverer that is raised up in the first instance, in reference to Midian, and one is raised up who is available, but here it is out of the hands of the Philistines and there would appear to be a prophecy? It says, "he shall begin to save Israel out of the hand of the Philistines".
J.T. Midian would represent the flesh contaminating us and take away the food -- worldly associations. Gideon was raised up to destroy their power. The Philistines are more an opponent phase. The Nazarite should be stressed in regard of them. You could only meet them on this principle. They are men of great ability and influence. Manoah himself would mature into that if he was not checked. He is a man that exercises his power because he had the position. He thinks himself great enough to do honour to the Angel. He should not content himself. The only hope, indeed in this oppression, is Nazariteship, but in this service we have a further suggestion as to the service of God. "Manoah took the kid", it says in verse 19, "and the oblation". It is not here flesh and unleavened cakes, but it is the oblation. It is a question, I suppose, of the humanity of Christ. The unleavened cakes is more our state. He offered it upon the rock. He is following up what happened so far and the Angel did wondrously. That is, we have more than we had in the instance with Gideon, as if we were advancing here. The Lord would, I think, suggest to us that in our assembly setting, He will do great things for us. "He did wondrously", it says, "And it came to pass, as the flame went up from off the altar towards the heavens, that the Angel of Jehovah ascended in the flame of the altar". The previous incident relates that the Angel departed out of sight. Here he ascended in the flame. "As the flame went up from off the altar towards the heavens, that the Angel of Jehovah *ascended* in the flame of the
{328}
altar". He is going up with the fragrance of the offering. So that we have his name which is 'Wonderful', and he is true to that name. He acts wondrously.
Ques. Why was this to the parents, and not to the individual -- Samson, as to Gideon?
J.T. Well, it is to be an assembly matter, really to be brought forth. The deliverer would not be in Egypt, in our deliverance. So he would be waited for, but the parents are brought into the line of this wonderful acting, divine acting, as you say, so that the child is to be brought forth. That is the assembly exercise, you might say. The result is to come.
Ques. Is that a different matter from what is in chapter 11, where Jephthah seems to be raised up? The man who has been an outcast, he is brought in, you may say, to give deliverance.
J.T. Yes. And he is not a product, as it were, of prophecies going before. With a man like Paul, you have prophecies going before. That is, it would be an assembly matter, an assembly exercise. The assembly in @Acts 7 and 8, had in mind, I believe, the result. The light is brought in through Stephen and the assembly is viewed as suffering. I believe that Paul was affected. There was nothing like that with Jephthah. Whereas in this case, it is going to be, as it were, the result of assembly exercise. The exercise is in the light of this wonderful acting. It is to work out in the parents. So in Timothy, we have the product, too, from Paul.
F.W. So is it the exercise that there is something for God from the saints when the light of the matter comes before the deliverance takes place?
J.T. Yes. It takes a good while. Both parents are brought into it, but it begins with the woman as indicated, but the husband is brought into it. Adam was brought into the transgression, through his wife, but so Manoah was brought into the light of the service of God through his wife.
{329}
G.H.C. Would it be right to say that Manoah and his wife looking on both with regard to the activities of the Angel, and then the Angel ascending in the flame, would suggest that the divine activities on this line are for contemplation?
J.T. That is the idea. The product must be in line with all this. Samson would be a man of this kind, born of all this. So that our coming generation ought to carry in its constitution the light of the previous generation. But here we have a careful instruction as to the one who is to come that there must be Nazariteship. Both parents are brought into it.
Rem. It says of the wife, that she bore a son and named him.
J.T. Well, that is what we are saying. *She* names him. She is the more spiritual of the two, but then Manoah comes into it and one would hope that he gained by his wife's answer; when he said to his wife, "we shall surely die, because we have seen God", but his wife said to him, "if Jehovah were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering and an oblation at our hands, neither would he have showed to us all these things, nor would he at this time have told us such things as these".
W.H. Would this suggest the elevated character of the service, the thought of the Angel going up in the flame -- something of what belongs to us as linked with the thought of ascension?
J.T. Do you not think God is helping us on those lines and has been for many years? God has helped us greatly. "I ascend", not 'I *shall* ascend', but "I ascend". It is the character of things.
W.H. So that that feature should find a definite place in our service Godward, that we should not drop short of God's thought in ascension.
J.T. The ascension would come in in the most auspicious circumstances.
{330}
HEAVEN
@Acts 1: 9 - 12; @Acts 3: 19 - 21; @Acts 7: 55, 56; @2 Corinthians 12: 2 - 4
These scriptures instruct us as to heaven, and they have been read on this account. We are drawing near to the end of this wonderful day or year, the acceptable year of the Lord, as it is called, and our heavenly calling and heaven itself are coming into view. The ministry that God has furnished for a century, and is furnishing, seems more insistent, the Lord Himself participating, having said to His servants as having been successfully engaged in His service, not to rejoice in the service, or the results of it, but rather to rejoice that their names were written in heaven. This is in view in this statement of the Lord, recorded indeed by the same writer as he who wrote the Acts; in Luke's gospel, the statement is intended to confirm the teaching in this book, particularly that of the apostle Paul. And believers do well to note that the gospels are reached and only reached rightly through the epistles, the Acts included. The gospels are all confirmatory of the epistles.
Here we begin with the subject of heaven; that is, in chapter 1. The forty days which are alluded to in the earlier part of this chapter in which the Lord is said to be seen by the disciples, were educational, educational of spirituality, for although heaven is the creation of God and physical, especially the nearer heaven, as also the idea of the higher heaven, yet the understanding of them and participation in the heavenlies essentially require spirituality. The forty days are intended to qualify us for entering heaven, that we shall not be strangers there, and that we shall not be awkwardly there, but there as knowing, understanding how to be there. Paul was caught up there, caught up as far as the third heaven, so that
{331}
he had experience of the whole idea of heaven -- caught up into paradise. This happened early in his history so that it would enter into his ministry although not formally stated. The history of the heavenlies as we have and shall have to do with them comes in in this chapter after the forty days. Stress is laid on the fact that the Lord showed Himself to His disciples as living, and then that He was seen by them during forty days. Elsewhere we have more detail, that is in @1 Corinthians 15, but the educational part is essential as to spirituality, dear brethren. The apostle has to say to certain, "I have not been able to speak to you as to spiritual". It is a very humbling thing if the Lord cannot minister to us as unto spiritual. He said, "As to babes in Christ". Thank God, they were not only babes, but babes in Christ; their state was low in that sense -- a very low state. So that in order to understand what is in mind now one counts on a measure of spirituality.
What is presented in the first scripture is that the Lord is received out of their sight by a cloud. A cloud does not characterise our dispensation; we do not get it in Stephen; so that we are here in the presence of a transitional state of things which requires patience. If there are better things in the purpose of God for us we have to wait for them, and we know that they are there; we have to wait with patience and serve others for that is what is in mind. The disciples were to learn how to carry on ministry to the Jewish brethren and yet with an inkling of better things for themselves. So that it is a cloud that intervenes and receives the Lord out of their sight, and two men in white suggest to them that gazing up into heaven was not opportune at that time. It was not in keeping with the light at the moment. In all our movements we want to have our eyes and ears governed by the light governing the moment, not to waste time. The two men in white regulate and we
{332}
always need this; the ministry is for regulation. But the two men in white say, "Men of Galilee, why do ye stand looking into heaven?" That is, they belong to the remnant properly, and I think they have an inkling of better things for themselves, for God had prepared some better thing for them, yet the time had not come for them to look into heaven, but to know that Jesus had gone in. It stresses the fact that the Lord goes away from them"They beholding him", and the men say to them, "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven". Their Forerunner had gone in, although the teaching of it had not yet come out, save what He had said in the gospels which they could not yet understand. The teaching is essential to the understanding of the gospels.
Well now, that is the first thought, that the position is one of faith, unlimited faith, too, if we are to progress in order and suitably, as it were, as light comes. So they are regulated, and it is an important thing that we should be if we have been going beyond the light that governs the moment. They returned to the city. The men did not tell them to do that. They went to the upper room. The men did not tell them to do that; that is, they are governed by the light; they have an inkling of the heavenly position. They go to the upper room. That was, virtually, they do not belong to the ordinary religious sects around us, for there were sects even in Jerusalem then. As Luke presents it earlier the Lord was separated from them before He was received up, meaning that it was not the idea of the body; He was separated from them. The Jewish remnant is not a body, not an organism, it never will be; the assembly is. So that we have the teaching in this earlier instruction -- He was separated from them and carried up into heaven in
{333}
the attitude of blessing them, and they went to Jerusalem, to the city, and went into the temple. That is, they had not reached this level. The teaching is advancing, and according to this record they are on higher ground.
I desire, dear brethren, that we should be led on step by step. Now it is a question of faith, faith as to what is happening. They were witnesses that He went up. The cloud was the screen between them and heaven, but faith understands, and so Peter's ministry in the next chapter has to do with these facts. He is ministering to the remnant of Israel; he is not ministering in relation to the body of Christ. He is ministering in relation to an absent Messiah whom the heavens must receive until the times of the restitution of all things. Israel shall repent. The apostles had learned that they were within limitations. Jesus had been received out of their sight; they had seen Him go up. Faith understands. He had gone in, but He had been received out of their sight by a cloud, and they pursue their toil and their labours; and the Spirit come down is sure evidence that Jesus has full right, full sway up there -- the presence of the Spirit here below as Peter testifies: "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, He has poured out this which ye behold and hear". But the ministry is nevertheless on this line that Christ has gone in, received out of their sight by a cloud, and they enter on this service in limitations. Peter calls upon the remnant to repent, that Jesus was foreordained for them. It is not a question yet as to the eternal counsels of God as to the assembly, but foreordained for the Jews, the wonderful grace and patience of God being fully set out to the Jewish remnant.
I am speaking now not simply in a dispensational way, but as to patience, as to moving on in patience
{334}
according to the limitations set upon us by God, not being behind, not overlooking anything, but not being before, for our minds travel much faster than our feet. We may go further ahead in our hearts than we really are, so that God would have us to move on with Him in so far as we have already attained, as it is said. There is never any excuse for dislocation or cleavage because some are further on than others. However far advanced I may be I can humbly and happily tread along and keep abreast of my brethren and not get out of their sight. The apostle Paul is our example. In the Corinthian epistles, especially the second, he stresses the idea of the minister being with the brethren, keeping with them. Being with them suggests position. "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God". He is alongside the Corinthians. So Peter's ministry in @Acts 3 is according to the facts of chapter 1. There is further stress on the fact -- "Jesus Christ, who was foreordained for you, whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things". Think of the grace of God reducing the position of Christ, bringing it down to that one thing, that He was really for the Jews, indeed He was their Messiah, as if God would say, 'I am thinking of Him in that way, and I am presenting Him to you in that way'. And so Peter enjoins them to repent, and says, "Whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things, of which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets since time began". It is not eternal counsel here: it is God operating in relation to His earthly people, and those who have part in the heavenly calling are content to be the ministers within these limitations.
Now to go on to Stephen and show you how the cloud departed, how it is left behind, and we are moving towards heavenly ground. We are still considering the minister, one who began in a small way
{335}
and purchased for himself a good degree -- "For those who shall have ministered well obtain for themselves a good degree, and much boldness in faith which is in Christ Jesus". And so he delivered his word with wonderful exactness and power -- a model for all servants, and before he began to speak his face shone as the face of an angel. It was heavenly but judicial. It is very important for the ministry to be judicial. There is never a moment in the history of the assembly down here when the judicial side does not need to be stressed. His address is judicial. His face shines; it is in keeping with what he is going to say; and he is furnished, and it says, "Being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God". Moving on these lines, dear brethren, we shall reach the heavenly side, the door being open. It is a question of the Spirit. 'The Spirit's power', one said, 'Has ope'd the heavenly door'. It really is a spiritual matter, not that heaven is not above; the external heavens are: Stephen looks through. "Having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and said, Lo, I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God". Let us rest on these two verses, dear brethren, because they are transitional in the sense that we are being led out of the one order of things into another, and one is endeavouring in his inward being to bring out something that may be taken in spiritually, a look into the heavenlies.
Now to make this practical, the epistle to the Hebrews is the expansion of these two verses: "We see Jesus", the writer says, "... crowned with glory and honour". That is really the look into the open heaven. And so the ministry comes into verse 56. Verse 55 is what the believer may see in the power of the Spirit of God. Verse 56 is what he may say.
{336}
Stephen does not say verse 55; the Holy Spirit does -- it is the record; verse 56 is what he says. That is to say, verse 55 is what the minister sees, what any of us may see in the measure in which we are spiritual verse 56 is what the minister says. He puts it into language, levitical language. That is, he has a testimony. It is ministry which is calculated to lead on in faith, dear brethren. God is opening up the way for us; the cloud has departed for ever. It never is associated with christianity; it is a cloudless dispensation. It has disappeared in that sense. There is nothing at all of it here. The heavens are seen through. "Having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God". Peter says He is to be received there till the times of the restoring of all things, pointing on to the millennium. Stephen says, 'It is all settled up there whatever you do down here'. Whatever men do down here, the mind of God and the effectuation of it is settled up there. Then he puts it into language suitable for the moment, and says, "Lo, I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God". He does not say 'Jesus'; he says "the Son of man". He understands. A minister is not simply a parrot; it is not that the words are put into his mouth; it is a question of light, and God gives him ability by the Spirit to put that light into such words as are needed at the moment. There are no articulations from heaven here. It is what is seen by the minister. There is no voice: it is what is seen by the minister, and the appellation he uses. He does not say, 'I see Jesus', nor does he say, 'I see the glory'. What would they understand by him saying, 'I see the glory'? They would understand when he said, "I behold the heavens opened and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God". That is an intelligible word. Notice he is speaking to his opposers. He had spoken about
{337}
the glory, but now he has seen into heaven. It is not simply the God of glory, but the glory itself and Jesus standing. Then he turns round and puts what he sees into phraseology which applies at the moment and would be intelligible at the moment. It is the Son of man; it is not the Messiah of Israel. That is, God is widening out. Are we ready to follow the widening out of the testimony that God is opening up to us? It requires spirituality, and we cannot afford to be without it. It is available. Without it we shall not follow the expansion of the testimony as God is pleased to give it to us.
Well now, that is what we get with Stephen. The door is opened. He seems to understand. Were he to explain to a man of mere natural mentality what he saw, what would the natural man understand by the glory of God? It requires spiritual understanding. But he does say, "I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God". That is to say, Jesus in relation to the whole race of mankind. Peter says, "He is foreordained for you", but not now, not with Stephen, not for reprobate Israel, not for the remnant of Israel. It is for the true Israel He is foreordained. Now He is the Son of man; He is preordained for the whole race of mankind. Think of it, that we have Him up there. We men have such a One as He is up there. He belongs to our race; He is on our side, too; but were this to be opened up, then we should have the epistle to the Hebrews, but it was not opened up to them. The epistle to the Hebrews opens it up to us and tells us that this glorious Man belongs to us; we have Him and He is there to look after our affairs up there, and to serve us in the sanctuary up there, and to give us a footing in heaven, and to bring us into correspondence with Himself and into companionship with Himself up there, for we are His companions in heaven. It is worth while following the line.
{338}
Well now, passing on to Paul, I wanted to say that he is one of ourselves, but he is an apostle. He does not call himself that here. He is a man in Corinth. In writing to the Corinthians and Romans, in these fundamental epistles, he makes it plain that 'in Christ' belongs to every true christian. Every true christian is in Christ. What a word! But every true christian cannot be designated as a man in Christ. That is the great need always -- a man. There were babes in Corinth and, dear brethren, there are babes now; not that one would discredit anyone, but that is what he is speaking of; he is speaking of a man in Christ. He said the Corinthians were babes in Christ. They had status in Christ as much as he but they were not men. God intends to fill heaven with men, not babes -- men, that is sons. Well, that is what the apostle is at here. He is calling attention to that, and the Spirit is calling attention to it now. "I know a man in Christ". It is not 'I knew', but it is "I know". It is a present man. It is what is. There is the historical side, but in practical testimony it is always what is; that is, the thing spoken of as in testimony. So that the word is, "I know a man in Christ". One wonders as to oneself; surely it is a searching matter as to what one knows if one thinks of oneself, not that you would bring yourself forward, although it is very remarkable how much the Spirit of God puts self forward even in Paul's own ministry. It must have been a trial to the apostle to speak so much of himself. He told about his suffering: it is for us that we might know the kind of thing that God has in mind, like the two apostles at the temple -- what God has in mind in the gospel. So that it is not a question of what is historical, although it is historical because it was fourteen years before, but he says, "I know a man in Christ". The man in Christ is developing now. It is not merely a historical matter. We all like to speak of what we have experienced 
{339}
in earlier days. Old brothers and sisters are apt to speak too much of earlier days, but the real thing is what is now. The apostle brings it in here he says, "I know a man in Christ ... . (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows)". That is, his mental powers were there as God made him, but he could not tell whether he was in the body or out of the body, but he was conscious of himself. In deliverance, he says, "I myself with the mind serve God's law". Not simply 'I' but 'I myself' -- 'in my own consciousness I am serving God's law'. And now he has not lost his consciousness, the consciousness of being a man in Christ. What he learned at the feet of Gamaliel is gone from him for the moment. He does not know anything about that; if he did he would know that he was in the body, but he does not know whether he was in the body or out of the body; but he was there; in his own consciousness he was there. He was there in intelligence, too. God alone knows whether he had his body or not. This shows that if one departs to be with Christ, he is not in the body but his consciousness remains. He was there as conscious and intelligent, and he distinguishes between the altitude reached and the state of the altitude reached. The first is 'to' as you will see in the better translation. That is, he went up as far as that, meaning that he went beyond what we call in so-called scientific language, the first heaven. Now, you may think I am speaking of mere material things, but I am not; I am endeavouring to show you that it is a spiritual matter. What it is essentially, I doubt if that is disclosed to us. The apostle says, "caught up to the third heaven". He knew the altitude and he would immediately denote that it was the verification of what the thing is. The plural generally is the full thought; three certainly was competent testimony as to what the thing is.
{340}
Well, if we were speaking to Paul, or if he were speaking to you, he would convey some little impression to you of his experience. If a man is spiritual -- the more spiritual a man is and the more spiritual those around him are, the more he conveys his feelings. We have read today of an angel using his staff to touch the rock: why should an angel have a staff save that it was a symbol of experience on his part? If Paul had been to the third heaven, there is something there even although he could not utter it to you; he could convey, could carry down to earth feelings that no other man had, and those feelings belong to the assembly. Not only what I know but my feelings, my experience, belong to the assembly; they are the property of the assembly. So that he would convey to you something. His gesture would disclose certain things; so the nearer you get to spiritual men the more insight you will have into those spiritual things, and it is incumbent upon all of us to get some knowledge of these things.
<blockquote>'There no stranger-God shall meet thee'. (`76:10)</blockquote>
We are to be at home. We do not want to be out of the current of what is there. This experience of Paul -- he would say, 'I cannot put it into words; it is not lawful'; but he heard things and the effects of them were in his soul; he carried them down to earth. Well, you say, 'He is gone', but still the Spirit is here and I do not believe a single impression received by a man in the assembly is lost down here. It has come down: the spiritual constitution of the assembly embodies all that. So then it says that he was caught up into paradise. It is not now only your experience, but experience and enjoyment. The Lord says to the thief, as we have often had it, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise". How remarkable that is, that the Lord should have said that at the crucial moment on the cross! He says,
{341}
"Today shalt thou be with me in paradise". These words are to be taken into our souls. It is a constitutional matter. Matthew tells us when he is reporting the earthquake when the Lord is on the cross: "The tombs were opened; and many bodies of the saints fallen asleep arose, and going out of the tombs after his arising, entered into the holy city and appeared unto many". That is all you get as to words, but you will get impressions. They appeared unto many. What was that for? Well, their appearance impressed many as the appearance of Jesus in resurrection impressed many. It is constitutional. It is impressions conveyed. If we begin with faith we shall see Him. It is an impression conveyed -- the way into heaven. The Lord had not to knock at the door before He was received into heaven. He was received up in glory. It is the way in and the way out of heaven, the way of heaven. "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven". Notice the recurrence of the word 'heaven': heaven is the point. It is constitutional and the Spirit of God would bring it to us and fit it into our minds and our affections. It is a question of our being able to be impressed in our minds and affections in view of having part in the heavenly city, so that we shall come out of heaven from God, having the glory of God; we are fit for the place. The Lord said, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise". Would that man ever lose the impression of those sufferings when the glorious Saviour said that to him by his side? "Thou shalt be with me in paradise". Had he ever read @Genesis 2? The Spirit of God does not say. No doubt he had. And so Paul says that he was caught up into it. He went into paradise, as if he were in the enjoyment of the place. "Things which eye has not seen", says Paul, "and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's
{342}
heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit". It is not that they are spoken or written; they are too vast. It is the impression you get, the revelation by the Spirit. It is here for us to enter into and anticipate in measure by the power of the Spirit. So he says that he was caught up into paradise. The word 'caught' is used here. The Lord was not caught.
He went up: He ascended. But as to this servant it is this peculiar word: he was caught up into paradise.
What enjoyment it must have been for a moment to be there in that place called paradise, the place of delights.
That is all I had to say, dear brethren. I have made these remarks in a suggestive way so that we may be able to develop constitutionally in view of heaven. Our names are written there and I verily believe that symbolically we all go up together, we do not go one by one. We depart to be with Christ one by one, but that is never said to be in heaven; it is with Christ. We go up together, but if we go up together every one is known: "Your names are written in heaven", the Lord says, and we belong to that family called the assembly of the first-born ones written in the heavens, and to be simple, can we not visualise? Every one is known: it is so-and-so and so-and-so. It is no question of assembly order, nor is it in Acts; it was a crowd of names. Why should it be a crowd? It is simply to bring out the distinction, that in spite of the crowd you are distinguishable. No matter where you are up there you are distinguishable. It is a question of life. No two are alike in one sense and yet we are all alike in another. We are all like Christ. Each one of us has his own distinction and that distinction is in the book; his name is in the book, so that there is no question as to who he is.
{343}
THE SERVICE OF GOD TYPIFIED IN EXODUS
@Exodus 19: 1 - 6, 17, 24; @Exodus 24: 1 - 18
J.T. What is in mind is the service of God, and these chapters help, as I hope we shall see. The types in these chapters contain other things, and indeed what stands in contrast to the service of God as we have part in it, for we have come to mount Sion as in contrast to mount Sinai, and to the city of the living God, as over against mount Sinai and the terrors attending the giving of the law. But, making due allowance for all that, there is instruction typically in these chapters for us in having part in the service of God. It will be remembered that Jehovah said to Moses, "Ye shall serve God upon this mountain"; as come out of Egypt they should serve Him on mount Horeb or in mount Sinai, and it should be as sons -- "Let my son go, that he may serve me"; so that the divine idea is plainly stated at the outset. Israel was not to be long in the wilderness, in the divine thought, they were just to pass over it to Canaan, but, short as was the passage (it was eleven days¬ journey, as we are told later) the service was to begin in the wilderness; it was to begin at the mountain, and the presence of the mountain serves, in the type, to bring out the idea of ascent -- of what is on the level at the foot of the mountain and what is above. So that we shall see that Moses immediately goes up, as may be observed in the verses read, "Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the mountain". Then we find that Moses went back to the people and came back to Jehovah again, and finally Jehovah says to him, "Away, get thee down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee"; so that the idea of ascent was stressed, that is, the mediator having that liberty, but not the people. Moses is enjoined that they are not to break
{344}
through to Jehovah, they are to remain at the foot of the mountain. Then we have chapters 20, 21, 22 and 23, all occupied with the ten words and the ordinances that attached to them in relation to Israel in the land; these four chapters have to do with the giving of the law in the land, that is, the land being the final thought for us, the wilderness being only incidental, but nevertheless employed to bring out the service of God, that is, it would go on in spite of contrary circumstances. The land contemplated conditions of peace and restfulness, but the wilderness contrary circumstances. So the wilderness position is taken up again in chapter 24, and, instead of Moses and Aaron going up, we have Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the elders of Israel invited to go up. Now all these remarks have in mind the order of events at the Lord's supper and what follows it.
F.W. Why do you stress the thought of ascent in the service?
J.T. It is a principle entering into it. When the Lord instituted His supper, as recorded in Matthew and Mark, the disciples went to the mount of Olives, which was an ascent, after the partaking of the Supper. It is just because of that; of course, with us it is spiritual, not physical.
F.W. Would it be a progressive matter?
J.T. I think so. When we come to chapter 24 you will observe that Jehovah enlarges His thought, so to speak; He had specified Moses and Aaron in chapter 19, but the four intervening chapters evidently suggest enlargement and qualification for us, so that a representative number are invited up -- Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the elders. If we can follow that line, I think we will get something as to the order of events and procedure in the Lord's supper and what follows, namely assembly service.
{345}
The first great thought, of course, is God, being brought to God. God says, "I ... brought you unto myself". And then we have Moses leading the people out of the camp, according to verse 17, to meet with God. That is the first great thought, I think, to get hold of.
S.B. Moses was to address the house of Jacob and the children of Israel -- what is the thought in that?
J.T. It is a distinction that is carried through Scripture; Jacob, I suppose, alluding to the responsible side of our position, and Israel the spiritual side -- the word 'Israel' denoting that, taken from the wrestling of the angel with Jacob; Jacob prevailed, which would mean he had spiritual power, and we cannot really participate in the service of God save by spiritual power -- the sense of responsibility, on the one hand, and spiritual power on the other hand.
A.C. Is it after the Supper that this thought of meeting God comes in?
J.T. I think so. Verse 17 says, "Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount". There is no ascent yet save as to Moses himself.
T.T. Is it necessary to take account first of what God has done for us -- He has brought us to Himself, borne on eagles¬ wings -- before we are able to take the ascent?
J.T. That is how it stands. They encamped before the mountain in the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt -- it is all their doing. Notice the reference to Rephidim, which would be typically our having the Spirit. The Spirit had already come in in the water that sprang from the rock, "They drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ" (@1 Corinthians 10: 4) -- they had already begun to appropriate Him spiritually.
{346}
Ques. Why does it make the statement here that "all the earth is mine"? Is it a similar thought to what we get in @1 Corinthians 10 that "the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof"?
J.T. That is a thought that comes into the service of God. You will remember it is mentioned also at the Jordan -- "The ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth"; it is God's assertion of His rights with regard to the heavens and the earth. The heavens should be His; but whether people acknowledge it or not, the earth is His, the service of God begins here; for the moment it is a question of the service.
Ques. Is that the force of thinking of the breaking of bread as the Lord's supper?
J.T. That is the force of it. It is here below, it is a question of His rights; the Lord's day is another testimony to it, in spite of being rejected here He has that right, He has a day and He has a place here, an upper room for His service for the breaking of bread.
W.S.S. In regard to verse 17, to which you have alluded, Moses brought the people out of the camp. I gather this is not like the camp in Hebrews or in chapter 33 where the people had sinned and Moses pitched the tent far from the camp and called it the tent of meeting. Is there a contrast in those thoughts?
J.T. There is. I think here it is what is right and normal. The people pitched in a particular place, Israel encamped there, it is a spiritual encampment, one of the great encampments -- they "encamped there before the mountain", meaning they were in the presence of God and His resources. So that would be our public position -- applying it to an ordinary service -- our public position is like that. We come together in assembly before the eyes of the world, men and women, brothers and sisters, sitting down -- well, that is the public position. Verse 17, I think, means the Mediator's -- that is, Christ's -- activities amongst us, that He would take us further.
{347}
W.S.S. That is what I had in mind, that verse 17 would suggest a movement from a right position.
J.T. That is what I think it is. There is no idea yet of the camp as a place to be left, it is when Christ is rejected in the camp that there is a call to leave it, to go outside of it; but that had not happened here, so this might be taken to be an ordinary assembly meeting, like Troas -- they were all assembled to break bread.
-.McC. Would their position at the foot of the mountain mean they were ready for further movement?
J.T. That is the idea, they were not to go beyond that yet, Jehovah made special provision for that"Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish"; but He says in verse 24, "Away, get thee down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee". But when we come to chapter 24 God is making the way for ascent for all the saints, as you might say, in their representatives.
J.W. The initial place is to be given to Christ as we come together in assembly, is that the bearing of the Lord's supper?
J.T. I think that is how Moses comes in here, he is at liberty to go up; it says in verse 3, "Moses went up". He represents the mediator as having personal rights, as it were typically, and then Jehovah called to him out of the mountain, as if the idea of going up is there to start with, only it is to be reached by the people under given circumstances.
J.W. The first epistle to Corinthians opens with the thought of the assembly of God, would that correspond with the encampment? Then there are those spoken of who call on the name of the Lord Jesus -- Moses has his place in our hearts typically.
J.T. That is the idea, the mediator would be covered by the thought of the Lord Jesus. "In
{348}
every place", too -- "both theirs and ours" -- it is the universal thought. If we get that into our minds I think we shall see how the idea of ascension comes in; the Lord Jesus has a right to go up being who He is, He is the Son of man which is in heaven, and indeed He says, "I ascend to my Father". Right through John's gospel there is the thought of His right to go up, but then, how are *we* to go up? It is, I think, under the circumstances given in the type here. God gradually becomes more and more complacent as we are brought into accord with the Mediator in ways of obedience and subjection.
-.B. Would that be brought about by giving the covenant its place in the service?
J.T. It comes in peculiarly in chapter 24; it is reserved for that, that is the covenant in the sense typically of expressing love. The covenant also demands obedience, as we get in chapter 19 and right through in these four chapters I have mentioned, God asserting His rights amongst His own, His right to be loved indeed; and in chapter 20 He says, There are the thousands of those who love Me, and He wants all to love Him and He brings in, in the type, the Hebrew bondman as the Leader in the love. So that that is the meaning, I think, of those four chapters; they refer to the land, because that is what is in mind, but the wilderness is still there and they are in it -- it is incidental, but still the service is to begin there, and as the question of obedience is settled, as it is in these chapters, then we have the thought of going up. God says, Now the way has been cleared for the saints to come up, and the Mediator immediately raises again the question of obedience, in chapter 24 and, as the people accept the proposals of God, then he builds twelve pillars and an altar at the foot of the mountain, for that is where the moral matter is settled, it is on the low level. Then the service begins in the youths, the young men
{349}
offering their offerings, and then the volume of blood and the actual ascent by Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the elders. That is the order of the teaching.
W.S.S. This will actually be fulfilled when the law is written in their hearts and minds, so that chapter 24 is really based on that, I take it. Consequently we are in the spirit of it in covenant relations.
J.T. Yes, it is well to bring in that side -- the spirit of the covenant. The law will be written in their hearts and minds in the future. How far they will go up is a question, but there is in it no doubt that thought, for the book of Revelation shows the hundred and forty-four thousand are near enough to learn the song that is sung in heaven, and the names of the sons of Israel are on the gates of the heavenly city. So there is some idea of their going up, but we have to do with the spirit of the things, hence in 2 Corinthians it is said the Lord is the Spirit of the covenant and "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty", and we are brought into that liberty, changed from glory to glory in it. That epistle runs on to the idea of the new creation, indeed heavenly ground, we have a house in heaven -- all these are items that enter into our service.
A.C. Would the obedience to which you have referred bring to pass the desire on our part to go up?
J.T. Well, we become material amenable now for the divine purposes. We would be out of place on high were we not obedient below. @Psalm 24 speaks of it, "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord?" -- it refers to persons who are qualified morally.
Rem. Will you say a word as to the difference between the "book of the covenant" in verse 7, and the "blood of the covenant" in verse 8?
J.T. The book would be, I suppose, the transcript of the mind of God, it is the committal on the part of the people. It says in verse 3, "Moses came and
{350}
told the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the judgments; and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words that Jehovah has said will we do! And Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah", as much as to say, now that they have accepted the proposal, it is worth writing, it is the people's committal to the will of God that implies a writing, it is a testimony now, they have committed themselves to obedience. So we are said to be sanctified "unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ" -- it is a fixed matter and therefore a standard. So the blood put on the book would mean all is now ratified on that principle.
W.S.S. Is the obedience here the people's response to the ministry -- it was ministered to them, was it not?
J.T. Exactly. Jehovah did not tell Moses to do this. Jehovah says to Moses, "Go up to Jehovah, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship afar off. And let Moses alone come near Jehovah; but they shall not come near; neither shall the people go up with him. And Moses came and told the people all the words of Jehovah". Jehovah did not tell him to do that; I think it is to bring out the concern of the mediator to have things according to the mind of God -- that is what Christ is amongst us. He led them out to the foot of the mountain to meet with God, but now God is giving them more latitude, they are to go up, and Moses represents Christ, that there should be no discrepancy. Moses would have us according to God, as Joseph selected five men to present to Pharaoh; that is his idea, that they should be presentable. So the Lord says, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me" -- that is His thought. He must do the thing, for He alone knows what is suitable to God.
T.T. What is the thought in the youths being sent, as regards ourselves?
J.T. I think it is the freshness of the thing, in the
{351}
beginning of the service. It is not to be in platitudes, which old brothers are very often found using, with little or no freshness, or mere terms, it is a question of freshness in the service -- making the application. Aaron is there and he is mentioned in the chapter, not yet made the officiating priest, but he is not the one to offer the sacrifices here, it is a question of freshness in the service.
-.B. So that in @Psalm 1 you get one who has God's law in his heart, and then planted by the rivers of water.
J.T. Just so.
Rem. Would this be like the dew of thy youth?
"In holy splendour: from the womb of the morning shall come to thee the dew of thy youth", @Psalm 110: 3.
J.T. That is the idea, it comes out at the end of the gospels in the spiritual ability of the disciples.
They were all unbelieving more or less, but still they loved Christ and there was freshness and energy, especially with Mary Magdalene -- they were up early.
W.S.S. This is a position in advance of the camp position, but not yet the movement into the mountain.
J.T. No, it is preliminary, and belongs to the Lord's supper really, for that is where the covenant appears. It is after the blood of the covenant is brought in they begin to move up. The idea is the fulness of the testimony to love in the volume of the blood.
W.S.S. That is what I had in mind in asking about the ministry, whether for us it is the ministry of the new covenant that brings us into the enjoyment of that love.
J.T. I think so. 2 Corinthians therefore enters into it very fully; Hebrews is more the terms or law of the new covenant; but 2 Corinthians is an epistle to christians, while Hebrews is to Jewish believers. So in the Corinthian epistle it is the spirit of the thing, so it is in the Spirit we have it, and it
{352}
must be in a more exalted way; so Christ is the Spirit of it and He takes it to the level He sees is necessary, for it is really a medium or an instrument in His hand to make us more ready for Him to take us off the earth in a spiritual way.
S.B. Has the Lord all this in mind in @John 14 when He says, "I go to prepare a place for you"?
J.T. Yes, and in all those chapters from chapter 13. He asserts in chapter 13, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me"; later on He tells them to wash one another's feet, but He begins with that thought, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me". Chapter 12 begins with, "Six days before the passover", that is, it was not in relation to any ecclesiastical date or feast. Every Sunday now has something attached to it by the Establishment, whether it be a hundred years ago or today there is something attached to the particular day, but the Lord is saying in @John 13 that He is not paying any attention to that sort of thing at all -- the Jewish passover is not taken into account, it was not governing Him at all. In chapter 12 it was six days before it -- it was not governing Him there, either. So we are left to discern what supper this is; it is hard to say. The truth is, it was not according to any religious date or ceremony, it was a spiritual matter. So they were ceremonially clean to eat the passover, but the Lord is saying, that is not enough now, you need Me; you need Me, too, for this matter -- and that is most important for every one of us.
I.R. Would the cup of the new covenant come in at this juncture before the ascent?
J.T. That is what you see there, for verses 3 - 8 refer to the interim. The mediator evidently considered that all this was necessary before the ascension begins. I think this is all most important for us as to assembly service. So that in 2 Corinthians the Lord is the Spirit of the covenant; it seems to be brought
{353}
in there as an instrument in His hand for the perfecting of the saints for the service of God, so that we are changed from glory to glory as by the Lord the Spirit -- He does it, He is doing it; and that is what Moses is doing here, preparing them for the ascent.
T.T. Is there a suggestion in verse 8 that we should dwell on this truth and not hurry past it? He says, "Behold the blood of the covenant".
J.T. Quite so. Moses took the blood (in verse 8) and sprinkled it on the people (notice that) and said, "Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words". So that you can see the striking place the covenant has; in 2 Corinthians it arose from the idea of a letter of commendation; that is, Paul is questioned as to whether he should not have a letter of commendation, but he shows he did not need it, because he loved the brethren and he showed he loved the brethren in the way he spoke of them. So much did he love them that they were written on his heart as suggestive of the high priest's breastplate; and if any brother has a heart like that with the names of the saints written on it, he does not need a letter of commendation. So it is a question of fitting the saints in the way of love for ascent.
J.W. He speaks in chapter 8 of proving the genuineness of their love in the matter of giving, would that find expression on the Lord's day morning as the Lord takes us in hand?
J.T. I think that is the most important thing, the Lord taking them in hand. He took their feet in His hands and He said, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me", so the change is by the Lord the Spirit.
Ques. You spoke in another place as to the lack of power for what we might call a spiritual silence -- would you suggest that in a movement of ascent there
{354}
would be a moment of spiritual silence in power before?
J.T. Well, I think that fits nicely, it is really a question of spiritual power. And so here it says (in verse 9), "Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up" -- they are doing it themselves, and what may be helpful to us is to point out that after they go up and after they see the God of Israel and after they had eaten and drunk in liberty before Him owned as nobles, stress is laid on Moses going up by himself, to bring out, I suppose, the personal dignity of Christ. Joshua is mentioned, but he is only his minister. You have the actual mountain now mentioned; it is mentioned earlier but only to build the pillars at the foot of it, but now you have the actual mountain mentioned several times. "Jehovah said to Moses, Come up to me into the mountain, and be there" -- that is the mediator. Then we have later the glory of Jehovah and Moses going up (verses 15 - 18). Now that is, to my mind, very remarkable because in the idea of ascending there is nothing said about where they are going as to a place, it is the idea of going up and worshipping, it is a spiritual matter; but in the case of Christ He is in the place, it is His proper place personally. But they go up and they see the God of Israel -- it is just going up in regard of the elders.
S.B. Seeing the God of Israel is a wonderful thing; might it include the thought that we have all the saints in our affections previously?
J.T. No doubt. I suppose the elders are representative here. They see Him in His own circumstances, I think, in the type, it is the idea of our going up in a spiritual way for a moment, whereas Christ's place is permanent -- "Be there", is said to Moses.
Ques. Are Nadab and Abihu and the seventy elders a distinct company from the nobles on whom he laid not his hand?
{355}
J.T. I do not know whether it is not a question of them all, it is an item in our understanding in the service of God that, as ascending and being there with God, we are ennobled, we are viewed differently from what we are down below.
Rem. Would it correspond with the desire of the Lord in @John 17 that we should be with Him where He is?
J.T. Yes, quite so, being with Him where He is is more permanent, I think, applying to the future when we are at home in glory. The actual place is not stressed at all in regard to their going up, only Moses and the mountain is then mentioned several times. I think room has always to be made for Christ's supremacy -- He is made higher than the heavens. *We* do not go higher than the heavens, that would be beyond the created realm, that belongs to Christ. Paul, I suppose, went to the limit of our part -- the third heaven, that is the full thought of heaven for the creature.
Rem. So as the saints go up to this position they can appreciate the place Christ is in and in the sense of that, in their spirits they can worship.
J.T. Quite so, He is always anointed above His fellows.
T.T. John in the Isle of Patmos was impressed by the greatness of the Person of Christ, and afterwards he was caught up -- would that fit in?
J.T. Quite so. "Come up here" -- he belongs to the assembly, really, and the living creatures are there.
-.McC. In verse 10 it says, "They saw the God of Israel", but then in verse 11 it says, "they saw God". Does seeing God suggest a further thought?
J.T. I think it does; "the God of Israel" is a relative title: "God" is more absolute, so far as we may grasp that thought.
J.R.H. Regarding the greatness of Moses, would
{356}
it be seemly to address the Lord Himself as to His greatness at this juncture in the Supper?
J.T. At the Supper it would in relation to the covenant, but in reaching God, reaching the Father, the Lord is viewed in Scripture as on our side, because He leads us, He is the Leader of our salvation made perfect through sufferings -- He is on our side. I doubt the intelligence of anyone addressing the Lord after we have reached God, because that is the great ultimate in the service -- God. We recognise that Christ has a distinct place as He is here in Moses going up, but still Moses is on our side, he is the mediator and more particularly the minister of the sanctuary; for Aaron is not yet officiating, all is in the hands of Moses.
T.T. Would you say that in ascending everything becomes very clear to us? -- "as ... the form of heaven", it says, "for clearness".
J.T. Quite so.
W.S.S. In regard to what you were saying in connection with addressing God, does "they saw God" include Moses as suggesting the Lord leading us to the position?
J.T. Yes, then his own distinction is stressed rather, because that is his place, "Come up to me into the mountain, and be there", Jehovah says, that is his own characteristic place. We do not stay there, we are there for a moment in service and worship and enjoy the liberty there and see everything clearly, but he is to be there and remain there for forty days.
Rem. Would it be suggestive of the cloud that overshadowed them in @Luke 9?
J.T. Somewhat -- He is supreme. Peter would have had three tabernacles, but the voice said, "*This* is my beloved Son: hear him", that would correspond, I think, with Moses¬ place here, so that Peter says of it, "Having been eyewitnesses of *his* majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory,
{357}
such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight; and this voice we heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain", (@2 Peter 1: 16 - 18); they were with Him, but then the majesty was there, too -- His own distinctiveness.
S.B. What would be the thought in eating and drinking?
J.T. I think the liberty of enjoyment, eating and drinking, speaks of enjoyment. It would be that they had liberty to do that, they are not restrained, they are not in fear up there; that is the suggestion in it, I think. Of course, you might say, What did they see? Well, they saw the God of Israel. We are told no one has seen or can see God, so we must come back to Christ, how He is discerned, "He that has seen me has seen the Father", says the Lord; They are distinct Persons although the One is known in the Other.
A.C. You have given us a great deal to ponder on in regard to the Mediator; some of us have had rather different thoughts as to this.
J.T. We are getting hints as to the service of God in these scriptures, because Moses is not properly the minister of the sanctuary, he is the mediator: Aaron is a type of the minister of the sanctuary; but the Lord embodies both, He is the Apostle and High Priest of our profession.
{358}
THE PRESIDENCY OF CHRIST OVER HIS SERVANTS
@Mark 3: 13 - 15; @John 16: 13 - 15; @1 Samuel 19: 19, 20
J.T. What is in mind is to show that ministers of Christ and the ministry are intended to be always under His presidency, first in their selection, the circumstances under which they are selected, and that they are selected in relation to one another, then that the Spirit as here not only teaches directly -- as we are told in @John 14 and in John's epistles -- but that He guides us, as in our meetings, into all the truth; and in the prophetic ministry, which is so stressed now, there is the idea of special appointment over us in it, the word 'president' being used, it is said, "They saw a company of prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as president over them". These are the features of the truth which are in mind, so that we may perhaps first consider the appointment of the ministers, viewed, of course, in our scripture in Mark, as the twelve apostles. The facts stated are surely intended to govern us in regard of this side of the truth.
W.C. Would the thought of being "with him" be pre-eminently for training?
J.T. That is what I thought. The position first, up the mountain, and then the call, "whom he himself would"; then "that they might be with him, and that he might send them to preach". It is clear that the number twelve is in mind, and that we are chosen in relation to one another, and, as chosen, to be with the Lord -- "He appointed twelve that they might be with him".
Rem. The Lord's call to Simon and Andrew in chapter 1 was, "Come after me, and I will make you become fishers of men" -- they were included in the
{359}
twelve. Would you say a word as to the difference between the two callings?
J.T. The first one would be preliminary, I should think, their preliminary call out of their ordinary vocations -- a matter, of course, that enters into what is before us, what our several vocations may be, whether we are ready to make Christ's service first, or whether it may be just a sideline while we go on with our ordinary affairs. I think the verses would mean that Christ is influential enough in His first approach to move them, bringing out the kind of material that He was selecting. Chapter 3 would show, I think, they had been with Him a certain time, they are now to be chosen in relation to one another on the elevation of the mountain and in order to be with Him, I would assume, together. So that in the ministry there is no independency of thought. I think the verses read in chapter 3 contain a great principle: we may have been chosen in different countries or at different times even, but this great principle must dominate all the service and every servant, namely, that we are called in relation to each other.
P.L. Like the levites set round the tabernacle. If we take up Numbers, the ministers are viewed as the family, are they not?
J.T. The family thought enters into the relation of servants one to another. The levites were a family subdivided into three; in Joshua they are heavenly and the custodians of the grace of heaven in relation to cities of refuge, so that the clerical idea is wholly excluded. If we bring in the levitical side, it is a family and from the standpoint of training, we are called in relation to one another, called by the word of Christ -- "whom he himself would" -- but in relation to one another. It seems obvious that the idea is that the twelve might be with Him that He might send them out, so that each would know the
{360}
others and would bear in mind their several capacities and measures. The Lord, in His intercourse with them, would undoubtedly delegate certain things to them and all should know. As to selection, He selected three, on two occasions at least, to be with Him for a special reason -- the others would know that.
A.J.G. What is there in the thought that the three whom the Lord so often selected are surnamed in this passage?
J.T. Just what I am saying I think; they would be distinct, there is distinction amongst the servants.
What would you say yourself?
A.J.G. Yes. There would be some spiritual significance, I suppose, in the surname, would there not?
J.T. A surname is evidently a distinction. They learnt to surname people themselves, too, as in the case of Barnabas.
H.H. They were chosen, as you say; there would be no independency.
J.T. I thought that is an important matter that each stands in relation to his own Master, yet it is evident the Lord would have co-operation amongst His servants.
Ques. Is it relevant that in @Ephesians 4, before we have the gifts, there is the statement that there is "one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all"? Is it important that should come in before we have the gifts from the ascended Christ?
J.T. That is good, a great basis of unity. First the state of soul -- "With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, bearing with one another in love".
Then there is, "Using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace". Then the three circles of unity -- one body and one Spirit and one hope of our calling, "one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all". Surely that is a
{361}
great over-reaching thought, in everything, in every relation in which the saints are, for the passage goes on to say that "to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ", and then we have the specific gifts, all to the end of the work of the ministry. So that it seems the principle of unity and co-operation enters into our service and preserves from independency, not only of service, but of thought.
The next passage we read, in John, would seem to bring out the presidency, as I may say, of the Spirit, for in truth the thought is there, the word 'Comforter' would carry it, One who is in charge of us, and the idea is that He guides us into all the truth. So that in our services together, as we are now, the Spirit is here and would take charge of all that is said; the sense of His presence and function, I think, would in itself promote unity, the desire to have the truth. He guides, it says, "When *he* is come, the Spirit of truth, he shall guide you into all the truth". A very important word, I think -- all the truth -- and very encouraging. It is a word of great hopefulness as to the truth, that even difficult problems may be solved in the Spirit, the recognition of the Comforter and each recognising what another says, the Spirit would give an ultimate setting to all and make it the truth, for He is the Spirit of truth. It is a remarkable designation, the Spirit of truth, not only what is said, but the spirit in which things are said.
W.C. In the passage quoted in Ephesians it speaks of "holding the truth in love", would that, marking the saints as a whole, provide a kind of atmosphere in which the truth would open up through the Spirit's guidance?
J.T. I think that is right; you are not concerned as to special things so much, but as to the truth.
Rem. You mean we need one another in order to arrive at the truth in that way.
{362}
J.T. I am sure that is true. The temple necessarily enters into it, but especially where there are those who are fitted to teach, who are instructed as together; the Spirit guides us so that we reach the truth. I think we have proved that. Not simply what one says but what one and another say, it is the Spirit that makes the thing, He guides us into all the truth. There is no need of our leaving anything as something unknown; we wait on the Lord, and the Spirit will, perhaps at an unexpected time, bring out something that clarifies the matter.
Rem. Would not that point to the need of our being amenable as together to receive what the Lord may give by the Spirit?
J.T. Quite so.
H.H. Then He does not speak as from Himself; He is not -- if one may be allowed to say it -- independent.
J.T. That is another great fact that enters into this. The Lord Himself, in John's gospel, takes the ground of being taught -- a marvellous and affecting thing, but one of the great features of John's gospel. The more spiritual the atmosphere is -- and the gospel contemplates a spiritual state of things -- the more we shall appreciate and look in the face the wonderful down-stooping of Christ, taking the place even of being taught of His Father. So John would cause everything, whether work or teaching or whatever it be, to emanate from the Father, coming down mediately through Christ and through the apostles and one and another, acting on the principle that the Spirit does not speak from Himself, but whatsoever He hears that He speaks. And then it goes on to say, "He will announce to you what is coming"; the whole coming vista is opened up to us, so that we understand and see the end from the beginning.
Rem. Does @Mark 6 help in this? It says He sent
{363}
them out two by two, and then gave them power -- He did not give them power before.
J.T. I think that is right. We have power, it may be, but I suppose the real truth is we get the power as we need it; in ministry you get it as you need it. It is in us, of course, in principle, in the Spirit, but it comes as we need it; the Spirit gives us in that hour what to speak.
Ques. Do we get the thought of the prophetic word coming in here and showing us things to come?
J.T. I suppose it had more force with the twelve than it would with us. Things to come are pretty well written down for us in the Lord's discourses recorded in the synoptic gospels; and the book of Revelation, I suppose, may be taken to embody all this side of it, "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to shew to his bondmen what must shortly take place; and he signified it, sending by his angel, to his bondman John, who testified the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, all things that he saw". I suppose it would really, in the main, involve the opening up of the Apocalypse, the whole prophetic testimony, of course, of the Old Testament entering into it, too, "the spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Jesus", it is the opening up of the thing, the showing of the thing, I think, that we might look for.
H.B. In regard of the guiding into all the truth, would it take account of the several capacities of the saints, and also of the work of God as necessary in view of entering into the truth?
J.T. I think it takes account of what there may be at any given time. The more spirituality there is in any given company of saints, the more it will be opened up to us; the more gift, of course, the more ability, but spirituality in the saints as a whole has a great deal to do with the opening up of the truth.
Ques. Does the Ephesian setting indicate that?
{364}
Paul says, "I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God".
J.T. It is all declared; there was no showing of things after that. The apostle, I believe, had to go through much himself to fit him to bring out all that was in the mind of God; the general range was opened up in the ministry at Ephesus, but there is much to be shown. These epistles from prison contain the greatest depths of spiritual vision, I think.
W.C. "I have yet many things to say to you, but ye cannot bear them now" (@John 16: 12); does that indicate the need of state in the saints for the Lord to be free to open things up?
J.T. It does. You find the state of the brethren has a great deal to do with the opening up of the truth. So that the apostle had to go through much; I believe his years of imprisonment were intended to fit him for the Spirit to open up things more fully and in more detail with more power of application, as we get in the epistle to the Ephesians, for instance. He tells the Corinthians, "the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God"; but then the condition at Corinth hindered the apostle from opening things up to them, and that is always true where there is a low state of soul. Powerful gift may move on, as Paul did at Ephesus, and open up things objectively for the understanding, but searching the depths requires, I think, a certain state in the saints.
Ques. Do you mean that much depends on the place the saints give the servants through whom the Lord or the Spirit are speaking?
J.T. That enters into it, too; but whether the saints are lovers of the truth, not simply wanting to hear a certain brother, but wanting the truth. You may know beforehand that the Lord uses a certain brother and is likely to use him to give you something, but the question is, Do I love the truth? The temple exists, and if there are lovers of Christ listening, 
{365}
the truth will come out -- "As they were listening", it says, "... he added and spake a parable", @Luke 19: 11. It is largely a question of the state of the saints.
Ques. Is there a difference between being guided by the Spirit and being filled with the Spirit for some particular service?
J.T. There is a difference. Being filled with the Spirit is a question of any person, like Stephen, being ready for use; but I think guiding into all the truth is a collective thought. The Paraclete or Comforter is with us, taking charge of the matter. It is wonderful, as this is borne in mind, how the truth comes out and you are made conscious of it. The canon of Scripture, I believe, is on this principle, what has been reached by the Spirit having His place.
W.C. A number of the names we have amongst the twelve we hear very little of, but they were necessary to the whole. Does that suggest we should always be listening? We may not always have eminent servants to listen to, but all are part of the whole.
J.T. Yes, the apostles are all in the foundations of the city, there you see the full result. Peter had his name there, of course, but then others whose names are mentioned only once in the Acts have their names there, too, showing the work was carried on"To every man his work".
W.C. The love of the truth would give us an interest in it through whomsoever it might come. We should not be looking merely to be refreshed, but looking for the one through whom the Lord would speak.
J.T. Yes. Then another thing -- loving the truth will give you to look for and value every one who has more than you have. Paul laid himself out to commend it to them, bringing up with him to Jerusalem
{366}
Titus, so that they gave to him and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, and Peter came to it fully.
Ques. Is it in your mind that, as being set together, features of adjustment might come in amongst us in order that the Spirit might be free to guide? Is that in your mind in relation to our being with one another?
J.T. That is what I am thinking of; a readiness in what I am saying to think of what another may say and wait to see whether the Comforter, the Spirit of truth, may not have something further to bring out, for that is what He is there for really; He helps us, but then He is the Spirit of truth and He is to direct in a subjective way. Christ is the truth objectively; the Spirit is the truth subjectively; and surely it is a great matter to lay myself open to be in that. There is that which He is objectively, the Spirit is the truth, but that is what He is in the saints held in relation to one another.
Ques. Will you say a little more as to what is involved in "that they might be with him"; what is the difference between that and what you are saying now about our being together?
J.T. Being with Him together -- one must assume that is the meaning. His gestures and attitude and hints and often words of ennoblement as in the case of the three mentioned, would fit us into each other, fit the apostles into each other, that they were a separate people mutually set together under the influence of Christ in His companionship.
Rem. "One Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things".
J.T. Well, the apostles were peculiarly 'by him', He brought them in, a set of men the like of which never existed before or after; they are His product "by whom are all things". He is now working in the thing that is going to characterise the whole testimony while the Spirit is down here, wonderful men, and
{367}
they go right through, for John shows them in the foundations of the heavenly city. Each man did his work, and they evidently worked in relation to one another, there is no discrepancy in the foundations.
P.L. Each gracing his niche in subjection to the Lord's sovereign will.
J.T. That is what is worked out, I think. Peter says, "What shall this man do?" Well, you might say, there was perhaps some right thought at the bottom there, but the Lord had to check and correct that. There might have been a little inclination with Peter to dominate, to be the first. He was first, but then, he was not a president of the apostles, he was just an apostle; he must therefore -- and did readily -- take his place and listen to any of the others. You often wonder how they did get along in their meetings, how they would proceed; but you may be sure these great men like Peter and Paul, would gladly listen to another and enjoy what another was saying. Paul speaks of himself and Silas and Timotheus preaching the Son of God.
Ques. In @Acts 15 James speaks about Simeon, how he had brought before them certain truth; were they consciously together there?
J.T. They were, they were reaching a great conclusion. They were facing a difficulty, too, because the enemy was attempting to drive a wedge between Jerusalem and Antioch, but the procedure by Paul and Barnabas, under the Lord, defeated it. Peter and James were the spokesmen, and we can see how they move together.
A.J.G. Is it a question of seeing what the Lord is doing and the end He is working to? I was thinking of the Lord Himself saying when here that "the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself doeth" (@John 5: 20); that the Lord in His service moved as being shown by the Father what the Father was doing?
{368}
J.T. That is very touching, that principle must come right down to us, not only what we say, but what we show. The Spirit is here to guide us into all the truth, showing, I suppose, that everything emanates from the Father, whether it be working in a general way or teaching; not only that the thing is done, but how it is done.
Ques. Would it involve the spirit of enquiry with us all?
J.T. You feel you would need to enquire. The apostle, in writing to the Ephesians, wishes particularly that they should know his knowledge of the mystery. Well, it is a great matter somebody knows, and he wants them to understand that he, knew and, of course, you ask questions of a man who knows.
E.G. Referring to the showing, it says, "Yet show I unto you a way of more surpassing excellence",
@1 Corinthians 12:31.
J.T. That is the idea. Not simply that you talk about love, which Paul did, but you show the thing.
The Father showed the Son -- wonderful that the Lord should so speak! Here we have the Spirit showing us things to come, the word is 'announce', it is this sense of making a thing plain, too, and the more you know a thing the plainer you can make it.
Do you not think so?
Rem. "Jesus knew therefore that they desired to demand of him, and said to them ..." as though the mind of the Lord was given authoritatively in answer to the spirit of enquiry that was amongst them.
J.T. Quite so. The Lord, I am sure, helps us.
We have spoken of the distinctions He puts on His servants. He began Himself, I believe, to set out the principle for us, "Both hearing them, and asking them questions". I am sure the apostle Paul would gladly sit down and listen to the twelve or to any one
{369}
of them at any time to hear what they were saying and ask them questions, too. So would they listen to him normally, I am sure.
Ques. So would you connect the guiding into all the truth with what is obviously authoritative at any time?
J.T. Well, it says particularly in Matthew and Mark of the Lord that He spoke with authority, not as the scribes. If one knows a thing, he knows it and can speak of it; the better you know a thing, the more power you have in giving it out; not only that you can say it, but you can show it is so.
P.L. Does this guidance link up with spiritual leadership and is that balanced by the temple thought bringing in what is more mutual?
J.T. I think that is right. @Acts 15 has been already alluded to; it is a very remarkable procedure, there was strong opposition, the enemy was working. The apostles Barnabas and Paul were received by the assembly, things were maintained right in spite of the opposition and the apostles and elders came together to consider the matter. Then you get the apostles speaking of the work of God which had been done among the gentiles and Peter makes his statement. I suppose the idea is that Peter was first in Jerusalem, God gave him that place, and he opened up the mind of God on the matter. The Holy Spirit undoubtedly was present in the procedure and He used the qualified persons, too; it was not any brother getting up, it was Peter, and he begins by calling attention to the fact that God had ordained that by his mouth the gentiles should hear the gospel; so that his position is clear, he is the one who gives the spiritual lead in the matter. Then there is happy conversation; it is quite apparent that the spiritual atmosphere increases in the meeting. Then James draws attention to what was said, that it agreed with what the Scriptures said. So an excellent 
{370}
spirit prevails in spite of the opposition, and then a conclusion is reached.
W.C. Would the idea of presidency be there?
J.T. If you were to ask Paul or Barnabas afterwards, I am sure they would have said the Lord's hand was over all that, and I am sure that many of us can say the same thing as to such matters, that the Lord takes care of things in a palpable way. One and another speaks and a right conclusion is reached, and all that brings out the idea of presidency.
Rem. So James would be in the consciousness of that when he said, "Brethren, listen to me"; not that we should say that, but should there not be a sense of that with us, of the Lord's presidency?
J.T. Well, the man who says that knows he has something to say.
H.B. It says they held their peace -- things were not too hurried.
J.T. The atmosphere increases in that remarkable chapter, and it is set down as an example for us. First, the apostles and elders came together to consider the matter, and then certain from the gentiles are allowed to tell the company what God had done with them, and there was Titus by them, a man the like of which you could not meet in Jerusalem as a product of the gospel, a gentile, and Paul says they did not insist on their being circumcised, showing the power of the truth was there. The account in Galatians helps us.
P.L. "Ourselves your servants for Jesus¬ sake".
"Barnabas and Paul, men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ".
J.T. You mean that is embodied in the letter.
P.L. Quite so.
J.T. That is, I think, a good example for us of how the Spirit of God guides us into all the truth.
W.M. It says in this chapter, "It has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us" -- is that the thought?
{371}
J.T. Quite so. Then there is just the other thought, namely the presidency of Samuel over the prophets. In @1 Samuel 19: 20 it says, "Then Saul sent messengers to take David; and they saw a company of prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as president over them; and the Spirit of God came upon the messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied". It would seem that the Spirit of God incorporated the messengers and brought them under His presidency.
Ques. Is there any similarity between this last account and @1 Corinthians 14 -- the prophetic word?
J.T. I think there is. This shows us how the prophets may be increased. These were messengers of Saul but there was remarkable power there. We see how the prophets may be increased even as we sit down. We cannot say, This one ought to speak tonight and that one -- it is a question of the presidency. The Spirit of God may use persons you have never thought of.
P.L. Suggesting what is there potentially in the Spirit.
A.C. The name of Samuel would speak of what the Lord had asked the Father for -- "I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter".
J.T. You mean his name means, Asked of God. Yes, quite so -- a good principle here.
Ques. Is the subduing power of the prophetic word seen here to subdue what is hostile?
J.T. Quite so. It is remarkable how it subdues others more than might have been thought of; I mean to say, this line of thought makes for the increase of prophets, even Saul himself came under the power, showing what power there is.
P.L. Would you say that David finding refuge here suggests that such a character of things would furnish a retreat for the Lord in a dark day?
{372}
J.T. It shows how there may be that at the present time with the murderous spirit that is abroad in the sense of opposition to Christ. Christ is not here personally, but the testimony of the truth is most vigorously attacked in all directions. Well, here is the thing, this is the thing -- the prophets prophesying, they are doing it, they are not simply official prophets, they are *prophesying* and Samuel is presiding over them as appointed, showing he has a special place; he is called 'president'. Well, that is the way the thing is met, that the enemy's power is broken. First Jonathan saves him, then Michal saves him, then, when both of these failed subsequently, there is only one hope, and that is the prophetic ministry. That is, it is not now in this day a question of creeds or even codes being taught amongst us, it is a question of power, that is, power working out prophetically among the brethren, that overcomes all the difficulties.
W.C. Would the word, "We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth" (@2 Corinthians 13: 8), bear on it? As the enemy attacks, the truth comes out.
J.T. I think that is it; the Spirit is the truth, it must stand.
Ques. Do you connect Samuel's standing with the Lord being actively present as in a meeting for ministry?
J.T. I think that is what we should look for. We ask Him to be with us, and He does not like us to be asking for things we do not expect; He comes in and we know well enough He comes in. So, besides Samuel, we have the action of the Spirit, the Spirit of God comes upon Saul and he prophesies -- the power was there. I suppose the Lord represents the authority, but the Spirit is the subjective power.
H.B. In regard to the meeting for ministry, if the Spirit of God was active might we look for fresh
{373}
vessels serving in that way giving the prophetic word?
J.T. That is what comes out, I think. You see the messengers of Saul are brought in there, showing the power there was, but in @1 Corinthians 14 we have, "If there be a revelation to another sitting there, let the first be silent"; that shows the Spirit of prophecy is operating and selecting another vessel besides the one speaking.
{374}
CONDITIONS SUITABLE TO THE SUPPER
@Exodus 19:1 - 25; @Exodus 24:1 - 18
The question was asked whether we could have some help on the order of the Supper, but Mr. Taylor remarked that he thought the Lord had helped us on the order. What we needed was more the substance to enter into it. A certain part of the service is left to ourselves. Luke shows this, for as the service was proceeding the Lord stood there. In chapter 24 the brethren were proceeding with the service, as it were, and the Lord stood there; it does not say He came, He stood there, as if to give effect to what was proceeding. An earlier instance is in chapter 1, where all was well as to the external order, the people were praying without, and the priest was offering incense within, but the conditions were not right, with the result that the priest is stricken dumb. Thus in @Luke 24 the Lord's standing there brought out that the *state* of the saints was not equal to what they were saying. This is a humbling matter.
Ques. Is adjustment always brought in by a word?
J.T. Adjustment may be reached secretly. Both in @Luke 1 and @Luke 24 the result was reached. In John things are viewed more abstractly -- there is hope on that line. In chapter 20 adjustment is not indicated; it was as if the Lord found enough to go on with; He came and stood. There was something there for Him to proceed with.
A question was raised as to the hallowing of the priest coming in between the brazen altar and the golden altar in @Exodus 28 - 30, whether it bears on this state of affairs. Mr. Taylor answered that the golden altar is introduced in Exodus after the priesthood is set up, there being no thought of breakdown. The requirements of @Exodus 28 and 29 imply that the priesthood is there as answering to the mind of God.
{375}
Zacharias in @Luke 1 had broken down, being characterised by not asking in faith.
Ques. As we come together is there room for the worship of the Son after the breaking of bread?
J.T. Yes; "He is thy Lord, and worship thou him". @Psalm 45 helps in this, showing the place the King is to have in our souls. The queen is there on His right hand with gold of Ophir, and the matter is brought down even to the thought of a daughter; as natural claims are denied the way is made open for her to be described as all glorious within, that is, where she is, in the royal apartments.
Ques. Does Solomon's taking Pharaoh's daughter to wife help with this side?
J.T. Yes, many types bear on it, especially Zipporah in Exodus, this book being foundational to the service of God; the service begins at the mountain. In @Exodus 2 Jethro and his daughter appear before the experience of Moses at the bush, and Jethro is introduced as having more regard for Moses than the daughters had. He says, "Where is he? Why then have ye left the man behind?" Jethro gives Moses his daughter Zipporah as wife. Thus the connection with Jethro is clear. He is described as Moses¬ father-in-law. The sequence of events then is that as Moses is taken up by God, the service of God is at once in view. "Ye shall serve God upon this mountain". The deliverance side of the people from Egypt is then described up to chapter 17. Then Jethro appears again with Zipporah and her two sons before the service is taken up at the mountain, all this being in the wilderness, which has now become a spiritual matter. We are viewing the wilderness from the standpoint of Rephidim (chapter 19: 2), Rephidim suggesting the scene of the introduction of the Spirit; chapter 17. Then in chapter 19: 3, and then later verse 17, there is the going up, Moses leading the people out of the camp to meet with God. Much is
{376}
said about Moses going up. There follow four chapters, 20 - 23, which seem to intervene to include the terms of the people with God *in the land*, but after this God returns to the wilderness as if to suggest (chapter 24) that we need not wait for the land in order to begin serving Him. It will be noticed that prior to this, in chapter 18, Zipporah is introduced with her children (verses 2, 3), suggesting the idea of Christ and the church in reciprocal affections. Accompanying this portion there is the thought of rejection and strangership, Gershom ("Sojourner" ) typifying Christ in reproach, and Eliezer ("God is my help" ) introducing God's power. There is much wealth in this section; chapter 18: 1 - 12. Jethro has heard what God has done in redemption. It is as if this enters wealthily into Jethro's soul so as to enrich the thoughts of Christ and the assembly as we approach the service of God. It may be enquired what the term 'father-in-law' means. It is to be noticed that the link of Jethro and Moses is through Zipporah, emphasising the marital thought. Jethro suggests the thought of formation. In chapter 2 he is spoken of as a priest of Midian, but in chapter 18 Jethro speaks and acts as a priest to Jehovah (verses 10 - 12), all this being allied with the idea of the wife, for he appears with Zipporah in this chapter.
Ques. Power in silence was mentioned at Birmingham, connected particularly with @John 12. Does it at all fit in here?
J.T. Yes, we may link it with the experiences of Moses in @Exodus 2 in Jethro's house being "content to dwell with the man", and receiving a wife there; all this is before the actual service of God is introduced, and suggests substance coming into the soul preparatory for service.
Much was asked at this juncture about the introduction of Jethro and Zipporah, but it seemed to emerge clearly that Zipporah does not represent the formative
{377}
side in the soul; Jethro rather suggests this, being now a priest to Jehovah, his soul being full of the thought of God in delivering power bringing out His people from Egypt; chapter 18: 1. Zipporah suggests the thought of the marital side. This all refers to the state of our souls; it is not exactly what enters into the *order* of the service, but more into the state of the souls of the *persons* who engage in the service. Chapter 18 is very instructive and distinctive as coming between chapter 17, involving the Spirit in principle, and chapter 19, where the service of God is definitely commenced by the people.
In chapter 19: 1, 2, it is what the people do, taking a position in relation to the mount. Moses¬ leading is not mentioned here; it is like our "intelligent service". Then in verse 3 elevation is suggested. This brings in the mediator who now begins to take charge. He goes up to God, and God calls to him saying, "Thus shalt thou say", etc.
Ques. Would this indicate that there is opportunity for a word just here, and would the word always come in the same part of the meeting?
J.T. No, not exactly; it is rather that subjection is being introduced, and after verse 3 there are conditions for the service to proceed, but it is the mediator who undertakes it, not the people. We are to be impressed with the Lord's personal distinction*He* can go up.
Ques. Are we to understand that Jethro typifies moral state in the saints after the introduction of the Supper in view of movement according to chapter 19?
J.T. Yes, just so.
Ques. Is the marital side suggested to us before we are engaged with the Lord as Mediator?
J.T. It is what is *in the soul*, God taking this movement in hand that we may be furnished in view of service. God was definitely in the people's going to Rephidim, as we read in chapter 17: 1: "at
{378}
the command of Jehovah". This is important as suggesting that it is imperative for us to come to the recognition of the Spirit. Involved in this are the sufferings of Christ and conflict in our souls to make room for the Spirit. Chapter 19 says they departed from Rephidim. This again bears on the state of our souls, the saints having got the benefit of the Rephidim experience.
Ques. Does the conscious joy of the marital side help us in view of the glory of the Lord and assembly service?
J.T. Yes, the conditions are there for the service to begin. We are to have rich thoughts in our minds as we sit together; chapters 21 - 23 suggesting our relationships in the land are to bring in enrichment, like the level of Colossians and Ephesians, so that as we begin over again in the Spirit every Lord's day we may do so wealthily.
In this sense God's returning to the wilderness in chapter 24 is not an accident; it is as if He said, This is My ordering. We face this service in the wilderness full of wealthy and heavenly thoughts. It will be observed that earlier "they stood at the foot of the mountain" as having been brought out of the camp by Moses "to meet with God", chapter 19: 17. This action of Moses is like the action of Christ personally to bring us into preparation for fresh features of movement in assembly service.
Ques. In this typical side where would the actual breaking of bread be placed?
J.T. I suppose in relation to the covenant as in chapters 19 and 24, for much is made of the blood of it in chapter 24, suggesting the cup.
Ques. Is the marital relation introduced for us in the loaf, "This is my body"?
J.T. Yes, from the Lord's own side. It is to be noticed that there is a kind of overlapping between chapter 19 and chapter 24, with the parenthetical
{379}
introduction of the land. Moses is very active in chapter 24 after God's invitation to go up, as much as to say, Are the people ready for this? But at the end of his activity (chapter 24: 3 - 8), he says, as it were, We can have something now for the people are completely ready as having accepted the terms of the covenant. The twelve pillars speak of the unity of the saints, the youths suggest the freshness, the people have accepted the further enrichment involved in chapters 20 - 23, there is the volume of the blood, all giving competency to the people in movement. The fact that the people (chapter 19: 17) are seen at the foot of the mountain, and that there is no thought in that scripture of their ascension, is to be compared with the thought of Jehovah in chapter 24 that they, representatively at least, *should* ascend. The explanation of this seems to be in the four chapters intervening which treat of their entrance into Canaan, thus ennobling them.
Ques. Does the marital relation give us a state to move with the Mediator?
J.T. It does so far, but in chapter 24 it is a question rather of love, alluding to the twelve. With a people so prepared and so secured in subjection and obedience what can God not do? It is to be noted that the mountain is not introduced in connection with the people's going up; it is just the thought of elevation, whereas when Moses later goes up it is with the addition of *place* ("into the mountain" ), suggesting fixity. There is fixity in Christ and liberty to go up in us. Christ is distinct from us.
In chapter 24: 12, Moses has instruction for us, that is, we are to be instructed in our souls, but this awaits the return of Moses. The number twelve gives scope for all this, for the saints are able to be manipulated in connection with it all in love in their souls. There are no priests as such here yet, only youths are mentioned.
{380}
A further remark was made about the mountain. It is not mentioned before verse 12, except in relation to the altar and the pillars. That is that Christ is to be regarded as Mediator and to be distinctly before us in His own place.
Ques. Do we have Christ here before us in His own place as Mediator, or as Son?
J.T. Sonship underlies it, as suggested in Hebrews, but this is all in the wilderness where we touch Christ as Mediator.
Ques. Would the parental line in Jethro, the marital line in Zipporah and the enrichment line in the land suggest that every blessing is brought under tribute for the service?
J.T. Yes, thus our minds may be full of Ephesian thoughts as we sit down for the Supper. In @Acts 20 we see Paul, personally so rich in divine thoughts, but he says, as it were, to the saints, You need more instruction yet. @Ephesians 3 is another suggestion of this. He says, "ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery". All this riches and intelligence is to be in *persons*, persons whom the Lord has now on earth, persons whom He takes on in this provisional state of things.
Ques. As to the verse in @Ephesians 5, "Christ also loved the assembly"; does this enter into the loaf?
J.T. Yes, but we should note that though we may quote what Paul says, the point is that we are to be impressed with the richness that enters into what Paul says, or what we may say. It is not merely the quoting of Scripture, but the wealth in the persons.
Ques. Would the Lord have us speak to Him in the marital relation?
J.T. Yes, it would give liberty for Him to impress us with what He is to us, and what we are to Him. *Question* as to the eating and drinking; chapter 24: 11.
J.T. This means that we are in the position happily and reverentially, not exactly as serving, but
{381}
really happy in the presence of God. What a contrast is provided in chapter 32, where the people ate and drank and rose up to play in an idolatrous state of things. But even this happy state of things is not the end, but what is contemplated is that Christ as the Minister of the sanctuary will take us on, our souls being filled with admiration of Christ. The state of eating and drinking is not always in scripture a direct reference to Christ, but we may, as in this chapter, enjoy one another. The Lord brings us to this in the assembly, and thus God will be more and more to us.
*Question* as to the instruction in chapter 24: 12.
J.T. It is for the whole heavenly range of things to come before us, the whole mind of God, though to complete this we need David. Thus it can be seen that if this is provided in the wilderness the wilderness is no accident, but is of God, and in the wilderness we have the preliminary light of the whole position.
In chapter 25 and following, we get light as to the whole system of glory, but David and Solomon are needed for the personnel, but what possibilities there are for us even while down here, notwithstanding the adverse conditions of the wilderness!
*Question* as to the difference between being brought to God (chapter 19: 4) and "to meet with God", chapter 19: 17.
J.T. The first is Romans, how we are brought to God through the gospel. It is the moral idea, meaning for us how God has wrought to bring us before Him, but in the latter it is activity which the Mediator takes in hand, a great thought involving His bringing us *out of the camp*. The principle of obedience is prominent, meaning that all is settled on our side; we are ready to go forward.
Ques. Does then the service of God begin with the Mediator, and is the thought that the continuance of it is under the Minister of the sanctuary?
{382}
J.T. Yes, the latter involving a new heavenly system, for the Minister of the sanctuary is connected with the heavenly position.
Ques. Would a word come under Christ as Mediator, or as Head?
J.T. Either; nor is there any definite time when a word would come in. Some may say that a word interferes with worship. On the contrary a word is to stimulate; that is, there is a point where power is needed for further movement, and a word should supply this. A word so given is not exactly on the line of gift, although a brother should be ready to give a word, for if the Lord has used him before, it is likely He may use him again.
*Question* as to the order of procedure in the morning meeting.
J.T. We have the idea of the general direction of the meeting, as in @1 Corinthians 11, but we should note that what follows the Supper is entirely spiritual as seen in David; things are not to be in a mould. David was a man who was ready for anything. He is introduced at his first mention simply as 'David' or the 'beloved', and the Spirit came upon him; @1 Samuel 16: 13. The young man who speaks of him later (verse 18) suggests that David is a man skilled and spiritual, ready for anything that is needed. We are to be in this sense ready to serve under the headship of Christ. David makes men of us, as Christ speaks of men. Scripture mentions David's men and Christ mentions men as in @John 17. In 1 Chronicles headship dominates all. Chapter 24 suggests that; indeed Jehovah is mentioned in chapter 29 as "Head above all". For this we need Colossians and Ephesians. Unless we understand these epistles we cannot serve under the Head. In @2 Chronicles 29, under Hezekiah there is an interesting point, where the song of Jehovah began as the burnt-offering began, and the congregation worshipped and the singers sang, and
{383}
the trumpeters sounded until the burnt-offering was finished. After this it says that the king and all that were present bowed and worshipped. This is beyond the covenant, it is in keeping with the David and Solomon line, the spiritual side, suggesting sonship, so that we go out, as it were, on a very high note. Josiah has a point of additional interest, for with him everything is noted as in its place, the king, the ark, the priests, the singers and the doorkeepers; @2 Chronicles 34, 35.
*Question* as to the sanctuary. The service is mentioned before the sanctuary. Aaron appears as priest in relation to the sanctuary. The instruction is given to Moses on the mount as to this, therefore it would seem that this service relates to the spiritual side. It really relates to how the Lord links these things up *in our souls*. The sanctuary begins in the wilderness, but as it involves what is universal, it enters into the land, and mainly refers to that position. In @Exodus 15 "the abode of thy holiness" is a reference to the sanctuary in the wilderness, in the tabernacle; "the Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared" is the final thought, in the land, bringing in David; see @Psalm 78: 68, 69. The service in the sanctuary would include the addressing of God as the God of the covenant as well as addressing Him as Father. God known in the covenant and thus addressed connects with the Lord having the place of Mediator on God's behalf rather than on ours, leading into the glory (@2 Corinthians 3), and hence conditions suitable for the sanctuary.
*Question* as to the assembly filling out Israel's part as well as her own peculiar part.
J.T. The Lord's supper involves this, as Rebecca was led into Sarah's tent, but what the assembly has is more than Israel will have. It is interesting to compare the covenant as presented in Hebrews in the *terms* of it and in 2 Corinthians as in the *spirit* of it.
{384}
THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD, THE SPIRIT OF ADOPTION AND THE FATHER'S SPIRIT
@2 Corinthians 3:17,18; @Romans 8:14,15; @Ephesians 3:14 - 16
J.T. What is in view is not to take the subject of the Spirit in its general bearing into consideration, but as to how it enters into the service of God in the assembly. There are two main features in that service, the first is dominical and the second paternal. The Spirit of the Lord obviously has to do with the part that is regarded as dominical in the Scriptures; and the Spirit of adoption, being the Spirit of sonship, refers to the saints in relation to God as their Father; then, in addition, there is the Father's own Spirit, that is, the Holy Spirit viewed as the Father's Spirit, which alludes to power, power in our souls in leading us to apprehend things or comprehend them, so far as we may. These three phases of the Spirit, it seems, are essential to the service of God at the present time. The statement by the apostle Paul in writing to the Philippians enters into what we are saying, "*We* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh", @Philippians 3:3. Christians are characteristically those who worship by the Spirit of God. One observes, in moving about, that there is considerable irregularity as to the order of the service of God in the assembly, the dominical part is put into the paternal, and sometimes the paternal into the dominical, tending to confusion; as, for instance, hymns given out to the Lord, thanksgivings addressed to the Lord, after we have begun with the Spirit of adoption. So that, if we consider the Spirit of the Lord in @2 Corinthians 3, we may get a little help as to the first part of the service.
{385}
W.W. If it is not going on too far, I would like to ask a question as to the difference between the Spirit of the Father and the Spirit of God. I notice in @Ephesians 3 it says, as to the Spirit of the Father, "that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God".
J.T. Well, what may be in your mind is that that also might be brought in, the Spirit of God and the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Christ. In general, the Spirit of God stands in relation to God, so that we find Him very early. As you will remember, in the first chapter of the Bible, the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters; it is, therefore, a more general thought extending back to Old Testament times, to the creation, "By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens" (@Job 26: 13), that is to say, it is God viewed in a more general sense than we have in mind now. The Spirit of the Father cannot be spoken of as existing in the Old Testament times -- I mean in that aspect -- the Spirit of God can be spoken of but it would be as acting beforehand in others, but the Spirit of the Lord is, I think, peculiar to the present time, and certainly the Spirit of adoption is. The Holy Spirit, of course, has to do with the assembly in the sense of the anointing; the assembly is said to be the Christ, that is, as anointed, which is a matter of our public position, affording dignity in a moral sense. But the Spirit of the Lord seems to be fitting as to the actual service, because the Lord is said to be the Spirit of the new covenant and that thought is immediately transposed into the term the Spirit of the Lord and then the Lord the Spirit.
Ques. Would it be the particular liberty of the Spirit in view of the glory connected with the new covenant?
J.T. Yes, I suppose it would. The covenant is said to be the ministration of the Spirit which subsists in glory, that is, the Spirit Himself is seen as ministering the new covenant; but that comes in in connection 
{386}
with the paternal thought, the original thought arises from the suggestion of the new covenant and what it is in the spirit of it, which is said to be the Lord Himself. But then it does not stop at that, it says the Spirit of the Lord and brings in the Holy Spirit; the Lord the Spirit is the Lord Himself as the Spirit of the covenant; but, as to the Spirit of the Lord, it seems we must bring in the thought of the Holy Spirit -- at least that is how I understand it. Have you any other thought?
Rem. I only had the thought that, connecting it with the service of God, it might indicate how far we can go on the dominical side.
J.T. The verse alluded to reads, "How shall not rather the ministry of the Spirit subsist in glory?" (verse 8), and then, "We all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit" (verse 18). It would seem as if we should link on the ministry of the Spirit in those verses (that is the verses in the parenthesis beginning, as all will know, at the end of verse 6 and ending at the end of verse 16) with the ministry of the Lord; that is to combine the thought of the two divine Persons, the ministry leading to our being changed, but it culminates in that way, as if the two divine Persons have to do with it, the One involving authority, the Lord, being at the same time the Spirit of the new covenant, and the other involving the Holy Spirit Himself.
N.K.M. What is involved in the statement you have made, the Lord the Spirit being the Spirit of the new covenant?
J.T. I think the Spirit of the new covenant being the Lord Himself means that He personally is that, as it applies to those of us who form the assembly. You do not get the terms of the new covenant in Corinthians, nor in any epistle addressed to gentile
{387}
believers; the terms are very exact and brief as applied to Israel and Judah, the Lord writes His law in their minds and does not remember their sins any more. These terms are not introduced to us who form the assembly, but instead of that you have the new covenant in Christ's blood in the first epistle to Corinthians, and then the Lord being the Spirit of it in the second epistle, as if He personally applies it to ourselves, lifting it on to a higher plane, as is obvious; He is applying what refers to one family, a family on a lower plane, to a family on a higher plane. He has to do with all the families ministerially -- they are all named of the Father -- and knows how to take the Spirit of the new covenant as applied to Israel and Judah, in a spiritual way and apply it to us; for it is not made with us at all, the link is, I think, with the Lord being the Spirit of it, so He can bring the thing in in the spirit of it and make it applicable to those with whom it is not made.
N.K.M. Does that involve His mediatorial service in the assembly?
J.T. I think so. A Mediator of a better covenant -- the mediation of it involves not only that it is brought into existence, but that it is made effective; He will make it effective to Israel by and by. It is the divine teaching of forgiveness, but it is more than that to us, it involves the Spirit of the Lord amongst us and leads up to glory, the complete transformation in us. That is, it is something not made directly with us, but it becomes a great instrument whereby glory is introduced and we changed according to that glory.
Ques. Would @Exodus 24 fit in there at all, where everything was sprinkled, Moses and the elders going up into the mountain?
J.T. Well, I think we have a suggestion of it, a suggestion of more than what was proper to Israel there. Chapter 19 contemplates what was proper to Israel, they were to be a holy nation, a nation of
{388}
priests, and Moses led them out of the camp to meet with God, but they were at the foot of the mountain and they were kept there. But in chapter 24 they are invited up, not exactly to the mountain, for it is not mentioned in their case, but they are invited up, which would, I think, point to what belongs to us.
Ques. Is the effect of this service to bring us into conscious known relationship with God?
J.T. That is what is seen here -- an instrument not intended for us directly is taken into use and service as to us.
Rem. I was thinking if we want the realm of @Ephesians 3, we have what is given sovereignly, but do we need to be helped so that we are in right moral relations with God, and is the outshining of His glory prior to what is connected with counsel? Does it come in in this way?
J.T. Well, we need to learn, as Israel needs to learn, as here on earth, great moral teaching has to come out. We are in school, as it were; we may have noblemen's children and artisans¬ children in the same college. They are perhaps intended for different avocations, but there are certain lines of education that both must have. But one can see that, if a royal personage has to have a certain line of instruction, the tutor understands the line on which he is teaching, so there is a different spirit in the instruction. The basic side of the teaching is the same, but the personnel, the spirit, are all different. That, I think, is perhaps illustrative of 2 Corinthians, that the Lord is the great Teacher, all are to be taught of God -- that is one great principle the Lord enunciates, they shall all be taught of God, whatever family. He is the great ministerial Personage; He has to do with the teaching of God and if He has taken up those who form the assembly, He never forgets they are of that class; He can bring in the Spirit proper to that class, for in truth we have the Holy Spirit already, we
{389}
are sons of God, children of God, we are on a higher plane and He knows how to bring the Spirit of the new covenant to bear on us profitably. That is, I think, how the matter stands.
W.S. Does the introduction of the Spirit suggest the thought of our being in liberty with God?
J.T. It does; in liberty with one another, too. I think that, in sitting down in assembly, it is important to be at liberty with one another as well as with God.
Ques. Is liberty brought about by the appreciation of the way in which the Lord makes known the love of God to us as people who were not a people?
J.T. Just so. Israel is God's people, and so are we; for the moment, in a provisional way, we are God's people on earth, so teaching applies to us and qualifies us to be that.
Ques. What would be the difference between the quickening of the Spirit and then going on to the thought of our being transformed -- do both thoughts come in?
J.T. They do. The transformation is the point reached, from glory to glory, that is, we reach a plane of unending glory. Covenant glory merges in a higher glory, fitting us and carrying us on at the same time. There is no lapse, or hiatus, we go on; that is the point, how we link on with the higher glory.
Ques. I was wondering as to the character of this glory. Would it be connected with the complete triumph of God in all His ways and the saints brought in on the line of that but having their place in regard to counsel?
J.T. Just so. You can see how great the instrument used is in the Lord's hands. He will say, I can use this, and He does use it as the Spirit of the thing, so we are immediately told, "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty" -- a great general fact. There is liberty with God and with one another, a
{390}
point reached which gives great scope in the service of God. The Lord has much room now, so as we go on, by beholding His covenant administrative glory, we are changed into the same image even as by the Lord the Spirit.
N.K.M. What would "according to the same image" involve?
J.T. I think it involves we are made like Christ, but more particularly like one another; so He has all that now under His hand. The book of the Revelation helps as to how we progress. We get one hundred and forty-four thousand sealed in chapter 7, but when we touch one hundred and forty-four thousand again, in chapter 14, they are with the Lamb on mount Zion; well, that is the love sphere, applied to ourselves, for mount Zion is a position divinely loved. We are now advanced into a realm of love, and the hundred and forty-four thousand can learn the heavenly song. You are progressing now in Revelation.
N.K.M. Where do you put mount Zion in the service of the assembly?
J.T. Well, it is a question of divine counsel. That is where "He built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he hath founded for ever" (@Psalm 78: 69); but He says, "Here will I dwell, for I have desired it", @Psalm 132: 14. If we reach that point we are in our proper situation, there is nothing to interfere with love now, the persons are suitable, for they are like Christ, and the place is suitable. The persons are under His hand and amenable to the administration of love.
W.C. Do you take this to be the general thought going on, or is it specially when we are together?
J.T. It comes out when we are together. In 1 Chronicles we have a great occasion when the ark is restored, and David is very active himself, but then he left Asaph and others to carry on as every
{391}
day required. Abstractly the saints may not be together, but then the thing goes on; the great occasion brings out that we are equal to it.
N.K.M. You would find the formation going on in relation to Mary of Bethany as she sat at the Lord's feet.
J.T. That was the great occasion, it illustrates what we are saying; Luke shows her as sitting at the Lord's feet -- that was her everyday attitude.
F.W. Would the principle of addition enter into it, from glory to glory?
J.T. I think it should. It is a wonderful thought spiritually, for these matters refer to spirituality, not mere mentality, but what it is to be in a realm of glory, and it is one thing after another, glory to glory, in that we are taking the thing on in a substantial way, and that must be continuous in each of us, and when we come together it is there, every one is equal to the great occasion.
F.W. So it would be cumulative.
J.T. Certainly, the history of the saint is continuous throughout the whole of his life here; there is never a moment, I think, should be lost.
F.W. So we would be greater spiritually every time we come together.
J.T. Exactly. All that is said about the sanctuary in the Old Testament is to show us that there is a great occasion, when we come together all shines, every whit says Glory -- that is the idea. Well, it will not if any person is there without the Spirit or without formation, there will be dark spots.
-.F. Is the covenant glory taken on by Stephen in view of the further glory coming in by the apostle Paul?
J.T. Certainly. There are two glories in Stephen the actual was that the council could see his face shining like the face of an angel; the other is moral. We have to consider what that face means there;
{392}
the moral glory is unquestionable when he kneeled down and prayed for his enemies; that is the reflection of Christ in a suffering saint, but a face as an angel, I think, is judicial glory. The old covenant was through angels, the new covenant is by Christ, He is the Mediator of the new covenant. I think, therefore, the face of the angel is judicial glory that Stephen took on, he was about to indict Israel and his face shone beforehand as to what he was going to do, but he ended up with the great moral glory, as Jesus was here in suffering -- a wonderful combination. But he was capable of taking on the glory; it is the kind of material God effects in us that we can take on glory, whatever it may be. God may use a brother for judicial purposes; well, his face ought to reflect that.
Ques. Would what is said in @Joshua 3 help us? -- the ark of the covenant is much alluded to there.
J.T. Well, we are really dealing with an actual time in the service and I believe what you say applies; we are about to pass over, but it is as fully fit to do it. This chapter is fitting us to take on glory, going into Canaan is another glory. The Lord has got us now, we are like Himself and like one another. Joseph selected five men to present to Pharaoh; he could have taken the whole eleven, for they are all his brothers, but he did not; and that suggests the Lord takes us in suitably and He ministers to us to that end because He is the Lord the Spirit; He has authority over our souls, then the Spirit being in us is the great weapon to form us, then the Spirit of the covenant, all to make us fit to go over, so He has us as in His mind before the Father.
Ques. Do we need to linger more on the covenant sphere?
J.T. I think so. It seems as if we ought to make this a success, as it were, and if time is needed, to take the time. The Lord is waiting on us to take the time to be adjusted. Of course I know well enough
{393}
how the sisters close their books and make a noise with their bags, and so on, but still it is worth taking the time. Think of what it has cost Him to have this service, and now we are the actual vessels of this service. He has provided everything for us in the Mediator -- the type shows it in Exodus.
Ques. Was the queen of Sheba allowed to see the whole range of glory?
J.T. Well, she got a wonderful view, greater than she could have had in Exodus in the wilderness.
Ques. Is any link essential for the operation of the morning meeting between the thought of the covenant and the ministry of reconciliation?
J.T. I think there is, there may be more the Lord will help us on. New creation must come into it, but I think generally it is more generation than new creation in assembly, it is the personnel of it, and the crucial point is just what I am taking on, the change from glory to glory, so that the Lord has us under His hand, happy, like Himself and like one another.
Ques. In regard to the change, would you speak to the Lord or to God?
J.T. We are still under the Lord, it is the dominical thought.
Rem. Joseph, in glory typically, says to his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you; he gets them all together first.
J.T. And what a testimony it was when he selected five of them only to take them in to Pharaoh.
Ques. What do you see in that?
J.T. It is a question of quality, what is suitable to a man like Pharaoh, a figure of God there as supreme; and Joseph, knowing well what the court of Pharaoh required, is concerned that his brothers should be equal to it.
Ques. Do you think in this meeting the Lord would employ the brethren for that in which they are most capable?
{394}
J.T. You mean in participation -- just so. I can understand that, if the Lord would like to say a word to us, He would use a man who can do it, who is accustomed to do it -- not that it would be always so. But He did it Himself; attention is called to the manner of His speaking. It is not a question of what is said always, but the spirit in which it is said, and the use of words, too; the Lord is concerned as to having everything ornamental and commendable, as it should be.
Rem. We may not be numbered amongst the five, we may miss the point, through lack of qualification.
J.T. I think that is right; it is intended to challenge us.
Ques. Is the qualification in the Spirit as well as the personality? Is it mainly in the Spirit?
J.T. It may be, but I think it is more the effect of the Spirit when it comes to our being brought in to God, it is the Spirit in a particular way. I am adjusted as to everything, and now I am ready for family relationship, I know how to be inside, how to speak to God inside.
Ques. Does the quickening of the Spirit in Corinthians referred to just now bring us to livingly enter upon the love of God and thus be qualified to move on?
J.T. Yes, "the Spirit quickens" would be to make alive in relation to the position we are in. Life is in various settings, but we are on the highest plane in the assembly of God.
Rem. We have to hold the thought of the Spirit of God in a special way in our minds as the Spirit of the living God.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. Joseph's brethren say, "We are twelve brethren, sons of our father", would that show the tendency to pass over the dominical side without matters being adjusted?
J.T. Well, they had to learn the authority of
{395}
Joseph; he binds one of them before their eyes. And so it is, you see the reverent way things are done in the assembly; you like to see a man bound so that the others should be warned. Take a man like Zacharias; he asked for things and when they came he would not believe it, and he was bound for nine months. Better that a brother should be made dumb than that he should be interfering with the service of God; but, on the other hand, if be is a dumb brother, you want to have his mouth opened.
Ques. Is not the word in Hebrews exercising"Let us ... have grace, by which let us serve God acceptably with reverence and fear. For also our God is a consuming fire", @Hebrews 12: 28, 29?
J.T. Just so, that is the thing to keep in mind. It is God's assembly and the order of God is greatly stressed in 1 Corinthians.
Ques. Is your scripture in Romans just the changeover from the dominical side to the Spirit of adoption?
J.T. Well, there is the change in ourselves, there is this passing over, and if this continuous formation is not going on, when the great occasion comes I am left out of the matter -- and we do not want to be left out. When the Spirit of adoption comes in, our minds should be brought into it; as soon as the Spirit of adoption is heard, we should proceed on that line -- that is one of the most important things I see. Brethren often go back to the dominical side after we have touched the Spirit of adoption.
N.K.M. It speaks of it here as a Spirit of adoption.
J.T. Yes, it is the character of the thing. In view of all the settings in which it is found, it seems the Holy Spirit has to be brought into it.
Ques. Do you mean that, before you would say, Father, in worship, you would listen for this note of the Spirit of adoption? You would not do it lightly.
J.T. Yes, you would look for it in worship, or it might be suggested in other ways, but as soon as it is,
{396}
keep on at it, for we are now on the level the Lord intends for us. When, in Luke, He told the disciples that their names were written in heaven, we are immediately told He rejoiced in spirit, as much as to say, I have a people like that. Here we have people giving out a hymn to the Father and immediately speaking to the Lord; the result is we are confused and do not reach any definite end.
Rem. It is remarkable that there should be more rebellion in the service of God than in any other service.
J.T. That is just the one thing the enemy would spoil. Jehovah says to Moses, You come up to the mount and be there; that is the first time we get place mentioned. As to the ascending part, it is just said the elders of Israel were to go up, it is moral elevation, but the first reference to a place is that the Lord says, Moses, you are to be there, I will give you the tables of stone and the law and commandments for the instruction of Israel. Well, that instruction has to be waited for, and, in the meantime, Satan comes in and spoils the whole matter.
Ques. Would the dominical side help with the great matter of closing the doors that all that is unsuitable is kept out?
J.T. Quite so. You only find the doors closed in John, not in Luke, and hence there was much there the Lord had to deal with. In John it is all settled, and the Lord comes in and finds things right.
W.C. In connection with the enemy's move to spoil the service, would the exercise on our part be in connection with the divining cup? Do we need to take account of the Lord's perfect knowledge of the state He sees -- "What deed is this which ye have done?"
J.T. That is a good type in point, for these ten brothers were now consciously in the presence of a man who could read their hearts.
{397}
Rem. The first time they all moved together on another line was when every man laded his ass and returned to the city.
J.T. Very beautiful. You mean the presentation of the new covenant there?
Rem. Yes.
Ques. At what point do we speak to God as in regard of the covenant?
J.T. It can be appropriately done in the set of circumstances of which we are speaking. It is intended to be a wide area, so to speak, spiritually, and it comes in very appropriately there where it is still a question of the new covenant, the Lord the Spirit. I think it rightly leads on, where God is spoken of in these ways, we can go on to the Father very conveniently and happily.
Ques. Do you think we lack the power to ascend? It says in @Exodus 24 that "Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and ascended the mountain".
J.T. Yes, just so. There he is a type of Christ. The ascension of the saints is spoken of before verse 12. "Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up; and they saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness. And on the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: they saw God, and ate and drank". That alludes to our part. What follows that passage is that Moses is invited up by himself -- Joshua, his attendant, too, of course, but that is another matter -- he is invited up to be there in the mount, in the place, and then he ascends; it is a continual glory for the Mediator, an important thing to have in our minds as in the assembly that Christ is always above us; He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His companions -- that is always a wholesome thing to have in mind.
{398}
Ques. Would you say the service of the Lord in relation to the covenant precedes His service to us in relation to God?
J.T. In relation to the Father, not in the covenant, and then God in the absolute sense. We have wonderful things ahead of us.
Ques. I was thinking of referring to God distinctly in relation to the covenant before the thought of the Father and God as we understand it, how would that come in?
J.T. In the circumstances of which we are now speaking spiritually, it is a wide area, the Spirit of the Lord is there, we are very sensitive; the idea of the body, the organism, is always present. We are very sensitive as to what may be going on in each other, and if there is a suggestion of God as the God of the covenant, we all join in that happily, and presently the Spirit of adoption comes in, the area is very free and the Spirit of God loves that; there is liberty, room, scope, as was said of the well in Isaac's day, Rehoboth, a place of room; there is plenty of room, the Philistines no longer challenge us, the Spirit of adoption is heard -- that is the thing, to keep on with that, do not let us lose that.
Ques. Is that why you get Paul's face mentioned in @Acts 20? They were specially pained that they should see his face no more; had there been the expression of this great glory amongst them?
J.T. Just so. Jesus¬ face, Stephen's face, Paul's face, all suggest what this thing may be. The face is intended to reflect what is in one.
Ques. What do you understand by the Spirit of adoption?
J.T. The Spirit of sonship. If a child is adopted into a man's family, the child never forgets he does not really belong to the family save by adoption, but in christianity it is more than that; I am inwardly conscious that I am of the family, I have no other
{399}
history; in truth, as the matter is clearly understood, I have no other history at all.
Rem. It is the Spirit of His Son in our hearts.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Would there be a difference between the thought of redemption and being born of God?
J.T. The idea of redemption has to come in to clear us; the idea of generation is that I have no sinful history at all, and that is how the matter will stand ultimately in eternity.
Ques. Where does your third scripture fit in?
J.T. Well, now we are entering on an immense domain, and the Father has named us, He has given us a status in the divine realm, every family in heaven and earth is named of Him, we are told, and the apostle bows his knees in regard to it. "In order that he may give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ". Now we are in the great domain, and you want to be in it in power. Your mind is not great enough for this, no creature mind is great enough for this, you need the Father's Spirit in the inner man. The apostle does not speak of praying anywhere else as he prays here, and that shows how important it is for us.
Rem. The word is 'apprehend' in the New Translation.
J.T. Yes, because it is the creature side, the thing is too great for us to take in. But the first thing is, "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts", that is, it is Christ apprehended as operating to bring everything into effect: that is important, everything is under Him.
 
{400}
Ques. Before going on to that -- do we not often find that a brother giving thanks for the cup brings God in the covenant before our hearts, is it quite right then to go back to the Lord?
J.T. I think you might do it, but the Lord says, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood", it is the Lord who is before us, it is the Lord's supper and the new covenant is brought into the Lord's supper. It is not God's supper; God has a supper, but that is not it -- it is the Lord's supper, and it seems it is simpler to keep to the Lord, and in due course, if we refer to God, His love in the covenant, to use our minds wisely and say, We must keep to that thought, and not go on to the Father immediately.
Ques. What would help us to linger over the thought of the covenant, for that usually ends in a very high note of praise?
J.T. Just to do it. You sing with the spirit and you sing with the understanding. Use your mind, the renewed mind.
Ques. If a brother gives out a hymn which takes us away from it, what will you do?
J.T. Well, go back again. You may sing the hymn but you are not governed by it, you feel it is not right. Beholding the glory of the Lord has great detaining power to those who love Him.
N.K.M. Is that what you have often referred to as having spiritual power in silence?
J.T. Yes, so much enters into the intelligences of the brethren. "I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing also with the understanding" (@1 Corinthians 14:15)be free in doing the thing, but do it with your understanding.
-.T. Would that come in with what the apostle refers to earlier, "Having the same spirit of faith, according to what is written, I have believed, therefore have I spoken", @2 Corinthians 4: 13?
J.T. Yes. Then that ought to challenge us as to
{401}
what hymn we give out or how we give thanks, what is suitable now, for Exodus points out that all is under the priest, it is the priestly book, the service is under Aaron, and the priest knows, his lips keep knowledge. If we are priestly we know what to do -- that is the thing to have before us.
W.C. Do you think we ought to know the way up by steps? It speaks of the stairs that went up, whither the tribes went up, there were stages, one after another. We have to study the way to know where we are.
J.T. I think that is good; the Songs of Degrees help in the spirit of them, they are songs of ascents.
Ques. Will you develop a little more as to the simplicity of taking each feature by itself?
J.T. I think that would greatly help us; intelligence then would regulate us in what we do.
Rem. There is a tendency with us to roam about, but this might shorten some of the contributions and make room for others.
J.T. Just so.
Rem. One often feels, in that way, the position is spoilt by one brother wanting to start a line and carry the meeting through, whereas, if we were more simple and took what is immediately before us, we should get help.
Ques. Does the thought of the Father suggest the Lord has His place as Leader of the assembly in approaching the Father?
J.T. Just so. Now is the time to make room for that. The court is not, in one sense, in mind, we are on a high level, it is the second inner compartment.
Rem. So the going back to Lordship would perhaps be setting aside the Lord's position as Leader.
J.T. Quite so. There is a derangement of the whole matter, so Ephesians says, "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts". In this domain we need to apprehend Him, not only as
{402}
amongst us, but in relation to the whole breadth and length and depth and height, that is, it is Christ operatively, it is Christ, the One who does things. Your eye is on the great Personage who has everything in hand, and you see Him by faith. And then we are to be "rooted and founded in love", it says; that is our present state, not simply that we love one another but we are rooted in it, meaning, I think, that love is actually working, producing living conditions. And "founded" is that I am fixed in the position, not vacillating -- "in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints". It is not mental, it is a question of the Father's Spirit in the inner man.
N.K.M. Then, "To know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge", is that the love of the Christ operative in this domain you are referring to?
J.T. I think so, to know that that great Person loves us.
-.B. So this would take us out of the sphere of what is local.
J.T. It would. It is a question of what we have in our souls, and, on the great occasion, we rise to what is required.
Ques. Do we see how the dimensions increase as we go up? No need to go back for lack of scope in this great realm.
J.T. Just so -- plenty of scope from the Ephesian point of view, but great operations necessary, and that is the thought of the Christ being brought in here both in His operations and His love; we are in the great domain of the Father -- all the families.
Ques. "To him be glory in the assembly" -- would that be God as the One who is?
J.T. I think so, as the One who is, and who was, and who is to come.
{403}
THE SERVICE OF GOD TOWARDS MAN
@Acts 2: 14 - 18, 37 - 47; @Acts 3: 1 - 11
J.T. What should come before us in these meetings refers mainly to the service of God toward man. We shall, I hope, reach to the service Godward, too, as we proceed. What is in mind is that we should all have before us that there is such a service, and that we are all in mind for it. So that I thought we should perhaps take special account of Peter's quotation from Joel, showing the variety of persons to be employed in divine service, namely, "And it shall be in the last days, saith God, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your elders shall dream with dreams; yea, even upon my bondmen and upon my bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy", @Acts 2: 17, 18.
We can see what a variety is in mind; sons and daughters; young men mentioned; elders, bondmen and bondwomen. This is a quotation from Joel, and, I have no doubt, will have a more literal fulfilment in the future, but this prophecy is brought in here and not for nothing. It is evidently to show that all the saints are to be active in service, all qualified in the possession of the Spirit of God.
W.L. Is it your thought that this prophecy of Joel is fulfilled in the assembly at the present time?
J.T. It is quoted here obviously with that in mind. All the saints are in the mind of God for service.
C.A.M. Would mentioning the last days show that at the very commencement God was looking right down church history?
J.T. Yes, I was thinking of that. There is such a tendency among the brethren to leave the service to
{404}
certain ones. The increase of meetings of recent years has greatly increased the number of those who serve, young ones are brought into it. But yet the principle in the mind of God is perhaps not clearly seen -- that He has all in mind.
A.T. Did Moses have the idea in his mind when Eldad and Medad prophesied?
J.T. Yes. "Would that all Jehovah's people were prophets", @Numbers 11:29. "All".
W.R. Does this convey the idea of service -- the thing carried out in the Spirit of God?
J.T. That is one thing. "I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh". That is not flesh, in the moral sense, it is men, women and children, but it is to be in the power of the Spirit. The Spirit had come in great power at the beginning. Peter is pointing out it is in keeping with what Joel had prophesied, because it says, "And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth", @Acts 2: 4. They were all filled. Before we get the specific gifts to the apostles, we have the Spirit filling all, and all acting accordingly -- they "began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth".
C.A.M. The very fact of filling shows there was completion in the thought.
J.T. That is right. It is mentioned in this liberal full way. His service began early, but now God is reserving the best for the last. Your sons and your daughters, all grades of the saints, old and young, male and female, and the young people are included, so that it says, "Even upon my bondmen and upon my bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy" (verse 18). That is, something would be done, the thing would be understood, what God had in His mind would be done.
W.L. The impression given in Peter's speaking is that God was working. They heard them speak in
{405}
their own tongues the great things of God. I was wondering if that is in mind for us to get.
J.T. The great things of God, yes, quite so, and the Spirit. It was "as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth". For they were not going beyond their measure. We are told each to know his measure in Romans. It is important that we do not go beyond it.
C.A.M. The very fact of pouring out and filling would in itself involve the idea of measure. Would it be right to say we are vessels?
J.T. Quite so. They were there. We are told in @John 2, "there were standing there six stone water-vessels, according to the purification of the Jews, holding two or three measures each" (verse 6). Each vessel had a measure. "Jesus says to them, Fill the water-vessels with water. And they filled them up to" the brim (verse 7).
A.H.P. Do you think that it is important for every one of us to understand that God has positive ends in view in first touching us in divine grace?
Take the word of Moses to Pharaoh, "Let my son go, that he may serve me", @Exodus 4: 23. It is filled out in the setting up of the tabernacle system, and the divine system of worship both manward and Godward.
J.T. The anointing is essential. As coming in the Spirit is understood to be here in vessels, and each vessel is to be filled. The variety of vessels is what I thought we might see first, so that everyone here would understand he is not out of this. Every christian is included in the mind of God in the last days.
H.B. Would this be the public working out of @Ephesians 4: 16? As to the organism it says, "According to the working in its measure of each one part, works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love".
{406}
J.T. Yes. The body was there in the coming in of the Spirit.
C.B. Do you think sometimes we are not up to this? Regarding the wide circle in which the Spirit is prepared to operate.
J.T. I think not. The young people are apt to leave things and take up the attitude that it is a matter for older brethren. We have the elders mentioned, but anyone can see they are not the only ones. "Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy", the Spirit having been poured out, "Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your elders shall dream with dreams; yea, even upon my bondmen and upon my bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy". Surely Peter's words were intended to affect his hearers!
Rem. Joshua was not up to this for the moment when he asked Moses to forbid Eldad and Medad.
J.T. I thought that a moment ago. "Would that all Jehovah's people were prophets". That is the desire of a man not jealous of his brethren.
F.S. Would it be a good thing to overcome congregationalism by not merely being together, but all following their exercises in carrying on the service?
J.T. Congregationalism on the one hand and hierarchy on the other work together for the reduction of the variety of service. They work together, the congregation content with the organisation of the hierarchy for the right of speaking. This quotation is to break up all that.
E.P. Would the passage in @2 Kings 4: 3, "Borrow for thyself vessels abroad from all thy neighbours, empty vessels; let it not be few" fit in?
J.T. Just so. "Let it not be few". You mean they were all filled. Every vessel that was brought was filled.
E.P. In the acceptance of Peter's words and the
{407}
apostles¬ doctrine, the closing of the doors upon the vessels took place.
J.T. Closed upon the people that listened, yes. We may as well come to that now, what the hearers of Peter said, what questions they asked. That is the next thing -- the outcome of the ministry here. They said "to Peter and the other apostles, What shall we do, brethren?" That is, another principle comes into evidence, and that is the principle of gift, apostolic authority, that those affected by the truth know, discern these. They discern those who are specially fitted. They say to Peter "and *the other apostles*". I mean to say as christianity was set up and inaugurated God was working. Those in whom He worked instinctively recognised the people to whom questions should be addressed, they "said to Peter and *the other apostles*". How did they know the other apostles could answer their questions? They might readily perceive that Peter could, but how did they know the others could?
S.McC. In that connection is it right to ask certain brethren if they have anything before them, when we come together in temple character, addressing them personally?
J.T. Is it right? I think it is. I think this is a good example. They "said to Peter and the other apostles".
S.McC. You would discern in some a measure of gift.
J.T. There were a great many standing about, you may be sure. Three thousand affected, there may have been twice that many there or more, and eleven men standing alongside of Peter. How did they know these people could answer questions, too?
C.B. Would that be by the Spirit of God that they got that sense?
J.T. They were born again. "They were pricked in heart". They did not have the Spirit yet. There 
{408}
is no doubt the work of God had begun in them. It was after that they discerned the work of God in others, those capable of answering questions.
C.A.M. It is remarkable in that way, they had become like God Himself. God differentiates these persons in verse 17, shows what a range it is, including those in a position of relationship, going down even to bondmen, and when He comes to age, God is over that. These variations are wonderful, so that when they come to answer to it, they can differentiate, too.
J.T. Yes, if these eleven men were garbed in clerical habiliments you can understand people would see that they were intended to answer questions, but there was no evidence that they were, and yet the convicted people knew to whom to address their questions. They were not confined to Peter. They said to "Peter and the other apostles".
S.McC. Is that not one of the great evidences of the work of God, that divinely accredited authority is recognised in the ministry?
J.T. I think it is one of the features. It is well to bring it forward now, so that brethren should have it in their minds in ministry that special gift is required of them. We have this great variety in verse 17, and no doubt there were many sons and daughters there, bondmen and bondwomen, elders and young men. These convicted people only addressed their questions to the apostles.
J.S.T. Would that link on with Mark's gospel, gave "to his bondmen the authority", chapter 13: 34? Would it be recognised here?
J.T. The allusion is no doubt to the apostles there, but they are called bondmen. It is a remarkable passage because it shows how the work of God in people generally has a certain instinct in it. It leads them to do what is right.
Rem. I was thinking of the authority that would be seen in that marked way in the apostles.
{409}
J.T. There must have been something about them, that the convicted ones discerned. We are told at the beginning in verse 14, "But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice and spoke forth to them". That was the levitical thought, what was to govern the position, that the ministry was to be marked by gift. These apostles were fitted and gifted men and Peter stood up in relation to them, although amongst others who could speak, too, as we are told, they spoke to one another the wonderful things of God. "We hear them speaking in our own tongues the great things of God" (verse 11). There were many others there, but the convicted ones did not address their questions to them.
G.M. The presence of the Spirit made perfect order on that line.
J.T. It seems the Spirit being present and working, even though some were not indwelt by the Spirit, they discern the order, that these twelve men had a special place, meaning they represent those commissioned specially for service.
W.R. There is an absence of officialism. The twelve would merge with the brethren. They "said to Peter and the other apostles, What shall we do, brethren?" (verse 37).
J.T. That was just an ordinary form of address.
Jews would use that expression. It is "What shall we do, brethren?" Meaning these speakers were Jews, they were not yet christians. They would just address them as Jewish brethren, but they discerned in them something different from the ordinary.
A.T. Does this link on with the Corinthian setting, what God has set in the assembly authoritatively? The apostles come first.
J.T. That is exactly what is in mind. It is not stated here, but Paul brings it out. You may read what the specific gifts are in @1 Corinthians 12.
E.P. I was thinking of the words of the centurion,
{410}
"For I also am a man placed under authority", @Luke 7: 8. The element of obedience was coming into view as the result of Peter's speaking.
J.T. He discerned the Lord was under authority as he himself was. Now these people evidently discerned the apostles¬ authority. So you read in @1 Corinthians 12: 28, "And God has set certain in the assembly: first, apostles; secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers; then miraculous powers; then gifts of healings; helps; governments; kinds of tongues". These are all specific gifts. Some are sign gifts, others like apostles and prophets are spiritual gifts. So we can see that whilst we all would have the Spirit -- every believer in principle has the Spirit in a general way -- yet we have to differentiate, there is the idea of special gifts and commissions, that we are brought into an authoritative state of things.
S.McC. Do you feel that there is a need for the liberation of the work of God from elements of spiritual darkness in these last days, that we might recognise what is rightly clothed with divine authority in the ministry? If the work of God is hampered by the working of things in us, as it is in the professing system all around us, we will not see what bears the stamp of divine authority.
J.T. We have to own there is very little of it, but still as has been remarked, He has given to His bondmen the authority. Their office is not the point, it is what you see in them, their position as bondmen. Although John the evangelist was an apostle, "he signified it, sending by his angel, to his bondman John", @Revelation 1: 1. Even John there is only a bondman.
J.R.H. Would you say if we are moving in living exercise there will be the recognition of gift?
J.T. That is good. That is important. We have been noting the variety in verse 17, God pouring out of His Spirit upon all flesh, that is not specific gift,
{411}
that is the great general thought, the profuseness of the pouring out of the Spirit in the last days. Alongside of that you have these twelve men, they are recognised by the converts as able to answer their questions. So that I think it brings us down now to authoritative teaching, because the early converts, we are told, "persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles". They had discernment, the work of God moved in that way, they had discernment as to authoritative teaching.
J.R.H. These people did not have the Spirit yet but they were in very real exercise, were they not?
J.T. They were. They knew the kind of persons to ask. These eleven men had said nothing, as far as the passage goes to show, but they could see there was something there. They addressed their questions to them as well as Peter.
J.S.T. They did not only listen to the authority as spoken by the apostles, but they moved in the doctrine, in the authority, as persevering in the apostles¬ teaching.
J.T. After they came into the truth, they persevered in the apostles¬ teaching, showing there was a force against that. The enemy's work was against their teaching.
S.McC. Is this not an important question, "What shall we do, brethren?" A readiness in the spirit of obedience to take on what is ministered, and to get help in relation to it.
J.T. It is a good thing to prompt and promote the idea of questioning, but to know to whom to address your questions.
W.L. I suppose you would say the apostles were apostles because they themselves had taken on these things in a positive way. They had taken on this teaching of the Lord.
J.T. They had been with Him. Quite so.
{412}
J.R.H. As to this matter of asking some particular person. You sometimes find in meetings of temple character saints seem disposed to address themselves to all. Is that right?
J.T. It is not right. It is a mistake in that the temple of God should be clearly before us and that its existence is based on the fact that the Holy Spirit is amongst us. The Spirit that dwells in you, that ought to be clearly kept in mind. Alongside of that you have these specific gifts, set not in the body, but in the assembly; not in the temple, but in the assembly. The temple is just the idea there is light there, and the primary thought of a shrine was that you could go there and have your questions answered. This passage in @Acts 2 shows the kind of persons that are questioned. The twelve apostles belonged to the temple, but they had distinction in this matter of understanding and authority.
S.McC. Do you make any difference between the local meeting and the meeting where the brethren come in from other parts?
J.T. Well, I do, I should a little. It is well to make as much latitude as possible in these local meetings so that all shall come into the thing, but the idea of ability ought always to be provided for, because it is in the gift that God gives that the working out of it is clearly seen.
J.S.T. There is a desire to see everyone filled with the Holy Spirit, a desire to see what God has given being free to operate.
J.T. The pouring out -- of the Spirit upon all flesh would suggest brothers and sisters alike sitting down together recognising the Spirit. That is the basis of the temple. The working out of the temple requires gift, the questioning of the persons who could answer the questions and would answer them. "They persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles".
W.R. Would you say that the Lord recognised
{413}
that early, at the age of twelve? He is in the midst of the doctors both hearing and asking questions.
J.T. Quite so, that is the doctrine.
-.DeB. Is there a danger of us not recognising the gifts?
J.T. I have seen it. There is a certain communistic element  -- a levelling element that would ignore gift altogether. Have we not all got the Spirit? They all have the Spirit, but Peter did not stand up with all who had the Spirit, but with the eleven.
W.W. Gifts are given to edify the whole body. We are not edified unless we recognise the gifts.
J.T. Quite so. So that we are told not to quench the Spirit.
A.P.T. Is it not well to get this matter of @1 Corinthians 12 more in our minds as to the public side?
J.T. The public side requires the anointing, in the sense of commission and gift. "How shall they preach unless they have been sent?" @Romans 10: 15. Peter stands up as one sent of God.
C.B. Would that spirit you speak of be illustrated in Dathan and Abiram in their rebellion against Moses?
J.T. You mean the spirit of opposition to gift.
Quite so.
J.W.D. Do you think if there is a proper understanding of the temple, distinctive gift would be in evidence in the locality?
J.T. Quite so. It is clear from this passage that the divine order in the economy as regards ministry is qualified persons "sent" and they recognise one another, they recognised he stood up with the eleven.
W.W. You mean to say that lack of recognition of gift leads to confusion?
J.T. It robs us of what God has for us, brought through them.
H.B. Would the principle be seen in Bezaleel and 
{414}
Aholiab, that special gift would fit in today by the Spirit of God?
J.T. Yes, they were specially fitted for that special work, to put things together that the people brought. 
-.DeB. When it says that all may be edified, I suppose if we leave the divine rule it works out in the opposite way.
J.T. If we leave the divine rule and order I am sure there is confusion and the saints are robbed of what God has for them.
W.L. Would you make a distinction between the Spirit as being poured out on the principle of the anointing, and the receiving of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes, quite so. It is the pouring out here on the principle of the anointing, the external side. Peter conveys to his hearers that there is authority with him. He says, "Men of Judaea, and all ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and give heed to my words", @Acts 2: 14. "To my words" -- that man knows what he is saying, he has God behind him. He is a sent man. "My words".
Elijah says the same to Ahab. "And Elijah the Tishbite, of the inhabitants of Gilead, said to Ahab, As Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, except by my word", @1 Kings 17: 1. There is a man conscious he is commissioned to represent God.
J.S.T. There is a beautiful word in @Daniel 10: 9. "And I heard the voice of his words". I was wondering if this passage would link on with it, as carrying a certain personality, the authority being linked up with the word.
J.T. This passage in @Acts 2 contains all the main features of the dispensation, initially that is: first, all present sitting down together in one place at one time. The Spirit comes in in that connection. We are reminded there that the Spirit expects us to be all together at that particular time given, if we are to
{415}
get what is available and He sat on each one, each person is in mind, as you say, each personality. It is one of the most interesting things amongst us, and then they "began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth". They did not go beyond that, they recognised that that was the power. Then this position of Peter with the eleven calling attention to the special gift and commission amongst them. There are only twelve of them. These twelve were recognisable by those in whom God was working. That is the great general position. Then the result of their work, how those who believed "persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles". They recognised the authority in the teaching of the apostles.
C.A.M. Would you say that one of the great marks of a gifted man would be the power, and the living meaning of the prophetic word that a man of God could give? Is not that one of the marks of gift?
J.T. I think it is. Those in whom God is working recognise it. That is one thing I thought we might see: how that all are included in the coming in of the Spirit. Every vessel filled, at least every vessel anointed and then every one of them speaking "with other tongues as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth". They began at once to recognise their measure, and the power of the Spirit, that there was no other power. Then Peter standing up with the eleven calling attention to the specific gift that God had provided for the commencement of the testimony.
E.P. Would it be right to say that in @Luke 4: 16 when the Lord stood up in the synagogue of Nazareth He was the anointed preacher? But you not only have the anointed preacher, but the anointed vessel.
J.T. The whole number, you mean, quite so; the assembly corresponding to Christ in that sense, only that there He says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad
{416}
tidings to the poor". Peter answers to that in that he was anointed to preach.
J.W.D. Do you think that Peter standing up with the eleven would in a way govern the whole principle in which gift operates today?
J.T. We have very little of it now; as we often say, there is light in going back to the beginning, and we walk in that light so that we discern anything there is according to that. Peter standing up with the eleven calls attention to specially qualified persons standing up to minister. As Paul says in @Romans 10: 15, "how shall they preach unless they have been sent?" and then we have the recognition of these features by those in whom God has been working and then the result in them in that they persevered in the teaching of these twelve men.
C.A.M. So that when it comes to our meetings they are not just bible classes. We might, as far as that is concerned, read any commentary on Scripture. God's idea is to send some specific person, such as to the eunuch. He had the prophetic word in front of him, but God had a certain means of illuminating it to him.
J.T. "How should I then be able unless someone guide me?" @Acts 8: 31. He was instinctively right, too, "unless someone guide me". That is the principle of these twelve men, they can answer questions.
E.F. They said here to Peter and the eleven, which was general. If we are holding special meetings at any special time and have in mind recognising gift, and we have a number of brethren who are helpful, what would you say would govern us in inviting any one of them?
J.T. It is ability, of course, whether he is qualified for the service you have in mind. The idea of inviting does not come in as early as this, of course, but it comes in in chapters 9 and 10. Then it comes in in chapter 16. In chapter 9 they sent for Peter, in
{417}
chapter 10 Cornelius sent for Peter, he was told to do so by a revelation from heaven. Then in Paul's case a man of Macedonia was seen in a vision "standing and beseeching him, and saying, Pass over into Macedonia and help us". Why did he not go to Peter? He went to the man who was most qualified for the work. So earlier when Peter was sent for, it was because he was the man qualified for the work. Evidently there were other apostles but they were not sent for, he was.
E.F. If there are several gifts available, would you say that the Lord would indicate someone to us, that He would come in for us?
J.T. I think He would. Would such and such a brother be able to help us at the present time, that should underlie our invitation.
E.F. Being simple about the matter, too?
J.T. Quite so.
J.H. Would it be a matter taken up in care or would you leave it until the occasion?
J.T. I do not quite follow 'until the occasion'. If you invite a man you expect him to be there, do you not?
J.H. You mean the thing should be taken up in care first.
J.T. Quite so, if you are going to invite him, certainly, "come over into Macedonia and help us". It would be the brethren in a place wanted help, not simply to have an annual meeting, that ought to be understood, an annual meeting is nothing in itself. The very thought of an annual meeting is not spiritual.
C.A.M. I suppose if we keep to routine like that God might come in as in the death of Dorcas, some person living on religious status. It was then they wakened up. They thought it was disastrous that she had died. Here is a spiritual man within reach, they say you must come to us.
J.T. Quite so, they were most urgent about it.
{418}
He did two things in coming. He got Aeneas to make his bed and he raised up Dorcas. Each one respectively and locally. The thing is a living and ordered state of things, that is what Peter accomplished by his visit.
W.L. Would you say that local need has a great deal to do with the availability of gift?
J.T. Local need, quite so. What can a man do?
What is he capable of? Would not he be a good man for this particular state of things? Our condition is varying all the time. This meeting will not be the same a week hence as it is now. There are constant variations, constant changes, emergencies arising. You want to know what kind of a brother would be helpful to us, more particularly. We need help, come over and help us.
C.B. Would it take the whole twelve to meet the condition of things?
J.T. I think the number would mean God had enough to meet emergencies. It is the idea of manipulation, God can use these men, they are available, they are amenable to divine requirements. They are ready to go at any time, "Here am I; send me",
@Isaiah 6: 8.
G.M. Is it a man's history that qualifies him? Peter had a different history from Paul.
J.T. You mean his history brings out what he is, quite so.
J.W.D. One has been at meetings where perhaps the only brother who could function levitically was the one specially asked, which made it difficult to develop the truth. I was thinking of Ezra, he had thirteen levites with him to support him in giving the people to understand the reading.
J.T. They helped him.
J.W.D. There should be those present with gift to support the one specially asked.
{419}
J.T. That is how God is blessing His people all over, just on that principle.
S.McC. In connection with the fellowship meetings in the province here and the fellowship meetings in Detroit and Royal Oak, should there be concern that levitical ability should be invited specifically to these meetings?
J.T. I think so. That is what we were just remarking as regards the Macedonian man. Why did he go to Paul? There are plenty of others. He was the one best calculated to help them.
S.McC. It has been suggested that the general invitation sent out should cover all that, but that would hardly be sufficient?
J.T. I do not think so. I think what we are speaking of now shows men are fitted for certain work and the saints should discern it. God helps, because in all these cases there was divine guidance. In @Acts 10 in Peter's case there certainly was: but in @Acts 9 the message was evidently because they knew he could do the work. They sent specifically to him and he came.
A.McD. Paul would say, "Take Mark, and bring him with thyself, for he is serviceable to me for ministry", @2 Timothy 4: 11.
J.T. Exactly, that is good. He was a suitable man for the ministry.
J.W.D. I was wondering if we had any scriptural basis for calling brethren together to our localities for any other reason than to gather to a gift for ministry.
J.T. It does not seem so, not a general meeting. The local phraseology is "when ye come together in assembly". That is not a general meeting, that is a local meeting. A general meeting is for ministry and according to @Nehemiah 8, and these passages we are alluding to here, it is that persons qualified by God should help us and that is what is in mind, I am sure.
{420}
S.McC. Do you make any difference in regard to any part where the brethren might be all together and seeing each other a good deal all the time? Do you make any difference in that regard? Take the New Jersey and New York area where the brethren are in close proximity to each other, does it make any difference in regard to the inviting of special levitical ability in the area?
J.T. I think not. A man is what he is, in ministering amongst his local brethren or otherwise; but, of course, if there are twelve men there is variety, there must be variety with twelve men. So that you would get another element in the thing, you get variety, another view, another kind of brother than those you have. Perhaps you do not follow what I mean.
S.McC. The question then would be as to whether we are prepared to make room for the best that would be there, is it?
J.T. If, under the Lord, you invite a brother thinking he is the man to help you at a particular time, then you ought to make way for him.
R.W.S. Is that determined in a meeting for care?
J.T. "In the multitude of counsellors there is safety", @Proverbs 24: 6. I think so. The Lord helps us. The Lord enters into all these things. We get guidance in all these matters.
Dr.W. May I ask if you would help us further on the question of annual meetings? Is it not so that most of our meetings are occasioned by public holidays which are more or less annual, like the meeting here?
J.T. Yes, but if it is regarded as an annual affair it is apt to become a distinguishing feature in the town and loses its lustre. In truth it ought to be an occasion for today and for today only. You want freshness.
C.A.M. In that regard is it not remarkable how the Lord is helping the saints by the month, the idea of the month; and assembly light like the lunar idea
{421}
seems to be stressed by the Lord at the present time? Would you say that?
J.T. The spiritual year, the divine year, was shorter than the lunar or calendar year of twelve months. The spiritual year was eleven months. I think there must be something in that for spiritual freshness. It is not an annual affair governed by the revolution of the sun or earth. It is a spiritual matter, it refers really to sowing and reaping. It refers to the fruit of the earth.
C.A.M. In @Revelation 22:2 it says, "the tree of life, producing twelve fruits, in each month yielding its fruit". In the first part of Luke's gospel where the feminine side is so wonderfully stressed -- after so many months had gone by certain things happened, and the prophetic ministry came on the scene.
J.T. I am glad you bring up the question of the months; it only confirms what we are saying, that it is freshness. Every month had its own fruit from the tree of life, variety right through to the end. You would not have the same fruit in November as January or March. The divine thought was freshness from the tree of life in every month. The allusion to "the acceptable year of the Lord" that is not the seven-month year, but the fullest year you can get, every month is fresh. So in Solomon's realm there were twelve princes who provided food for every month, showing that from that point of view the year is lengthened out to the limit, but there is freshness in every month. Nothing stale, it was not an annual occasion. A different man to provide the food from the one who provided it the previous month. There are twelve distinct princes providing food for twelve distinct months. That is important because you get freshness.
W.R. You see the thing singled out here, in this setting, to each day, do you not? @Acts 2: 46. "And every day, being constantly in the temple with one
{422}
accord, and breaking bread in the house, they received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart, praising God". It is a daily matter, too, is it not?
J.T. Quite so, but this is a matter of months, it is well to consider it because it shows that if we have annual meetings they ought to take on a monthly variation of food. It is not simply the locality is distinguished by this meeting every year. Rochester has an annual meeting. They do not want to allocate to this any distinction because they invite their brethren every year. We want to see freshness, not simply we have so many brethren invited and we provide food for them. Is there freshness? There was a prince for every month in Solomon's time to provide food for that month. So the tree of life provided fresh food for every month.
J.W.D. Is the basis of it spiritual prosperity in a locality? Is it not very unsuitable for a meeting where there was a great local dissension among the brethren to call brethren together on the monthly principle you suggest?
J.T. Quite so.
A.P.T. The Lord in John sets aside the ordinary Jewish calendar and brings in freshness. "Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water", @John 7: 38.
J.T. That was an annual occasion. John refers to the Feast of Tabernacles and the Feast of the Passover, but the Lord makes nothing of them. His brethren said, Come up to this feast. That is the idea, just an annual affair, that is all that was in their minds.
But, "My time is not yet come", @John 7: 6.
-.DeB. Is there a danger with us that it might become, as it was at that time, a feast of the Jews?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. The Lord says, "My time is not yet come". They say that if a man is distinguished he ought to go up and show himself.
The Lord says, "but your time is always ready",
@John 7: 6. That shows these occasions must come
{423}
from God. There must be spiritual power behind them or else they are nothing.
E.P. Do you think the testimony of Peter's is like the blowing with the trumpet "in your new moons"?
J.T. Quite so, it was the new moon.
S.McC. Is it not in God's thoughts at the very outset, "this month shall be unto you the beginning of months", @Exodus 12: 2?
J.T. Quite so.
Dr. W. Is it not so that the brethren in Great Britain look forward with great anticipation to every annual occasion and are most thankful for these occasions?
J.T. They happen to be annual but in truth they are on the principle that I am speaking of. They are not in the same place every year. There is a new set of brethren with a new set of exercises underneath every one of them.
Dr. W. Is it not so that the brethren look forward to them?
J.T. I am sure they look forward to them but it is on the principle we are speaking of. The spiritual underlies it every time. It is a new occasion every time. A new occasion, new locality, fresh brethren and the Spirit of God uses that. It is not simply an annual matter, in fact it is a different time of the year. We might say, too, nearly every meeting is on a different date, showing it is movable.
C.A.M. Of course, the idea of months is to fill out the acceptable year. So the brethren grow in this, they are further on spiritually. So that this matter of the months means that the saints are coming into the light of the assembly. It is the moon, the lunar calendar.
J.W.D. Historically the annual meetings at Quemerford ceased because the monthly features were not in evidence.
J.T. The princely element had gone; the princes
{424}
of Solomon that provided food were put down as Ben So-and-So; Ben is son, which is sonship entering into it. Some of them were sons-in-law to Solomon, showing that there was a peculiar kind of freshness linked with Solomon in the whole matter.
J.R.H. Do you think we are wise to give up the idea of the annual thought and keep to the monthly side of the matter, that is if there is fresh exercise on every occasion?
J.T. I think we should give up the annual thought altogether, it is the moral side of the matter. Good and well, there is a meeting at Rochester or Detroit, but let us keep to the spiritual side, it is an emergency meeting. There is need and it is being met.
J.R.H. You pointed out a little while ago the idea of it being crystallised.
Dr.W. Is it not so that most of us are governed by the holidays, or church festivals during the year, such as Easter, Christmas?
J.T. You are not governed if you are spiritual by Christmas-time or the New Year. If we are with God that is nothing, it is only an instance that enables us to bring in the spiritual thought and holy freshness, that is the idea. I believe the allusion to the tree of life in @Revelation 22, and Solomon's princes providing food, is very instructive. You have always got something fresh, suitable to each month.
C.A.M. As far as the holiday is concerned, in the States they have gone on and on making holidays so that we have got one practically every month. God can make them do anything He wants.
A.P.T. So that we do not mind, they can have all the holidays they want. You are pressing the thought of being on spiritual lines.
J.T. If you get Ben-Hur, he was one of the men, he represents spiritual power, that is the thing to keep in mind. He is thinking of that, he is princely
{425}
in what he is doing. He is the son of someone, he carries that thought, Ben is son.
J.S.T. So that where the brethren are together in care they would take advantage of all these helps to see that they came.
J.T. It is a spiritual matter with us. Christmastime is nothing. It is simply an opportunity that God has given us.
J.W.D. Then you have a lot of these Ben's, they looked after the territory on the other side of the Jordan. These all had to yield.
J.R.H. What has been said would apply to what are called quarterly meetings also.
J.T. Quite so, it is really the heavenly coming in to the regulations of the sun coming round, "And let them be for signs, and for seasons", @Genesis 1: 14. God set the sun and the moon and He made the stars also; all these heavenly bodies are for seasons and for times. So that, although men set the days, we are to bring the heavenly into them. After all they are God's days.
S.McC. The Lord says to help the disciples in @John 4: 35, "Do not ye say, that there are yet four months and the harvest comes? Behold, I say to you, Lift up your eyes and behold the fields", etc.
J.T. Quite so, the work of God was there without waiting for the four months.
C.A.M. Is it not remarkable the way the Lord is emphasising to the saints today the things that have been brought to our attention such as the ordinances of the heavens? This matter of personality referring back to what came up in these meetings about asking gifts, and so forth, do you not think it tests our knowledge of personalities amongst the saints? We can hold forth in a natural way about our differences, but how well are we acquainted with different personalities spiritually?
J.T. One of the great principles of Scripture is personalities. The mount of transfiguration was to
{426}
bring out personality. Three men were selected to go up with the Lord and then two men came out of heaven. The kingdom of God is marked out by personality. Paul says, "I, Paul". John says, "I, John". Daniel says, "I, Daniel". These are personalities, they are supposed to be known by the saints. "I, Paul" is an appeal to our knowledge of Paul so that he comes into our minds under certain circumstances.
W.L. Would you say that is one reason why we receive the Spirit so that we have spiritual discernment?
J.T. Quite so. We have "the crowd of names" at the beginning of chapter 1. Every name has a distinction. You could pick him out. There is a man good for something. I know that man. Jehovah Himself says, "I know him". He is a personality, I know Abraham. "If any man love God, the same is known of him". That is, the personality is known by God, so that the saints are to be acquainted with one another, so that when emergencies come up, I know that brother, he is good for that particular service. David says of Ahimaaz, "He is a good man, and comes with good news", @2 Samuel 18: 27.
S.McC. Barnabas knew what Saul could do. He went and sought him.
J.T. Very good.
A.P.T. You get the highest thought in the concluding part of this chapter.
J.T. You get the great general thought of the dispensation, authoritative preachers and converts, and how they were affected by the persons through whom they were converted -- the apostles. They would proceed into this happy, blessed state of things to which God and the Lord would add.
Dr.W. Something has been said about the recognition of gifts. Say something about prophecy, visions and dreams.
{427}
J.T. We only referred to verse 17 to show how in a great general way God intends all the saints to understand they are to be useable; and He is qualifying them. "But to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ", @Ephesians 4: 7. Here we have prophecy stressed, which is always a necessity, and it is today. God is helping us on these lines. "Follow after love, and be emulous of spiritual manifestations, but rather that ye may prophesy", @1 Corinthians 14: 1. It is one important thing that is always urgent, because it brings God to our souls and edifies the assembly, so that you get four women who prophesied in Philip's daughters. They did the thing, they are not called prophetesses, they are persons who did the thing. They prophesy.
-.DeB. Prophecy is always the thought that one would have the truth for the moment.
J.T. And the mind of God. Prophetic ministry brings that to your soul. "God is indeed amongst you", you are convicted and fall down and worship God, and say, "God is indeed amongst you".
R.W.S. Even the giving of thanks for the food would be a fresh expression, not just a stereotyped giving of thanks. "They received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the people".
J.T. You see how that links on with Solomon's year, the men supplying the food. We shall have to leave the third chapter. If we have time we will go on to it. It is the best of the twelve in mind, they are the best of the best, you might say, and the best kind of a result. We might be able to touch that tomorrow, God willing.
