{1}
INTELLIGENCE IN THE ASSEMBLY
@Luke 24: 27, 44 - 46; @1 Corinthians 14: 14 - 20
J.T. I had before me the thought of the intelligence that God intended should mark the assembly as it is constituted here on earth at the present time. The idea of an assembly is that it is composed of intelligent persons.
-.H. We sang in our hymn, 'Give us a child's simplicity' (`479:1); does that contradict your thought?
J.T. A little child is one who learns, who is impressionable, and learns. "As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word", Peter says; there is no reproach in that, but there is a reproach in the word 'babes' in this epistle, it implies that the saints had not gone on. @Luke 24 contemplates the public body; @John 20, which is the corresponding passage, contemplates what is within. The disciples were again within, it says, but Luke has in view the public assembly, and hence the place the Scriptures have. We might have read from Ephesians, which also enlarges on the thought of intelligence, but it would carry our subject beyond our time. Ephesians would show the divine thought that those who form the assembly should have the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of God, the eyes of our understanding being enlightened, all in view of us being formed for heavenly places.
Ques. How is the intelligence you refer to obtained?
J.T. There are two things in @Luke 24 which have a bearing on the house. The first is the exposition the Lord gives of the Scriptures. Then secondly He opened the understanding of the disciples that they might understand the Scriptures, and the way they treat of Himself. In a corresponding passage in
{2}
@1 Corinthians 2 the apostle says, "even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God", and further, "we have the mind of Christ", @1 Corinthians 2: 11, 16. So that we are furnished from God with all that is requisite for spiritual understanding.
Ques. Would the manifestation between the two expositions in @Luke 24 have any bearing?
J.T. Yes, a very great bearing. It does not appear that the first exposition the Lord gave altered the course of the two. There are those who enjoy expositions of Scripture and their course is not altered, nor their associations changed, but the manifestation of the Lord in Emmaus in the breaking of bread led to a movement toward the assembly. The Scriptures cannot be understood save by those in the light of the assembly. The manifestation had the effect of their returning to Jerusalem and there they find the eleven and those with them. Then they relate what had taken place, and the Lord comes in and says, "It is I myself", and it is in the light of His appearing that we have the Scriptures divided so that they become intelligible to us: "that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me". The law of Moses represents the authority of God, His rights. One has to begin there, no one can arrive at an understanding of what is becoming in the assembly, save as he sees how the rights of God are fully maintained and expressed in Christ. "Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day". So the law of Moses read in the light of Christ risen represents the authority of God in our souls. Then the prophets impress us with the patience of God. One needs to know the patience of God if one is to reach the Psalms, because, if we seek to answer to the rights of God, we soon discover that we have to draw on His patience. One of the most interesting
{3}
things found in Scripture is the patience of God. The Psalms themselves testify to this feature, and as I said, if we do not know patience we shall not reach the Psalms. So that is how the Scriptures are to be read if we are to be spiritually intelligent; they are to be read in the light of Christ risen.
R.S.P. You do not get the Psalms in verse 27.
J.T. Well, they are included in "all the scriptures", but their omission is a mark of spiritual exactitude. People who have their backs to Jerusalem have no psalms that God can take account of. They were going through an experience of dejection, and their faces were away from Jerusalem where divine interest was centred.
P.L. So you get in @Isaiah 66: 13, "ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem"; there is no dejection there.
E.P. Do we make psalms of our own as the result of this intelligence?
J.T. The Psalms are a wonderful storehouse. God greatly honours saints in that He draws from that storehouse to build up the testimony to the greatness of Christ.
-.G. In the "things concerning himself", you apprehend Christ as set forth in Scripture.
J.T. Where can we get an apprehension of Christ risen if we do not understand Scripture? How many things one could refer to in a moment to show how true that is!
A.N. What you have been saying will be seen in the remnant eventually. "They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward", @Jeremiah 50: 5. They have had proof of the patience of God, and are now moving on to the Psalms, so to speak.
J.T. Yes. @Hosea 6: 1 contemplates they should return. "Come, and let us return unto the Lord". Then in verse 3, "Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain,
{4}
as the latter and former rain unto the earth". That is what comes within the range of one who is truly desirous of knowing. As light comes into the soul, you see what God has effected on the third day; you move on. You are not stationary, you follow on to know, and that brings out the movements of Christ. How many apprehend them? "His going forth", Hosea says. He is moving in relation to all the thoughts of God; every thought of God is to be fully expressed in the *day*, so His going forth is as the morning dawn. Spiritually you see every divine thought becoming verified in Christ, and the heart is full of hope as the fulfilment of all these thoughts is the end to which we are going. Colossians and Ephesians take account of Christ in that way in relation to the thoughts of God, to the mystery. This principle of following on to know is important. As knowing and made to live before the face of God there is power for movement, and you come to see that His going forth is as the morning dawn. Wonderful things come into view, filling your heart with hope. "He shall come unto us as the rain": His coming unto us shows what an interest He has in us.
Ques. Are these movements assembly-wise?
J.T. Yes. You begin to see them as you follow on. The present dispensation is a dispensation of movement on His part, as well as on ours. The Lord's appearings after He rose suggest a dispensation of movement. Freshness in the assembly is in mind. He comes to us as the latter rain, shedding refreshment on us, but that is dependent on following on to know.
Rem. In the end of John's gospel you have, "follow thou me", @John 21: 22. Does the thought of following run through the dispensation?
J.T. John gives three manifestations; Paul gives six appearings, and Matthew, Mark, and Luke give a variety of additional appearings. John in the first
{5}
two manifestations in chapter 20 has in view a weekly experience, they were on the first and the eighth day; the third manifestation is in chapter 21; we do not know on what day it occurred as it is not a question of a spiritual or assembly experience as the two others were. It has reference to recovery, not of the whole body, but of leading brothers who went astray. Luke has in view the recovery of the most insignificant persons who, we might consider, are of no note. But the public assembly requires *every* believer, the least as well as the greatest, so they have to be brought back. One, it says, "named Cleopas"; he was not like Peter, for instance, well known to every one, but the Lord thought it worth while to travel sixty furlongs to bring him back.
Ques. What is the force of the second manifestation in @John 20?
J.T. The disciples are again within. The exact day is given to show that the Lord is thinking of the experience of the assembly. None of the other gospel writers gives exact dates. It shows too the Lord would take account of any absentees from the first manifestation.
P.S.P. Is this chapter in Luke an illustration of how He deals with us individually to set us in assembly conditions?
J.T. Yes.
A.N. The two set out themselves for Jerusalem, though they had said it was too late for the Lord.
J.T. Yes, they set out the same hour. It is well worthy of note. The Lord in His work of recovery would not overlook the humblest of the people of God when the public body is in view.
P.L. So "I have much people in this city".
J.T. Yes, all are to be sought out, and if they come back they are to be intelligent.
E.P. It says "that same day" (verse 13). Is there anything in the fact that all takes place then?
{6}
J.T. It shows the wonderful activity of grace. Things are all done at once; God does not put off. The seraphim *flew* in @Isaiah 6. Thomas was absent from the first meeting in @John 20 and he had to learn during the week what he had missed.
-- M. As we take account of the Lord's movements we shall be exercised to get something fresh every time we come together.
J.T. Yes. He comes to us as rain.
Rem. We see Him going forth as the morning.
J.T. Yes. First in relation to the thoughts of God, then in relation to the saints.
J.C.M.W. Would the first be in connection with the exposition of Scripture?
J.T. It would be more than that, though it includes it. The morning dawn would include the effectuation of all the divine thoughts in Christ.
F.W. Spiritual intelligence largely depends on the apprehension of resurrection as in Hosea.
J.T. Yes, we are made to live before God in the resurrection of Christ on the third day. He is risen and would set the disciples in movement in regard to spiritual intelligence as there is much more beyond. You observe He is never seen sitting in these appearings, as the end is not reached.
Ques. Are all His activities in view of the assembly getting the gain?
J.T. Yes; the disciples come in, in the light of Christ risen. "It is I myself". He is now apprehended as risen, and they are to be set in movement here in the intelligence which should mark those who form the assembly publicly. The Scriptures provide a basis for what is authoritative; the study of Scripture is in the light of Christ risen, and the understanding He gives has in view the setting up of a public body here representative of God. They know what to do, they know the position as it is. Wonderful that the Jewish remnant should have part in this;
{7}
the Scriptures are instrumental in severing them from the accredited religion of the world. Those led into the light would use the Scriptures with powerful effect in delivering the Jews from their present position. How effectively would a scribe instructed unto the kingdom of heaven use Genesis, which abounds with types of the assembly, for the deliverance of the Jews from Judaism. The gentile, too, would be reached. We are told that Jacob fled into Syria, and Israel served for a wife and for a wife he kept sheep. That would be understood, showing the Jews the divine thought extending beyond themselves, and showing the gentiles that they were in the mind of God even in Genesis. They were to form part of the assembly.
P.L. The Syrophenician woman would come in in that way.
J.T. Quite so. Here in this chapter we want to see the place the Scriptures have in the constitution of the assembly. You know where you are. You have in the right understanding of the Scriptures, an authoritative groundwork for all you do. This chapter shows how the assembly as a public body is to be instructed by the Lord directly. The assembly is God's and He has a right to speak there.
-.M. In the recovery of the truth there is the place *Scripture* has and the place the Lord has, to be taken account of.
J.T. In 1 Corinthians the truth of the Supper is introduced, and then the body, then love, and the exercise of gift. In ministry you have God speaking, particularly in prophetic ministry.
W.S.S. Peter speaks of the writings of Paul in @2 Peter 3: 15.
J.T. He recognises that Paul's letters were Scripture. Peter tends to unify the work of God by writing to the Jews of the dispersion, who had been scattered, and he reminds them that Paul's letters
{8}
were Scripture. But what I was thinking of was the assembly convened, which the first letter to the Corinthians contemplates, and how room is made for divine communications. My impression is that the tendency in assembly occasions is to overlook the divine right to speak. I believe the tendency is growing among saints, unconsciously perhaps, to view such meetings as the place where saints speak to God. Now, it *is* intended that saints should speak to God, but it is *never* intended that our speaking to God should shut out His speaking to us. If God comes in, and He will come in, there will be something that will greatly enhance what I may have to say to Him. Rain coming into my soul (referring to our scripture in Hosea) greatly invigorates me and accentuates what I have got. I fear the tendency is to make no provision for God speaking; people come without their Bibles, and do so deliberately. They say it is not a time for the Bible, only for the hymn book.
Ques. Do you refer to the morning meeting?
J.T. It is not so called. The 'assembly' is the word used. In the early days they met in the evening apparently. The word is "in assembly". The breaking of bread is spoken of in @Acts 20. It is God's assembly and there should be the full recognition of the rights of God; it is where He can speak. It is a denial of the rights of God in the assembly, if we say we should not have a word on that occasion.
P.L. "He shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth", @Hosea 6: 3.
J.T. The rain comes into the soul and it enhances what may be there, and freshens and enlarges it; a word from God instructs you.
A.N. We may have a tendency to go from one extreme to another. There was a time when a word given in the assembly was corrective in character and
{9}
had relation to the wilderness; now, it may be, no room is given for a word at all.
J.T. Of course there is to be no licence for the activity of our wills. We simply want to get the right principle that governs the assembly. The assembly is God's and He speaks, and we should expect it and make room for it. In the end of each gospel, what is emphasised is what the Lord says. The Lord is not here corporeally now; He comes in in a spiritual way, and if He speaks He speaks through selected vessels. The assembly is furnished with these, and gift will be there, if desired, particularly prophecy.
E.L.M. How would you distinguish between what is prophetic and what is expository?
J.T. A prophetic word would bring God into the consciences of saints, and He is identified with His word as in @Hebrews 4. This does not at all interfere with the outflow of worship; it rather enhances it, if there is a worshipful condition.
F.G.W. Would the Psalms help us in regard to the assembly on the line of intelligence?
J.T. Oh yes. Take @Psalm 45, "I speak of the things which I have made touching the king". Someone has made something; he has got it fresh; what an asset that is!
P.L. The queen would profit by all she heard about the king.
J.T. Yes.
M.O. Would a prophetic word connect you with Christ?
J.T. Yes, quite so.
P.L. The heading of @Psalm 45 is "An instruction -- a song of the Beloved".
J.T. That is very good.
W.W. "Where there is no vision, the people perish", @Proverbs 29: 18.
{10}
J.T. Yes, that is very good.
P.S.P. A word spoken would not be of an individual character, but one expressive of the mind of God at the moment.
J.T. Yes, a word spoken in the grace of the Head. If we see it is God's assembly, we shall recognise that He will speak according to what is needed. It is a question of what may exist and He knows. Here He had to allay their fears. We may give out beautiful hymns and say nice things, but the Lord is concerned as to what lies behind. There might be a very low state, a very worldly state, and yet saints can give out hymns in a formal way. Generally speaking, if a word is given, one would look for something in the grace of the Head in the way of refreshment.
-.M. Something that would give the Lord His true place in our hearts. J.N.D. used to say he knew the state of the meeting by what the Lord gave him.
Ques. Would you say there was something wrong if a company had not had a word for a year?
J.T. I should certainly think so.
-.G. You spoke of God speaking through selected vessels.
J.T. Yes. He does select His vessels. It says in referring to the gifts, that He set certain in the assembly, the ones fitted to speak, no doubt.
Rem. If one had no gift, would he be precluded from giving a word on that account?
J.T. Oh no, not at all. But if you give the Lord His place, gifts are provided; that is part of the furnishing. If you leave it with God He will select His vessels. He had to take up a woman in John's day; not that that would be suitable now.
A.N. We have thought of ministry Godward in relation to the assembly; what you are now speaking of is ministry manward. Is there the ascending and descending, as when the thought of the house was first introduced (@Genesis 28: 12)?
{11}
J.T. That is good, that was the first thing in connection with the house.
P.L. In @John 20 you have, "I ascend", and later, "I also send". Might not a word given in the grace of the Head provide the furnishing in regard to sending? Solomon rose up from before the altar, and stood and blessed the whole congregation (@1 Kings 8: 54, 55).
J.T. Yes, and David dealt to every one of Israel "a loaf of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine", @1 Chronicles 16: 3. There is the thought of God's bounty; you go out richer than when you came in.
F.W. Is gift open to desire?
J.T. Yes, it is there to be had. The Lord has plenty to give, if we make room for it. "Desire earnestly the greater gifts", the apostle says, and he adds, "but rather that ye may prophesy", @1 Corinthians 12: 31; @1 Corinthians 14: 1.
{12}
HOW SPIRITUAL LIFE IS DEVELOPED
@John 1: 4; @John 12: 23, 24; @Judges 14: 5 - 9; @Judges 15: 15 - 20; @Judges 16: 1 - 3, 22
I wanted to bring out from these scriptures something as to life, according to the manner in which it is developed in our dispensation. Life necessarily enters into all dispensations. When the Lord said, "I am come that they might have life, and might have it abundantly" (@John 10: 10). He had reference to ourselves; we have everything in abundance and especially life. John, having this great subject in view in his gospel, introduces the subject of life immediately, and he does so, not in a theoretical way, but in a concrete way; that is, as it had taken form in a Man -- in One, indeed, of whom he had already said that He was in the beginning with God and that He was God, and that without Him not one thing received being which had received being. So that His Person is carefully guarded and asserted, before John introduces this great subject as having its beginning in Christ: "In him was life, and the life was the light of men".
It is well, dear brethren, to be reminded in approaching such a great subject, which has its beginning in Christ, that we should be on our guard in regard of the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, for on every hand He is attacked. Even those who profess to love Him and regard Him in esteem, are letting down the bars and admitting the agents of the enemy, of whom the apostle says, "his ministers ... transform themselves as ministers of righteousness", @2 Corinthians 11: 15. One is reminded of Joab, David's captain, a sagacious man, one who would stand up for, as we say, the fundamentals, but who, being selfish, and ambitious, and perceiving that David's heart longed for Absalom,
{13}
devised a way whereby the king would be induced to recall the banished murderer. The scheme, indeed, was the gospel; the gospel was to be employed to bring about the recall of the murderer, but as is usual where the eye is not single, where Christ and His glory are not alone before the soul, we have the assertion of the natural mind of the ambitious man, the ambitions of the flesh. Joab employed the wise woman of Tekoah to approach the king. She began by telling the king that her two sons strove in the field and there was none to separate them. She intended to convey to the king that Absalom was one of those, but it was a lie. It was no question of two sons striving together; Absalom's act was one of murder, not a protective measure, not in any sense an act of self-defence, and although she proceeds to outline what corresponds with the gospel in a most striking manner, there was, underneath, this serious and fundamental defect, that the young man was veiled in the tale of a man striving with his brother in the field. How the enemy would thus misrepresent the position with regard to our Lord Jesus Christ, as if He were put to death by strife! His death was a murder, and His murderer is the man after the flesh whom Joab would have recalled, and whom the leaders of christendom today have recalled. They have contrived to open the door so that these opposers, these murderers, these enemies of Christ, should be brought in and have a place. And what is the result? Absalom, as will be remembered, having been recalled, burnt the field of barley (@2 Samuel 14: 28 - 32). Barley is universally a type of the Lord Jesus Christ as the first-fruits to God, and the admission of these enemies of Christ involves that the truth of the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ is being attacked, set aside, and undermined; the barley-field, as it were, has been set on fire, and who can quench it? Joab had no power to quench it, nor have those who are
{14}
responsible, and although they may have respect for Christ, yet they have given the enemies a place, with the result that the Person of Christ is attacked on every hand. The condition of christendom is hopeless. Absalom has been recalled, so to speak, and as recalled he was not inactive; he set fire to the barley-field, and then he undertook to displace the king. And he *did* displace the king; so that, dear brethren, it is well to be reminded that we should be on our guard lest the barley-field be destroyed. The barley-field refers to the place of the testimony. We have to be on our guard in regard of the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, lest the truth of it should be set on fire, as it were, and be destroyed. The foundation of God stands; that cannot be destroyed, but the barley-field refers to the sphere in which the testimony of the Person of Christ has been presented; and that has been corrupted, so that there is no protection in it at the present time for the Person of Christ.
John, having all this in view, introduces the truth of the Lord's Person. He has in view to develop the great subject of life, but in order that the foundation should be right in our souls he introduces Him as in the beginning with God, as with God, that He was God, and that not one thing was made without Him. And yet it says, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men".
I want to enquire as to how far we have apprehended the life of Christ in this way. John goes on to say, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us"; he does not say, 'The Word became man', although that is true, but "became flesh"; that is the Word came in as a babe, and the life developed in Him according to its own nature. @Genesis 1 insists that everything developed according to its kind, and so the life of Jesus developed in every respect according to itself. He brought it into this world; it was in Him. We see a remarkable picture of it in the dream of Pharaoh's
{15}
butler in the prison in Egypt. He sees three branches of a vine, and they budded, and blossomed, and bore fruit. There was the bud; there was the blossom, and the ripened fruit, and then the grapes are pressed into the cup of Pharaoh. What was for God, dear brethren, in that life! It was perfect, for the Word became flesh, and the life developed in perfection according to itself in every stage. It drew nothing from its environment; it had all its substance in itself. Thus the life of Jesus here under the eye of God, from the very outset was for His pleasure. The grapes pressed refers to the death of Christ in which that life that belonged to God was given up. Life belongs to God, and in no one was that more perfectly presented than in Jesus -- His life was for God. The scene of death was lighted up by that life. "God ... commanded the light to shine out of darkness", and so it did in the life of Jesus. In that life the light shone in the scene of death; and it was for men. "The Word", it says, "became flesh, and dwelt among us". He dwelt among us. As He moved in and out amongst men in the most ordinary circumstances, the light shone in every word, in every look, in every service of Christ; in every step He trod the light radiated. But, "the darkness apprehended it not". Terrible fact! Men in the flesh, however cultured, however religious, are incapable of discerning such light! Hence the necessity for the work of God.
Even men who believed on Him because of the signs were of no moral value in His eyes. He did not commit Himself to them because He knew what was in man; He knew all men. Let no one beguile himself, the Lord knows perfectly what is in you; and unless you are born again He has no confidence in you or in me.
Therefore the work of God ran on collaterally with the light. As the light shone, God wrought, and such as Nicodemus, the woman of Samaria, the nobleman
{16}
of Capernaum and the blind man, came into that light, and coming into that light, they came into the life, for the term is reciprocal. The life is the light, and the light is the life. The life of Christ is the light, and the light is the life, and hence as God wrought, the light that shone in the souls of men and women meant life to them. The question was asked in Ezekiel, "Shall these bones live?" @Ezekiel 37: 3. Yes, they can live, but how? By the work of God.
Well now, that precious life, filling with delight the heart of God as it did, and illuminating men, shedding its light on every man, must remain alone unless He, in whom it was, died. He had been the light of men when Philip and Andrew came and told Him that the Greeks were desiring to see Him. Mark you! they said, "We would see Jesus"; it was the Man they wanted to see; the Man was in perfect keeping with the light presented. The magi in an earlier day did not ask to see the Man; they asked to see the King: "Where is he that is born *King* of the Jews?" That meant that the light that had come to them from heaven, through His star, had delivered them from national feeling. Their words indicated there was no national feeling in their minds. They wanted to see Him who was the King of the Jews, not 'our king'. Such is the power of the light as it comes into the soul. It is true to itself, and as Matthew presents the King, they sought the King. But John presents the Man. You say, 'I thought Luke presents the Man'. So he does, but John presents the Son of God as a Man, and emphasises that He is the Son of man. And so the Greeks come up and want to see the Man: "We would see Jesus". They understood very little what their enquiry involved. Those who through Paul were led to believe on Jesus later understood how much lay behind the enquiry. Paul testified through the Greek world announcing that Jesus was the Son of God. He spoke of Him as the
{17}
Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom for all, a testimony to be rendered in its own time; and so assemblies were formed and they came to apprehend, as we see in the second letter to the Corinthians, the life of Jesus. How much do we understand of the life of Jesus? Paul's great desire as to his body was that it should express "the life of Jesus".
As the Greeks came up they said, "Sir, we desire to see Jesus" (@John 12: 21), and Philip and Andrew came to Jesus and told Him. Then He says, "The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified ... . Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die it bears much fruit", @John 12: 23, 24. What a humanity we shall see presently, not only in kind and quality, but in quantity, as the fruit of the death of Jesus! Let us not in any way be discouraged in regard of numbers. He says, "If it die it bears *much* fruit".
Now I want to show you from the book of Judges how the "much fruit" corresponds with the original stem. Samson returns and he finds in the carcase of the lion a swarm of bees. A *swarm* of bees, and they are living. I hardly know anything in the realm of creation that suggests energy of life more than a swarm of bees. It is industrious life; it is life in mutuality with results. He finds a swarm of bees and honey in the carcase. You say, not a desirable place. We have to understand how to live in death and how death becomes the energy of life. As Paul says, "Death works in us, but life in you", @2 Corinthians 4: 12. We have to understand that; it is mutuality in the carcase. Abraham used the expression, "that I may bury my dead from before me", @Genesis 23: 4. The natural eye does not like death. All sorts of devices have been employed to minimise the awfulness, the hideousness and offensiveness of death, but these are of no avail. The christian does not wish that; he accepts it as it is, and as it is rightly apprehended,
{18}
it is the very energy and stimulation of life, for our life is a life out of death. We are all in the same position, because we are all in the carcase. The swarm was in the carcase. There is nothing for the flesh in that. But the bees were acting industriously, there was mutuality and so the Spirit of God says, "and honey". There was a product, and Samson takes of that and eats, and gives of it to his father and mother and they ate also; but he kept the secret. One of the most important things in christianity is secrecy. Rightly understood there is no secret society like that of christians. We have to learn how to keep the secrets of God. The epistle to the Romans tells us God kept a secret throughout the ages; He never divulged it. So the secret of life is known alone to christians. No one understands life except he who has the Spirit of God. The Philistines could never have answered the riddle had Samson's wife not disclosed it. "If ye had not ploughed with my heifer, ye had not found out my riddle". The church has proved a failure; it has disclosed the secret and hence is responsible for the undoing of Samson.
Having said so much, which I hope will be simple to us all as to the thought of life, I wish to add a further word as to mutual relations. The thought of working together mutually with a definite end is the first feature of collective life, and we find it here in this type. Now how is this to be preserved? We may begin in mutual relations, but how is mutuality to be preserved in freshness? I apprehend that the Lord's supper is that which is designed to maintain it in freshness. As a young christian takes his place amongst the people of God, he feels himself one of them; he looks at them all in the light of the death of Christ; he is glad to recognise the poorest of them and the richest of them, as all meeting together happily and mutually, enjoying the things of the Spirit. But presently if the world gets in a little and has place
{19}
with him, he begins to feel he has something to distinguish him from the rank and file, and he loses his freshness and his power, and becomes occupied with theories and doctrines; he loses the fresh spring in his soul and there is no honey. The Lord says, "I am come into my garden ... I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey", @Song of Songs 5: 1. As coming into His garden, He looks for the product of mutual life.
If you look at chapter 15, you will see it refers to the wheat harvest. I have no doubt the allusion is to the saints as the fruit of the death of Christ, and so if they are to be preserved in mutual relations they have to be kept fresh in the thought of the death of Christ; there is to be something to bring to their attention and to keep before them the constant efficacy of the death of Christ. Hence Samson finds, it says, a fresh or a new jawbone. We have got to understand that. It is a *fresh* one, not one dried up by the sun; death had just occurred, and he slays a thousand men with that. I have no doubt, dear brethren, that it refers to the Lord's supper as bringing before us week by week the love of Christ in freshness. There is no growing old in that. I often think of the freshness of divine love as illustrated in the emerald rainbow around the throne in @Revelation 4. There was a "rainbow round the throne like in appearance to an emerald". What did that rainbow represent? The covenant of God made thousands of years before. It had been seen in the clouds for thousands of years by men in every nation. One has seen a perfect rainbow from horizon to horizon, but who understood it? And now, as the throne is set up in heaven, and God is about to resume His relations with men on earth, there it is! He says, I have not forgotten my covenant. I remember my covenant; you forget it; I have not forgotten, for my love was in it. The kindness and love of God to men was in that bow,
{20}
and that kindness and love are as fresh in the heart of God now as they were then. And the rainbow is the colour of an emerald. Green is a symbol of freshness, so that the love of God is as fresh and as true as He resumed His direct relations with the creation, as it was when He made the covenant. There is no change. Nor is there any change in the love of Christ; it remains as fresh as it was when He laid down His life, when He had each of us in His mind individually and when He had us collectively in His heart as the assembly. His love is as fresh today as it was then. It is the love of Christ brought weekly, if not constantly, to our attention, that preserves us in these mutual relations, and in the freshness and vigour of them. So there is always a supply of honey. He comes and looks for it. "I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey".
The Lord's supper is, so to say, objective, and we need more than that, and hence we have what is subjective suggested in the well. Samson thirsted. He had slain a thousand men, but he says, "Now shall I die for thirst", and God clave the hollow rock which was in Lehi, and water came out of it. The well was therefore called En-hakkore, which means 'the caller's spring'. God answers the cry in the Spirit. You have the principle of calling or praying, and I would suggest for the young that perhaps one great cause of weakness, and unhappiness, and depression, is the want of constant prayer. We are enjoined to pray without ceasing. Think of an expression like that! Make everything a matter of prayer. If you do, the depression will disappear, and you will find that the Lord will come in for you; every detail of the path is known to Him. If He has numbered your hairs, has He not numbered your sorrows? He has, beloved brethren. He knows them. "The heart knoweth its own bitterness" (@Proverbs 14: 10), but He knows it better than the heart, and He knows how to
{21}
relieve us. Samson has the spring and is invigorated. Put 'the caller's spring' to the test; you will never find it to fail you. And so Solomon, in that remarkable prayer of his in which he mentions heaven and the house of God so often, says, "What prayer, what supplication soever be made by any man ... when they shall know every man his own plague, and his own grief ... then hear thou from the heavens, the settled place of thy dwelling", @2 Chronicles 6: 29, 30. God would answer, from His dwelling place, such a one who turned to him, and He does so now. I would especially urge upon young people to put what I am saying to the test. "For every one whosoever, who shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved", @Romans 10: 13. You will never find Him fail you. He answers by the Spirit, because it is the subjective side. Prayer and the Spirit go together. So Samson has the spring and he is invigorated.
After the Spirit is understood and prayer is understood as distinctive elements for maintaining the freshness of life in our souls, then we see how the purpose of God comes into view. Samson carried the doors of the gate of the city and the two posts with the bar to the top of a hill before Hebron. It is the power of Christ risen. We come into the light of the resurrection of Christ, the light of another world, for Hebron was built before the world, before Zoan in Egypt (see @Numbers 13: 22). It represents what was before the world, and the doors, bars, and gates of this world (the power of Satan really) are all carried up there. There is no power left against us now; Christ has led captivity captive; He has gone up into heaven and has opened up a new world to us, and Hebron stands for that. We are in the light of another world in the resurrection of Christ.
If there is defection, which there is, alas! there is one other word: "The hair of his head began to grow". As soon as you begin to discover the hair
{22}
growing you may be sure that restoration has set in. It is not now a question of conforming to the requirements of the brethren in terms. We do not need to press for right terms and doctrine; what we should be looking for is the growth of the hair. If your hair begins to grow, it cannot be contested; it marks the energy of life coming into view. How can hair grow without the energy of life? So it says Samson's hair began to grow. Dispensationally the hair of the church, so to speak, has begun to grow; life is being developed. And hence the end is near, for in that power all the world is coming down presently, even as in figure in Samson, when he bowed himself the house fell on all the people that were therein.
{23}
THE SERVICE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT TO THE ASSEMBLY
@Mark 14: 26; @Mark 13: 3, 4; @John 7: 53; @John 8: 1, 2
These scriptures, as you observe, speak of the mount of Olives, and I use them in this connection, wishing to show how the present privileges and intelligence and service of the people of God are dependent upon the Spirit as come down from heaven. The Holy Spirit is here as from heaven; He has come down from heaven, Christ being there as Man, and is here as a divine Person Himself, with the holy affections and feelings and sympathies that are proper to divine Persons. He is here thus, as the Lord says, as "another Comforter". He takes the place of Christ as amongst His people on earth, and, as sent down from the Father in answer to the mediatorial prayer of the Son. He is here to supply all that the assembly needs and to be her Guide and Companion to lead her to Christ *now*.
We are not translated by the Spirit. The Lord reserved that, as according to divine ways, for Himself. The Spirit's perfect service and mission are seen perhaps fully at the end of Scripture where we read "the Spirit and the bride say. Come", @Revelation 22: 17.
The Spirit has His own interest in the coming glory of Christ being placed in this world according to divine purpose and right, and so He says "Come!" to Jesus, and in unison with Him the bride says "Come!" It is the united expression of desire.
I want to show from these scriptures how we are brought into the present gain of the Spirit -- not exactly in the light I have spoken of, though intimately connected with it -- but as a direct link with heaven. In this gospel and in Matthew, after the
{24}
Lord introduced His supper to His disciples, it is said, "when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives". I apprehend as coming into the assembly, and as having part in that holy institution called the Lord's supper, we are in a position to enter on this living link with Him.
Matthew and Mark pre-eminently treat of what is dispensational. The church has her part in that, for it is said that on her has come the ends of the dispensations, that is, the ages: they all converge on the assembly. Every testimony of God from the outset was deposited in the assembly. I use the word 'deposited' as a scriptural word for we are enjoined to "keep ... the good deposit entrusted", @2 Timothy 1: 14. We are enjoined to hold in affection every divine thought, not to allow any to lapse; all are to be preserved by the saints, but this can only be by the Spirit, and by the Spirit as a link with heaven, for by virtue of this living permanent link with heaven the assembly is kept alive, vigorous, and fresh, a becoming vessel for the maintenance and expression of these wonderful thoughts. This expression is indicated in the candlestick which suggests the way in which she is to shine during the dark night of this world.
So there is this outlet for us in Matthew and Mark into that which is our own sphere. The assembly is left down here to have access into these things, and there is ability in her by the Spirit to enter heavenly regions.
What I am saying is, I hope, not theoretical in our minds, for it is practical, and a truth which if not rightly understood will leave us little better than Judaism, whereas we should be marked by what is heavenly. "Such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", @1 Corinthians 15: 48. It is to be noted that this does not refer to what we shall be, but what we are.
{25}
The Lord maintained that heavenly side, saying, "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man" (@John 3: 13) and also "We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen", @John 3: 11. The divine thought is correspondence with that, and that is possible by the Spirit as the living link with heaven. It says they sang an hymn; it does not say *He* sang it, but *they*. We never find the Lord praying with the disciples; He prayed in their hearing and sight, but always He is seen alone, whereas in this particular case He sings with them, and they go with Him to the mount of Olives.
Now in later days they would revert to this extraordinary experience. Need I suggest that they would think of the manner of His singing. Can anything be more interesting than enquiry as to His singing with them? And then came the movement outwards and upwards. This experience can be sustained only by the Spirit. It involves a link with heaven, and this can only be by the Spirit.
Many will know that this incident is only recorded in Matthew and Mark, and this is because in these two evangelists the previous dispensations are prominent and the assembly is linked up with them, but she has an outlet to her own domain by the Spirit, and in virtue of this outlet and her appropriation of it she takes on this character in the maintenance of it.
In chapter 13 we have another feature. The temple, the representative building of the accredited religion of the day stood out prominently as viewed from the mount of Olives, so that his disciples say, "See what stones and what buildings!" How many people of God today are held by imposing buildings, ceremonies, and titles held by those who serve there, and by the antiquity of it all. The Lord would show that what Olivet represents is the secret of deliverance. Even His disciples were awed by the grandeur
{26}
of the system, but it was nothing to trust in now; the Lord had said "Your house is left unto you desolate" (@Luke 13: 35) and here "not a stone shall be left upon a stone". This is a solemn word for every religionist today who relies on structures and system. "Not a stone shall be left" and this is said of that which God had owned. There is no idea in the New Testament of the sanctification of a material building; God is not in it, and deliverance for us lies in the recognition of what mount Olivet represents, the Spirit. The Holy Spirit says through Stephen as the system is about to be given up, "Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool", @Acts 7: 49. Think of the presumption of men who would build a house for God today. Does not God resent this? He does, and the systems are coming in for judgment.
The disciples ask Him privately; so we can see that we can obtain private information. News has become an article of commerce, but here is information beyond the range of man: it is not intended for the journalism of this world but for those who understand secrets.
Samson began with a riddle but disclosed it, and this led to his ruin. We understand secrets -- the ultimate destination of this world. How many have asked for private information? It is possible to obtain it for "the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him", @Psalm 25: 14. Think of Daniel who prayed towards Jerusalem; he had secret information. He was not merely curious, he loved his people and enquired of heaven, and heaven instructs him; he gets days and dates. Here was a man "greatly beloved", and how precious it is to turn to God as having this sense and as doing so in relation to His interest. The assembly is in the midst of the course of God's governmental dealings with this world, but we can know what is going to happen. Daniel, "greatly beloved", is instructed by the angel as to
{27}
the future of his people and then he is "to stand is his lot". It is most important that we ask for private information. They "asked him privately", and the Lord immediately answered.
We are in a most deceptive age; darkness is everywhere and hence it is most important to seek private access to the Lord and get information. It is not that everything has not been told, for the Revelation is an unveiling. In @Luke 2: 32 we have, in the Babe in Simeon's arms. One who was "a light for revelation of the gentiles", who were to be brought under God's eye by Christ for blessing, whereas the book of the Revelation is the unveiling of the European world and its outgoings, so that we may learn what is going to happen; the assembly has a place in it all.
It steadies the believer as, like Ezekiel, we see the frame of a city, the city of God. You see how important it is to be in a secret and this by the Spirit. You say 'we have it all in Revelation', but how many understand that book, which is designed to be for private information for the saints?
(@Revelation 1: 10 - 19 quoted).
You see that whilst it is all there it can only be understood by the Spirit. "I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day". And so, as in @Mark 14, they are led by the Lord to the mount of Olives, they are led into the link with heaven. We are, as it were, in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and hence our capacity for receiving private information. The truth is hidden there, but not to those who are "in the Spirit"; it is by the Spirit we understand all things. This steadies the soul and separates one from the course of this world and from its political atmosphere.
In John we have an example set for us as to ministry, and among other passages it shows us the Lord in isolation. This gospel particularly stresses the isolated positions in which He is seen in His ministry. "Every man went unto his own house.
{28}
Jesus went unto the mount of Olives". @John 7: 53 - 8: 1. This position of isolation stands out as one of the most prominent because it is set over against "every man". His position is different from that of every man. If we are to serve we must learn to be thus isolated. It is much easier to serve in a sympathetic atmosphere than in an unsympathetic. The Lord had to serve in an unsympathetic atmosphere, and though unfolding the greatest light, He was alone. This isolation is a test, but necessary if we are to be effective as servants for we must learn to be alone, and yet not alone, for He says "I am not alone", @John 8: 16. *He* went to the mount of Olives, the point nearest heaven. He did not retire there, nor was He withdrawn by just a stone's cast; everyone had gone home.
May I remark on the power of *our* homes, of the time, thought, and money expended on them. The more sumptuous, the more attractive to the flesh, the more likely they are to draw us away when we should be on the mount of Olives with Christ. Our homes may be a link with the world instead of with the mount of Olives, and thus our outlook will be to the world, and need we be surprised if our children go to where we look!
He spent the night on the mount of Olives and then early in the morning He came again into the temple and sat down and taught. The chapter which follows is one of the most wonderful in Scripture and all hangs on what we have here. How can we expect to come in to the people of God to teach and serve except as we frequent the mount of Olives?
Mere reading will never make teachers nor preachers. Those whom the Lord intended to make preachers He chose and took to the mountain so that they might be with Him, and if we are to be effective in ministry it will only be as we frequent the mount of Olives. "He sat down and taught them"; coming in in the early morning with all the thoughts of heaven
{29}
in His mind and heart He sat down and taught.
I commend this to all who would aspire to serve the saints, and ability to serve is available as we desire it. The service is as heaven imparts, and one serves as coming out of heaven.
In this passage we have the incident of the woman, and how in meeting her guilt and the religious men who accused her. He stooped down and wrote on the ground. The One who comes with thoughts of heaven in mind and heart is ready to stoop down. The first stooping forces out the accusers; they might have stayed, but they went out from the light. She did not go out and so He says, "Neither do I condemn thee".
He was not only the Teacher of what was in heaven, but this incident shows that He had stooped down in order to save the sinner, and so it follows the thought of the house, as to which He says, "If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed", @John 8: 36.
{30}
MAINTENANCE OF THE TESTIMONY LOCALLY
@Judges 1: 1 - 20
J.T. We see here the sovereign disposition of God in the selection of Judah and the brotherly spirit in Judah corresponding with that; then there is the exercise as to the need of springs of water, that is the Holy Spirit. I thought that under these heads we might get help as to how we move in a local way in the maintenance of the testimony of God.
Ques. Is this a little hint of God's thoughts coming out in the selection of Judah in the way of trial?
J.T. Yes, I think so. It says, "The children of Israel asked" (verse 1); this is a beautiful touch at the outset of Judges and brought out their dependence on God and thus made room for the sovereignty of God; and as room is made it came into evidence. They asked of Him; no one takes things on himself. The principle of government in the assembly is that room is made for the divine disposition and thus we have God's thoughts for His people. Then the spirit of the brother goes with that and the subjective need for the Spirit. The woman Achsah refers to the subjective need; no doubt this ought to be experienced, but it is ever present among the saints; however much light and ability we have in warfare, things cannot be kept going in freshness and vigour without the Spirit. Things here are all in Achsah's favour, a south land; there could be no more favourable position. It is wonderful the way in which we have all that God is, in our favour. He acted in the resurrection of Christ and the gift of the Spirit. Achsah represents a continual demand -- a sense of need of the Spirit so that there should be freshness.
{31}
Ques. Why did this take place after the death of Joshua?
J.T. It is as seen in the New Testament after the apostles were removed. Joshua represents the direct authority of the Lord, and as such an one is removed it remains for God to indicate His disposition. The question of divine disposition is not a matter of anyone coming forward. The Lord makes it evident that room is created for it. Hence the immediate answer, "Judah shall go up: behold I have delivered the land into his hand". So victory is already assured and makes room for the divine disposition.
Rem. This is seen centuries afterwards, right down to the birth of Christ. He was of the tribe of Judah; we see it in David, too. The Lord is far-seeing and acts in power.
J.T. I think, too, that there is a suggestion of the Lord's reserves, when, after the passing of Joshua, Judah comes in with reserves. We also see this suggested at the end of Judges. It does not say, 'Let no one go up': saints are not left like that, but, "Which of us shall go up?" It is helpful to see that Judah recognises the need of his brother: he "said to Simeon his brother". It is a most important thing in the ordering and maintenance of the testimony to make room for God and let Him decide. He has His own way; it is for those who have eyes to see it. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. The response on Simeon's part, seen in his readiness to go, shows the spirit of a brother.
Rem. That is the only way for true happiness.
J.T. If you see what the Lord is doing it gives a sense of peace and victory. God is not only disposing of things; He gives results, too. He says, "I have delivered the land into his hand". And then Judah said to Simeon his brother, "Come up with me into my lot, and let us fight against the Canaanites". In Judah we see a beautiful spirit; you link the brethren
{32}
in all you do to ensure unity and sympathy. He said to Simeon *his brother*, "Come up with me into my lot, and let us fight against the Canaanites, and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot". The two were typical; it brings out the brotherly feeling. Where brotherly feeling exists we have success, but in the other instances later in the chapter there is no success. In verse 1 we were noticing that the whole of the children of Israel raise the question, so that in any exercise no one is exempt; each has his own exercise. It was a national affair; that is, it affects everybody in the meeting.
Ques. Does it show any weakness on Israel's part in that they had not taken possession of the inheritance?
J.T. They had not cleared the land yet. Evidently they were slack. The early verses call attention to what God was doing. It is a question of what was there after the death of Joshua; there was such a situation there to make room for God to act. What the Spirit emphasises is the happy state after the death of Joshua to which the Lord is pleased to afford His help. This is a book of sorrowful declension. From the standpoint of the nation, the beginning was the brightest spot in the book. We see revivals here and there among individuals later.
Rem. We should exercise means whereby a good beginning may be made. If there is room for the Spirit this ensures we shall have a good ending as well.
J.T. The book of Joshua corresponds to Ephesians. Provision is made for the conflict at the end of Ephesians; it can only be undertaken in the power of the Spirit and only in that way can it be maintained. Hence much prominence is given to the Spirit in this book. The Lord gives the Spirit prominence in John's gospel in connection with His provision for the disciples for maintenance, in the Supper. John makes room for the Spirit so you get
{33}
enlargement. So here in Judges we get "springs of water" and in Deborah's song "the clouds dropped water" (@Judges 5: 4), and in chapter 7: 1 the Spirit is referred to in "the spring Harod" where Gideon marshalled his army. Then in verse 4 the men had to go down to the water and were tested by it. In chapter 15: 19, the place was called"En-hakkore, which is in Lehi" -- "the caller's spring"; so there was freshness. In the end of the book the result is seen in Phinehas with whom the covenant of life and peace was made; he is seen standing before the ark of God: that was the testimony secured.
Ques. What would the upper and lower springs suggest?
J.T. The upper spring suggests the truth of Ephesians and the lower one the truth of Romans; thus they cover the whole sphere of the Spirit's activity on earth. We have the upper first to get adjusted to the heavenly side by the Spirit, and then the lower springs come in and adjust us on earth; so we pay our debts by the Spirit; the whole field is covered by these. Othniel suggests spiritual energy to take up this land and Achsah shows how things are maintained. We are considering the anti-typical point of view. We may have light and energy but we must have the Spirit.
Rem. We are not maintained on ecclesiastical lines, but whatever is in the Spirit brings in victory. We need to encourage the desire for that maintenance in the Spirit.
J.T. The first part is to make room for the sovereign disposition of God. God has set certain gifts in the assembly. *He* does it. That is the one thing to make room for to begin with. There is no hope of the second without the first. Then there is the great desire for the activity of the Spirit in the form of a spring.
Ques. How can we apply that about Judah today?
{34}
J.T. There is some line that God has given you to do. You do not want to be independent about that. You see what Judah said to Simeon his brother. The dominating feature of christianity is that it is composed of brethren. When Saul was to be received into the assembly God prepared a brother to receive him; so Paul says, "All the brethren with me", @Galatians 1: 2. Be sure you have them *all*. You cannot overcome that. So always there is a present ministry. It is not merely that we have what was set up by the apostles, but that we have the direction and the power of the Spirit to maintain us in it. It says, "The children of Israel" not Judah. God says, Judah. So the saints collectively should ask God for direction. God comes in and makes room for us.
Ques. Would you say the husband here came under the influence of his wife?
J.T. Yes, this is one of the very few instances where the husband comes under the influence of his wife, and is helped by his wife. When she came to him, "she sprang down from the ass". It is divinely selected to point out what she aimed at. She, in the presence of her father and springing from the ass, shows spiritual, not natural, agility -- not agility in a natural way but spiritual agility.
Rem. Everyone in the meeting should be at the disposal of Jehovah.
Rem. If room is made for God, He can come in and then we keep it as He orders it. Everyone is desired; it is not left to a few.
J.T. Yes. Judah had no aspirations that are mentioned. He was content to be subject to the will of God. In his invitation to Simeon he recognised that Simeon had his lot although Judah had the lead. As we know Simeon's inheritance was inside Judah's; this was all the more testing for Judah.
Ques. What leads up to the desire?
{35}
J.T. The ministry of the book of Joshua was to bring about brotherly relations and these had continued beyond the influence of Joshua. God was pleased to raise up a leader and then tested them to see the effect. Wherever God is working, room is made for it. The work survives. We could not have a better land objectively than we have in christianity; it is the unfolding of the mind of God for us. Paul said, "I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God", @Acts 20: 27. But the land was not enough for Achsah; she knew what she had and did not undervalue it, so that in addition to the gospels we have the epistles. The prosperity that marked this led to making room for God. "Judah went up; and Jehovah delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand, and they smote them in Bezek, ten thousand men. And they found Adoni-Bezek in Bezek, and fought against him, and they smote the Canaanites and the Perizzites. And Adoni-Bezek fled, and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut off his thumbs and his great toes". Here we have a special case mentioned -- Adoni-Bezek. This is no ordinary man; but one the enemy is using. He reckoned himself as having done this very thing. The people of God have to make room for God. He acknowledges God's government. We see what they had to contend with, and the way they did it; he was brought down, his wings were clipped, and he acknowledged the righteous judgment of God. This is the great end of God, self-judgment. The principal thought is that it brings about relief to the saints, as he died after all. It records that Adoni-Bezek said, "Seventy kings, with their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gleaned under my table: as I have done, so God has requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem, and there he died". We may take him to represent some person bringing in sorrow among the saints, a man
{36}
the enemy is using, as it usually is a man of consequence and ability: otherwise he would not become so prominent. We see here how to deal with such a man, cut off his thumbs and great toes. This power of limitation can only be done by moral power in others. Moral power is the means by which we can limit hostile powers.
Ques. Is Adoni-Bezek an Anak? Is the enemy in the land different as seen in Judges from Joshua?
J.T. There is something in the man, as the sequence shows, whereby he acknowledges God's righteous judgment.
Ques. Is it a little on the same line as Nebuchadnezzar?
J.T. In Judges we find different men dealt with in different ways; these men in a time of weakness assert power, yet underneath there may be something of God. He said, God hath requited me; this acknowledgment of God is a moral victory. They had got a victory and the saints were at rest from the disturbing power. It is not as we say, have no more to do with them, but we have a great moral victory, which is a great thing. We have seen it in our own experience, times without number, when there have been interference and hindering of the work of God, that we have been limited through lack of moral power to bear upon them. It is a great moral victory brought out here. It is a great moral victory because they take him to Jerusalem where he dies entirely. The spiritual meaning is that it is the city of the great King. It is the place of God's purpose. Adoni-Bezek was already limited; now he disappears altogether. All that is in opposition goes, so he ceases to be an enemy. In the government of God this man actually dies. With us it is the flesh and all that is in opposition. It all corresponds with the sovereignty of God. We have respect of how God brings in recovery of one who might be an enemy.
{37}
Rem. We must consider the person but be unsparing in regard of the principle.
J.T. His thumbs were cut off -- the man was there but he was limited. We see another class in verse 10, out-and-out enemies, sons of the giants, prodigies of evil. These serve to develop evil against the truth. There are those for whom there is no mercy. There is the book called *Irrationalism of Infidelity*, written in reply to *Phases of Faith*. The author of the latter had been nominally a christian and Mr. Darby assumed he was a christian and that there was a work of God there. So his book in answer to it is on the line of saving anything there is to save in the author. If there is anything of God there you want that; it may be underneath a heap of filth, but you want it.
Ques. What is the difference between Joshua and Judges in regard of the leadership?
J.T. Judges is different from Joshua; the leader is gone now, so what you do is to make room for God; we must adapt ourselves to changed conditions. The setting of the book is peculiarly the setting of our own times. Judah included Caleb, Othniel and Kenaz. There were great spiritual elements bound up in Judah. God took account of the saints and made provision for these peculiar conditions. In John's gospel we see how drastic is the refusal of all workings of the flesh. The word is like a sieve, so small a sieve, it preserves each tiny grain of wheat, like Nicodemus, for instance; in @John 7 he was one of the council who were against the Lord. That chapter is one of incongruities. There was one cry lifted up in favour of Jesus, "Does our law judge a man before it have first heard from himself, and know what he does?" One tiny cry on behalf of Christ. It might only be an acknowledgment of God by some dignitary on earth, a king or ruler, so John preserves that little bit of God's work and in the end of John we get
{38}
Nicodemus bringing a hundred pounds weight of myrrh and aloes. So we must not be wholesale in the refusal of people. If there is something there of God we must respect it.
Ques. What does cutting off a man's toes and thumbs mean?
J.T. It refers to a man's initiative. You do not let such an one lead or walk.
Rem. In the case of Alexander the coppersmith no favour at all was shown.
Ques. Do we have any part in 'bringing to Jerusalem'?
J.T. It says, "*They* brought him to Jerusalem, and there he died". Brought to that place the flesh died. The brotherly spirit is there and the state at Jerusalem overwhelms fleshly aspirations and what man is naturally dies out. Moral power is the great thing to have and the only thing that stands. A man who has moral power cannot be gainsaid. You bring him to the city of the great King. Jerusalem viewed spiritually is a wonderful place. If we read the Psalms we get an idea of the wonderful place it was. Speaking of it in a spiritual way it is the assembly viewed as formed in sonship. In that atmosphere there is no sustenance for the flesh -- it dies.
The fighting against Jerusalem and taking it was an early act; the city was evidently rebuilt later before it was taken possession of by David. In verse 8 it was some past occurrence -- they had fought against it, and taken it, but even though rebuilt, the Jebusites still held it; but Judah is going to get it. Actually it was one of the cities assigned to Benjamin, but became merged into Judah who shows a good brotherly spirit.
Judah, while chosen of God, wants the brethren with him; that maintains the balance. In verse 17, Judah, in return, went with Simeon and slew the
{39}
Canaanites. We are using this scripture in its moral connection, not the historical one. Actually we know David takes the head of the giant before taking Jerusalem, the head speaking of the special power of Satan. That was dealt with later. So, following the thing out here, we see room is made for the Lord, and the power of the Spirit is the power for maintenance of the testimony.
After Jerusalem two other cities are named. Kirjath-Arba and Kirjath-sepher -- the city of Arba and the city of the book, speaking of the world of literature. The city of Arba is the city where big men shine; the idea of a giant is a man with a big name, with a title and written up in 'Who's Who'. In the city of the book, literature dominates through the intellect. Many young people are held by great heroes and others by books. Kirjath-sepher was a special exercise to Caleb. The great feature of the present time is books. In Caleb's family there was a desire for springs of water. The exercise to Caleb was how to overthrow things; this would be objectively by doctrine, and to maintain that by spiritual freshness we must feed the young from above.
These fathers in the Old Testament scriptures represented what God is. Parents represent what God is. Caleb was a wise father, he gave a south land and upper and lower springs. What Caleb found in his lot were three giants and it meant tremendous exercise; he sought the fellowship and spirit of his brethren to be with him in it. Offering Achsah his daughter to wife speaks of the assembly. Caleb the father holds out a reward to any who smite the city. Things are to be understood spiritually. Achsah's desire was for the Spirit.
Room is made for God in the early part of the book and there is a sphere into which the Spirit can come. Difficulties would be at an end with the exercise of the brotherly spirit. Carrying out things
{40}
apart from the brotherly spirit nearly lost a whole tribe, Benjamin, as shown at the end of the book. Caleb got what represents the mind of God. Hebron speaks of what was before the world in the divine thoughts; there were giants there but they were dislodged. "They gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expelled thence the three sons of Anak"; he was worthy of it. This was a beautiful reciprocal spirit. '*They* gave' corresponds with the primary thought of God, and His people are in accord with that here as those affected by it. In @Joshua 15 he claims it and Achsah comes in and claims the springs; here it is not claimed, they gave it. The right to the inheritance is not in question here, but the exercise is how to maintain it.
We see the working out of this in localities. It was ever the divine thought that the assembly is one whole, not in the metropolitan sense. Jerusalem above is the whole assembly; the divine thought is that it is to be worked out locally. It is a question of making room for the Spirit -- there is a constant demand for the Spirit of God and in making room for Him there is the maintenance of the testimony.
{41}
THE GLORY
@John 2: 11, 18 - 25; @John 3: 1, 2
I wish to speak about the glory. This gospel refers to it more perhaps than the others. And the explanation is that it presents the Person to us. The opening verses refer to the glory of the Lord. It says, "And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory ... )" (@John 1: 14), as if to call attention from the outset to the fact that as He became Man, the glory was there, and it was there to be contemplated. It is to the end that we might become contemplative of the glory of Christ that I felt encouraged to speak to you on this great subject. The Holy Spirit would lay it upon us by this gospel that we should become contemplative. And indeed it is to those that contemplate that things are shown. When Moses was behind the wilderness, it says that a bush burned, as if God would call his attention. We would scarcely credit at the outset how difficult it is that our spiritual attention should be arrested; we are extremely slow to respond to what is presented spiritually. So that our attention has to be arrested. As Moses saw the bush he said, "Let me now turn aside" (he was arrested) "and see this great sight, why the thorn-bush is not burnt", @Exodus 3: 3. It burned, but it was not being consumed. A contradiction of terms, as we may say, in physical things. Spiritual things are always contradictory of physical things. And then it says (verse 4), "And Jehovah saw that he turned aside to see, and God called to him out of the midst of the thorn-bush and said, Moses, Moses!" This would show the importance that heaven lays upon our attention to spiritual things. And then He says (verse 5), "Loose thy sandals from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest
{42}
is holy ground"; this would remind us that these things are to be taken in holily. As Peter says, "I stir up, in the way of putting you in remembrance, your pure mind", @2 Peter 3: 1. So Moses feet were to be unshod. For He says, "The place whereon thou standest is holy ground". And so it is, beloved, as we approach this wonderful presentation of Christ, of God Himself, it is holy ground.
And now John says, "And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated ... )". He was amongst those who took notice of what came spiritually within their range. They contemplated the glory of the Son of God. It was, so to say, stationary. And he goes on to say, "A glory as of an only-begotten *with* a father"; he was not speaking of His activity. But when we come to this chapter, it is activity. It is being manifested forth, as it says. And it is of that I want to speak at this time, because what is manifested forth is for testimony.
There is that which may be seen, but what is manifested forth is for testimony. And then I want to show that what is thus manifested forth is to be preserved. It was to be gathered up, so to speak, and preserved in the temple. It is not to be left as other things are left. Man discovers things, as they say, in the heavens and in the earth. Astronomers discover things, but there is no idea of enshrining them in a temple. They are written in books, but a book is not a temple. A book may be burned, but "the temple of God" never. The bush burned, but it was not consumed. All the holy thoughts of God were shining forth, and they were to be preserved. A book is a record, and one would make much of books. Matthew speaks about a book. The first word in his gospel is, "Book". It is the "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham". The Lord in coming into this world speaks about a book. He says, "Lo, I come (in the
{43}
roll of the book it is written of me)", @Hebrews 10: 7. Indeed, that is the first book, both historically and morally. The book that contains the wholehearted devotedness of the Lord Jesus to His God is surely the first book, both historically and morally. It is the foundation out of which every other book of any moral value must issue. All books that have not their roots in that book must disappear. They are of no moral value. It says "(in the roll of the book it is written of me) to do, O God, thy will". That was the book. And Matthew, as I said, begins with "Book"; but not the book of eternal thoughts, but a book of historical, but nevertheless spiritual, thoughts.
His generation begins with Abraham. The spiritual line is recorded in that book. "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham". A most important book. A book which introduces the King to us. I have been impressed lately with the qualifications of a king. Balaam speaks about a shout of a king being amongst the people of God. There is power. A king is not simply one who rules. He does rule; but he is one who is great personally, who is royal. And Matthew brings Him thus before us. "The king", he says. It is the royal line. Matthew is a book of the generation of the King, so that we might have Him thus before us. He is the Root and Offspring of David. A paradoxical statement, indeed, for the human mind, but perfectly intelligible to the spiritual mind, and perfectly intelligible to the assembly. Indeed it is to the assembly that the Lord speaks when He says, "*I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star", @Revelation 22: 16. So that He is the Root of David and the Offspring of David. Only a spiritual mind can take this in. The Lord in dealing with His adversaries puts that question to them. "If therefore David call him Lord, how is he his son?" @Matthew 22: 45. It was
{44}
beyond them. But it is not beyond the assembly. And hence, as I said, the importance of books. Then again John, in this very gospel, speaks about a book. A book is a complete thing. Luke speaks about a treatise, but John speaks about a book, and Matthew speaks about a book. John says virtually, 'This is complete spiritually. There are many other things Jesus did. But this is complete spiritually. It is a book'. But he had such a sense of the divine Person before him, that he says, "And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they were written one by one, I suppose that not even the world itself would contain the books written", @John 21: 25. There should be so many of them. He was so impressed with the greatness of the Person he was presenting. But nevertheless he holds to the importance of his own book. It was a complete thing, as was the gospel of Matthew, and so also the book of the Revelation.
But as I said, a book is not a temple. And so as the Lord begins here, as He manifests forth His glory, we have the temple brought in, because the things that are manifested are not simply to be written down, they are to be held in the temple. It is true that the book of the law was in the temple, but it was in the ark. And the ark of the covenant was said to be the glory. That was Christ as cherishing in His heart every divine thought. So that the glory was in the temple, when the ark was placed there.
Well, now I wanted to show how this works out. We have in this chapter a remarkable set of circumstances. It is a marriage. This chapter is one of the most familiar in the Bible. The set of circumstances which it affords does not in any way correspond with the temple. It does not involve the temple. But nevertheless it was a sphere in which Jesus was highly regarded. He was invited to the marriage. He was not invited by way of patronage, as when Simon the
{45}
Pharisee invited Him. Here He was held in respect. And not only was He invited, but also His disciples. If I invited you and all your children, it is not by way of patronage; but I show that I am interested in you. I show a certain care. Simon did not invite the disciples. Moreover, Jesus mother was there. Now it does not say she was invited. But she was there. And she was not a mere guest; she seemed to be of some importance, she had something to say in the course of events. She was interested. So that there seems to have been a sphere at Cana in which the Lord and His relatives and disciples were all free. And it is to be regarded of no mean importance that there was such a sphere, for generally He had to deal with what was contrary to Him. According to John we find that there was very little that was congenial to Him, but there was this sphere at Cana. And at the present time, too, there is found a sphere congenial to Him. Generally He is not at all respected, even by those who nominally believe on Him. But there are spheres where He is respected. The bridegroom and the bride were, of course, of more importance, but nevertheless He was there. And so the chapter is a sort of description of what we may find at the present time. But God is greatly interested in spheres where His beloved Son is to some extent, at least, respected. Even if only an individual has respect for Him, for the Scriptures, for His people, He takes account of that. And so I often feel with young people that this has to be taken account of. If you are not opposed, that is so much to the good. And some day He manifests His glory to you. Parents know how the Lord comes in here. Their children are not opposed, there is respect shown, and some day the Lord will manifest His glory and you will believe on Him.
Well, now you see what happened here, the Lord would acknowledge this position. True enough His attention was called to the deficiency in the supply of
{46}
wine by His mother. But she was not just right. A situation like this does not ensure spiritual individuals. Nevertheless there is a respect for Christ, and that is an immense thing. His mother says, "They have no wine". As much as to say, 'You are my son. It is my prerogative to turn to you. And as my son, you should help'. But that will not do. If we are to get anything from Christ, we must leave what is natural in abeyance. Natural things have their place, but they must not intrude here. And so the Lord says, "Woman", not 'mother'. "What have I to do with thee, woman? mine hour has not yet come". You see she is reprehensible, and so it is wherever the natural is introduced to obtain from Christ. The natural is to be laid aside. But nevertheless she was truly a child of God. When Jesus was born, she presented her tribute. It says of her, "And Mary said, My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour", @Luke 1: 47. But she has dropped a bit; thirty years have elapsed since then, and that makes a great difference. In thirty years you have either advanced or declined. And now after thirty years, she is not spiritually what she had been. But nevertheless she was a true believer. And so she says to the servants, "Whatever he may say to you, do". If we are to come in for the manifestation of His glory, the first great thing is subjection. You cannot assert your own will. She might have turned away and sulked or complained that He was ungrateful; but, no! You see she was a true believer. And a true believer always responds to a divine rebuke. "Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are profuse", @Proverbs 27: 6. And again, "Open rebuke is better than hidden love", @Proverbs 27: 5. This was open rebuke. The Lord loved her, but He rebuked her, even though she was His mother. Then He said, "Fill the water-vessels with water". There were six
{47}
water-pots. That is necessary, if there is to be manifestation. Then too, they were water-pots of stone. Mary, His mother, is an example of such. She was capable of containing water of purification. And she needed it. When you are out of communion, or where decline has taken place, water of purification is necessary. It is exceedingly important. The Lord came by water and by blood. He came with the means of cleansing. "Jesus says to them, Fill the water-vessels with water. And they filled them up to the brim". For it is full vessels from which the glory shines. They were to be filled with water of purification. And then He says, "Draw out now". Everything is to be at His direction. It is an immense thought. "Whatever he may say to you, do". They draw out and bring to the feast-master. He says, "Every man sets on first the good wine, and when men have well drunk, then the inferior; thou hast kept the good wine till now". It was the very best wine. It was the good wine. And it says, "This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested his glory; and his disciples believed on Him".
Now you see we have the glory. It is a great thing to see the glory shine. What are we going to do without it? The next thing is that He went down to Capernaum, which, I have no doubt, would have a dispensational reference. Then He is found at Jerusalem, and there there is hostility; what He finds in the temple of God is men selling merchandise and changing money. How incongruous! Can He bring the glory into that? Is there a home for the glory there? I look abroad today and see the religious system and buildings. Can I put any manifestation of the glory of Christ that I have by the Spirit into any of these buildings? Is there a home for it in them? No! I speak thus, beloved, that you may understand what I have in mind. The temple at
{48}
Jerusalem afforded no home for His glory. But He manifested it forth. It was not simply accidental or casual. He manifested it forth. That was the point -- He caused it to shine, but who was to house it? Well, the temple at Jerusalem was not suitable. He made a scourge of small cords and drove them all out. And He says, "Make not my Father's house a house of merchandise". How indignant He was! How indignant He is at the present time as He looks at christendom. He comes into the midst. He walks in the midst of the seven golden lamps. "These things says the Son of God, he that has his eyes as a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brass", @Revelation 2: 18. And yet in the midst of all these things there is the manifesting forth of the glory of the Lord. "And his disciples remembered that it is written, The zeal of thy house devours me". But the Jews answered Him, "What sign shewest thou to us, that thou doest these things?" Think of the hardness of their hearts! He had shown them a sign. It says, "This beginning of signs did Jesus". But He did not call their attention to that. But He says, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up". Was He merely answering their question? No, beloved! He was speaking truth. He was announcing there was a temple. The word is changed. It is a different word from that used where they speak of the temple. It referred to the inner thing, the shrine. He was about to die. In resurrection every divine thought was to be taken up and secured. Every ray of the glory manifested was to be gathered up and preserved. But what He said did not convey that to them because they were incapable of receiving such a thought as that. He says, as it were, 'It is *this* temple, not *that* temple'. For that temple was a material temple, but this temple was His precious body. They did not catch His thought. There is not the ability in man to comprehend the divine thoughts.
{49}
The Lord was not speaking merely for the Jews. He was speaking for us. And so the Holy Spirit immediately says, "But *he* spoke of the temple of his body". The Lord does not say that Himself. It is the Holy Spirit who says it to us; He wants us to understand that the Lord is speaking about a temple that would be in resurrection which would contain and secure every divine thought. Nothing would be lost. All would be gathered up and preserved in Him, as indeed the latter chapters of this gospel prove. As after His resurrection He was amongst the disciples, every thought came out. So this chapter goes on to say, "When therefore he was raised from among the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and believed the scripture and the word which Jesus had spoken". Now you see the great result, dear brethren, the importance of attending to what is written. The Holy Spirit says it was the temple of His body. "But *he* spoke of the temple of his body". Why did they not believe before His resurrection, why did they not believe then? The answer is, beloved, that they were not capable of it. It is only by the Spirit that we take in divine things. Not even the disciples could take in the bearing of the Lord Jesus ministry before they got the Spirit. Everything is secured for us in Christ risen. "When therefore he was raised from among the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and believed the scripture and the word which Jesus had spoken". Hence the importance of resurrection. Did they not believe the Scriptures before? I do not suppose that any of the Lord's disciples would have denied the inspiration of the scripture. But that is not believing the Scriptures. Believing the Scriptures means to see that it all refers to Christ. You read it and see Christ and believe it. They believed all He said. You believe all that Jesus said, if you understand that He is risen from the dead.
{50}
I just close with a word about 'man'. Immediately after the matter of the temple and believing in Jesus and in the Scriptures, you have brought to your attention that Jesus did not trust man, even though they believed. You cannot trust man simply because they assent or profess to believe on Jesus. And so it says, "But Jesus himself did not trust himself to them, because he knew all men, and that he had not need that any should testify of man, for himself knew what was in man". There is a remarkable scripture in Ecclesiastes. It says, "What man is, is known", @Ecclesiastes 6: 10. This sheds light on conditions at the present time, because there is so much inquiry into the origin of man. Solomon said, "What man is, is known". Modern scientific men say, 'No, we are investigating'. And that means that they do not know. They do not know, and they are only throwing up clouds of dust. How can they know? They shall never know! John would manifest what is known. "We speak that which we know"; that is what you want, what is known. The Lord knew what was in man. He amplifies what Solomon says, "What man is, is known". John says, as it were, 'Jesus is the One who knows, and He did not trust man'. They are not to be trusted, not even my own heart, naturally. "What man is, is known". But then it immediately goes on to say here, "But there was a man". He is a remarkable type of man. "He came to him by night, and said to him, Rabbi, we know that thou art come a teacher from God". That is the thing. These notorieties talk about man's development, but they do not profess to come from God. "Thou art come a teacher from God"; this was said by a man on the way to the temple. I mention this so that you may understand that the temple is now composed of men who recognise that Jesus is come from God, a teacher. The Lord says, "It is needful that *ye* should be born anew". There was to
{51}
be an entirely new start. He spoke of the temple in which everything says, "Glory". Who is to have part in the temple of God? Men who are born again, only such. The Lord outlined to Nicodemus the truth by which we have men who can be trusted. You cannot have the temple unless you have trustworthy men. The truth contained in the second chapter is Christ risen, and the saints are to correspond with Christ risen. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God ... ?" (@1 Corinthians 3: 16), and again, "All the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord". So that every divine thought is cherished. The assembly comes down from God out of heaven, having the glory of God. Her shining is like a most precious stone; the manifestation of the glory of Christ will shine there.
Well, beloved, that was all I had to say. I hope you will be able to follow so as to get an idea of the temple and that the glory is in it. It is enshrined and preserved there. In due time it will shine forth and that blessed world shall be lighted up with it. "When the Christ is manifested who is our life, then shall *ye* also be manifested with him in glory", @Colossians 3: 4. Wonderful contemplation, and wonderful hope and expectation! "We boast in hope of the glory of God", @Romans 5: 2.
{52}
THE AUTHORITY AND INFLUENCE OF CHRIST
@Song of Songs 8: 5; @2 Corinthians 3: 1 - 18
J.T. It is evident in the Canticles that the apple tree alludes to the Lord, and that the feminine speaker had been awakened, or raised up, under Him; and I thought that that idea would have a connection with the epistles to the Corinthians in that the aim of the apostle in writing to them was to awaken them under the authority and influence of Christ, so that they should be formed, as it were, and brought forth. There is much that answers to the idea of mother in the religious organisations around, but wherever the assembly is recognised, wherever believers walk in the light of it, the aim should be that those coming in should be nurtured under the authority and influence of Christ. It is only thus that there can be right formation, that there can be children according to God. The bride earlier had said when she found the Lord, having sought Him that she brought Him to her mother's house; that is, as finding the Lord she would connect Him with the assembly, so to speak.
Ques. Is the assembly the mother?
J.T. Well, it is Jerusalem above that is said to be our mother, or the mother of us all. The Corinthians were disregarding the authority of the Lord and were making much of one another as men, so that the apostle had to say that they were ignoring the dignity of the Lord; so the idea of the apple tree, I think, enters into these epistles. It is seen in the first epistle in the way in which the apostle asserts the authority of the Lord throughout. In introducing the Lord's supper he brings in that by which the Lord intends to influence us, so that we have His authority and influence over us, built up on what He is personally,
{53}
for we are called into the fellowship of God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Ques. Do you mean by the thought of the Supper that we are brought into the gain of the mother?
J.T. Yes. That is the means, I think, by which the Lord maintains His influence over us. It belongs to those who have come to recognise what He is "as the apple-tree among the trees of the wood"; such would say, "So is my beloved among the sons".
Ques. What are the things you refer to in saying there is much in the systems around that answers to the idea of mother?
J.T. Well, take any of them, particularly Rome. It is formally alluded to as a mother: "Her children will I kill with death", we read; and so all the others in a lesser degree, of course, but nevertheless truly so. The thought of 'mother' corresponds with the idea of a system that gives character to those who come under its influence. Each system has its organisation and its peculiarity; it may be some distinctive doctrine that is laid hold of, but those coming under the nurture of the particular system take out of it its character and in every case its bondage. It answers to what is said in Galatians. Hagar "answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children". Every earthly organisation is in bondage with her children, but we, brethren, the apostle says, "are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free", so that we come under another system, a heavenly system and hence take on its liberty. The Corinthians were fast drifting back into that which was in bondage, but they were corrected in this way that the apostle asserted the authority of the Lord over them and brought them back under His influence. In doing that, by bringing in the Lord's supper, he brought in the reminder that Christ and the assembly are inseparable. "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?",
{54}
but then it is also a symbol of the unity of the saints so that they are inseparable.
Rem. So that the one loaf in that way would speak of the unity of the saints.
J.T. It would; it speaks to us of Christ and at the same time of the saints, and in holding these two thoughts we are brought up under right principles and right influences so that we are not bondwoman's children. There is much therefore made of the mothers in Canticles and this is so, too, in the New Testament and that both in a bad sense and in a good sense. We have to be on our guard against the bad feature of it. We cannot correspond with the divine idea of children unless we are brought up under the right mother. To make it simple, a right mother is one who is truly in fellowship.
Rem. Everything hangs on the apple-tree as Christ personally.
J.T. Yes. In chapter 2: 3 she makes the comparison "as the apple-tree among the trees of the wood", but then that would be the result, I think, of what is stated in chapter 8, verse 5, which had already taken place -- that is, she had been brought up or raised up under Him.
Rem. I suppose the weakest meeting that ever was on earth is greater to heaven than the whole Roman system.
J.T. I am sure that is true, and very forceful, too. It shows how much moral value there is to be attached to a few who are governed by the light of the assembly. There you have the divine ideal, the paternal and the maternal combined. I think the apple-tree would correspond with the paternal side. Take the gospels, for instance, and see how believers were drawn to the Lord and gradually came to acquire a knowledge of Him, and as they did so He dominated them -- they came under His influence and rule; and in gaining
{55}
His place thus He brought in the love of God. It is in apprehending His dignity -- His greatness, that you can see how He could bring in the love of God.
Ques. Does that give an indication of "the glory that excelleth" in @2 Corinthians 3?
J.T. Just so, for Moses could not have brought in the love of God. It is true indeed that Israel came up out of the wilderness leaning on her beloved, and that there is an allusion to that in this verse. She came up out of the wilderness, as in the kingdom, supported, as it were, by Moses, but he was but a type of the Lord. She came up as having been under the apple-tree, because as having come out of Egypt she gradually acquired a knowledge of Christ typically. There were three things combined: first there was the ark, then there was Moses, and then there was Aaron; each presented to Israel some feature of Christ. But Moses rose in their estimation; God caused him to acquire a place from the period of the golden calf when the tables of the covenant were broken. He was bringing in a testimony to God into the camp but the golden calf was there. He broke the tables and then he says to the Lord, "Blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book", @Exodus 32: 32. The Lord had said, I am going to destroy them and I will make of thee a great nation -- a wonderful opportunity for man after the flesh -- he would grasp at it, but Moses refused that. He says, 'No, I have to think of Thee, what will the world say about Thee'. Then too he thought about the people and he knew God loved the people and therefore he does not say 'blot them out', but 'blot me out'. *There* was the apple-tree in the spirit of it. Moses was qualifying there. He was showing the Spirit of Christ in self-sacrifice, and from that point onwards Moses rises and rises until God comes down to the door of the tabernacle that he has spread and talked to him, speaking to him as a man speaks to his friend, face
{56}
to face. God honoured him and then He told him to come up again with two tables of stone, but he was to make an ark this time -- "make thee an ark of wood", @Deuteronomy 10: 1. That meant that Christ would become man, it would be a question of Christ in manhood. And I will give you the law again, I will write on the tables and you will put them into the ark. They will never need to be broken again. It is a figure of Christ come in. He will have the law within His heart and will maintain it. He will bear the curse Himself of the broken law, and in doing that He will bring out not only His own love for the people but the love of God. Well, there is no one in the whole universe who could do that but Himself, and so He thus acquires a place in the soul of the believer as distinguished above all others. "As the apple-tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons". You know Him thus. He has come up into your soul in that way.
And then Moses comes down from the mount. He comes down with this new law. It is in principle the new covenant and so his face shone. Thus Israel was brought up, raised up, under him. She was reinstated, you might say, under Moses but Moses with his face shining. Of course it was not a perfect state of things -- "not as Moses", we read, but here you have the perfect. The book of Deuteronomy, I think, unfolds to us what Moses was. The children of Israel were brought up under him. In reading Deuteronomy you will see what a place they had in his heart.
Ques. Do you think that Paul in a way would answer in character to Moses when he speaks of himself here as competent as a minister of the new covenant?
J.T. I think that is it. "Has also made us competent, as ministers of the new covenant" as Moses was, in as far as he could be. It is a remarkable
{57}
thing that these covenants are so much worked out in connection with Paul's ministry.
Rem. Moses had desired to see the glory of God, but they had gazed on the glory of the Lord.
J.T. The enemy was attacking the Lord through men in Corinth. They were attacking Paul, and Paul in the first and second letters labours much to establish what his ministry was.
Ques. The ministry would beget confidence in God. Is that thought suggested in leaning upon the arm of her beloved?
J.T. Yes, that is so. In reading Deuteronomy you see what an influence Israel had been under all these forty years when God nourished them in the desert, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. He nursed them through that instrumentality -- by the hand of Moses and Aaron, for God ever acts mediately through others -- through Christ and through servants. Hence the apostle and those who laboured with him were competent as ministers of the new covenant. The minister would get competence from God. You get the competency leaning on the arm of the beloved.
Ques. Do you mean that it is as being with God we can be for God?
J.T. Well, I think that is how it stands. Moses was with God and as he came down from God his face shone. In the ministry expressed in these epistles we have the effort to awake the saints under the apple-tree -- he raises them up under Christ.
Ques. You were speaking of finding the Lord. Is that the idea of our finding the Lord?
J.T. Yes, we do not want to see any other. All true ministry is to awaken people under the apple-tree. I think that is what is going on at the present time. All ministry of the Spirit has in view to create exercise and awaken people in regard of God. But it is under the apple-tree. You are not to move away from that. The Canticles show, I think, how the
{58}
heart becomes attached to Christ so that you do not move away from the Lord. If you have tasted that the Lord is gracious, that is the result of ministry. It leads you into relationship with Christ, and you want to remain there. If you are brought into touch with the Lord you soon want to stay with Him. The bride was awakened under the apple-tree. Her mother brought her forth there. We do not want to bring young people under any other influence, or to have any other influence brought to bear upon them. She was brought forth there. "There thy mother brought thee forth". So that in chapter 2 she says, "As the apple-tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons". She is now comparing -- she has found out some of His worth.
Ques. Is it the spirit of things that would awaken us rather than the letter?
J.T. That is so.
Rem. So the apostle says he had espoused her to one husband that he might present her as a chaste virgin to Christ.
J.T. Paul says "we do not preach ourselves, but Christ Jesus Lord, and ourselves your bondmen for Jesus sake". That is the ministry that tells. Young people awakened under that want to stay there.
Ques. Would grace in contrast to law be part of the spirit of it?
J.T. Quite; not according to the letter but the spirit -- not the able presentation of things but the spirit in which they are presented. That was what marked the apostle. He tells us in the first epistle that he is not speaking according to human wisdom. He wanted to bring in Christ; "I did not judge it well", he says, "to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified". He knew that Man and if you want to *introduce* anyone you must *know* him. He does not say exactly I knew no one but Jesus Christ, but "I did not judge it well to know
{59}
anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified", and I think that was how the apple-tree was set up, it was brought in there. They awoke under it and the second letter is to bring them forth under it.
Rem. So he would espouse them to one man as a chaste virgin to Christ.
J.T. Hence the chapter opens with the query whether he needed a letter of commendation to them. They were his letter written in his heart, known and read of all men. They were to know that whatever they thought about Paul he loved them and that is really a reflection of Christ. Whatever you think about the Lord He loves you and all ministry is to bring you to know that. An able minister refers to an able minister of the new covenant -- one who can bring it in in the spirit of it. You will observe here that it is not that Christ is the spirit of the new covenant but the Lord is that Spirit; it is a question of His authority, but His authority used to bring into your heart the best thing in the whole universe. When you see that that is what He is to do, you readily submit to His authority. He wants to bring in the love of God. The more authority He has the better, as it would become effective.
Rem. So that coming under this authority brings liberty.
J.T. Yes; I think the more the Israelites knew Moses the more they recognised his authority. They saw it was in their favour, it says, "he was king in Jeshurun", @Deuteronomy 33: 5. When they saw how good a man he was, how helpful he was, too, they acknowledged his authority.
Ques. In our case would that be to open our eyes to the glory of that Person?
J.T. Yes; and we come to see that the glory that excelleth is the bringing in of the love of God. He is making that effective and that is what Paul was doing as a new covenant minister. The first letter is
{60}
really a letter of the minister of the covenant as much as the second, only Paul acted wisely in the first letter because he had to use severe language; he had to deal with things contrary to God there. But in both letters he is aiming at establishing the Lord as the apple-tree so that they should be awakened under Him, as He says to the Colossians, "As therefore ye have received the Christ, Jesus the Lord, walk in him".
Ques. Would that verse in @Colossians 2: 6 refer to those brought up under the apple-tree?
J.T. I think so. I think the Colossians were taken account of as wakened up under Him. They had received Him. The subject of ministry is perhaps very little understood by the people of God. As I was saying, the apostle interweaves it in these two letters to the Corinthians.
Ques. Have we the thought of the maternal in the new covenant, that is, the thought of nurture?
J.T. Well, I think it works out in the way in which the love that the new covenant expresses is seen in the saints collectively. For instance, "confirm your love toward him" is a maternal thought. The apostle had dealt with the man with authority; "When ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one". But now they had to restore that one and he had come under the influence of the 'mother' in the reclamation; and so when the love of God is in the hearts of the brethren and active, young people and young believers around who are needing help come under the influence of the mother, the new covenant.
Ques. Would the thought of the mother be in the woman of worth (@Proverbs 31) who looked well to the ways of her household, and whose children were all clothed and cared for?
J.T. Yes, just so.
{61}
Ques. Would you say that is the power to expel what is evil?
J.T. Quite; so that her children arise and call her blessed, and her husband praiseth her.
Ques. Would you say the spirit of the mother is expressed in Paul in Thessalonians -- "as a nurse would cherish her own children", @1 Thessalonians 2: 7?
J.T. Well, I think you see in Sarah more the divine thought of the mother, because Abraham is enjoined to hearken to her voice on that point. It was she who said, "Cast out the bondwoman and her son", for the son of the bondwoman was not to inherit with *her* son -- with Isaac; that is to say, the saints as possessing the love of God in their hearts will not admit of a legal thing. I believe all the systems around are more or less formed by legality, the human element expressed in that way. Now love refuses that. It takes away our liberty. We want to be free children. We are indeed as Isaac was -- children of promise, children of the free woman -- and we want to retain our liberty, so we refuse Ishmael; cast him out, as Sarah said.
Rem. "So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us", @1 Thessalonians 2: 8.
J.T. That is an excellent example of it, I think.
Rem. So souls *grow* into liberty, they do not reach it on the principle of fighting, but by growth.
J.T. The mother should see to that -- that is, each local company should see to it that the natural, that is the legal element, is not admitted.
Rem. We need to take account of how the mother bears us under the apple-tree.
J.T. Yes, those who are brought up under the influence of the light of the assembly are free. It is evident there is something about them that is different. In the christians around there is something
{62}
wanting. They are christians like others, but nevertheless there is something lacking. Paul, as a competent minister of the new covenant, expressed the spirit of Christ. The Lord is that Spirit. It was the Spirit of the Lord, only in the way of authority, and that is the paternal side, I think, but then *they* were to act. I have no doubt that the mother element was brought in in chapter 5 in dealing with the offending one. That is housekeeping according to God. We cannot keep house without dealing with evil. Housekeeping according to God means cleanliness, the expulsion of what is evil.
Ques. Can we be active with regard to what is maternal without the paternal side? Does the paternal come before the maternal?
J.T. Well, I think Paul's attitude all through is the paternal side, the authority of God in Christ. He was insisting on the evil being put out, but then *they* were to do it -- that is how the mother was brought in. The assembly at Corinth had failed. It could not be said of her that "The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her". The apostle in his first epistle was therefore asserting the rights of the Lord without coming himself -- he was asserting the rights of the absent husband. What is to be done is done by him paternally, but his concern was that *they* might do the thing, the virtuous woman in the absence of her husband, and that is what he wrote his letter for.
Ques. Does the mother teach us how to do the things in a right way?
J.T. Well, these letters to the Corinthians are to teach the mother how to do things first and then young believers coming in would be received rightly. We want to do things as the Lord would do them, as he says, "Receive ye one another, according as the Christ also has received you", @Romans 15: 7. Now the Corinthians had not given evidence that the heart
{63}
of her Husband could safely trust in her; and so His absence tests us. The first letter is to get them to do the thing. He tells them what to do but *they* had to do it. The principle of the assembly is the mother acting in the absence of the Lord -- acting as He would act -- carrying out His mind. The first letter asserts His authority and then brings in the Lord's supper by which His influence might be brought to bear upon them. The two letters show their love to the offending one, first in carrying the thing out, and then acting like God, confirming their love to him when he is restored. The wife acts like the husband and knows his mind. Another thing that comes out in the first letter is wisdom, indeed that is interwoven in both the letters. We get an illustration of the effect of wisdom in @2 Samuel 20: 22, the wise woman of Abel who went to the people of the city in her wisdom and got *them* to do the thing. They cut off the head of Sheba and cast it to Joab. And that is what came to pass in Corinth. They did the thing -- had to do the thing, for they were responsible to answer to the assembly universally in keeping the Lord's commandment.
Rem. The first letter to the Corinthians opens the way for love.
J.T. It does; so that a man restored ever afterwards would say, 'Well, I was brought back under the influence of the Lord, the brethren showed great kindness to me. They had compassion and consideration for me'; that is the mother element active toward him.
Ques. Would that be one of the ways in which we can gaze on the glory of the Lord -- seeing a reflection of what is in heaven?
J.T. Well, there is certainly truth in it anyway. The assembly should be Christ's glory and I suppose that would convey the thought. If you are taking up a brother who has sinned, but who has judged his
{64}
course, and restoring him you are really reflecting Christ. That is on the mother's side. I believe all the epistles and the gospels are to bring out this feature in the saints -- a feminine reflection of Christ. So that every one that comes in comes in under the mother. The mother brings them up in the admonition of the Lord. *She* does it, "There thy mother brought thee forth".
Ques. Would that have a transforming effect?
J.T. Quite.
Rem. That is to say you have to be under the influence of Christ yourself before you can help another.
J.T. Quite so, and young believers ought to be able to testify to the effect of Christ in the brethren and to learn more in that way. Presently, as knowing Him, they come directly into touch with Himself. Paul says they became followers of us and of the Lord. As they saw Paul they saw Christ in Paul.
Rem. The power of this livingly in our souls would give the cup a different significance.
J.T. Quite. I think that as we come under the influence of the love of God and the love of Christ, which the cup would denote, the next thing is to 'bring forth'. "There thy mother brought thee forth". You bring in something for God. It is the idea of helping in the divine way, going on constantly bringing in something for God. This is brought about as we enter into the two things in the cup -- the love of God and the love of Christ; it is "the new covenant in my blood".
Ques. Is His blood connected with the second giving of the law which we were referring to?
J.T. Yes. There it is the blood of the covenant -- the new testament in His blood; that is to say. He died to make the love of God effective. The Lord is that Spirit and where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty. We are changed from glory to glory by
{65}
the Lord the Spirit. There you have the same image -- you have the image of Christ, but it affects every one of us and thus we are qualified to reproduce. In helping souls we are bringing forth. There is a multiplying process constantly going on. In @Acts 2 you have the idea of addition, in chapter 9 that of multiplication, addition by God and multiplication by ourselves. When it is a question of adding it is God doing it, but where the saints are edified they are multiplied. If the cup is rightly taken in, it would set every believer under the influence of the love of God and thus qualify them to bring forth -- getting something for God. God does everything really, but nevertheless there is this side of the mother care working out under the influence of the love of God in us. "There thy mother brought thee forth" -- there under the apple tree -- under Christ as Lord making known the love of God to us.
Ques. Would you receive strength to conceive seed?
J.T. I think perhaps many of us have overlooked that the seed of the kingdom -- the good seed sown by the Son of man in @Matthew 13 in the second parable -- is *persons* and not the word of God as in the first parable. Look at that chapter, see verse 24, "Another parable set he before them ... The kingdom of the heavens has become like a man sowing good seed in his field". In the explanation the Lord says, "He that sows the good seed is the Son of man ... and the good seed, these are the *sons* of the kingdom". What do you say about that?
Rem. That would be in keeping, I suppose, with chapter 1 -- the generation of Jesus Christ.
J.T. It is very important to take account of the difference between the interpretation of the seed in the first parable of chapter 13 as given by the Lord. It is perfectly right that the seed is the word of God primarily, that is to say, the Lord in sowing sows
{66}
the word in the gospel but then after that you have *persons* sown.
Rem. So the state is there in a living person.
J.T. Well, quite. In @Genesis 1 in the fruit trees whose seed is in themselves -- "the seed of which is in them" -- there is the power of continuation or increase. There is to be no intermixing -- "producing seed after its kind". Satan too sows persons -- the tares are children of the wicked one. They are all around us spreading abroad evil doctrine, and leaven. What are *we* doing? God has said we should bear fruit. Fruit is what I *am* -- what each believer is as a son of the kingdom. It is not only the light now but the thing itself. The divine thought itself is expressed in a concrete way in a man or a woman -- a believer.
Rem. The enemy sowing and the results of it ought to exercise us.
J.T. The question is. Are we sons of the kingdom in character? In Hosea the word "Jizreel" means 'God will sow' and so Jehovah says, speaking of Israel in the future when separated from all that is contrary to God and established in true relation to Him, "*I* will sow her unto me in the land". When Israel is sown in relation to God the thought is that she should multiply.
Rem. It is the Son of man who sows.
J.T. Yes. He has sown you here and me somewhere else, and it is to the end that there is a divine thing set up here livingly in a person and that is to increase.
Rem. The influence of good is greater than the influence of evil. It is great encouragement that we are under the influence of the kingdom.
J.T. Quite. So that your influence and service are sure to produce something. That is what you are aiming at. You want to produce something, and what you produce is after yourself. So in the measure
{67}
in which you are after Christ you produce something under the apple-tree. "There thy mother brought thee forth". You want to bring a soul you may seek to help as near to Christ as possible so that it comes under His direct influence. We find in the gospels little children brought to the Lord that He might lay His hands on them and pray. Those who were responsible for the little ones bring them under the influence of Christ; they bring them to Him.
Rem. If it is Christ, it will remain.
J.T. Just so. We ought to rely on that. The little ones were brought to the Lord and He takes them over and lays His hands on them and departs, "and having laid his hands upon them, he departed thence". But they were brought to Him. Those that brought them valued Him; they must have come into some knowledge of Him. I think it is a principle that what you have got you bring to the Lord and let Him put His impress on it, but the divine thought is that we should go and bring forth fruit and that our fruit should remain.
Rem. In Matthew it seems a great decline from one hundred to sixty and thirty-fold.
J.T. Yes; it is declension in Matthew; in Mark it is the other way. I think that the collective testimony would distinctly diminish but the individual would increase. Mark would stand for the individual -- the levite; but it shows what one man can do.
{68}
LIFE
@Revelation 1: 17; @Acts 1: 3; @Acts 25: 19
My remarks, I hope, will be brief so as to make room for others, for the prophets are enjoined to speak two or three and the others are to judge. So I thought that a word as to *life* would help. Everything from the divine point of view was set out in the Lord Jesus and above all things life. So that it is said, "In him was life". Death marked all else, but in Him was life; this was a great feature as He came into the world, becoming Man. Life was there and "the life was the light of men". So the light shone in the darkness. It was the light of life. Life came into a scene of death, betokening the mind of God to man, for if God enlightens man by a thing, He intends him to have it.
So, brethren, it was the divine intention that there should be a new beginning in the Person of Christ. Life was there and it was shining. It shone on men. "The true light was that which", as John says, "coming into the world, lightens every man" (@John 1: 9); not Israel as such but "every man". God indicated that He had that in His mind for them, and that the testimony of life should continue here. So I thought that it would be helpful to bring before you that God intends a living state of things among His people and that this hinges on our apprehension of Christ as living. Jacob was moved as he was convinced that Joseph was "yet alive". He was convinced. He had been sent before them to preserve life. Indeed, the name given to him by Pharaoh would signify that he was the "sustainer of life". This is a great thought, seen fully in the true Joseph who has authority over all flesh that He might give eternal life to as many as God had given Him. There
{69}
is to be a testimony to it now in a living state of things in the people of God and this state of things necessarily hinges upon their being in the light of Christ as life. As they apprehend Him as life, the Holy Spirit works in order to bring about correspondence to a living Person.
And so I read the verse in Revelation. The Lord laid His right hand upon John. Isolated as he was, he was to bear witness to the power of the life that was in Christ. In the gospel he does not attach his name at all, it is "the disciple whom Jesus loved", but it is "I, John", in the Revelation so that we have no doubt as to who is speaking. It was one upon whom the right hand of power was laid. One knows but little of the Lord's touch, but one can understand that the touch of the right hand of the One who is life would convey an impression which would enter into John's testimony in this wonderful book of Revelation. Energy marks it. It announces the break-up of man's world. It is impregnated with the energy of life. "Behold, the lion ... of the tribe of Juda ... has overcome". So that there is energy in the testimony; this has a voice for us, for we should be as those who believe what we say and as those who are affected by what we say. So the Lord lays His right hand upon John and says, "I am he that liveth and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death". That, you see, breathes energy, victory; Christ has the keys of hades and of death. He has supreme control over those elements which Satan once held. One dwells on this because it is teaching intended to qualify a witness. This book of Revelation is one of the most powerful witnesses there is and the vessel had to be prepared for it. What preparation there is in the appearance of the Lord to him! and then in His personal touch, symbol of His power, "Fear not; I am the first and the last".
{70}
You see where we stand at the present time in the light of this testimony. It is the power of life in Christ operative in the witnesses. The spirit of life from God entered into the two witnesses. It is a book of power and it is for us to enter into the spirit of it. Well now, in the Acts you have the Lord appearing to them, as it says, during forty days, alive. He showed Himself alive, after His sufferings, with many proofs. They were to have Him thus among them as alive after suffering for the testimony. He suffered. You cannot have testimony otherwise really. The first great witness in Scripture is Abel and he suffered in his testimony. Indeed, the idea of testimony is that. So that it is a living One who had suffered. That is the idea. "He presented himself living", it is said, "after he had suffered", @Acts 1: 3. He was in their midst with many proofs. Think of the Lord coming into our midst at a moment like this, literally. Paul tells the Corinthians about several appearances and amongst them is one in which the Lord appeared to above five hundred brethren at once. One would be impressed with the power that was there, for He was alive; but as one looked at His hands and His side the heart would be touched. It was after He suffered. The witness of the hands and the side would appeal to the affections -- the living One suffered. And so I pass on to Paul because he is the great witness. As he was taken up, the Lord said to Ananias, "I will show him how great things he must suffer". He was to be a minister and a witness. The testimony would bring out suffering. When Paul was in chains, Festus said of him, that he affirmed that Jesus was living. He spoke about the living One. There was no doubt in his mind in the affirmation, it was a certainty. "Last of all ... he appeared to *me* also", @1 Corinthians 15: 8. "Am I not an apostle? have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" @1 Corinthians 9: 1. He was crucified in weakness but He lives by
{71}
the power of God. The power of the living Christ was in Paul. It was the testimony of life. That is one thing that differentiates the people of God from all others. In the plague of dog-flies God said, "I will distinguish in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell" (@Exodus 8: 22), and how can we be distinguished except in the power of life? It is a question of the power of life and in virtue of that we are marked off from the Egyptians. It is not the correct doctrines that we hold or the correct ground on which we stand that distinguishes us. It is the power of life. Moses said, 'How shall we be distinguished, except by Thy presence?' It involves the presence of God. Christ was alive in Paul in his ministry. That was what I had on my mind, that there might be amongst the saints a living state of things. Paul was in the enjoyment of life in Christ. He said, "I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds", @Acts 26: 29. He was in the enjoyment of a living state of things in Christ.
{72}
ATTRACTION TO CHRIST IN ETERNAL RELATIONS
@John 1: 35 - 39; @John 6: 66 - 69; @John 9: 35 - 38; @John 20: 15 - 19
I have it before me this evening to speak about the Lord Jesus in His personal touch with us. I have read from John because he presents Him in His eternal relations. In order to apprehend the Lord personally and in His personal attractiveness we need to apprehend Him in His eternal relations. That is to say, we need to apprehend Him as at home. John having in view that those who believe on Christ shall be brought into eternal relations, eternal living conditions.
I need not remark that I take a most blessed subject, believing that the Lord and the sympathy of the brethren will help, so that He should become known to us in His eternal relations; for I hope to show that in the scriptures read we have persons attracted to Him, and that the attraction had an inward and upward bearing.
You all remember how that David on taking Zion built round the citadel inwardly. David is a type of Christ in the sense in which I hope to present Him at the present time. He is a type of Christ as personally attractive, and so he has gained an entrance into hearts; that is really what the taking of Zion in one sense means, the hearts of God's people taken up in relation to His eternal purpose. A wonderful conception. God takes our hearts up in relation to His eternal thoughts, and in order that He should have these hearts He comes out in the Son, who is, as seen in that relation, unofficially but personally attractive; so that David as he appears first in Samuel is said to have been ruddy, meaning that he was full of life. Then he is said to have been beautiful-eyed and
{73}
of a lovely countenance (see @1 Samuel 16: 12, and note). That is the description given of him by the Spirit of God, and so his name is given for the first time in Samuel as he is anointed, his name meaning 'Beloved', as if the Holy Spirit were to say, 'Beloved!' as he appeared here. And so he became attractive; hence we have the description of him that was given by a young man who came into contact with him and admired him, and who, speaking to Saul in words of intelligent appreciation, describes David as "skilled in playing, and ... a valiant man, and a man of war, and skilled in speech, and of good presence, and Jehovah is with him", @1 Samuel 16: 18.
You see thus what Jehovah had in this remarkable type of Christ, and so in the epistle to the Hebrews, the first chapter of which is full of the Person of Christ, after the Holy Spirit in a few brief sentences shows that the Son had come in, and that it was the Son, and that this One was the effulgence of the divine glory, the expression of His substance, and that He upheld all things by the word of His power, and that after He made purification of sins He sat down at the right hand of the Greatness on high -- after these things are said, conveying in majestic language the Person, the Speaker, the Spirit of God, brings forward the estimation of the saints, what they had to say about Him; and so the citations which follow in quick order in that chapter are from the Psalms, as if God were to honour His people by allowing them to convey in their appreciation of Christ the greatness of His Person.
Is it imagination, beloved, to say that some day we shall be called upon to give an account of Christ, as the feminine speaker in the Canticles is called upon to give an account of Christ? What account shall we be able to give? In the epistle to the Hebrews, the Spirit of God cites saint after saint, as I may say, to establish the glory and beauty of the Person of
{74}
Christ. Should we not emulate these saints of old? Should we be behind those who spoke of Him anticipatively? Surely not. The divine intent is that He should be known personally in His eternal relations, that if any of us are enquired of in that day in those eternal courts about Him, we shall be able to give a true account.
"Who shall declare his generation?" There is the question. "His life is taken from the earth". You will not find it in the annals of this world. No historian or biographer of this world can declare the generation of Christ, only those who have come to know Him, because He is out of view of this world, for His life was taken from the earth. Those of us who apprehend Him taken from this earth and gone into heaven, those of us who know Him now, those of us who know Him according to this gospel, shall be able to give some account of His generation.
The so-called synoptic gospels present Christ not as in His eternal setting: they present Him as come in to effect a certain thought of God in regard of what existed on earth before. In other words, to speak in a general way, these three synoptic gospels present Him officially. In Matthew He comes into prominence as the Son of David and the Son of Abraham. That is not an eternal setting. In Mark, while it is true that He is the Son of God, as expressed at the beginning of the gospel, "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God", it is Christ in relation to what existed before, namely the service of God. In Luke we have Him in relation to man who had been on earth for thousands of years, so that Luke connects Him with what existed before here upon earth: He is the Son of man; that is not an eternal setting. True enough, the Son of man is in heaven, and the Son of man ascends up where He was before.
But when we come to John we have the eternal
{75}
relationship. How one approaches it with diffidence! The sense one has of the need of the support of the Spirit to deal with it is difficult to express. And yet, beloved, that relationship is there, and it is of all moment that the saints should understand it. Things are written in regard of Him that man would not have written. Only the Holy Spirit could write them, and so we do well indeed to approach the subject humbly and yet confidently, for it is for us. As I said, beloved, it is the Son, and what I wish to dwell upon is what the saints in this gospel see, those saints who are singled out as having come into personal contact with Him, as having been personally attracted, so that it may not seem beyond any of us.
First we have John the baptist. True indeed that the writer of the gospel refers to himself and others in saying, "We have contemplated his glory", but John the baptist is the first person presented who was personally affected by, and personally attracted to, Christ. He it is indeed who is the first to declare in this gospel that "this is the Son of God". I say these things so that you may see that they are not beyond us, and so the baptist says "I knew him not". As John the baptist did not know Him by natural means, no man or woman on earth can know Him by natural means. He was related to Him, he was contemporary with Him in childhood, and yet he says "I knew him not". Of course he knew Him as his relative, the child of Mary and Joseph, but he knew *Him* not, nor do any of us know Him on natural lines.
He is beyond the range of the cleverest or the shrewdest, or the most experienced man or woman upon earth. They may write about Him -- sometimes in a patronising way -- but, O, they do not know Him. They are writing in the dark as if they were speaking or writing in their sleep. He is beyond their range.
{76}
John says, "I knew him not; but he who sent me to baptise with water, *he* said to me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit". And what does John say? What designation does he give Him? Does he refer to 'the Baptiser with the Holy Spirit'? No. He says, "I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God". He had knowledge of Him by spiritual means. What we find is that John designates Him as the Son of God. He had in him spiritual ability to name what he saw, and that is what is so essential -- to be able to give a right name to what we see spiritually.
And so it is that John the baptist introduces to us the Son of God from his own personal appreciation of Him. "I saw", he says, "and bare record that this is the Son of God". And so the knowledge of Him as such is within our range. I do not say that there was the inward effect or the upward effect, for John belonged officially to a past dispensation. "A little one in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he" (@Matthew 11: 11), according to Christ's own words, for the reason among other things that such has access within and above.
The two disciples who heard John say "Behold the Lamb of God" followed Him. We now arrive at the first movement after Christ according to this gospel. It is a movement which began with the words of one who had given Christ the title of the Son of God. Were they likely to stop short? No, beloved, and so the Lord says to them as He saw them following, "What seek ye?" He would bring out what they had in their souls, and so He will ever. All divine questions put to us thus are to bring out what may be of God in us, however little.
They did not say that they sought the Son of God; they spoke according to their measure. "Rabbi" -- He was a teacher known to them -- "where abidest
{77}
thou?" You see the inner bearing. And so it is ever. We learn in the full light of christianity that the first movement is towards Christ as the great attractive Centre as presented by John. "Where abidest thou?" The bearing was inward. As I said, David built inward, securing the hearts of his people. The Lord leads inward. The movement is inward and upward.
And as He says, "In that day" -- what day? The day of the Spirit, the present day. "In that day ye shall know that I am in my Father", @John 14: 20. You see it is an inward movement, an inward thought. "I am in my Father". The idea is really suggested in this chapter -- the bosom of the Father. The bosom is an inward suggestion. And so the only-begotten Son was in it. As I may say, He came into it -- not that He was ever left of the Father. "Thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world", @John 17: 24. But as here in right of His own Person, in right of His attractiveness, His beauty in the eye of the Father, He had a place in that domain.
And so John had a place in His bosom. The Lord says, "In that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me"; that is the present time, it is all inward. We have a place in His bosom, and then we come out in testimony. Coming out in testimony is coloured and characterised by what is within, and so He adds, "and I in you". Our hearts are the centre. He found a place in them, and so He is here in testimony but the place He is in now is known to us. He is in the Father, and we are in Him.
As I said, these two disciples enquired of Him; they wanted to know Him at home. Think of the vastness of the thought that lies behind it. But what they knew not then they knew afterwards. That is the principal point. They knew afterwards where He abode, and it is for us to know. "They abode with him that day. It was about the tenth hour".
{78}
Well, now, I want to go on to Peter. As I was saying, the drift of this gospel is inward and upward, the result being to fit us in mind and heart and affection for Him for eternity. That is what is in view. And so passing over Nicodemus who was deeply interested in Christ, and passing over the woman of Samaria, I come to Peter. One might show the same thing from each of those mentioned, but time would not admit going into every one. I take Peter.
There was a drift away from Christ. Many of His disciples went away back and walked no more with Him. What a spectacle for heaven -- that such a blessed Object, such an attractive Object, attractive in every way, should be left! Is there anyone here with any thought of going away back from Christ? One has known of such, alas! And so the Lord challenges them, "Will ye also go away?" I only want to bring out, beloved, how the attractiveness of Christ and those who came into special touch with Him, have an inward bearing. And Peter says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal".
Words of life eternal! They do not belong to that which is without. You will not get any such words in the newspaper, nor in current literature, nor in current oratory. These words are not discussed in the athenaeums of the world: these words belong to another world. Words of eternal life. The Lord Jesus had them, and He has them. They are living words, they are not in a book but in a Person, words which He has to speak to any interested one. Think of words of everlasting life!
We have scientific books about animal life. Every species in the animal kingdom is discussed with the minutest detail by men called scientists; we have vegetable life also discussed. Who is able to discuss eternal life? What is any other life compared with
{79}
eternal life? And there are the words of it. Words are the means of conveying the thing so that it should be understood. These are outside of science so-called: they are in the realm of spiritual knowledge, knowledge which remains when every scientific book under heaven shall have gone into oblivion, never to be mentioned in the world again -- never.
The classics: what are they? So much rubbish, in the light of the words of everlasting life. Men may boast in them and be utterly ignorant of one syllable of the words of everlasting life. Peter heard these words. They had an inward bearing. They attracted him to Christ. He says, 'You have got them'. Then when he says, "*We* have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God", that is an inward thought. That thought has no place whatsoever in this world. The word, to be sure, is in every dictionary, but the thing is not anywhere in the world. It lies in the spiritual.
There is no holiness according to God outside of the work of God, in the souls of men and women, and only those in whom that work is know anything about holiness, know anything about the Holy One of God, for He is the Holy One of God. Not a holy One, but the Holy One. There is one glorious Person essentially holy. Peter apprehended that there was a minister of the sanctuary, and One in whom was infinite holiness. He who came out from God and was going unto God, according to chapter 20. He could go in in the right of His own Person; He goes into the infinite holiness of God; He is the Holy One of God.
Think of having such an One, as the epistle to the Hebrews sets out, for really what the epistle to the Hebrews develops is an extension of what Peter says here, with reference to the One who has "set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high". Such a high priest! Think of the glorious Personage there, and He is there in infinite holiness. He has
{80}
made a way for us inwardly, and we have boldness for entering the holiest. It is in the apprehension of the Holy One who has made us holy, and so I go on to the man in chapter 9, a man with a remarkable history that the works of God should be manifested. The Lord heard that they had cast him out. We have had the words of eternal life, and the Holy One of God, and the next one who is attracted to Christ acquires a knowledge of Him as the Son of God. John the baptist found that out, but he did not belong to our dispensation. I am speaking of those who enter into our own dispensation. And so the Lord heard that they had cast him out. You may be an outcast from the world, but an outcast from the Christian circle is another thing, a terrible thing. To be an outcast from the world for Christ's sake is a glorious thing. For the confession of Christ this man was an outcast, and Christ was an outcast -- two outcasts together. The Lord wanted company, and when He heard that he was an outcast He found him. And so He finds the outcasts, for He is an outcast Himself and He knows the heart of an outcast. He is looking for all outcasts in the world at the present moment. If you are an outcast from the world He will find you. He found him, it says, and having found him He says, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?"
A wonderful question. And the answer -- "And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?" He was ready for it. The Lord knew what was in his heart. He was ready for the question, and he answered, "And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?" He says, "Thou hast ... seen him". How oft it is that christians see the Lord in His dealings with them. In this case he had seen Him. His eyes are opened by the Lord. He went and washed, and came seeing. He had seen Him. And then the Lord says, "He that speaks with thee is he". You see He is forming a link with this outcast,
{81}
a link of dignity. He is making him acquainted with the greatest Personage in the universe, and that is what He is at now -- that we should all become acquainted with Him in His eternal setting. His eternal relationships. That is what He was at with this outcast -- to bring him into the light of Himself in His eternal relationships, for He intended to take this man with Him into eternity.
That is what He intends for every one of us, to take us with Him into eternal blessing. And so the man says, "I believe, Lord". And he worshipped Him. May we not see that the beauty of holiness is the trend of the gospel? That Holy One is before you: worship Him in holiness. The Lord goes on to disclose that He is the shepherd of the sheep, saying that there shall be one flock and one shepherd, and then He says, "I am the good Shepherd; and I know those that are mine, and am known of those that are mine, as the Father knows me and I know the Father", @John 10: 14, 15. Think of it. What an inward bearing it has -- the knowledge that the sheep are known and known as the Father knew Him and He knew the Father. That kind of knowledge, beloved, the Son of God has brought into this world; it is utterly beyond the range of man. Think of being possessed of that knowledge. The Holy Spirit has spoken there, and the bearing is inward. It is the way of knowing divine Persons. Marvellous thing! Such is the instruction which is opened up to us in relation to persons who are attracted to Christ.
Now I go on to Mary Magdalene, because she is really the climax of this instruction. She stands out as truly attracted to the Lord. John makes much of her. Mary of Bethany disappears at the beginning of chapter 12. Mary Magdalene stands out prominently in John's gospel as attracted to Christ. She stood without at the sepulchre weeping. The whole world was a sepulchre to her, a graveyard to her.
{82}
The One she loved had died, the Object of her affection was gone. She is the vessel that He will use in this great inward and upward trend of His ministry and influence. She thinks He is the gardener. Her mind was on a low level although she loved Him, like the minds of many who love Him, thinking Him to be the gardener. He calls her by name. He has great things to disclose. He intends to use her for this inward and upward instruction. He says, "Mary", and she knows Him.
She rightly owns Him as Master, but that is not an eternal relationship. He has greater things for her than that. He would lead her and all those who hear her into the light of our eternal relationships. I hope these words will enable us to know that we are to be brought into eternal relationships with the Lord. And so He says, "Touch me not". What seems to be rude and unfeeling has blessing in it. It is no love at all to withhold from people the best there is; that is a false love. The Lord intended the very best for this woman. He says "Touch me not". He rigidly refused any link with her. He says, "I have not yet ascended to my Father". He was about to ascend. "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend". It is the character of the thing here; it is not historic. We have no historic account of His ascension in John. It is the character of the thing; it is the One who does it, the One who ascends, it is the Person.
How He would draw the heart after Him as He goes up! "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". You see the upward trend of the thing, to carry her away from the garden and the sepulchre into an eternal region. And so He says, "Go to my brethren". And she went to the disciples and told them she had seen the Lord and that He had said these things to her. I need not say that she
{83}
did not teach them; it was simply a message she carried that He had said these things to her, but they were wonderful things. They were things which Peter and John and the others could take up and formulate into doctrine, and they have been formulated into doctrine, built into men's souls, and have stood the test of time. Such were in this simple message, this profound message, this message of eternity, as I may call it, sent by Christ through a woman to His disciples.
And now they are gathered together. They have got the idea; they are within and the doors are shut. The thing is received into their souls. The doors are shut. What is inside those doors? The principle of eternity is inside those doors. Now I am not using simple words. What I am saying I know, beloved, if you will believe me, that what is inside those doors is a spiritual realm, and the spiritual realm is eternity. It is open to us, it is available to us. The trend of the teaching is inward and upward, and the taught are inside. They have received the message, they are inside, and the doors are shut, meaning, I apprehend, that their hearts are shut from all that is without, especially current religion.
When the Lord comes in it is a spiritual matter, and He says, "Peace be unto you". We have now the company, the result of the teaching; we have them within and Jesus with them. These persons are companions for Him, such as He can regard as His brethren in that eternal home. It is a marvellous thing, and it is presented in such simple fashion -- the apprehension of Christ presented to us in persons like ourselves so that it should be within the range of every one of us -- brothers and sisters. May the Lord bless the word.
{84}
THE TABERNACLE SYSTEM (1)
@Exodus 26: 1 - 37
A.F.M. Say a little as to the tabernacle, the table, and the lampstand.
J.T. I suppose that the table alludes to divine administration. In @Exodus 25: 23, 24, it says, "Thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood: two cubits shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof. And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about". It is further said: "And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and covers thereof, and bowls thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shalt thou make them. And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway" (verses 29, 30). From this scripture we see that the table is a place of divine administration. It contains all the necessary accessories besides the bread itself.
A.F.M. It also sets forth representation. The bread is called the bread of God's presence. I wonder if the twelve loaves would suggest the twelve tribes of Israel.
J.T. I think so. Formerly, there was in Israel an administration on God's behalf. Of course, it also refers to our Lord's position here, in connection with which the twelve apostles were associated. They represent the complete means of divine administration. The number *twelve* is the most divisible of all the numbers. It points to the flexibility of those whom God would use to administer His bounty. They are available without breaking up the unity. They can be sent here and there in various parts of the world.
{85}
A.F.M. We see that two are sent out. In another instance, we see that Peter alone is sent on a mission.
J.T. Yes. The number twelve suggests that. It can be divided by 4, 3, 2, 6 and 12, so that you may have a great many parts. The table itself points to one whole. The bread suggests the richness of God's bounty.
B.F. To what were you referring?
J.T. I was referring to the table and the bread.
J.S. The bread sets forth God's bounty in Christ.
J.T. Yes.
Ques. What does pouring out suggest?
J.T. It suggests the Spirit. It is a question of what should be on the table.
Ques. Is there any connection with the table here and what is spoken of in @1 Corinthians 10?
J.T. I think that the idea of administration is not seen there. Referring to the table, we see that the dimensions of it are two cubits in the length, a cubit in the breadth, and a cubit and a half in the height. I think we have there the idea of testimony, and unity in humility. The length is two cubits; I think this sets forth testimony. The breadth is one cubit; this would suggest unity. And the height is a cubit and a half; the cubit and a half would denote humility, suggesting that there is more than what is seen. The half especially suggests that.
J.S. This is expressed in Jesus as Man.
J.T. Yes. As we said before, the half points to the humility of the Lord. He took a lowly place outwardly, but it did not alter His Person. In becoming Man, He came into limitation.
J.S. That is why the dimensions are given.
J.T. Yes. It suggests that there is more than what is seen.
Rem. It is written in John's gospel that the world could not contain the books if His works were all written.
{86}
J.T. Yes. The table suggests that the twelve were brought into correspondence with Him.
A.F.M. The height of the table was a cubit and a half. The half suggests humility.
J.T. Yes. You do not make yourself prominent in connection with your measure. For instance, the apostle Paul kept for fourteen years the secret that he was caught up into the third heaven; very few of us could keep a secret for that length of time. He was greater than what the Corinthians thought of him. When he did speak of it, he said, "For though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool", @2 Corinthians 12: 6.
C.N. So that if we look at the ark outwardly, we see a little box; but what stood connected with it was very great?
J.T. Yes.
D.R. Do you think that administration in connection with the table implies that the Lord would prepare a table for us in the presence of our enemies so that it should be a testimony to them?
J.T. Yes. I suppose that the table here is administration outwardly towards others; for it is said, if our enemy is hungry we should feed him.
J.S. In connection with the table, there is nothing set forth in it to offend.
J.T. Oh no! It shows that there is bounty.
B.F. Do you distinguish between the table and the twelve loaves?
J.T. We were dwelling on that a little while ago. The dimensions of the table refer to certain qualities in the saints. There is no doubt that these qualities were seen in Christ. But I think that they particularly refer to those who are used in the administration of the testimony. The two cubits, the one cubit, and the cubit and a half refer to certain traits of Christ. The half refers to the fact that one is greater than he seems.
{87}
Ques. Is there any connection with what Peter said to the lame man at the gate of the temple? "Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee", @Acts 3: 6.
J.T. "Such as I have" shows that Peter had something better than silver and gold.
A.W. The table comes into position immediately after the veil is mentioned.
J.T. It is remarkable to notice that at the end of chapter 26. A little earlier in the chapter the curtains are introduced with certain directions as to the materials and the way they were to be put together. It was an enclosure for those things which were brought in and set in order there. They are brought in in relation to the veil. In this system, there is the holiest and the holy place; and the end of the chapter shows how those things connected with the tabernacle were set in order in the holiest and the holy place.
A.W. That would confirm what you said of the table, that it represented administration outwardly.
J.T. Yes. There is the suggestion of light and food, "And thou shalt set the table without the veil, and the candlestick over against the table". We do not get the thought of the incense until the priest is mentioned; that is to say, not until we are on the line of approach. What is before us now has to do with God coming out to man.
B.F. Do the loaves represent the twelve tribes?
J.T. No doubt they do; but they represent more than that, especially in the New Testament. They would also refer to divine administration.
B.F. I was wondering how you would apply this at the present moment.
J.T. It is a question of administration and how much one is administering what is of God. Therefore we have to consider what is suggested in the dimensions of the table and how much we correspond to the
{88}
testimony, unity and humility. These things are suggested in the table. It is also said, "And thou shalt make for it a margin of a handbreadth round about, and shalt make a border of gold for the margin thereof round about", @Exodus 25: 25. I suppose it represents the moral dignity with which those who minister care for the saints. They do not 'lord' it over God's heritage. The apostles were in the lowest circumstances, but notwithstanding there was moral dignity seen in them.
Rem. Paul was content to work as a tent-maker. Do you think there was correspondence in him to what the half sets forth?
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Why is pure gold mentioned on some occasions and at other times simply gold?
J.T. I suppose pure gold would call attention to what was in Christ.
Rem. Would it refer to revelation?
J.T. Yes.
A.F.M. May we speak of God coming out as the primary thought in administration?
J.T. I think the loaves would suggest that.
A.F.M. The loaves were in the hands of the priest, I wonder if they would also represent that there must be priestly state on our part.
J.T. Yes. What is represented here is from the divine side. The priestly side of things is set forth in Leviticus. The important feature seen here is, "Thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway", @Exodus 25: 30. It is more apostolic administration in connection with God coming out.
A.W. That is an important point; so that the brazen altar is seen in this connection, while when it is a question of approach the golden altar is mentioned.
J.T. Yes. Here it is God coming out. You need the priest in connection with the golden altar. Leviticus represents the priestly side of things. Everything
{89}
depends on him; one may bring his offering to the door, but the priest has to do with it. But in Exodus, what we see is God coming out.
A.W. I think that is why it is so important to understand the brazen altar.
J.T. That is why Exodus is so important, because it represents the truth from God's side.
Rem. I think you said a moment ago that certain things were set in order as soon as the tabernacle was set up, and the veil brought in.
J.T. It is said, "And thou shalt make a veil of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen of cunning work, with cherubim shall it be made ... . And thou shalt hang up the veil under the taches, that thou mayest bring in thither within the veil the ark of the testimony; and the veil shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most holy". I suppose it means that the veil suggests the humanity of our Lord. It is what He was here. The ark was put into the holiest. What the ark sets forth was seen in Christ. He was Himself the Ark, for it is written, "Thy law is within my heart", @Psalm 40: 8. What the cherubim of glory set forth, and all that was necessary for God to effect His thoughts, were seen in Christ. Then, it is also written, "And thou shalt set the table without the veil". This alludes to the twelve apostles being brought in in connection with administration manward. The table was set outside; it refers to Christ and the twelve.
B.F. Where would the ring and staves come in?
J.T. I think they would be seen in @Numbers 4.
A.F.M. It seems as if the holy place is an expansion of the holiest. I suppose it would allude to God coming out in Christ as represented in the ark and in the veil; and then you have the table and administration.
J.T. That is how it stands. As soon as the veil is brought in, these things are mentioned: "that
{90}
thou mayest bring in thither within the veil the ark of the testimony ... . And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place. And thou shalt set the table without the veil, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side". I suppose the table is set where need is, where the pressure is.
Rem. It suggests what is adverse.
J.T. Yes. The Lord would come in at that point. For instance, in the gospels we see that five thousand were hungry. The Lord fed them. I think that suggests the idea of the table being put on the north side.
A.W. The brazen altar comes almost immediately after what is said concerning the veil. How do these things help us to understand the brazen altar?
J.T. I think these things refer to incarnation. The veil is His flesh, "Through the veil, that is to say, his flesh", @Hebrews 10: 20. God is seen in Christ. Then we were saying He met need where the pressure was; bread was there. In the feeding of the five thousand, as Matthew sets it forth, it is said that looking up to heaven He blessed the loaves; this means that there is an administration of heaven through Him. But the twelve also come in. Therefore it is further said that He broke and gave the loaves to the disciples and the disciples gave to the multitude. But in the second feeding, Jesus does not look up to heaven, and instead of twelve baskets, there are seven. This would emphasise the Spirit and the place He has in connection with the administration.
Ques. What does southward represent where it says, "And the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south"?
J.T. That is another feature of testimony. Light shows what God is towards man. God is favourable towards man. We see an illustration of this in the
{91}
prodigal. He knew what was in his father's house; therefore he said, "I will arise and go to my father", @Luke 15: 18.
J.S. It is helpful to see how these things are livingly set forth in Christ.
A.F.M. Would the feeding of the four thousand refer to Paul's ministry?
J.T. I suppose so. Speaking of the twelve. Paul said he laboured more abundantly than they all, "Yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me", @1 Corinthians 15: 10.
Ques. In connection with God coming out, you have the mercy-seat spoken of. How does this apply?
J.T. I suppose you have something more in your mind.
Rem. I thought that the mercy-seat is the beginning of things in connection with God coming out.
J.T. It is the beginning of things as regards the gospel being announced. In @Leviticus 16 the blood is put upon the mercy-seat. This is more like @Romans 3: 25, "Whom God has set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood, for the shewing forth of his righteousness". But God approached men in Christ personally, "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them", @2 Corinthians 5: 19.
Ques. Do we see that in Christ personally before His death?
J.T. Yes.
A.W. The ark is there. You must have incarnation, "And thou shalt put the mercy-seat above on the ark".
J.T. So that the mercy-seat is seen here before the blood is put upon it.
Ques. What is indicated in the mercy-seat?
J.T. God is going to be merciful. His rights in mercy are set out in the mercy-seat. It sets forth
{92}
the basis for the expression of mercy on account of the blood being put upon it.
A.F.M. For this death must be accomplished.
J.T. Yes.
Rem. I think it is good to make a distinction of the mercy-seat subsequent on the blood being put upon it, and the mercy-seat apart from the blood being put upon it.
J.T. That is important. The cherubim were always looking upon the mercy-seat. They and the mercy-seat were one piece, "And thou shalt make two cherubim of gold, of beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy-seat", @Exodus 25: 18. The cherubim represent the judicial authority of God. This was expressed in Christ as Man.
Rem. God has revealed Himself in Christ.
J.T. Yes.
A.W. Say a word about those whose sins were remitted or forgiven before the death of the Lord. It says, "To declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past", @Romans 3: 25.
J.T. God anticipated the death of Christ. The Lord asked the Pharisees in connection with the man sick of the palsy, "Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and walk?" @Matthew 9: 5. If sins are to be forgiven the Lord must die. It was easier for Him to receive the Spirit from the Father and give Him than for man to have his sins forgiven.
D.R. We have an odd number here in connection with the curtains; what does it suggest?
J.T. I think it alludes to an excess of power. It is said, "Thou ... shalt double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle". The figure refers to what came out in the Lord's ministry, how He went forward. He could say, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go their way", @John 18: 8. In going forward
{93}
one needs double strength, therefore the doubling of the curtain refers to the strength that is necessary to go forward. Opposition has to be met in all its force. But the rear has also to be brought up; hence we read, "And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the tabernacle. And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it". There was to be no exposure; the front and back were to be protected by the eleven curtains. These curtains were made of goats hair. The sixth was doubled in front of the tabernacle. It suggests a doubling of that principle to refuse what is evil. Sometimes the rear position may be lost, therefore protection is needed there also.
A.F.M. Amalek came from behind; therefore it is essential that there should be a safeguard there.
Ques. Is it a protection to the humanity of Christ?
J.T. It is a protection to the whole system. It has an allusion to the fellowship of the Spirit, what we have inwardly; and the more we are in accord with it, the more rigid are the curtains. They also imply what was seen in the twelve. I think they refer to the whole system of christianity where there is a protection for the things of God.
A.F.M. Are these curtains the result of the Lord becoming Man?
J.T. I think so. The intimate relation between the curtain and the veil shows that.
Rem. The taches of the inner curtains were of gold; but those of the outer curtains were of brass.
J.T. Yes; divine love is seen inside, what is heavenly, but when you come outside you must have the brass, the element of judgment in your business, in your family, among your relations and with the
{94}
world. You do not carry on your business in the same manner as men of the world do. You are prepared to judge yourself if others are not.
A.F.M. It is the same material of which the altar was made.
J.T. Yes; the metal that is seen outside is generally brass. You cannot have happy meetings unless there is the presence of what the brass represents.
B.F. In the brass there is the suggestion that what is evil is judged.
J.T. You maintain the judgment of sin in your attitude in connection with everything of this world.
Ques. What reason did you give for the eleven curtains?
J.T. They suggest that everything is covered.
Ques. Is everything covered in view of preserving the presence of God?
J.T. Yes, we are to insist on these things. The truth will soon slip away unless we are marked by the refusal of evil.
Rem. There is additional testimony in the rams skins dyed red.
J.T. There is the suggestion of maturity. The colour is changed, for red is very distinct. You are different now from what you were before.
Rem. The death of Christ has changed everything.
A.W. Is the covering of the badgers skins over the rams skins dyed red?
J.T. Yes.
A.W. I was thinking that the badgers skins were not permanent. If the rams skins dyed red are there, it will be seen by those who have to do with you.
J.T. The badgers skins refer to that power to say 'yes' and 'no'; 'yes' to what is good and 'no' to what is evil. We have a tendency to give way to
{95}
evil for the sake of peace, but the badgers skins mean that we are not to do that; you are not to respect people's feelings.
A.W. One does not seek for outward distinction. Do you not think he will spontaneously show what is represented in the rams skins dyed red, if the truth is formed in him?
J.T. The badgers skins refer to protection. They were a covering above the rams skins dyed red. Naturally, we are afraid to hurt people's feelings; hence, we may adapt ourselves to our surroundings. In the badgers skins is set forth the preservation from such a tendency.
B.F. In the rams skins dyed red, there is the suggestion that a complete change has taken place with us; we are different from what we were before.
J.T. Yes, you see this in Paul as he went up to Jerusalem with Barnabas and Titus. He was clear of Jerusalem, so was Barnabas, and so was Titus. There were certain false brethren who wanted to bring in circumcision. Paul was not afraid to hurt their feelings, for he said: "To whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour", @Galatians 2: 5. Later the question came up at Antioch. Now Peter was of the same colour as Paul at Jerusalem, but later Paul had to say, "But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision", @Galatians 2: 11, 12.
Ques. Was Paul showing the red when he went to Jerusalem the second time, after the saints had told him not to go?
J.T. I suppose he maintained his distinction at Jerusalem, but he was influenced by Jewish feelings.
{96}
THE TABERNACLE SYSTEM (2)
@Exodus 27: 1 - 21
J.T. We did not speak about the boards in chapter 26. It is said of the boards of the tabernacle, "Thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood standing up. Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half shall be the breadth of one board. Two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against another", @Exodus 26: 15 - 17. In connection with the bars, it is written, "And thou shalt make bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward. And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end. And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold", @Exodus 26: 26 - 29.
A.F.M. You have something more to say about the boards standing up.
J.T. I think they refer to persons, believers; the curtains are more characteristic of what is effected in us.
Rem. The boards are standing on something.
J.T. They are standing on sockets of silver; they refer to individuals who are made to stand up.
A.W. I suppose that they had not always been standing up; they were down once. They did not grow that way.
J.T. They were cut down. I think it refers to the effect of the gospel.
J.S. I suppose they represent men in Christ.
J.T. They are made of the same material of which the ark was made. It is that kind of humanity. I
{97}
think it is a very durable wood capable of a great amount of pressure.
A.F.M. The dimensions of the boards were ten cubits by one cubit and a half.
J.T. That would approximately be about fifteen feet high.
B.F. I suppose it is true that the tabernacle was composed of what was the divine nature; the boards were overlaid with gold.
J.T. The thought is, that God is to be seen in testimony. I think the overlaying of the board is that God is to be seen.
B.F. The wood is presented here underneath the gold.
J.T. There is the special kind of humanity underneath the gold. God had visited His people but in a Man. Luke emphasises this. The intent was, that God Himself should be seen.
B.F. The wood would refer to Jesus; the Spirit forms in the believer the truth of Jesus in this respect. The believer is formed in the divine nature.
J.T. Yes, and that is what is presented in testimony. It is, "The gospel of God ... concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh; and declared to be the Son of God with power", @Romans 1: 1 - 4. This would be expressed in the gold.
A.W. Do you think there is a correspondence between the ark being capable of sustaining the mercy-seat and the wood being capable of sustaining the gold?
J.T. Yes. I think so.
A.W. John said, "No man hath seen God at any time", but he says of the Lord, "The only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him", @John 1: 18. God is revealed in Jesus.
Ques. Do you think the board corresponds with what is seen in Romans?
{98}
J.T. Romans sets forth that the believer is brought into correspondence with Christ. In chapter 7 we see a man who delights in the law of God after the inward man. The Lord magnified the law and made it honourable; for it is said of Him, "Thy law is within my heart". It was never really set out until Christ came. Now in @Romans 7 there is a man who delights in the law of God after the inward man; there is some correspondence to what the board represents.
Ques. Is the board standing up in @Romans 12?
J.T. Yes, the Holy Spirit enables us to stand up.
J.S. We see Peter standing up with the eleven.
Ques. Was not the tabernacle considered to be the dwelling place of God in the wilderness?
J.T. Yes, it brings out the love of God as we see it in the book of Numbers. God was with the children of Israel; divine love was seen there in a living way. God has devised a means whereby He can be with His people in their journeys through this world, because He loves them; so that in this section of the Scriptures we have three different references in connection with the tabernacle. One is the inner sphere; it is where God dwells. Then there is the tent. Then there are the rams skins dyed red and the badgers skins.
Ques. The boards are made to stand up; what about the bars?
J.T. I think that is still @Romans 7 and 8, in fact it is the whole of the first part of Romans. In chapter 7 we see the believer who delights in the law. He is like Christ in that respect, and then it is said, "That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit", @Romans 8: 4. So that you are standing up in that way as having judged evil in the power of the Spirit. The sum of what is presented in the first part of Romans is taken up in chapter 12, where the saints
{99}
present their bodies a living sacrifice. I think the bars would suggest this line of things. Then there is one bar running through the midst.
Ques. Would that suggest Christ in you the hope of glory?
J.T. I think so.
A.W. So that it is not sufficient to stand up, there must be unity; sometimes we may be isolated.
J.T. That is important to notice. The boards are made so many in number, but it takes all of them to make known what God has in His mind. If I am independent, I am not available to the testimony.
Ques. Would you say that Saul was to be used in the testimony when he was told to arise and go into the city?
J.T. Yes, he had to go into the city; he had to humble himself. He had to be told what to do; it was necessary for him to learn from Ananias, for the Lord had told Ananias to "Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul, of Tarsus", @Acts 9: 11. Ananias finds him and tells him, "Arise, and be baptised, and wash away thy sins", @Acts 22: 16. God was passing Saul through a humiliating process. In the first place, after being struck down by the light, he is blind for three days, then he is told by Ananias what to do, and this process culminated in his being let down in a basket. Meanwhile he went to Arabia, a place where there would not be anything to promote the flesh. It is a good word to young people.
A.F.M. After Saul was baptised, he was with the disciples certain days.
J.T. Yes, he is now different from what he was when he started out from Jerusalem.
Rem. Later it is said, "When Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the disciples but they were all afraid of him", @Acts 9: 26.
{100}
J.T. Yes, it seems that the difficulty was with the brethren on that occasion. They had to be adjusted.
Rem. Say a little about Arabia.
J.T. It is a desert; there is nothing there for the flesh. Instead of going to Jerusalem. Saul went to a place where the flesh was brought to nothing.
Ques. Would that be like Moses going to the backside of the desert?
J.T. Yes, it is.
Ques. Do you think that the process Saul went through would suggest the cutting down of the board in order that it might be made to stand up?
J.T. Yes, this process enabled him to be fitted in.
Rem. There were sockets of silver under the boards, "Two sockets under one board for his two tenons". What does this refer to?
J.T. The tenons would suggest fellowship.
Rem. The lame man in the Acts held Peter and John; is there a suggestion of the tenons in that?
J.T. Yes. Peter gave him his right hand and "lifted him up: and immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength. And he leaping up stood, and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God", @Acts 3: 7, 8. I think that power is primarily presented in the case of this man; but the idea of the tenon may be seen in how he held Peter, and how he then knew how to balance himself; he never did that before.
Ques. How far does the gospel go in making a believer stand up?
J.T. Romans would show that. That epistle shows how the gospel is taught.
Ques. Does the gospel cut down the tree?
J.T. No doubt! What is said in Matthew is that the disciples were sent to all nations to make disciples of them. That is a remarkable thing to do; it is a big thing to make disciples. The Lord told His disciples, "All power has been given me in heaven and
{101}
in earth", @Matthew 28: 18. But before He told them this, He had sent a message telling them that they should see Him in Galilee. That was to test them, for it is a very long journey from Jerusalem to Galilee. What I believe is in view is that Jesus would test their strength, their endurance. Finally, when the disciples went to Galilee, He did not make much of them. Nothing is said of His breathing into them. That is to say; if I am to have part in the testimony, I must endure hardness. Now Jesus comes to them and says, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth. Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you", @Matthew 28: 18 - 20. This put them to the test.
Rem. This process would enable them to take up the testimony rightly.
J.T. Yes, if the testimony is to be taken up, strength is required. It is one thing to teach persons something but it is another thing to teach them how to observe it. This means that they had to learn how to observe it themselves, so as to show the nations.
A.F.M. The disciples underwent preparatory experiences before they came out in active service.
J.T. Yes! You may be asked to give an address and you may take up some books which you have to prepare the address, but that is not going to Galilee. Going to Galilee means that I have to go through things to get to the Lord. He has great things and one must go to Him in order to get them.
Rem. We saw in one of the gospels that there was a certain time when the disciples could not cast out the unclean spirit.
Rem. I suppose we commence service on the ground of redemption.
{102}
J.T. Yes, and you must go to the Lord; you must get on your knees about things. It is a matter of exercise.
C.N. I suppose that what is said, in connection with all power being given to Him in heaven and in earth, shows that nothing can be done apart from Him.
J.T. Yes, therefore the Lord adds, "And, lo, I am with you alway". The power is with Him, but you must go to Him.
Ques. Are you connecting the boards with service?
J.T. What I wanted to show is that the Lord, according to Matthew, would show us how the whole thought in relation to the boards and service is brought about. The disciples were not merely to make disciples of the nations, but also to teach them to observe all things; but this could only be done as the disciples themselves came under the influence of the Lord. What is true of the board would characterise them.
Rem. The apostle Paul could say to the Thessalonians, "Ye know what we were among you". Is that similar to what is presented in Matthew?
J.T. Yes, so that he said, "Ye became our imitators, and of the Lord", @1 Thessalonians 1: 6.
Ques. What would the five bars suggest?
J.T. They were "five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward. And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end", @Exodus 26: 26 - 28. It is difficult to locate the position of the middle bar. I think it refers to Christ; for it is said, "We, being many, are one body in Christ", @Romans 12: 5.
Rem. The other bars, the five bars, might represent local companies.
J.T. Yes, they might suggest a local idea, and then one general idea as represented in the middle
{103}
bar running through them. I would refer to Barnabas in this respect. You see in him the spirit of Christ in a universal way, for he took Paul into Jerusalem and introduced him to the brethren. And then he was sent down to Antioch. In this respect he formed a connection with what was at Jerusalem and Antioch. Barnabas was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit.
A.F.M. It is like @Ephesians 4: 3, "Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit"?
J.T. Yes, I think so.
A.F.M. Would not that depend upon us all?
J.T. It is very instructive to see in these bars how the system was held together generally and locally.
Ques. Why are there no bars in the front of the tabernacle?
J.T. That was the entrance.
Rem. The bars were of acacia wood.
Ques. Does that set forth any characteristic features?
J.T. Yes. The ark was made of the same material. We come now to the brazen altar; we were dealing with the tabernacle in chapters 25 and 26. In those chapters we saw the inner structure. We come now to the court; but the brazen altar is mentioned first. It is a link with the system.
A.F.M. We have no laver here.
J.T. That is because it is not the question of approach. The laver is not spoken of in God coming out to us.
A.F.M. The first thing is the altar.
Ques. What is the difference between the altar and what is put upon it?
J.T. The altar refers to Christ in the sense of His moral power.
Ques. What about the dimensions?
J.T. They allude to His manhood. The Lord Jesus was crucified in weakness. So that the altar is "Five cubits long, and five cubits broad". It was a
{104}
square. I think it would allude to the Lord as coming here to suffer. It is not the divine thought so much as expressed in John's gospel, but the side of His humanity that is expressed in His being crucified in weakness. The five cubits suggest this. He was crucified in weakness and He lives by the power of God.
A.F.M. I suppose the three cubits would be seen in His living by the power of God.
J.T. Yes.
A.F.M. Help us in relation to the ark and the altar. They represent Christ personally.
J.T. So that you would look in the gospels for the Lord's sufferings. This answers to the brazen altar, not to what is put upon it. In the gospels, you see His moral power in enduring what is put upon Him.
Rem. In the gospels we see the Lord on the mount; but before He came down, God said, "*This* is my beloved Son: hear him". He was coming down to suffer. I suppose there would be a suggestion of the brazen altar.
J.T. Moses and Elias spoke to Him of His death which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. The Lord came down to suffer. The power of endurance was seen in His sufferings, meaning that power and dignity were inherent: "Our fathers ... cried unto thee, and were delivered", @Psalm 22: 4, 5. But the Lord Jesus was not delivered. In @Leviticus 8: 11, the altar is anointed seven times, "And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all his vessels"; and in verse 15 we see the blood put upon it. All this refers to the power of endurance which was seen in the Lord.
Rem. I notice that two altars are spoken of in Exodus, the brazen altar and the golden altar; the golden altar is smaller.
{105}
J.T. The golden altar comes in after you have the priest. It has reference to man's approach to God. It has not particularly the idea of suffering, but more the idea of prayer, the way we approach God through Christ in prayer. This is seen in @Revelation 8: 3 where the angel has the golden censer. But here, in Exodus, it is God coming out, and He would call attention to Christ as enduring suffering. He endured the cross.
Rem. One of the gospels presents the Lord crying with a loud voice, "And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice", @Matthew 27: 46. Is the brazen altar seen there?
J.T. I think that what the three cubits suggest is seen there. The power of life is there. The centurion said, "Truly this man was Son of God", @Matthew 27: 54. It was a testimony to His personal power in suffering.
A.F.M. Here was One capable of sustaining things in relation to God.
A.W. How do you account for the fire of the golden altar?
J.T. I think that it was taken from the brazen altar. I do not think it denotes sufferings but it is rather to bring out the incense.
Ques. How do you connect the spiritual sacrifice with the altar? How would it be set forth in Christ?
J.T. The Lord is the altar, and the sacrifice. He offered Himself without spot to God. No other man could be the altar and the sacrifice, as seen in the brazen altar.
Rem. The apostle Paul caught a glimpse of the brazen altar. He said that he was ready to be offered. Is there the thought of the brazen altar?
J.T. There may be a reflection of it.
A.W. The incense is valueless without the fire there is a connection between the two.
{106}
J.T. I think the connection would emphasise the full effect of the brazen altar. We are to apprehend what was in it for God.
A.F.M. It is through the brazen altar that a basis has been laid for our approach to God.
J.T. I think that the golden altar was God's way of bringing the thing to us that we might see what God finds in the death of Christ.
Ques. Does the frankincense come from the sufferings?
J.T. The golden altar shows where it comes from.
C.N. Do we draw near to the golden altar in virtue of the brazen?
J.T. Yes. That is so. The golden altar is the testimony to us; it is smaller than the brazen altar.
Ques. Is the fact that it is four-square an emphasis of its greatness?
J.T. Yes, I think we would understand that through the golden altar.
Rem. In Hebrews it is said of Jesus that He offered Himself without spot to God. I suppose that suggests the brazen altar.
J.T. Yes. It is on our account that the golden altar is presented, so that we may see how we approach God.
J.S. That is why the golden altar is not seen in this part of Exodus.
J.T. Yes, what we are considering refers to God Himself.
A.F.M. A special word is used in Leviticus to express 'burn'; the same word is used for 'incense'. It shows what the effect of the death of Christ was for God.
Rem. The fire was not to go out.
J.T. I think it means that the effect of the death of Christ remains. It is kept here by the Holy Spirit.
{107}
Rem. Speaking of the Lord, someone said, 'In Thee the Father rests'. The basis for rest has been laid in the death of Christ.
J.T. Yes, the brazen altar shows that.
Ques. Would you say that incense goes up to God as we come to the golden altar in the light of the death of Christ as we are considering it?
J.T. Yes, but this refers to what the Lord Himself is for God. God has the altar before Him all the time. The fire is always burning.
Ques. What does the brass stand for?
J.T. It is the metal that stands the test of the fire. It is not a question of the value of the metal, but of the power of enduring. The shittim wood is underneath.
Ques. Was this seen in Stephen?
J.T. There was a reflection of it, but no one can come up to the brazen altar as set forth in Christ Himself. It refers to the inherent power in Him, the power of life.
Ques. In chapter 27: 4, we see a grate made for the altar; what does that set forth?
J.T. I think it has an allusion to the fact that everything in relation to the death of Christ is preserved.
{108}
THE TABERNACLE SYSTEM (3)
@Exodus 33: 7 - 11; @Exodus 40: 1 - 38
J.T. In our meetings last month we dwelt on chapters 26 and 27. As our object is not to go into details but to show the setting, in relation to the tabernacle system, in the different books, it is not necessary to take up each chapter. The object is to see the tabernacle in its general bearing in Scripture, so that our readings in Exodus are to show just how it is presented in this book. Then we may see how it is presented in the book of Leviticus, and in Numbers, and probably in the New Testament; so that having considered the furniture and arrangement in chapters 25 to 27, we may go on to chapter 33 and see the principle of separation in connection with that which was once recognised by God, but which He does not now own. Therefore it is said, "And Moses took the tent, and pitched it outside the camp, far from the camp, and called it the Tent of meeting".
A.F.M. Is that a provisional order of things?
J.T. I think so.
A.F.M. It was not the actual tabernacle.
J.T. Probably it was Moses own tent.
J.S. That shows how God can be with us.
J.T. Yes, when evil comes into that which God owns, it loses its privilege in relation to Him. Consequently, the ground of gathering is separation from evil.
J.S. Is that not important for our present day?
J.T. I think it will be helpful to dwell on this point, for it shows from the outset the relation of the tabernacle to the history of the testimony, and that the place of gathering was on the ground of separation from evil.
{109}
Ques. Would you connect this with what is said in @Hebrews 13: 13: "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp"?
J.T. I think it has an allusion to that.
Ques. In the same chapter in Hebrews it is said, "Whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin"; how would you speak of the Lord's suffering for sin in that respect?
J.T. It refers to His suffering without the gate: "Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate".
A.W. Did I understand you to say that before the tabernacle was set up the camp was owned of God?
J.T. It was owned of God from the time the children of Israel came out of Egypt. The golden calf was subsequently set up. God said to Moses that He would consume Israel and make of Moses a great nation. But Moses besought God on account of them, and we see that God "repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people", @Exodus 32: 14. Now Moses took the tabernacle or tent and pitched it without the camp. He is in keeping with: "The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up" (@Psalm 69: 9), so that it is said: "Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the Lord's side? let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him", @Exodus 32: 26. The Levites were to put on their swords and slay every man his brother; so that "there fell of the people that day about three thousand men". The glory of God was vindicated; then Moses pitched the tent outside the camp and called it the Tent of meeting, as if to remind us that God only goes on with us as we are separated from evil.
J.S. What light did Moses have to act on?
J.T. The light upon which Moses acted came from his knowledge of God as seen on the mount, from his
{110}
acquaintance with God. The knowledge of God is the secret of all actions that are pleasing to Him. Moses had no command to do this.
A.F.M. God, speaking to Moses from the burning bush, told him to take off his shoes. Moses was to have a sense of the holiness of God from his start.
J.T. Yes, that is so.
A.W. The camp exists today.
J.T. Yes, the epistle to the Hebrews contemplates the existence of it. There is an allusion to what we are considering in "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp".
A.W. What is the camp?
J.T. The general profession of christianity. It refers to that in which the name of Christ is owned in a general way, that in which defilement is seen. There is no doubt that it refers to the whole system of things in connection with Judaism; but I suppose that it has an allusion to the general profession of christianity.
Ques. Is this similar to the great house in @2 Timothy 2?
A.W. It is necessary to see how the way of separation is presented to the individual here: they did not go out as a crowd.
J.T. We do not deal with evil collectively. God never calls upon His people to deal with evil in this manner. Moses said, "Who is on the Lord's side? let him come unto me". There must be individual exercise. We are to separate from evil, we are to leave it.
A.F.M. Does the camp suggest a military idea?
J.T. In the book of Numbers it is seen in that character. The military order is not established in Exodus.
A.F.M. I was wondering if the reference to Hebrews, "Let us go forth therefore unto him without
{111}
the camp", depended upon what Judaism had become.
J.T. That is right. There was a measure of outward order connected with the camp, but that did not save the people from evil. We need more than outward order.
Rem. You were saying that God's 'meeting place' was far from the camp.
J.T. Yes, in christendom there is a measure of outward order, but order in itself is not enough. The absence of Moses was the test for the children of Israel; "As for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him", @Exodus 32: 23. In a similar way, the absence of Christ is the test today. There is ignorance, to a large extent, as to where Christ is.
Rem. The order in the camp is arbitrary.
A.F.M. In contrast to that there is the tent of meeting.
J.T. Yes, that is so.
J.S. Did Satan get control of the camp in the absence of the mediator?
J.T. Yes, the absence of the mediator was the test for the children of Israel. Moses was only away for forty days, but there was the manifestation of such weakness, the influence of which even Aaron could not check. The light of the heavenly order of things was not in the camp.
D.R. Would you say that the same thing has happened today, and that it is more serious because the Holy Spirit is here and has been disregarded?
J.T. Yes, the light of the whole system has been among the people of God; and yet, as it were, "we wot not what is become of him", @Exodus 32: 23. The truth of Christ where He is has been neglected.
B.F. Would you say that it was probably such a scripture as this that led J.N.D. to leave system?
{112}
J.T. Yes, I think so, along with 2 Timothy and Hebrews. What is presented in @Exodus 32 is not open apostasy, but it was called a feast: "And Aaron made proclamation and said, Tomorrow is a feast to the Lord", @Exodus 32: 5. It corresponds with what we have today. The name of the Lord is not openly abandoned, but those who profess have connected it with idolatry. It is very dangerous. If it were open apostasy, Aaron might not have gone with it.
D.R. How would you apply what is said about the Lord suffering without the gate, "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp"?
J.T. It has reference to the position of Christ. Christians who loved Him were to go outside the Jewish system. Jesus suffered outside of it.
J.S. Satan was behind that system of things.
J.T. Yes, that is so.
Ques. Was the order of things in 1 Corinthians similar to this?
J.T. Yes, the apostle had to tell the Corinthians, "Ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of devils", @1 Corinthians 10: 21. It is a serious question.
A.F.M. In this respect, the idea of the ashes was important. The body of the red heifer was burnt without the camp and what remained was the ashes. What is our place in relation to the ashes?
J.T. The ashes of the red heifer were gathered up and set in a clean place. The body of the red heifer was burnt without the camp. In this respect there is a testimony of the sacrificial value of the death of Christ. In @Numbers 19 the ashes were used for cleansing in connection with the running water. God said to Adam, "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return", @Genesis 3: 19. God said nothing about ashes. What was said referred to Adam as having sinned. But Abraham said, "I ... which am but dust and
{113}
ashes", @Genesis 18: 27. He had light as to the judgment of God; we can reckon on resurrection on that basis.
A.F.M. Do you think Job had some light of what you were saying when he said, "For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God", @@Job 19: 25, 26?
J.T. I think so. The meaning of 'ashes', throughout, signifies that judgment has been faced for us vicariously, that we have been ended, so to speak, in Another. Therefore it is written, "For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him", @1 Thessalonians 4: 14.
Ques. Do you think that christendom has a true sense of what we are saying?
J.T. There is little known of the Lord, in a true sense, among the great mass of christians. How many can speak with reality of the Lord undergoing the judgment of God in order that we may see that we have been completely ended, so to speak?
Ques. How many know Him as Leader of the praises in the assembly?
J.T. Ignorance in relation to the Lord's position as Leader of the praises in the assembly is the whole outcome of the clerical system. Men will have a leader whom they can see, a material and physical leader: "These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt", @Exodus 32: 4.
A.F.M. And yet, the moment that the tent is pitched outside the camp, God appears.
J.T. Yes, we can reckon on that.
D.R. Job said, "I know that my redeemer liveth", He was not thinking of anything of a material system.
J.T. He had light in relation to God.
D.R. Therefore, we should consider what is said in relation to us as christians: "We have an altar,
{114}
whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle", @Hebrews 13: 10.
J.T. Yes, the tabernacle was the old Jewish system on earth. It was no longer owned of God, therefore those who serve in it had no right to the altar of Christians.
D.R. In @Ezekiel 37 we see a similar instance of what the ashes signify; the dry bones were given life again.
J.T. Yes. We have a nice example in connection with Abraham. In @Genesis 18, Abraham recognises the judgment of God: "I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes". In chapter 22 he has an altar and Isaac is there. In chapter 23, he buys a burial place to bury Sarah. There is an allusion to resurrection.
J.S. Is order involved in the expression, "dust thou art"?
J.T. I think so: "The first man is of the earth, earthy", @1 Corinthians 15: 47. I judge that the ashes came in in connection with the altar.
J.S. The ashes are an evidence of sacrifice.
J.T. Yes, so that in Leviticus and Numbers, the idea of the ashes suggests the death of Christ.
C.N. We see that the ashes were used as a means of cleansing.
A.F.M. It is according to God to provide a means of cleansing.
J.T. Yes, that is so.
D.R. Does the pillar of cloud seen here show that God had confirmed Moses in connection with what he did?
J.T. Yes, that is good to notice. God came down in the pillar of cloud: "And it came to pass when Moses entered into the tent, the pillar of cloud descended, and stood at the entrance of the tent and Jehovah talked with Moses. And all the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance of the
{115}
tent ... . And Jehovah spoke with Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his friend". We see how God honours zeal for His glory when evil becomes prominent in profession.
A.F.M. Do you think the descent of the cloud was at periods?
J.T. No doubt! In the last chapter it was permanent.
A.F.M. I wonder if it has the same significance when it is a question of what is weekly in connection with us.
J.T. I think that the two things go on together, there is what is periodic and what is general. God is here, on earth, dwelling in the house by the Spirit; this continues. But then there is the idea of special visitations which God may be pleased to give. It is God in either case, whether dwelling in the house by the Spirit or appearing at various intervals. But we may also speak of a peculiar kind of visitation in connection with the Father and the Son. John contemplates this distinct presence and the privilege connected with it: "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him", @John 14: 23.
D.R. Is there a similar privilege today of God appearing to individuals as He did to Moses?
J.T. No one has Moses place.
Ques. Could we not say that David had the privilege of God appearing in a similar way as He appeared to Moses?
J.T. No one was so distinguished in Scripture as Moses. This distinction is to bring out how God honours those who honour Him. Moses honoured God. Therefore a little later (@Numbers 12: 6 - 8), we see that God vindicated him: "If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream.
{116}
My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house. With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?"
D.R. Here we see that God spoke to Moses face to face. Do you not think it establishes the principle that God would speak to others?
J.T. It is not brought in here to set forth that principle: "Mouth to mouth do I speak to him openly, and not in riddles; and the form of Jehovah doth he behold", @Numbers 12: 8. Here it is a question of how God honours Moses in the presence of the people.
J.S. Have we a similar instance of this in the life of the Lord on earth?
J.T. I think we have instances of this in the gospel of John and on the mount of transfiguration. In @John 12 Jesus said, "Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again", @John 12: 28. There is a remarkable recognition of the Lord as here upon earth. We saw this at His baptism. Do you not think it was remarkable that heaven should answer Him so?
J.S. Yes. How would you bring in Bethany here? Heaven recognises Him, as you were saying, and there are those in Bethany who would recognise Him also.
J.T. In @Mark 11: 11 - 15, it is said, "And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple: and when he had looked around about upon all things, and now the eventide was come, he went out unto Bethany with the twelve. And on the morrow ... they come to Jerusalem: and Jesus went into the temple". He spent the night in Bethany and then in the morning. He came into the temple and cleansed
{117}
it. Then He taught and answered questions. There are three actions.
A.F.M. He cleansed it first.
J.T. Yes. Jesus looked round about upon all things and went out. Returning the next morning. He cleanses it. That is how things stand now.
A.F.M. How do you mean?
J.T. The Lord is walking in the assembly, then He deals with it judicially, but He also answers questions.
J.S. We can have our questions answered.
J.T. Yes, that is what is going on now.
A.F.M. Reference is made in Mark to the Lord spending the night in Bethany. I suppose it would call attention to how God values those who love Jesus.
A.W. Say something about Moses returning into the camp.
J.T. The returning of Moses to the camp would represent how the Lord may visit the professing body of christians, today. The addresses to the assemblies in Revelation show that He is walking in the midst of them.
Rem. So that those who came out to Moses were overcomers.
J.T. Those who sought the Lord. Some worshipped at a distance; but God wants us to worship near.
A.F.M. So we have to recognise that there are many of God's beloved people in the camp and that the Lord may return to it as we see in Revelation. He is there in a judicial character.
A.W. That is a solemn thing to consider.
J.T. We should be in the attitude of going forth to Him.
A.W. The Lord will soon lead one out from the camp if he is marked by the spirit of going forth to Him.
{118}
Ques. Would the man in @John 9 be a type of a christian who comes out to the Lord? The Lord answered his questions.
J.T. It corresponds in some measure to what we were saying, but that is another side of the truth. It shows that, if you are in the camp and have the truth of Christ, you would not be wanted there.
Rem. The possession of the truth of Christ will lead us to separate from infidelity in the camp.
J.T. The question of fellowship becomes prominent. If the principle which underlies what is mentioned in the Lord's supper, "This do in remembrance of me", had been maintained by the children of Israel, they would have known where Moses was. As the Lord's supper is considered there is a response from every heart that loves Christ, but the next thing we have to consider is fellowship. It is the fellowship of His death, and it means that there is to be separation from evil as was seen in connection with the camp.
Rem. I do not understand what is said about the Lord being in the camp and answering questions, when we are told in Hebrews to go forth to Him without the camp.
J.T. It was said that the Lord was in the temple answering questions, and that He is in the midst of the assemblies in a judicial manner, according to Revelation. But where the temple condition of things is maintained, the Lord answers questions, so that the light which we have received during the last hundred years is on this line.
J.S. The judicial garb with which we see the Lord clothed in Revelation shows that He is there to judge evil.
J.T. Yes. He is presented to the assemblies in that character.
Rem. Speaking of the Lord's supper, Paul said, "For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you", @1 Corinthians 11: 23.
{119}
J.T. In Corinthians the Supper is brought in judicially: "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?" @1 Corinthians 10: 22. It means that the Lord has absolute power. He is like a dictator.
Ques. How is God expressed in connection with the temple order of things?
J.T. God is expressed not only in the way of love, but also in the way of light, so that everything is made plain when the temple condition of things subsists.
A.W. Let us refer now to Joshua.
J.T. Joshua represents a young man, not in authority, but having keenness of affections and interest in connection with the new departure. This is very valuable. He is apt to be very energetic and is liable to go to the extremity of being jealous, as Joshua was when it was a question of others prophesying in the camp. He would not have that, for he wanted Moses to forbid them.
Rem. Joshua needed experience.
J.T. Yes, his safe place was to be in the tabernacle. You can see what a remarkable young man he was in the tabernacle. He did not leave it. Joshua had a great amount of light in his soul and he loved the Lord and Moses. It is well that there should be young men like this in the tabernacle, for there is a certain amount of attractiveness in spiritual youthfulness.
Rem. Samuel presents a similar instance of this.
J.T. Yes.
B.F. Moses was not jealous.
J.T. No, but Joshua was, he was a partisan. Young men are safe in the tabernacle; but let them go into the camp and you will see that they are not equal to conditions there. Joshua said, "My lord Moses, forbid them". Forbid men speaking by the
{120}
Holy Spirit! Moses said, "Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets", @Numbers 11: 28, 29.
A.F.M. Joshua would represent a young brother who has taken his place in separation to the Lord's name. His place should be among the saints with a desire to learn how to do things.
J.T. Yes, the knowledge of God helps you to know what to do in a crisis. The man of God knows what to do when crises arise. He does what is according to God.
In the last chapter, we see what this book is intended to show us in relation to the tabernacle, for there is no repetition in Scripture. Certain things were done in connection with the tabernacle and formed a moral basis for God to be there in keeping with Himself, and for the tabernacle to be in keeping with Him.
J.S. Is it not remarkable that God comes in as soon as the tabernacle is set up?
J.T. Yes, and we see dignity in connection with the setting up of the tabernacle. Jehovah spoke to Moses and told him what to do and how everything should be arranged. God did not leave anything to Moses. Having done everything as he was told, Moses anoints the tabernacle with oil. It was holy. It was dignified, "And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels thereof; and it shall be holy". What we were dwelling on in chapter 33 was left to Moses; but when we come to the setting up of the tabernacle, God gives instructions about it, especially as to the anointing.
Ques. Is it because it is the dwelling place of God?
J.T. Yes.
Rem. We see in the gospels that after the Lord cleansed the temple. He preserved it.
J.T. Yes.
{121}
Rem. The Lord entered upon His service as anointed, and after He ascended the disciples began their service in the same manner through the Holy Spirit.
A.F.M. Is there an element of suffering in connection with the anointing?
J.T. I think we see the suffering spirit of Christ in connection with it. The disciples received the Holy Spirit from Him as the One who suffered: "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear", @Acts 2: 33.
J.S. Does the anointing, in connection with the tabernacle and the various things thereof, refer to the Spirit?
J.T. I think so; you have the anointing and then the cloud. The cloud is a symbol of the presence of God. As soon as the work was finished, it is said, "Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle".
A.W. How do you define the difference between the cloud and the glory?
J.T. The cloud may be spoken of as a symbol of the presence of God, while the glory would refer to the outshining of God.
A.F.M. The cloud was outside while the glory was inside.
J.T. Yes, the glory refers to God coming out in Christ, but we also have a sense of the presence of God through the Lord Jesus.
A.W. I wonder if the cloud has any reference to Christ at all.
J.T. On the mount of transfiguration there is presented the idea of the tabernacle. Peter said let us make three tabernacles; but the cloud comes in and a voice comes out of the cloud saying, "This is my beloved Son: hear him", as much as to say,
{122}
there are not to be three tabernacles, but one. The presence of God was there; but we have to distinguish between the presence of God and the symbol of it, for there is no cloud in connection with christianity; therefore, "when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone".
Ques. At the end of chapter 40 it is said, "For the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night". What does the fire refer to?
J.T. I think the fire would allude to the judicial element, the means of judgment that was ever present.
Rem. The priest is not mentioned in this section.
J.T. Reference is made to the priest in chapter 28. Emphasis is laid on Aaron's relationship to Moses, "And thou shalt take thee Aaron thy brother". I think it means that the priesthood is taken up in Christ as King or Lord.
In chapter 40 we see not only the means of cleansing in the laver, but also the use of it: "And he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and put water there, to wash withal. And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet thereat: When they went into the tent of the congregation, and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the Lord commanded Moses". We have an example in this, for there is not only the means of cleansing but also the use of the laver is necessary.
Rem. We should see that our hearts are "sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water", @Hebrews 10: 22.
{123}
THE TABERNACLE SYSTEM (4)
@Leviticus 1: 1, 2; @Leviticus 8: 1 - 12, 33 - 36
J.T. Most of us are aware that our subject is the tabernacle. We have been considering it in its various aspects in Exodus, and we desire tonight to see its bearing in the book of Leviticus. Probably what is to be carefully noted here is that the Lord called to Moses out of the tent of meeting: "And Jehovah called to Moses and spoke to him out of the tent of meeting". There is an indication of the assembly in type. The significance of the assembly is that it is composed of called-out persons. The end of Exodus showed us that the presence of God stood connected with the tabernacle; and what we see here is that Jehovah called to Moses from the place where He is, and from which He is speaking. I think the emphasis here is on the tabernacle.
A.F.M. It would suggest that there is an invitation to come in.
J.T. Yes, I think so. The word 'assembly' means called out. The assembly is formed of people who are called out. God spoke from the position in which His glory is secured and in which He is prepared to meet man, but He met man on His own terms. God seeks men; the seeking implies distance, but the answer to the call implies nearness. Therefore the idea of bringing becomes evident: "If any man of you bring an offering unto the Lord".
B.F. How do you apply the thought of seeking in the book of Leviticus?
J.T. We have not the word 'seeking' so specified here as in the New Testament. But in Romans and Corinthians we see that 'calling' is spoken of. God calls people out of the world. The gospel goes out world-wide and the voice of God is in it; so that
{124}
men might come out of the world to meet with Him on His own terms. Therefore this book emphasises the 'tent of meeting'.
A.F.M. The idea of men meeting God on His own terms is what the 'tent of meeting' implies. Kindly enlarge on that thought.
J.T. There are two or three words used in connection with the tabernacle. The one which is used in this book is 'tent of meeting'. It means that God was in the tent and would meet men.
J.S. Has God taken up His abode in the tabernacle as we are considering it in Leviticus?
J.T. I think what we are considering here is based on Exodus. In Exodus we see that God gave instructions to make everything according to the pattern and that these instructions were carried out. And then the tabernacle and all that was therein was anointed, so that God comes into it to dwell.
J.S. In Exodus it is said, "And the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle", @Exodus 40: 34. Does that mean His presence?
J.T. Yes, it is the place where the glory of God is seen and not the glory of man; and what we see in Leviticus is that God calls from that place, saying, "If any man of you bring an offering unto the Lord". God is not only there, but His glory has taken character.
A.W. Is not God's attitude a very great one here? He assumes that there are those who will come, and therefore He instructs as to how they should come. I think it is like @John 4: 23 where the Lord said, "The Father seeketh such to worship him".
J.T. Yes, the apostolic authority is in the call to Moses; but no one is commanded to bring an offering, it is, "If any man of you bring an offering unto the Lord". As you said, God assumes that there are those who will come and He shows how they are to come. Light is given in relation to worship. God
{125}
had told Moses, "When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain", on mount Horeb (@Exodus 3: 12). And again, it was said to Pharaoh, "Let my son go, that he may serve me", @Exodus 4: 23. But what we are now contemplating is that worship is established, not on mount Horeb in connection with the burning bush, but in the tabernacle, and that sonship is connected with worship.
B.F. Would you say that Jehovah delighted in the praises of His people?
J.T. Yes, I think so. God had intimated to Moses that Israel should serve Him at mount Horeb after they came out of Egypt. In connection with the sojourn of the people, there was a period marked with special interest because of service at the mountain. But service has to be according to God's terms, as we see in the beginning of Leviticus. There may be much in the way of service, but the question arises as to whether such service is according to God.
Rem. The Lord's supper puts us to the same test as we see from 1 Corinthians.
J.T. Yes, and Hebrews shows that our consciences are purged to serve the living God.
A.F.M. We may say that this book was not properly named, when it was called 'Leviticus'; it may be called the book of the Priest, or of Praises. Priestly service comes first and it is connected with sonship. "Let my son go, that he may serve me".
J.T. Yes, the name of 'Leviticus' was given to this book by the Septuagint, but it was not a spiritual name. It is not the levitical book but the priestly book.
J.S. Do we have light governing our approach to God here?
J.T. Yes, and I think it is that we might see the place the tabernacle has. Of course, there are a great many other things to be taken account of, but I
{126}
think it is important to see the place the tabernacle has in connection with service. The tabernacle is set up according to all the requirements of God, then it is anointed and then the glory of God filled it. The next thing we see is that it is the 'tent of meeting', a provisional place where God meets with persons and finally, we see what it will be eternally; "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", @Ephesians 3: 21.
Rem. There is an answer now consequent on the Spirit being here as @Acts 2 shows.
J.S. Yes, the tabernacle was set up in the beginning of Acts. The glory of God was seen; there was a response and service.
Rem. "They continued steadfastly in the apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers", @Acts 2: 42.
J.T. Yes, service was of such a character that they continued in it.
A.F.M. In spite of the breakdown of Israel in the wilderness, the shekinah glory never left them! It enhances the grace of God in spite of what has come in at the present moment.
J.T. Therefore, Exodus becomes of importance to us; because in that book we see the requirements of God in relation to the tabernacle, the arrangement of all that is therein, the anointing with oil, and how it was filled with the glory of God.
W.B. Is there an element of command in Exodus? It would seem as if the call to the people to bring an offering was left to them: "Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering", @Exodus 25: 2.
J.T. I think that sonship is implied. Jehovah instructed Moses to say to Pharaoh, "Israel is my son, even my firstborn, and I say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me", @Exodus 4: 22, 23. So
{127}
that the son would love to bring an offering, and we see that if he brought it, he brought it willingly.
W.B. It involves more than bringing; the willingness must be there.
J.T. I think that their intelligence would be based on the state of sonship being there.
W.B. In @Leviticus 8 we come to the priest.
J.T. I think we shall see that we come to the gospels in type in @Leviticus 8. The christian learns from the epistles of Paul about the tabernacle and sonship and his relation to Christ; and then he comes back as having arrived, "at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", @Ephesians 4: 13. That, I think, is equivalent to @Leviticus 8 where you get Christ in relation to the tabernacle. We see Christ in the gospels in relation to the mind of God. The earlier chapters in Leviticus, which deal with the offerings of the people, are to meet them and adjust them in regard to the different kinds of offerings. They are instructed how to approach God. Their spiritual instincts are taken account of, and then the law governing all that is committed to the priest; so that as all of that is dealt with and settled, the priest in his own personal rights is brought in in the eighth chapter. It corresponds to a believer receiving light through the epistles which adjusts him in his responsibility and his affections towards God, in order that he may be able to see Christ as He is presented in the gospels.
A.F.M. The epistles are very important; because in them we see how we are developed into spiritual manhood.
J.T. Yes, for we cannot understand the gospels until we arrive at "the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". Having arrived there, you are able to understand @Leviticus 8. It is a question of Christ's personal rights. Therefore we see
{128}
Aaron anointed without blood: "And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and all that was therein, and sanctified them. And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all his vessels, both the laver and his foot, to sanctify them. And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron's head, and anointed him, to sanctify him".
A.F.M. Please open up that a little more.
J.T. No one understands the gospels until he understands something about sonship.
B.F. Is there a difference between the priestly side of things and that of the people? Do we have the two here in @Leviticus 8?
J.T. The idea of the people and the priesthood is merged into one as we apprehend what it is to have arrived at the full-grown man. All the people are gathered together at the door of the tabernacle and all are interested in Aaron, the tabernacle, and Aaron's sons.
J.S. Are the epistles given us to prepare us for what is set forth in the gospels?
J.T. Yes, I think so. The epistles would probably correspond to the first seven chapters of Leviticus. In these chapters, there is light in connection with the death of Christ, that we may be free in our souls. The law of the offerings was committed to the priest. The law is there and is always valuable for adjustment. That being so, we are equal to the eighth chapter which corresponds to the gospels, for in them we see Christ in relation to the thoughts and purposes of God.
Rem. So that the light of the gospels has a universal bearing.
J.T. I think so. In them are set forth the thoughts and purposes of God, the plan of the tabernacle. What the anointing represents is also seen in them, for in the ministry of Christ all the
{129}
designs in relation to the tabernacle are seen. The anointing would convey the idea that the One, in whom are expressed the thoughts of God in relation to the tabernacle, had to suffer.
W.B. Would the first seven chapters of Leviticus set forth more the idea of the work of Christ, while the eighth sets Him forth personally?
J.T. That is what I thought.
W.B. If that is so, why does the first chapter open with the burnt-offerings? Does not the sin-offering come first in connection with our need?
J.T. We begin with the inverse order here; for when it is a question of the terms of God, Christ comes first. God is occupied with Him, so that the highest feature of His death is presented first. You will see this in connection with the gospel of John. But although we may begin with the highest side of the truth, we must come back to the sin-offering.
Rem. Therefore Peter says, "Desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby". Does this refer to the gospel?
J.T. I think the epistles enable us to grow up as Peter said, "desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word, that by it ye may grow up to salvation, if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is good". Then as you advance in your soul, you will understand what is meant by, "To whom coming, a living stone, cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious, yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house", @1 Peter 2: 2 - 5. This presents the idea of the tabernacle. Then what we see next is the holy priesthood and the offering up of spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
Ques. Did you say that Aaron and his sons were anointed without blood?
J.T. Not the sons, but Aaron and the tabernacle. The first three gospels present Christ anointed by the Holy Spirit, in His own personal rights. Peter said
{130}
on the mount: "let us make three tabernacles". There are not three tabernacles, but one; and that is presented in Christ, so that the voice from heaven is, "This is my beloved Son; hear him". We see the thoughts of God expressed in Him and these thoughts are to be formed in the saints. Therefore, we see how the laver stood connected with the priests and how they washed. This refers to the ministry of Christ: "ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you", @John 15: 3. In @John 13 we see a picture of the ministry of Christ.
A.F.M. So that as we were remarking, the apostle Paul ministers in relation to the tabernacle. What was in Christ personally is now seen in the saints. His death, blood-shedding and resurrection were the basis of all.
J.T. Yes. Aaron and his sons may be taken as a type to show the association of Christ with the saints. Blood is put on the tip of the right ear, and on the thumb of their right hand, and on the great toe of their right foot; and they are also sprinkled with oil. This latter part of @Leviticus 8 presents Christ in relation to the saints, while the earlier part of the chapter presents Him in His own personal rights.
Rem. The Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one.
J.T. This is seen in the priestly family. In the first chapter of Leviticus there was the idea of calling; but here it is, "Take Aaron and his sons".
J.S. What is the difference?
J.T. I think we see a difference between 'call' and 'take'. The latter is a question of power. The mind of God, in relation to Aaron and his sons, is expressed: "Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and a bullock for the sin-offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread". All these things are seen in
{131}
Christ becoming incarnate. There is no question of distance which the call would imply.
A.F.M. Everything is secured for God in Christ. The affections of men are secured. It is said, "Take Aaron and his sons".
J.T. Yes, the epistle to the Hebrews and the gospel of John show us what underlies this. The Word became flesh. One can now understand the burnt-offering coming first, Christ in relation to the will of God.
Ques. Was it not a command to Moses to take Aaron and his sons?
J.T. It is a command to Moses. But then, there is no 'if' in regard to Aaron and his sons. In the first chapter it is written, "If any man of you bring an offering", but when it is a question of Aaron and his sons, Moses is told to take them. They are all there.
A.W. Moses was also told to gather all the assembly together at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
J.T. Gather all the assembly together is another matter, but that does not apply to Aaron and his sons.
W.B. When the Lord was upon earth, do you think that Aaron and his sons were there representatively?
J.T. The section of John from chapter 13 to chapter 17, shows what was there.
Rem. The Lord said, "Take Aaron and his sons with him". I suppose this had its fulfilment in the Lord on earth.
J.T. I think so. You can understand, in connection with incarnation, that there is a Man here. He is there, so that God takes Him, "Take Aaron and his sons".
Rem. But in order for the saints to come in, Christ had to die.
{132}
J.T. Yes, He had to die. You see how the saints come in in the earlier chapters of Leviticus.
Rem. The blood is put on Aaron and his sons.
J.T. This comes in after; but before that Aaron is anointed and the altar and the tabernacle.
Ques. In connection with Jesus, would you say something about His dwelling on earth before His death?
J.T. The idea of the tabernacle was there in the Lord personally. But in order for us to come into the light of that we need the epistles. In them we see the wonderful things that came in by incarnation. The epistles build us up to understand what is said in John's gospel: "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory ... )". This is presented figuratively in @Leviticus 8. There is a Man here who is delightful to God, so delightful that He can be anointed. The dwelling-place of God is also presented in Him: "For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", @Colossians 2: 9.
B.F. Would you say that the Lord is seen first as the Ark? It says, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God" (@Hebrews 10: 9), and again, "thy law is within my heart", @Psalm 40: 8.
J.T. There is a representation of that in @Leviticus 8.
J.S. Is there a living expression of the mind of God and the will of God in the Word becoming flesh and dwelling among us?
J.T. That is right. I think the anointing would show that.
A.F.M. The Lord's death is mentioned in @John 12, and forms a basis for the company in chapter 13. But we are slow to take in these things. How long does it take us to understand the epistles, to be adjusted and be set apart to contemplate Christ! How little do we know of what it is to sit down and contemplate the glory of the only-begotten of the
{133}
Father, as John said: "We beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father", @John 1: 14.
J.T. That is the thing to see. Who can do that apart from one who is adjusted in relation to the truth in its various applications, so that he is set free for the service of God!
Rem. So that a right understanding of the wilderness side of things would set us free in relation to the will of God.
J.T. Yes.
W.B. It would require the knowledge of the assembly to contemplate His glory, the glory of the Son; for it is said, "we beheld his glory".
J.T. Yes.
Rem. We have to see how the truth in relation to understanding the wilderness side of things is set forth in Christ. In Him we see the intent of the gospel and how our need is relieved.
J.T. Yes, to understand the gospel we must consider the epistle to the Romans.
A.W. One has to present Christ to converts.
J.T. Yes, the apostle Paul said, "God, who ... called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations", @Galatians 1: 15, 16. Therefore Paul begins in Romans from this height: "Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God ... . Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh; and declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead", @Romans 1: 1 - 4. But while this is so in the beginning, we have to go to the mercy-seat, the righteousness of God. Then you come again to sonship in @Romans 8, but you arrive at it as a son so that you can understand what is meant by, "God sending his own Son", @Romans 8: 3.
{134}
You are beginning to realise what is set forth in the gospel. The apostle John says, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth", @John 1: 14.
J.S. So that we should be able to preach the gospel better if we understand Romans in a greater measure.
J.T. Yes, I think it is only as you are acquainted with Romans that you can speak of what meets the sinner's need. The person who preaches the gospel better is one who understands Ephesians. Adjustment in relation to God does not only consist in my being delivered from judgment, but also in my being saved from place. I am not only delivered from the world, but also from the earth. This is the full end so that we have: "God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) and hath raised us up together and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God", @Ephesians 2: 4 - 8. We do not get this in Romans but it is contained in the gospel.
J.S. It is the gospel of the glory.
Rem. We see humility in incarnation. It shows the sacrifice of God to bring in what is set forth in the gospel.
J.T. Yes, in @John 1: 1 it is written, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". In verse 14 we see, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us". Such a Person came into such limitations through love.
Rem. Do we arrive at this through the teaching of Ephesians?
{135}
J.T. Yes, you are great enough for it on account of the instructions set forth in Ephesians.
Rem. Is it arrived at in a collective way?
J.T. Yes, it is said, "we have contemplated his glory". We have an instance of what it is to contemplate the glory of the Son in Moses turning aside, when he was keeping the flock of his father-in-law"The angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush; and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed. And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt. And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses", @Exodus 3: 2 - 4. It shows how interested God becomes in us when He sees that we turn aside to see what is set forth in the gospel, not only what is set forth in relation to the need of man, but what is peculiarly connected with the revelation of God Himself.
A.F.M. So that the first twelve verses of @Leviticus 8 emphasise the position of Christ personally.
J.T. Yes, and the sons are there, "And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water". Nothing is said here, in the early part of the chapter, about blood. I think it refers to the purifying effect of the word, as we see from @John 15: 3.
B.F. Would you say that the water, as we see it in Scripture, would be the application of the death of Christ to the believer?
J.T. Yes, it would be in its full sense. But we are considering it now as it says in @John 15, "Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you". Of course, there can be no cleansing apart from the death of Christ, but I think we have a picture here of the Lord as He is seen in the gospels and how the saints stand in relation with Him.
{136}
B.F. May we not look at it as the result of the presentation of the death of Christ to our souls by the Holy Spirit; on account of which, new affections are formed in us?
J.T. Yes. That is why what is set forth in @Leviticus 8 comes after the offerings. The believer is able now to contemplate the Lord as He is seen in the gospels. While the earlier part of @Leviticus 8 emphasises Aaron's position, the latter part shows how his sons are consecrated for the priesthood. It is a figure of how the disciples are brought into association with the Lord in priestly service. For this the blood is necessary. They were to remain at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation for seven days and seven nights.
Ques. Is that why we have, in @Hebrews 10, the exhortation to draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water?
J.T. The reference to the earlier chapters of Leviticus shows how the believer draws near. I think Hebrews agrees with those chapters, for Hebrews does not take us as far as priesthood in the way that it is presented in @Leviticus 8. The epistle presents priesthood in Christ and how saints can approach God consequent on Christ's position, but it does not present priesthood in the saints as we are dealing with it here. It is more elementary in Hebrews.
Ques. Has the altar in Hebrews a universal idea?
J.T. The altar as presented in Hebrews is exclusive: "We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle", @Hebrews 13: 10. The altar there deals more with exclusiveness, it does not take you inside.
Ques. Which one of the epistles gives us the priestly order as in @Leviticus 8?
{137}
J.T. The epistles to the Colossians and the Ephesians. You begin with what is consistent with the priest in @Romans 7: 22 where you see, "For I delight in the law of God after the inward man". In chapter 8: 15 you have the Spirit; and as a consequence, you are marked with life and peace. Then it continues: "For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father". There you see the son.
A.F.M. In @Romans 12 you offer praises or spiritual sacrifices.
J.T. That is how priesthood is seen in Romans.
A.W. Why is the offering presented at the entrance of the tent of meeting? What is the force of that?
J.T. It is said, "If his offering be a burnt-offering of the herd, he shall present it a male without blemish: at the entrance of the tent of meeting shall he present it, for his acceptance before Jehovah". I think that the offerer merges in his offering into priesthood. The basis is set forth in the fragrance and virtue of the offering.
W.B. One does not go in alone.
J.T. He goes in with others. At the entrance his offering is accepted. It refers to his own acceptance. Our offering is Christ. In Him is set forth the right for us to enter.
J.S. We enter in virtue of His acceptance.
Ques. Why do you connect priesthood with relationship?
J.T. It is the son that is a priest. Aaron and his sons are referred to all the time.
Rem. You were saying that the son is seen in @Romans 8, "Ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father". Would not this part of Romans agree with the latter part of @Leviticus 8?
{138}
J.T. In a way, but what you get in Romans is the principle of the thing. You do not get sonship there in a concrete way. But when you come to Colossians, where the Spirit is only spoken of once, you will observe that what underlies is sonship. The Colossians were marked by love in the Spirit. They were not partial.
A.F.M. In Romans the apostle takes up the whole question in relation to the adjustment of the believer on the earth so that he may be free with respect to things here. And when we come to Corinthians, we see enlargement.
J.T. Yes. Romans and Corinthians run together. But Corinthians is corrective so that the apostle had to say, "We speak wisdom among them that are perfect", @1 Corinthians 2: 6.
Rem. You were saying something about Colossians.
J.T. Colossians sets forth love in the Spirit. It is not preferential love. The Corinthians were marked by preferential love. As long as this state of things remains, we can never touch priesthood. Love, as seen in Colossians, suggests that you love all the saints and that you are not influenced by what is natural. Therefore the priests were not to wear woollen garments, or drink wine, or mourn for the dead. "They shall be clothed with linen garments; and no wool shall come upon them ... neither shall any priest drink wine, when they enter into the inner court ... . And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves", @Ezekiel 44: 17 - 25. The Colossians were in the reality of this truth, there was love in the Spirit, and in Ephesians there is such an expansion to your love for the saints that you want them in heaven. Therefore the apostle writes: "And hath raised us up together, and made us to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace
{139}
in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2: 6, 7.
W.B. To love in such a way one must have the Spirit and be marked by love in the Spirit.
J.T. Yes, unless you have the Spirit, you cannot love thus.
{140}
THE TABERNACLE SYSTEM (5)
@Numbers 1: 1 - 5, 17 - 19; @Numbers 10: 11 - 13, 33 - 36
J.T. Numbers is important because it contemplates the saints in the wilderness, and it brings out typically the interest of God in us. God is interested in us in that He is content to be with us in the vicissitudes, whatever they be. I think that one feature of Numbers is that the love of God is seen in that He is willing to be with us in all the various experiences in the wilderness journey. God said to David, "I have not dwelt in an house since the day that I brought up Israel unto this day; but have gone from tent to tent, and from one tabernacle to another", @1 Chronicles 17: 5. Here we see how God was content to dwell in a tent. His love led Him to do that for the sake of the people. This is touching to consider. For this reason Numbers is important since the book shows how God was pleased to travel with the people in love, going from tent to tent, and to be with them in all the vicissitudes of the wilderness journey to the end.
A.F.M. When you speak of God dwelling in love among the people, are you thinking in any way of the covenant at Sinai?
J.T. I think that the covenant underlies dwelling; love has to be known. The disposition of God towards us makes room for Him to dwell. This is taught in the epistle to the Romans. There we see the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit. The love of God is known in our hearts. Then we are able to say, "All things work together for good to them that love God", @Romans 8: 28. The book of Numbers shows this. Those who love God understand that everything works together for good, so that it will be observed that the book opens with the wilderness. It is not as in @Leviticus 1 where God calls out
{141}
of the tabernacle, "And the Lord called unto Moses; and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the congregation". We find in @Numbers 1 that emphasis is on the wilderness, "And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tabernacle of the congregation". Numbers makes a point of the place where the people were, in the wilderness. It is a question of the position of the people.
A.W. When you speak of vicissitudes, what have you in your mind?
J.T. I am thinking of the troubles we encounter both in relation to the testimony and in our life here. Every one pitches according to the standard of his father's house, according to his local place. From the age of twenty years old, each man is taken account of in relation to his father's house, to his tribe, and to his group of tribes; and finally, he is in relation to the whole system.
A.W. I think it is interesting to see how we are connected with the testimony.
J.T. Yes, the epistle to the Romans shows how interesting it is. In Romans we see how we are brought in relation with God and what is our privilege: "We have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God ... knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope", @Romans 5: 2 - 4. All of this comes in Numbers. We are able to consider the journey of Israel from the outset until they reach the land of Canaan and to see that the love of God enters into everything.
A.F.M. It is said that Moses wrote down all their goings out. Everything is marked down until they came into the land, so that their journey would include what was individual and what was collective.
J.T. I think so. You notice that they were to take the sum of all according to their father's house, with the number of their names, every male by their
{142}
polls, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war in Israel. I think that every one is taken account of.
B.F. Would you say that Numbers gives us the history of the people in the wilderness?
J.T. Just so; Exodus is from God's side. In Exodus there is the representation of God dwelling, and Leviticus is on that line; therefore God calls out of the tabernacle in connection with the worship of His people. Leviticus sets forth the priestly side, but Numbers deals with what is public, the saints being taken account of on the basis of their responsibility. The males are numbered from twenty years old and upward and set in relation to the testimony in a military way; a little later we see the service of the Levites.
J.S. I suppose the important point here is that of training.
J.T. Yes, a saint sees that he is taken up of God, but he is not to remain a unit by himself. He is taken account of with all those who are able to go forth in military service. He knows where his standard is, his father's house, his tribe, and group of tribes; so that when the blast of the silver trumpet is sounded, he knows how to move. Numbers seems to set forth what is individual.
A.F.M. Is not the unit of chapter 1 brought in relation to others when it is a question of the protection of the testimony?
J.T. Yes, each knows the position to which he is assigned so that when the trumpet sounds he knows how to move. They were to move first from the east and then from the south. Unless the believer understood these things, he would not know what to do. The trumpet was made of silver, meaning that the Lord has a right to us.
Ques. Would the blowing of the silver trumpet suggest what may be done by the Spirit?
{143}
J.T. Yes, it indicates what may be attacked in any given ministry of the Spirit. The tribes were divided into four groups, indicating a four-fold character of the truth. Any point may be attacked: it may be the Person of Christ, or the truth of the assembly, or the revelation of God. The sound of the trumpet indicates where the attack is.
Rem. The book of Numbers contains very much instruction in connection with the Levite.
J.T. Yes, you begin as a member of a tribe, ready for warfare; and then you merge into what is levitical. It is a question of the standard from which you are taken account of.
J.S. Does the merging involve spiritual growth?
J.T. The Levites were numbered from a month old and upward. I think that refers to nature more than development. You belong to the family of the first-born.
Rem. And you are able to appreciate the love of God.
J.T. Yes, the christian knows that God loves him and that the love of God is shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Spirit. He loves God; and therefore he knows that all things work together for good. He merges into what is levitical and is now prepared to serve in love; for no one can serve according to God except by love. The epistle to the Romans prepares us for levitical service. Chapter 8 shows that we cry, "Abba, Father", the Levites cry. The Levites were taken in place of the first-born. I think it shows how a believer is adjusted in relation to his responsible position, as confessing the Lord Jesus as Lord, and in relation to the place he has as belonging to the heavenly family. Hence he cries, Abba, Father. He is a month old.
A.F.M. Our prayers to God would be characterised by what we know of Him.
{144}
J.T. Yes, the believer knows that he belongs to the heavenly family. The Levites were given to Aaron and his sons. In a similar manner, we see how the saints are associated with Christ: "If we suffer, we shall also reign". The moment you are prepared to be here for Christ and the saints in a levitical way, your importance as a military man is not so prominent.
A.F.M. Say a little more on the Levites being given to Aaron and his sons.
J.T. I think emphasis is laid on the priestly family.
J.S. Is that because movement is seen here in Numbers?
J.T. Yes, we have the public service of the Levites.
A.F.M. So that the Levites and Aaron's sons are specially connected with the tabernacle, bearing the various parts, taking them down and setting them up.
J.T. Yes, we see movement from place to place.
J.S. They were to take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel. Everybody seems to be included.
J.T. They are numbered from twenty years and upward. It has an allusion to those who confess the Lord. When we come to levitical service, there is reduction. It shows that the levitical element is small, that there is quality instead of quantity.
J.S. The experiences which come up in the wilderness bring in reduction.
J.T. Yes, we see the principle of reduction in Saul. We read of "Saul, who also is Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit", @Acts 13: 9. The name Paul suggests quality, not quantity.
J.S. We see how this principle is worked out in @Acts 13.
J.T. Yes. Paul is the last mentioned in the list there.
Rem. Discipline was to make Saul small.
{145}
J.T. Yes, before the tabernacle moves. The passover is introduced in @Numbers 9 before the tabernacle moves. The position of the tabernacle was related to the cloud and the children of Israel did not move until the cloud moved. But the passover comes in before movement and alludes to reduction.
J.S. Gideon's army was reduced from thirty-two thousand to three hundred. The element of reduction is seen there.
J.T. Yes.
A.F.M. Korah and his company were not in the good of what the passover sets forth. They were marked by inflation.
J.T. Yes, they were marked by the spirit of going up. They wanted the priesthood.
B.F. Do you see the principle of reduction in Saul of Tarsus? He was born in Tarsus, a city of Cilicia, and brought up in Jerusalem at the feet of Gamaliel and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers; but a little later, he was let down through the wall.
J.T. Yes; he was let down in a basket.
A.W. How do you explain reduction in the Acts?
J.T. I think the same principle obtains in Acts as we see here in the scriptures before us. In connection with the first great result of the gospel, it is said, "and there were added in that day about three thousand souls". What is said there is important and should be noted: it is not said that they were added to anything or that the Lord had added them. The three thousand were added. But in the end of the chapter, where we see the assembly in the reciprocity of unity and affections, it says, "And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the people. And the Lord added to the church daily such as should be
{146}
saved", @Acts 2: 46, 47. What we see emphasised here is that the Lord added such as should be saved.
Rem. Barnabas was more spiritual in the beginning than at the end.
J.T. Yes, but that is not normal. The principle of shining brighter and brighter should mark us as individuals.
A.F.M. The three thousand of which you spoke in the Acts were genuine. But would you say that what is said about the Lord adding daily such as should be saved would be the result of the power in the assembly, in the way of gift?
J.T. It is said in @Acts 2: 41, "Those then who had accepted his word were baptised; and there were added in that day about three thousand souls". This shows that the quality was good but a further evidence of it remained to be shown; you may have a lot of people converted, but declension may soon be manifested in connection with them; we have seen it. But what is said of the company in Acts is that "they continued steadfastly in the apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers", @Acts 2: 42. The Holy Spirit shows us that they were genuine. But when it says that the Lord added, He is acting from His own side. It is not such as were saved, but such as should be saved.
Ques. Do you think that there was a more spiritual condition of things at Antioch than at the beginning?
J.T. I think a more universal condition was seen at Antioch, but I should not like to say that anything was greater than which was seen in @Acts 2.
Ques. What is the difference between levitical and priestly service?
J.T. I think that the book of Numbers brings it out. Priestly service is seen in Leviticus. The priests were consecrated in chapter 8; then they spent seven days and seven nights and kept the
{147}
charge of the Lord: "And ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the congregation in seven days, until the days of your consecration be at an end ... . Therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the Lord", @Leviticus 8: 33, 35. That chapter stands out peculiarly in its priestly function of keeping the charge of the Lord. During this whole dispensation we have access to God, and therefore we know His mind and maintain things until the end. There is no position higher than this. Now, in Numbers there is a similar position. The Levites are given to the priests; so that in our levitical position we minister to the priestly. The Levites had to carry heavy things. We can imagine how difficult it must have been for these Levites bearing heavy burdens under the heat of the mid-day sun in those eastern regions! The priests took down the holy things and covered them, not the Levites.
A.W. Is it correct to say that levitical service is manward, and priestly Godward?
J.T. Not quite; if you serve as a Levite, you may have to defend the Person of Christ. This may cause you much anxiety for it is a great thing to bear or maintain the truth in this respect. Certain features of levitical service merge into priestly service. Hence those who were doing levitical work when the ark was borne in Jordan were called priests.
J.S. It shows how they developed spiritually the nearer they approached Canaan.
A.F.M. When the Levite became fifty years old, his levitical work ceased.
Rem. Must one be a son to be a priest?
J.T. Yes, sonship underlies priesthood. The sons of Aaron were priests.
A.F.M. In connection with the assembly, the priest carries out the function of the levite and the common person.
{148}
J.T. Yes; this is evident in Numbers, so that the wilderness is mentioned first: "Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai in the tent of meeting", while in Leviticus nothing is said about the wilderness. God calls to Moses out of the tent of meeting.
B.F. In @Numbers 19, the red heifer comes before us. Why is it not presented before?
J.T. The red heifer comes in late, because it is a question of being distinct. It refers to Christ, for He said: "I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth", @John 17: 19. The Lord desires to set us apart entirely from what is natural, so that the complete judgment of the flesh comes before us in chapter 19. It comes in when you are ready for it.
A.F.M. That marks a complete change which is seen in the brazen serpent.
J.T. Yes, we see now that God is dealing with the source of things. The brazen serpent suggests that sin did not originate in man but in Satan; and that it is to be dealt with at its source. In a similar manner, John presents the love of God from its source in chapter 3; and the springing well comes in in chapter 4.
W.B. What is suggested in the words: "And Moses and Aaron took these men which are expressed by their names"?
J.T. Do you not think it shows what is important in connection with our position? The reference to those expressed by their names would suggest that they were persons of weight on account of their spirituality; it would also convey what each man was: "And they assembled all the congregation together on the first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after their families, by the house of their fathers". If a man has influence
{149}
among christians, it must be on account of what he is spiritually. The saints look for it.
A.F.M. Chapter 7 shows how this idea of influence among christians is worked out.
J.T. Yes, it is a beautiful setting forth of what the princes were. They were able to declare their pedigree. They represent persons who have the Holy Spirit, and in whom there is a spiritual formation, so that each prince has his day. God took account of them individually.
Rem. A prince has to be a nazarite.
J.T. Yes, I think you see in a nazarite what one who is in separation can do. In the book of Judges we see how failure marks the children of Israel, and how the situation is maintained by the nazarite. The truth of the nazarite is fully expressed in Jesus; but relatively, it refers to what may be true of anyone in a day of departure.
A.F.M. The truth of the nazarite was primarily secured in Jesus.
J.T. Yes, but, relatively, the reality of the nazarite may be seen in anyone who is in separation.
B.F. It is like @John 17.
J.T. Yes, we see how the Lord sanctified Himself that the disciples might be sanctified.
A.F.M. We may say something about chapter 10. In the first part of chapter 8, the Levites are presented to the Lord, and then they are given to Aaron and his sons. In chapter 9, the passover is introduced, conveying the idea of reduction and smallness. It is said: "Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked"; keeping the passover saves us from this.
B.F. Is not the passover brought in as a precaution against evil?
J.T. Yes, so that one has to keep it although he may be on a journey. This was shown to Moses when he made special inquiry.
{150}
Rem. The apostle Paul introduced the passover to the Corinthians as a means of delivering them from evil.
J.T. Yes, the Corinthians were not keeping the passover; as a result they were marked by pride. Reduction is effected when we consider: "For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us: Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth", @1 Corinthians 5: 7, 8.
Rem. I thought that the main point of our reading was the tabernacle.
J.T. Yes, we are dealing with the tabernacle. We have been considering how God spoke to Moses in the wilderness out of the tabernacle; and how the children of Israel were set in relation to it.
J.S. Two things are mentioned here, movement and encampment.
J.T. Yes, I intended to remark further in relation to what is written in chapter 9: "And on the day that the tabernacle was set up, the cloud covered the tabernacle of the tent of testimony". The word 'testimony' is prominent here: it is not so much the tent of meeting, but the tent of testimony. It is a question of what is set out: "On the day that the tabernacle was set up, the cloud covered the tabernacle of the tent of testimony; and at even it was upon the tabernacle as the appearance of fire, until the morning. So it was continually", @Numbers 9: 15. We may compare this with @Acts 2. It continues: "And when the cloud rose from the tent, then the children of Israel journeyed". We may compare this to chapters 9 and 10 of Acts. After the death of Stephen there is a movement which continues when Paul comes in. It is further stated: "And at the place where the cloud stood still, there the children of Israel encamped", @Numbers 9: 17. We may compare this with Antioch. What do you say about it?
{151}
A.F.M. Would there be a continuation of movement when Paul and Barnabas were sent out from Antioch?
J.T. It seems as though the cloud was resting at Antioch for the moment because Paul and Barnabas returned there. Therefore, after they returned, the line of things which @Acts 15 presents comes before us so that all the brethren might be brought into accord with this new position. The brethren in Jerusalem came into accord with the work of God in Antioch and among the gentiles.
Rem. The saints were first called christians at Antioch; why is that?
J.T. It shows how Christ was seen there. The epistles to the Colossians and Ephesians emphasise Him in this character. The Lord was no longer in relation to the Jews as He was before the death of Stephen.
A.W. Do you think that there is any new movement today like what we are speaking of?
J.T. I do not think so. What we see today is recovery; but Numbers does not contemplate recovery. It is the normal movement of the testimony. There is nothing new brought out in recovery, although a particular feature of the truth may be emphasised and we may have to regulate ourselves to it.
J.S. @Acts 15 shows that Jerusalem had to become adjusted to the new position of things in Antioch and among the gentiles; and the chapter also shows that Antioch had to recognise Jerusalem.
J.T. Yes, in the epistle to the Galatians, we see the exercise of the apostle Paul that the work of God should be according to the cloud, so that he was very careful to go to Jerusalem and see Peter. It shows that brethren who are influential should be on good terms with each other.
{152}
A.F.M. Can you trace any other movement like that at Antioch?
J.T. I think that another movement is seen in Ephesus. It is the place from which the word of God went out to all Asia.
A.F.M. The apostle Paul found twelve believers at Ephesus.
J.T. Yes; the work of God seemed to reach its culmination at Ephesus. It was there that Paul disputed daily in the school of one Tyrannus: "And this continued by the space of two years; so that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks. And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul ... . So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed", @Acts 19: 10, 11, 20. After this Paul went through other places exhorting, and on his return he calls the elders of Ephesus; and, having said many things to them, he says, "For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God", @Acts 20: 27.
A.W. Paul passes through Corinth on his way to Ephesus.
J.T. Yes, you will notice that you do not get the evangelist at Corinth; this gift is not mentioned among those which are spoken of in Corinthians. Things were not normal there. But in the epistle to the Ephesians the evangelist is mentioned.
A.F.M. It is said that the Corinthians came behind in no gift.
J.T. Yes, but that is not the point. It is a question of what the Holy Spirit mentions. The gifts in Corinthians have reference to what is objective.
Ques. Does the cloud indicate that heaven is the centre?
J.T. I think the cloud is a symbol of the presence of God. It is seen in the Spirit, so that it is written in @Acts 13: "The Holy Spirit said, Separate me now
{153}
Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". God dwells here by the Spirit.
Rem. So that Antioch and Ephesus would each be a base from which the work of God was carried on.
J.T. Yes, and in the epistle to the Ephesians, the gifts are spoken of. All the counsel of God was declared at Ephesus, as the apostle Paul said. There we see the truth in relation to the assembly and the house of God. There is nothing new after this, so that Paul warns the Ephesians of what would happen after his departure.
B.F. What do you think about the tribes moving together?
J.T. I think that there may be two suggestions in the movement of the tribes. In the first place, there has to be the recognition of the various localities with which we may be connected. Then there may be an allusion to the particular way the Lord may be presented to us at any given time. With respect to locality, it is said: "Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of their father's house", @Numbers 2: 2. Judah pitches on the east side towards the rising of the sun, then the tribes of Issachar and Zebulun pitch next to him. These tribes move first from the east. Their movement may represent the Lord coming in as the Sun of righteousness. The next movement is from the south: this may be the presentation of the Lord in connection with peculiar blessings. The last movement is from the north: this may allude to the Lord appearing in view of discipline.
A.W. Do you think that the idea of locality is literal?
J.T. Yes, reference is made to the assemblies in Judaea and Macedonia. Going on to @Numbers 10, we see that, "They departed from the mount of the Lord three days journey: and the ark of the covenant
{154}
of the Lord went before them in the three days journey, to search out a resting place for them".
Ques. What is suggested in the three days journey and the connection of the ark with it?
J.T. In @Acts 9 we see how the authority of the Lord is emphasised. I think that you are impressed with the authority of the Lord when the cloud moves. In @Acts 9, Saul was doing things against the disciples and we saw how the Lord came in at that point.
A.F.M. What is specially connected with the ark going before them in the three days journey?
J.T. We were saying that: "They departed from the mount of the Lord three days journey: and the ark of the covenant of the Lord went before them in the three days journey to search out a resting place for them. And the cloud of the Lord was upon them by day, when they went out of the camp". The ark going before them in the three days journey calls attention to the love of God in Christ. It is the ark of the covenant. If there is to be any movement, the Lord goes before us; for in every movement there is fresh opposition.
A.F.M. Would the ark going before be a special thing in view of their start?
J.T. Yes, otherwise what could we do if the Lord did not go before? It is very touching to see how He goes before us to search out a resting place where we have not passed heretofore.
J.S. Would it refer to the Lord's death?
J.T. I believe so, but we learn the reality of it gradually.
J.S. We have the ark and the cloud here.
A.W. It is said, "And it came to pass when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee. And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of
{155}
Israel". The going forward of the ark creates emotion in Moses.
J.T. I think it refers to the experience we acquire in a normal way in connection with the Lord rising and scattering. It seems as though the enemy makes a start to hinder God's people every Lord's day, but through experience we can say, "Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered".
A.F.M. It is said of the ark: "And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel". Do you think that in the 'resting' there is what we might find in the assembly?
J.T. Yes, "Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands" would allude to the company. I suppose you see how this is effected in chapter 20 of John's gospel. The Lord had said, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go their way". In His resurrection the enemy is scattered and in chapter 20 the Lord returns.
{156}
THE TABERNACLE SYSTEM (6)
@Numbers 11: 16, 17, 24 - 29; @Numbers 12: 4 - 10
J.T. I think we observed in our last meeting, that Numbers sets forth the love of God seen in His journeying with us in our wilderness circumstances; so wherever the children of Israel went, God went with them. In @Numbers 10 we see that as they were about to move the ark went before them. According to primary arrangements, the ark should be in the centre. Such a position is due to Christ, as He said in @John 13: 13: "Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am". Yet, He who has this position among them washes their feet. The Lord takes a lowly place to serve them; that is to say, love is not limited to its own arrangements. The love of God is sovereign, so that whilst the Lord has a place of honour among His people, He takes a lowly place to serve them. The ark went before the children of Israel to seek out a resting place for them; it bore the dangers, as it were, contingent upon seeking out a resting place in a way where they had not passed before.
A.F.M. I suppose that the love of God would characterise the journey when the ark takes the lead.
J.T. It seems so; in the history of the church the love of Christ is seen in this way. He takes the lowest place to serve for the sake of the well-being of the saints. Even the great apostle Paul said, "ourselves your servants for Jesus sake" (@2 Corinthians 4: 5), and again, "all things are for your sakes", @2 Corinthians 4: 15.
A.F.M. So that the ark takes the lead right on in love, even through the Jordan.
J.T. I think that an understanding of @Numbers 10 enables us to see the bearing of these chapters which follow. In that chapter we see how the love of God
{157}
meets oppression arising from the enemy, and how it settles other questions in relation to the calling together of the assembly, and finally we see how the love of God is connected with the ark going before. Now we come to chapter 11, where Moses feels the burden too heavy for him. This question is to be adjusted at the tent of meeting, so that it is written "And Jehovah said to Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and their officers; and take them to the tent of meeting, and they shall stand there with thee. And I will come down and talk with thee there; and I will take of the Spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, and thou shalt not bear it alone". That was to be done before the tent of meeting.
A.F.M. I suppose this would show how the type fails, yet there was no lack of power for the Spirit is put upon seventy; but with the Lord Himself there was every capability to undertake the burden and carry us through.
J.T. Quite.
Ques. Why are seventy taken?
J.T. It is an allusion to the principle of responsibility taken up by those who are qualified. They were elders of the people and officers over them.
Ques. Would it refer to those who have a genuine care for the people of God?
J.T. Yes. "Whom thou knowest to be the elders". They would be known to Moses as men who were already qualified.
B.F. How would you apply this today?
J.T. I suppose that the same principle applies today. Persons who are fit for the service of God are those who are already qualified by experience.
W.B. Was there a similar principle in connection with Stephen and Philip?
{158}
J.T. Yes, when murmuring arose among the disciples, the apostles said, "Look out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we will establish over this business", @Acts 6: 3. Stephen and Philip are soon distinguished in connection with the testimony. They were men of good report and full of the Holy Spirit. What we are considering in the book of Numbers shows that God had not miscalculated the position, although Moses might have thought so; for there is no addition to the power already there: "I will take of the Spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them".
Ques. Was there not an expansion of the power?
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Is that the way God meets failure?
J.T. Yes, and in doing so, God shows that He has not miscalculated. If it were said to Moses, "Carry them in thy bosom, as the nursing-father beareth the suckling", there was power for it; for it was really God who was doing it.
Rem. These seventy men were in the school of God.
J.T. Yes, and it is important to see that God has never miscalculated or underrated. He knows what is needed and gives it when the position calls for it. Therefore, if the vessels are increased, it is a question whether those who are already in the service can make room for the added vessels. Moses has a beautiful spirit with respect to those who were added.
A.F.M. But you do not think that Moses failed to rise to the dignity of his position as having received the Spirit in such a wonderful way?
J.T. Probably he did not realise the extent of the power.
A.F.M. In regard to making room, we find in the gospels that seventy disciples are sent forth, but their position did not conflict with the work of the
{159}
twelve. We should desire to see amongst us expansion in the way of ministry.
J.T. I think that is an important thing. Joshua, being a young man, was disposed to be a partisan. There were two men who did not go out to Moses in the tabernacle, but remained in the camp; nevertheless the Holy Spirit came upon them: they were of them that were written. They were selected by God and they prophesied in the camp; but Joshua wished Moses to forbid them.
Ques. How would you apply the position of the seventy today?
J.T. I think that what we are to learn is, that God has made provision for His people, and if those who are serving are not equal to the service. God meets the failure, not with an addition of power, but by adding more vessels. The power that came down at Pentecost is the same.
B.F. You would not say that Eldad and Medad represent those who are not walking in the truth. It is possible that there are some true ones in system whom God may use.
J.T. For some reason these men did not go to the tent of meeting; they should have gone. But they were among them that were written, and the Spirit came upon them so that they prophesied.
A.F.M. I suppose we see the sovereignty of God in connection with these two men.
J.T. Yes, but they are not to be excused for not going to the tent of meeting. They missed what was said to Moses: "And Jehovah came down in a cloud, and spoke to him". We do not want to miss anything that occurs at the tent of meeting. These two men represent persons who have relations with God; the name Eldad has some significance of friendship, and Medad refers to love. But although that is true, yet there is a tendency to neglect going to the tent of meeting and on account of that we miss very much.
{160}
A.F.M. We have to learn that prominence is connected with the tent of meeting.
J.T. Yes, and we cannot absent ourselves from the tent of meeting with impunity, for we miss very much. There were certain occasions for gathering the people at the tent of meeting and such assemblings are not to be regarded lightly.
Ques. Were the people gathered at the tent of meeting in view of adjustment?
J.T. The Lord gives His presence at the tent of meeting and whatever is to be dealt with is solved. It is not a question of right or wrong doctrine so much, but the presence of the Lord that settles any difficulty.
A.F.M. We always need the presence of the Lord whether it is a question of adjustment, privilege, or discipline.
J.T. Yes, hence in a case of discipline, you rely upon the presence of the Lord. His presence solves the matter as we see here: "And I will come down and talk with thee there". We see also that "Jehovah came down in a cloud, and spoke to him (Moses), and took of the Spirit that was upon him, and put it upon the seventy men". It was God's action. Who could question that?
A.F.M. The result is that they prophesied, even the two men in the camp did the same. It was a mark of God's sovereign choice.
H.S.D. Although these two men did not go to the tent of meeting, yet they received the Spirit.
J.T. There are many who have the Spirit and minister, but do not know what it is to go to the tent of meeting; we should not like to restrict all real ministry to those who have the light of the assembly. Some persons have gift, yet they remain in the camp.
{161}
Rem. In one of the gospels we read of one who was casting out demons, but was not among the disciples.
J.T. We are thankful for ministry, but to miss the Lord coming down to the tent of meeting is a great loss. One loses colour for he cannot take on the heavenly character and learn to do things rightly if he misses these occasions.
B.F. Is there any connection between the way that Jehovah comes down to the tent of meeting and what we read in @John 14: 18, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you"? Do you think that discipline is connected with that passage in John?
J.T. The subject we are considering in Numbers deals chiefly with discipline. While you may also connect it with @John 14, I think that I would connect this section of the scripture with chapters 2 and 3 of Revelation. In those chapters we see the Lord walking among the candlesticks. His presence settles whatever issue there may be; for we may make a thing very clear and yet we may not settle it. But if the Lord comes in it is settled.
A.F.M. Would it be like @1 Corinthians 5: 4, where the apostle Paul said, "when ye are gathered together, and my spirit"?
J.T. Yes, and Paul added, "with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan".
W.B. When the Lord comes in, I suppose the matter is ratified in heaven.
J.T. Yes, and it is written: "where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them", @Matthew 18: 20.
Rem. Moses said on a certain occasion, "If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence", @Exodus 33: 15.
{162}
Rem. The two disciples who were going to Emmaus were not adjusted until the Lord manifested Himself to them.
J.T. Yes, that is right.
Rem. That scripture which says, "not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together" (@Hebrews 10: 25), may be connected with what we are considering in Numbers.
J.T. Those who forsake the assemblings do not see the visitations when the Lord comes in, for it is the assembling of ourselves together that gives the occasion for Him to come. The assembling may be looked at as the tent of meeting.
W.B. In other places we see that Jehovah speaks from off the mercy-seat, but here He comes down to the tent of meeting; what is the difference?
J.T. In another instance when adjustment was needed, we saw that "Moses took the tent, and pitched it outside the camp, far from the camp, and called it the Tent of meeting", @Exodus 33: 7. In a similar manner @1 Corinthians 5 contemplates the idea that sin is to be dealt with. The brother who is guilty of anything that is evil has to be shunned: "with such an one no not to eat". Fellowship is an important subject, therefore we have to be clear from what is evil. I think that is why the tent of meeting is emphasised at certain times.
W.B. And what we are considering is adjustment in relation to service.
J.T. Yes; the next thing we have to notice is the position that Miriam and Aaron assume in connection with Moses. They spoke against him. That was a sorrowful thing, for we were just considering how Moses was feeling the weight of things; but now he is also despised by those who are near him: "And Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had married", @Numbers 12: 1.
{163}
A.F.M. Miriam takes the lead in speaking against him because of his marriage.
J.T. The marriage was only the occasion, for they could have spoken of it without going further, not that they would have been justified, but they said, "Has Jehovah indeed spoken only to Moses? Has he not spoken also to us?" I suppose the Ethiopian woman was a type of the church and what we see here may be taken as Jewish opposition.
H.S.D. Do you think that the opposition arose from jealousy?
J.T. It appears so. The opposition comes in after the seventy are selected, after there was an extension of power. Miriam and Aaron did not say that God spoke to the seventy. They say, "has he not spoken also to us?" I suppose we may speak of Miriam and Aaron as those among the Jews who could not endure the testimony going out among the gentiles. Hence Miriam became leprous, "and the people did not journey till Miriam was received in again", @Numbers 12: 15. It alludes to the fact that Israel does not move now.
B.F. I suppose the truth is that the gentiles are brought into blessing and occupy the place that Israel once had and that the saints are now in a closer intimacy than Israel.
J.T. Yes, the wife was nearer than Miriam. You will observe that this question is also settled at the tent of meeting: "Then Jehovah spoke suddenly to Moses, and to Aaron, and to Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tent of meeting".
B.F. Would this refer to the assembly in function today?
J.T. I think so, actual discipline occurs when we are gathered together.
Rem. Moses did not defend himself against the accusations of Miriam and Aaron.
{164}
J.T. We see how the character of Moses shines out in this instance, "But the man Moses was very meek, above all men that were upon the face of the earth". It seems as though God would emphasise the dignity of Moses, for He said to Miriam and Aaron, "Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I Jehovah will make myself known to him in a vision, I will speak to him in a dream. Not so my servant Moses; he is faithful in all my house. Mouth to mouth do I speak to him openly, and not in riddles; and the form of Jehovah doth he behold". From this we learn how to reckon on God when we are attacked, however serious the attack may be.
Ques. Does the word "suddenly" in the fourth verse suggest the seriousness of the case?
J.T. Yes, it shows that God would settle it at once.
A.F.M. I suppose that the greatness of Moses would be seen in his meekness. Would it be right to say that, as being the meekest man, he was the greatest?
J.T. The word 'man' seems to be emphasised here. It is not the official character of Moses but what he was in his relation to everybody.
A.F.M. This case shows us how adjustment puts us in our respective places before God when anything is settled from heaven; Miriam was put outside the camp and Aaron beseeches Moses on her account. They are all adjusted.
Rem. Speaking reverently, I think it is an honour if God should bear testimony on behalf of His servant, as in the case of Moses.
J.T. It makes you very restful, if anything happens like this. If it is a personal matter or an attack, you should rest on God; for if He approves of you. He will see that no one will do you harm.
Ques. How does God indicate His approval of His servants today?
{165}
J.T. I think that God would make it clear that He is with them. God may appear by means of ministry on their behalf. The approval would be manifested in our meetings, just as these various issues were settled at the tent of meeting.
Rem. Miriam must have been the leader; nothing happens to Aaron.
J.T. Evidently, she must have been the leader. It does not appear that Aaron was ever a leader in such matters.
Rem. This instance shows us how solemn it is to attack anyone whom the Lord is using.
J.T. Yes, and it is well to observe by whom Moses is attacked here. He is attacked by those who were near to him, by those whom God is using, for Miriam is called a prophetess. The danger is to assume that you are as great as others, whereas the Lord will never allow His arrangements to be interfered with. Paul said, "Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion", @2 Timothy 4: 17. God would let no one put Paul aside. Although Miriam was a prophetess and God might have spoken through her, she was not as great as Moses.
Rem. It seems that Aaron was easily influenced.
J.T. Yes, he was a man of affections; but it is not enough to be swayed by affections. We should be on our guard against being easily influenced.
Rem. The making of the golden calf shows that Aaron was not firm.
J.T. Yes, he did not mean to be a leader in idolatry, but he went with it.
B.F. What is suggested in Miriam being made leprous?
{166}
J.T. I think it suggests the state in Israel; you could not apply it to an individual. I think Miriam represents a state more than a person.
A.F.M. It is will.
J.T. In a subjective way, so that she was shut out of the camp seven days and the people did not journey.
A.F.M. In a similar manner, if there is a condition like this among us, we do not receive much help and real ministry until the thing is healed.
J.T. Yes, not even until the man was restored was there much movement at Corinth. If discipline or restoration is to be executed, we cannot go on until it occurs.
Rem. The first letter to the Corinthians was more on the line of adjustment, while the second presented ministry of a different character.
J.T. Yes, they could move on; the man was ready for recovery.
Rem. So that, in our local meetings, if we are able to recover one, the Lord takes account of that and helps us.
J.T. Yes, I think so.
Ques. Do you not think that we have a tendency to be indifferent in connection with restoration?
J.T. There may be such a tendency yet there are those who are not indifferent. In the case before us, all seemed to be concerned, "And the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again", @Numbers 12: 15.
{167}
THE TABERNACLE SYSTEM (7)
@Numbers 14: 10; @Numbers 16: 16 - 19; @Numbers 17: 6 - 13
J.T. From the last scripture we read, we see the effect of the dealings of God upon the children of Israel. They said, "Behold, we die, we perish, we all perish. Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the Lord shall die". Of course this was not really so, for God had appointed a way to approach. We approach in "the new and living way", hence we do not die although we approach. The effect of the presence of God among the children of Israel produced fear in them, as it is said in a certain place, "God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints", @Psalm 89: 7.
A.F.M. The actions of the people caused God to come in in discipline. The effect of the discipline caused them to fear.
J.T. It is a right thing that they should fear God. Although it was not really the fact that every one who approached the tabernacle died, yet there was the sense that God was there.
A.F.M. It is better than the spirit of rebellion.
J.T. Yes, the epistles to the Hebrews and Corinthians, and the first epistle of Peter agree with the teaching of these chapters in Numbers. Judgment begins at the house of God. The glory appears in chapter 14 when there is the spirit of rebellion "And the whole assembly said that they should be stoned with stones. And the glory of Jehovah appeared in the tent of meeting to all the children of Israel".
Ques. Why did you not read chapter 13?
J.T. I think chapter 14 continues the subject of chapter 13. It is a question of rebellion. The heavenly testimony was rejected. In chapter 14 the
{168}
people wished to make a captain and return to Egypt. They were turning away from heavenly testimony to what was worldly. The rebellion of Miriam and Aaron was very bad, but the idea of choosing a captain and returning to Egypt was worse. It is a characteristic of christendom.
Rem. Unbelief and rebellion generally go together.
J.T. Yes, that is true.
Rem. The refusal of the heavenly testimony changes everything in relation to the people. "Doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I sware to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun. But your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will I bring in".
J.T. Yes, that alludes to the judgment in the wilderness.
Ques. How do you apply this today?
J.T. It alludes to the rejection of the truth and the acceptance of false doctrine: "For indeed we have had glad tidings presented to us, even as they also; but the word of the report did not profit *them*, not being mixed with faith in those who heard", @Hebrews 4: 2. It is the glad tidings of the land which is emphasised more than the glad tidings of our deliverance from the world. The epistle to the Hebrews teaches the gospel of our salvation -- the great salvation which is deliverance out of the world; but there is also"the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ", @Ephesians 3: 8. This is what @Hebrews 4 alludes to, "For indeed we have had glad tidings presented to us, even as they also". It was the glad tidings of the land, but they rejected it. In connection with the assembly, Paul said, "Thou knowest this, that all who are in Asia ... have turned away from me", @2 Timothy 1: 15. Paul was identical with the ministry; in turning away from him, they turned away from the heavenly position.
{169}
Even Ephesus, where the heavenly position was presented in a peculiar way, was included in the retrogression.
W.B. All the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron.
A.F.M. It proves the incapability of the flesh to cherish heavenly things. But after the brazen serpent comes in, there is real progress.
J.T. Yes, these chapters present, typically, the course of things in the history of the church right down to the end. In chapter 18 there is a revival of the priests functions and the Levites place.
A.F.M. The unity of the Levites with the priests.
J.T. Yes, the Levites were given to the priests, they were under the priests. In chapter 16 the Levites aspired to the priests position, because they were Levites, that is to say, because I am a minister of the gospel I may assume to be a priest; whereas the levitical position depends upon my being a priest. The priest should come first. The rebellion of Korah and his company would suggest what has taken place in the history of the church, there has been rebellion in connection with the position of Christ as Lord and Priest. But recovery has come in, so that there is a reassertion of the truth in relation to Christ as Priest. @Numbers 18 presents this in figure. If we are Levites, we are subordinated to the saints. We are not to rule over them because ministry is given to us.
A.F.M. At the end of chapter 18 we see how the priests and Levites are regarded by God: "Thus ye also shall offer Jehovah's heave-offering of all your tithes, which ye take of the children of Israel; and ye shall give thereof Jehovah's heave-offering to Aaron the priest ... . When ye heave the best thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the Levites" (verses 28, 30).
J.T. Yes, the priests are maintained in order to keep the charge of the Lord. In recovery there is a
{170}
reassertion of the priesthood and authority of Christ.
Ques. Is gift connected with the priest?
J.T. Priesthood belongs to all the saints.
A.F.M. I recently saw a remark that even a young brother, when he starts to pray, is a priest.
J.T. Yes, everyone who has the Spirit is a priest.
Ques. Is a sister a priest?
J.T. If she has the Spirit of God she is a priest. That is an important matter. What a service sisters can render in prayer, for this is a great function of priests! If sisters prayed and read the word more in view of these meetings, we should have better meetings when we come together.
Rem. Prayer is not confined to the prayer meeting.
Rem. You can hardly find a believer who does not pray.
J.T. That may be so, but the question is how much do we pray. It was said of Paul, "behold, he prayeth". That is what marks believers normally, the continuous attitude of prayer.
A.F.M. I suppose that it does not simply mean that the believer who is praying is praying about himself, but about Christ's interest on earth.
J.T. That is what comes out in chapter 18. The word is directly to Aaron; it is purely a priestly matter: "Thou and thy sons and thy father's house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary; and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood. And thy brethren also, the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring near with thee, that they may unite with thee, and minister unto thee". You see the Levites now with the priest, but they minister to the priest.
J.S. What is the meaning of the expressions "the iniquity of the sanctuary", and "the iniquity of your priesthood"?
J.T. It means that the priest is responsible for whatever happens; when we say the priest, the
{171}
expression takes in both brothers and sisters who have the Spirit.
Rem. Does it mean that he carries it in his spirit?
J.T. He carries it before God. In Ezekiel it is said, "Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men *that sigh and that cry for all the abominations* that are done in the midst thereof", @Ezekiel 9: 4. Returning to chapters 13 and 14, we see the people in rebellion against Moses. They wish to choose a captain and return to Egypt. To meet this state of affairs it is said, "And the glory of Jehovah appeared in the tent of meeting to all the children of Israel". It suggests that God will come in in some way, where His people are in the recognition of what the assembly represents, and make His glory felt in connection with any uprising which may be existing.
Rem. The people were deliberate in their action of rebellion.
J.T. It was the state of the people's heart. No doubt Miriam represented their state morally, a state of pride and rivalry against Christ.
Rem. The report of the spies was the occasion for the action of the people in chapter 14.
J.T. Ten of the spies brought back an evil report, but Joshua and Caleb brought back a good report. They represent a remnant, a link between Israel in responsibility and Israel according to purpose.
Rem. Joshua and Caleb were sympathetic with God.
J.T. Caleb represents the spiritual position as in Christ and how the saints enter into it. "But my servant Caleb, because he hath another spirit in him, and hath followed me fully, him will I bring into the land whereinto he came; and his seed shall possess it", @Numbers 14: 24. What is said as to "another spirit" refers to another order of being. Joshua is spoken of in the same way in connection with leadership,
{172}
"a man in whom is the Spirit", @Numbers 27: 18.
Rem. We see how Caleb takes heaven in type, in the book of Joshua.
J.T. Yes, and he gave his daughter to Othniel, who took the 'city of the book' (@Joshua 15: 16 - 19); he overthrew the world of literature; it takes a man of spiritual power to do that.
A.F.M. I suppose that we have to understand the truth which stands connected with the brazen serpent to appreciate the characteristics set out in Caleb.
J.T. I think Caleb is a link between responsible Israel and the Israel of purpose, "because he hath another spirit in him".
Rem. That spirit which would appreciate the land.
W.B. The whole assembly said that Joshua and Caleb should be stoned with stones.
J.T. It is the attitude of the flesh, not only opposition but also persecution. Hence the glory of Jehovah immediately appears in the tent of meeting.
J.S. Is the appearing of the glory of God seen today?
J.T. I think so, the recovery of the truth of the assembly has given God an opportunity to manifest His glory.
J.S. It shows how important the truth is.
J.T. We saw in the previous meeting that "Jehovah came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood at the entrance of the tent", @Numbers 12: 5. But it is not said that He comes down in chapter 14; it says, "And the glory of Jehovah appeared in the tent of meeting to all the children of Israel". Here it is the shining out of the glory of God.
Rem. God's glory shines out now in the assembly.
A.F.M. I suppose you would say that the glory of God shines out in sanctified vessels.
J.T. Yes, but it is in relation to the whole assembly.
{173}
A.F.M. In connection with recovery, the shining out of the glory of God becomes evident because evil has to be displaced.
J.T. Yes, we see that in chapter 14.
W.B. The glory is in sympathy with Joshua and Caleb.
J.T. Yes, and chapter 15 shows what Joshua and Caleb came into: "When ye come into the land of your dwellings, which I give unto you". In the land everything was to be adjusted from the standpoint of God's glory.
W.B. You emphasise the glory of God in connection with actions in the tent of meeting.
J.T. Yes, hence if we are in the light of the assembly, there should be great concern among us "set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry".
B.F. If a company of saints are going on in the power of the Spirit, would you say that there is a manifestation of the glory of God there?
J.T. Yes, it is evident.
Rem. Joshua and Caleb said, "If Jehovah delight in us, he will bring us into this land", @Numbers 14: 8. They had confidence in God's power.
J.T. Yes, they knew that God could bring them in. It is further said of Caleb: "But my servant Caleb, because he hath another spirit in him, and hath followed me fully, him will I bring into the land whereinto he came" (verse 24). He represents a new order and there is a world of glory opened up to him in chapter 15, so that he can be here in reproach. Caleb was not even feeble in his old age: "and now behold, I am this day eighty-five years old. I am still this day strong, as in the day that Moses sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war, both to go out and to come in", @Joshua 14: 10, 11.
{174}
A.F.M. Why do you speak of chapter 15 in that way?
J.T. It is written in another place that the earth shall be filled with the glory of God. In @Numbers 15 we see that provisions are made in connection with the glory of God: "When ye come into the land of your dwellings, which I give unto you" speaks of the accomplishment of God's purpose, and of there being a heavenly position. They were to wear fringes in the borders of their garments. Caleb would understand this.
A.F.M. Is it not a fact that Caleb had gone in already and was now in the reality of what he had seen?
J.T. So that he is a man out of heaven, as it were.
B.F. Would you say that the lives of Paul and John would have the same effect with us as the lives of Caleb and Joshua should have had on the children of Israel?
J.T. Paul's ministry was the ministry of a man out of heaven. He had been taken up into the third heaven.
Rem. Hence he expressed a heavenly character among the saints.
Rem. In @Numbers 15 provision is made in connection with the burnt-offering. Does it refer to Christ in a particular way?
J.T. It speaks of the devotedness of the children of Israel to the will of God. This is effected by means of the burnt-offering; otherwise there would be the tendency to assume holiness in the flesh. In @Numbers 13 and 14 we see that the whole assembly of Israel were willing to give up the heavenly position and return to the worldly. In chapter 16 we see certain prominent persons, men of renown, rising up against Moses. They said, "It is enough; for all the assembly, all of them are holy, and Jehovah is among them". It is an assertion of holiness in the
{175}
flesh; this is current among the various systems of today.
A.F.M. They assume relationship which does not exist.
J.T. It was a serious matter for Israel. Their proposal to go back to Egypt was met by means of the tent of meeting (chapter 14). But in chapter 16, the rebellion is settled by means of a test. It is to be shown whom God will accept; hence they were to take censers. When Moses heard these leaders, men of renown, he fell upon his face; he could not meet the situation.
Rem. You said that Moses could not meet the situation, but he seems to say very much here.
J.T. It is a question of God coming in in a new way. Old precedents were not taken, so that we have to be prepared for any new methods which God may bring in.
Rem. Say a little more about the new way which God uses here in connection with the rebellion of Korah and his company.
J.T. What we notice in chapter 16 is that God Himself deals with the rebellion directly: "The earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up". It was not Moses act but God's. He made a new way in answer to Moses request.
Rem. Moses was spoken of as the meekest man of all the earth; but we do not see much of that here.
J.T. When it is a question of meeting evil, the righteous is as bold as a lion. In connection with Moses being the meekest man, he was spoken of as the man Moses. That may suggest what he was in his house and among men in a certain character; but when there is need to contend for the truth, one has to be as bold as a lion. This is set forth in the Lord Himself. How meek he was! Yet when He had to do with the Pharisees. He did not hesitate to
{176}
pronounce woe upon them. He did not mince matters.
-.R. Moses addresses himself to Korah.
J.T. That shows that Korah was the responsible person.
Ques. Was there an element of grace in the words "Even tomorrow will Jehovah make known who is his", @Numbers 16: 5?
J.T. Yes, they were given time to retract.
W.B. The question of approach to God was the point at issue here.
J.T. Korah and his company were claiming the priesthood. But Moses said, as it were, we will see whom God will choose. The thing is put to the test; and as a result, Korah and his company were consumed.
A.F.M. Hence it is a question of God's decision which we must look for.
J.T. Yes, God has His way to show approval or disapproval.
J.S. Is there anything today in connection with the earth opening her mouth in judgment on these men?
J.T. I think the judgment of the beast and false prophet in Revelation would answer to it: "Alive were both cast into the lake of fire which burns with brimstone". Judgment is pronounced on them, at least one thousand years before others are judged; they are judged even before Satan himself.
W.B. In @Numbers 16, the matter was brought to the tent of meeting.
J.T. Yes, it shows how important a place the tent of meeting has.
H.S.D. It is the greatest court of appeal.
J.T. Hence it is said the Lord is greatly to be feared in the assembly of His saints. The judgment of Korah and his company and also of the beast and false prophet should show us what solemnity is connected with God's presence among His people.
{177}
A.F.M. There is really a comparison between the two instances. In Numbers Korah and his company gathered themselves against Moses and Aaron. Moses represented authority; and Aaron priesthood. In a similar manner, the beast and false prophet rise up against the authority and priestly position of Christ. But they are immediately punished when the Lord appears, as is seen in @Revelation 19.
J.T. Yes, that is right.
A.F.M. What do you think about the judgment of Babylon?
J.T. Babylon is a system which is dealt with on earth, "Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire", @Revelation 18: 8. It is a system which is dealt with on earth, while the lake of fire is for individuals.
Ques. What is the force of "Separate yourselves from the midst of this assembly, and I will consume them in a moment"?
J.T. It appears that the whole assembly would have been destroyed except for the intercession of Moses and Aaron: "And they fell on their faces and said. O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh! shall *one* man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with the whole assembly?" God listened to them, and on account of that the guilty persons perished, but the assembly was saved.
Ques. Would that passage show that "evil communications corrupt good manners"? The assembly was told to separate themselves from those guilty persons.
Ques. Does verse 24, to which reference was just made, show that we are to deal with evil?
J.T. That verse shows us that we are to separate ourselves from evil. God Himself deals with it.
Ques. Is this the attitude we should take in connection with christendom?
{178}
J.T. Yes, I think this chapter shows that separation is the proper course to follow in relation to evil in our day.
Rem. It corresponds with the second epistle to Timothy.
J.T. We see breakdown in @Numbers 16, in type. Hence there is a reassertion of the priesthood in connection with it. God shows what life is connected with in chapter 17, for where there is recovery everything depends upon the Spirit of God.
A.F.M. I suppose Aaron's rod would show that the priesthood is based on resurrection.
J.T. Yes, but in this aspect Christ is known in the assembly, for the lie went abroad that He was stolen from the tomb.
B.F. The Lord was seen only by His own after His resurrection.
J.T. The great point to be observed in the Lord's resurrection is that there is the power of life. Aaron's rod bloomed blossoms, showing an evidence of the power of life. Paul made a point of the fact that the Son of God was preached and that in Him there was no uncertainty: "For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus), did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him. For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen", @2 Corinthians 1: 19, 20. This is seen in Christ risen, in the Son of God.
W.B. Say a little on the staying of the plague "And he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was stayed" (verse 48).
J.T. The staying of the plague suggests the mercy of God, expressed on account of the intercession of Aaron.
A.F.M. We see what the priest represents in Aaron. God comes in in blessing where a priestly
{179}
condition is maintained among the saints; is that not so?
J.T. Yes, and I think that Moses act would suggest love in some measure: "And Moses said to Aaron, Take the censer, and put fire thereon from off the altar, and lay on incense, and carry it quickly to the assembly, and make atonement for them". We do not want judgment to come in.
Rem. In that way you are in accord with the heart and mind of God.
J.T. Yes, hence you present that in which God can rest, that which is consistent with Himself revealed in righteousness.
Ques. From what altar was the fire taken?
J.T. It was the brazen altar. All fire came from there; any other fire is strange fire.
Ques. What is the difference between the tent of meeting and the tent of testimony?
J.T. The tent of meeting is where God meets with us, and the tent of testimony suggests that God sets out what is in His mind. This is seen in @Numbers 17; and 2 Timothy is also on this line: "Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus".
A.F.M. Aaron's staff was put before the testimony: "And Jehovah said to Moses, Bring Aaron's staff again before the testimony, to be kept as a token for the sons of rebellion".
Rem. There was the evidence of life in Aaron's staff. It brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.
J.T. Yes, and there is a normal development in connection with the rod. The bud comes first. It shows that God would have us to develop in a normal manner. We may gather up the truth from books, but in doing so we have taken a short cut. The idea is to begin with the bud. We see this order in Luke's gospel. The Babe is first presented, then the Boy,
{180}
and then the full grown Man; and heaven opens upon Him at the age of thirty years.
Aaron's rod was kept as a token: "that thou mayest put an end to their murmurings before me, that they may not die". I suppose that there is nothing greater in the whole universe than a man alive spiritually, one who has grown up normally. Paul said that he took Titus to Jerusalem. Titus was a gentile convert, a product of Paul's ministry; and, although there were those who were ready to spy out their liberty in Christ, what could they do about Titus? He was there in life, an evidence of Christ reproduced in the saints.
Rem. Paul told the Corinthians that they were the product of his ministry.
J.T. A reproduction of the life of Christ in the saints is what withstands opposition and rebellion; as Paul said, "Now in the same manner in which Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, thus these also withstand the truth ... . But they shall not advance farther, for their folly shall be completely manifest to all", @2 Timothy 3: 8, 9.
Ques. Would you look for this state in all the saints?
J.T. Yes. John's writings have this in view.
{181}
THE TABERNACLE SYSTEM (8)
@Deuteronomy 31: 14, 15; @Joshua 18: 1 - 7; @2 Chronicles 5: 2 - 5
J.T. These passages may serve to indicate the teaching in connection with the tent of meeting in these books. What we noticed in Exodus was that God was pleased to dwell among His people, and in Leviticus we saw that the people approached Him as dwelling thus among them. Numbers shows how God journeyed with His people through the wilderness as He said to David, "I have not dwelt in an house since the day that I brought up Israel to this day; but have gone from tent to tent", @1 Chronicles 17: 5. This shows the love of God in journeying with His people and entering into all the circumstances of the wilderness, so that, as they began to move, the ark went before to seek out a resting place for them, a type of the Lord Jesus going before us in love.
We also saw that all matters of difficulty arising in opposition to the truth were met by God coming down to the door of the tent of meeting. These are important features for us to consider. We can reckon on God intervening in difficulties and settling whatever might arise. In Deuteronomy very little is said about the tabernacle; yet it is recognised as being there. Although there is not much said about the tabernacle after @Numbers 21, it is mentioned in @Deuteronomy 31 in connection with the change of leadership from Moses to Joshua.
A.F.M. Would you mention the other places in Deuteronomy where the tabernacle or ark comes into view? Moses was told to put the testimony into the ark (@Exodus 25: 16).
J.T. In @Deuteronomy 31: 26. Moses commanded the Levites, "Take this book of the law, and put it
{182}
in the side of the ark". We will observe that, in the change of leadership, the song which Moses composed is taught to the people, and the book of the law is put into the ark.
Ques. The tabernacle is spoken of in Numbers as the tent of testimony but it is called the tent of meeting here. What is the difference?
J.T. The idea in the tent of the testimony is that God sets out what is in His mind. He had said, "thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee", @Exodus 25: 16. The testimony was placed in the ark and the ark was in the tent. This is one reason why the tent is called the tent of testimony in Numbers.
Rem. Say a little more on the allusion to the tent of meeting in Deuteronomy and to the tent of meeting in Numbers.
J.T. The tent of testimony suggests that God sets out what is in His mind. In @Numbers 17: 4 we see how God indicated His mind in relation to the priesthood when there was assumption on the part of others. Referring to the staves of the princes. Jehovah said, "thou shalt lay them up in the tent of meeting before the testimony, where I meet with you. And it shall come to pass, that the man whom I shall choose, his staff shall bud forth". Then in verse 7 it says, "And Moses laid the staves before Jehovah in the tent of the testimony. And it came to pass ... behold, the staff of Aaron for the house of Levi had budded". God showed that He had chosen Aaron. The first reference to the tent of meeting is in @Exodus 33: "And Moses took the tent, and pitched it outside the camp ... and called it the Tent of meeting. And it came to pass that every one who sought Jehovah went out to the tent of meeting which was outside the camp". It seems that God indicates His mind where the principle of separation is maintained.
{183}
In Deuteronomy there is to be a change of leadership and Jehovah appears at the tent of meeting. He had said to Moses, "Lo, the days are near for thee to die; call Joshua, and present yourselves at the tent of meeting, that I may give him a charge ... . And Jehovah appeared at the tent in the pillar of cloud; ... And Jehovah said to Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers". The time of Moses departure was at hand, but the testimony was to be continued.
J.S. In connection with a change of leadership, how would you apply the principle today?
J.T. I think that God would indicate His mind concerning it among the assembly. In christendom leaders are introduced in another way.
Rem. The assembly answers to the tent of meeting.
J.T. Yes, it is the place or sphere where God meets with His people who are in separation and in sympathy with Him and one another.
Rem. It appears that there is a principle wherein God may bring in a change of leadership.
J.T. I think it is a principle with God to carry on the testimony in connection with leadership.
C.A.M. But is there not a principle or a suggestion that God may change or use various vessels?
J.S. Is it not more a succession to leadership here rather than a change?
Rem. That seems evident, for there is no change until Moses is about to die.
J.T. Yes, in the chapter before us we see how clear that is, "And Jehovah said to Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers". In a similar manner, Paul said, "the time of my departure is at hand", @2 Timothy 4: 6.
Rem. His service was completed.
J.T. Yes, he had kept the faith and finished his course. Paul could say, "Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the
{184}
righteous judge, shall give me", @2 Timothy 4: 8. Paul is concerned about the continuation of the testimony and charges Timothy, "I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom; Preach the word", @2 Timothy 4: 1.
A.F.M. Where do you get the thought of succession to leadership in 2 Timothy?
J.T. In @2 Timothy 2: 1, 2, Paul told Timothy, "Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also". Timothy is instructed there to take up the question of leadership and to see that the ministry was passed on to faithful men. The tent of meeting should have an important place in our minds, because it is the place where God makes known what His dispositions are. Of course God is sovereign in connection with His dispositions, but He makes them known among His people as we see here in Deuteronomy in view of the continuation of ministry and service.
Rem. We see the close of Moses service and the beginning of Joshua's here.
Rem. Joshua was with Moses from the outset. Sympathy with the previous leader is necessary.
J.T. Joshua was Moses minister. He was with Moses on the mount; and he remained in the tabernacle after Israel failed in connection with the golden calf.
Rem. It appears that God carried on the same line of things which Moses set out. For instance, in @Joshua 20 we read, "And Jehovah spoke to Joshua, saying, Speak to the children of Israel, saying, Appoint for yourselves the cities of refuge, whereof I spoke unto you through Moses" (verses 1, 2). God does not disregard the previous leader.
{185}
J.T. Much is made of Moses; the previous leader is always recognised. Hence we read, "And it came to pass after the death of Moses the servant of Jehovah, that Jehovah spoke to Joshua the son of Nun, Moses attendant", @Joshua 1: 1. Joshua is referred to as Moses attendant. It is necessary that one should be adjusted after he is installed. Joshua was never anything to Moses other than his attendant.
J.S. Joshua would maintain what Moses spoke.
A.F.M. @Deuteronomy 34: 9 shows that: "And Joshua the son of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him; and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as Jehovah had commanded Moses".
J.T. Moses did not suggest the name of his successor. It says, "And Moses spoke to Jehovah, saying, Let Jehovah, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the assembly, who may go out before them, and who may come in before them, and who may lead them out, and who may bring them in, that the assembly of Jehovah be not as sheep that have no shepherd", @Numbers 27: 16, 17. Timothy is mentioned very little in the Acts, but he was qualified. I think the Lord takes up the one who is available, as seen in Timothy. You do not see a great vessel in Timothy as you do in Paul. The Lord said of Paul, "this man is an elect vessel to me, to bear my name before both nations and kings and the sons of Israel", @Acts 9: 15.
B.F. We see the priests associated with Joshua when he took up the position of a leader. He charges them in relation to the bearing of the ark of the covenant.
J.T. There is a suggestion there of state. We are priests and Levites in virtue of the fact that we are christians, and have the Spirit. Leadership is looked at from another point of view; God mentions Joshua in a special way in @Numbers 27. Moses appealed to
{186}
Jehovah as the God of the spirits of all flesh, but he said nothing about Joshua. Then God said, "Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him". It may be said that every christian has the Spirit. But God particularly says of Joshua here that he is "a man in whom is the spirit". He is characterised by having the Spirit.
A.F.M. Joshua was not a young man now, but a man fully developed.
J.T. He is a man "in whom is the spirit".
H.S.D. He is not an inexperienced man.
J.T. Joshua has experience. Formerly, he was a young man and was spoken of as such. But at that time he was not mentioned in connection with leadership. The qualifications of a leader must be present with one whom God takes up, and these qualifications must be known and seen by the saints. God knew what was in Joshua.
Rem. If the brethren introduced a leader, he would spoil things as Saul did. But David was a man after God's own heart. God supports the man whom He brings forward.
J.T. David had a secret history which was brought to light by the Spirit; Saul had none, for he could not even find his father's asses.
Ques. What would his inability to find the asses suggest?
J.T. Do you not think that it refers to communion? Those who are in communion with God know His mind, and have light about things. Saul's servant said to him, when he was about to give up searching for the asses, "Behold now, there is in this city a man of God, and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that we should go", @1 Samuel 9: 6. Those who are in communion with God make His mind known.
{187}
J.S. How would you regard Timothy in connection with leadership?
J.T. The apostle said, "This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me", @2 Timothy 1: 15. It was a question of apostolic authority. The brethren had turned away from Paul, but Timothy was one on whom he could lay his hands, a young man. Why should he take a young man? It was a strange thing.
Rem. Joshua was one who had brought back a good report of the land. He carried the truth of the heavenly position in his soul at all times. Now he has become a leader; the people are with him and he would continue to present the heavenly side of the truth to them.
J.T. He would be associated with Caleb as standing for the heavenly position and testimony.
A.F.M. Sometimes we see that there is opposition when the Lord brings forward a vessel. We may have our eyes on someone else, but the Spirit may indicate the opposite of what we had before us.
Ques. Are there leaders or one leader?
J.T. It is written, "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God", @Hebrews 13: 7. It is in the plural. There are those who are qualified. It goes on to say, "and considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith".
Rem. So we think of Joshua, David, and others.
J.T. Those men were types of Christ in peculiar ways. But there are leaders, as we see in Hebrews "Obey your leaders, and be submissive; for *they* watch over your souls as those that shall give account; that they may do this with joy, and not groaning, for this would be unprofitable for you", @Hebrews 13: 17.
Rem. The point you are making is that the Lord places leaders among us and they must be recognised.
J.T. Yes, that is the idea.
{188}
W.B. "The pillar of cloud stood over the entrance to the tent. And Jehovah said to Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers". We see how God indicated His mind to Moses and showed him what he should do.
J.T. Yes, Moses was told to call Joshua and present themselves at the tent of meeting; and Jehovah appeared there. The presence of the Lord among His people brings out what He is doing, and whom He is owning. Hence God appears and speaks to Moses; and finally He says to Joshua, "Be strong and courageous; for thou shalt bring the children of Israel into the land which I have sworn unto them; and I will be with thee", @Deuteronomy 31: 23. The idea of God owning and appearing to His servant is magnified in the gospels in connection with the Lord Jesus. In Mark's gospel it is written, "Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptised by John at the Jordan. And straightway going up from the water, he saw the heavens parting asunder, and the Spirit, as a dove, descending upon him. And there came a voice out of the heavens: *Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". We speak of the Son, the Lord Jesus, as the Servant in Mark's gospel; and we see in what a marvellous way He is owned and recognised by God: "Behold my servant, whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth! I will put my spirit upon him", @Isaiah 42: 1.
A.F.M. "He saw the heavens parting asunder, and the Spirit, as a dove, descending upon him". The saints will see the glory of God in a similar manner, and it will be a confirmation to them.
J.T. You see an instance of that when Peter on the mount wished to make three tabernacles. But, "While he thus spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them ... . And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear
{189}
him", @Luke 9: 34, 35. God showed whom He had selected.
Ques. Would the glory appear today in the way of ministry?
J.T. One can never be sure of the way God may show Himself, of the way that He will come in; for He has His own way of appearing.
Rem. The Lord's coming among us has to be observed spiritually.
J.T. Yes, I think those who are spiritual recognise it. In connection with the departure of Moses we have a song: "write ye this song for you, and teach it the children of Israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a witness for me against the children of Israel". I suppose Joshua is included in the writing of the song, "write ye this song". What is put into the mouths of the saints is a living ministry.
Rem. Joshua is associated with Moses in @Deuteronomy 32: 44: "And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears of the people, he, and Hoshea the son of Nun".
J.T. Yes, Joshua is linked up with the living ministry that was to be put in the mouths of the saints. The ministry was of a poetic form.
B.F. It was that form of ministry which would be preserved in the affections of the saints.
J.T. It was a poetic writing, and it was to be put in their mouths; it was to remain with them. The song was written the same day that he was told to write it (see @Deuteronomy 31: 22).
Ques. Why should this song be a witness?
J.T. God said, "this people ... will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them", @Deuteronomy 31: 16. This song would be a witness against them.
J.S. Hence we see that, "Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel the words of this song, until they were ended", @Deuteronomy 31: 30.
{190}
J.T. Moses knew what to write. That very day it was composed in freshness, and it was full of life:
<blockquote>"My doctrine shall drop as rain, <br>My speech flow down as dew, <br>As small rain upon the tender herb, <br>And as showers on the grass", @Deuteronomy 32: 2. </blockquote>
Rem. One may learn the song, but unless he gets in touch with God, it will do him no good.
J.T. But it will be a witness for God against him. For instance, the Bible is read in churches; it is a witness on God's behalf. The next thing we notice in connection with the song is how Moses rises to the occasion. It is a voice to all old brethren. Moses is about to die, but he is told to write a song and he writes it immediately. Joshua has part in it, a living ministry with which this second leader is connected; and it is put in the mouths of the saints. But the book of the law is put into the ark. This may suggest the truth as it is in Christ. It will never fail; so that the reference in Revelation is, "Jesus Christ, the faithful witness".
A.F.M. So that Moses says, "For the name of Jehovah will I proclaim: Ascribe greatness unto our God! He is the Rock, his work is perfect, For all his ways are righteousness; A God of faithfulness without deceit, Just and right is he", @Deuteronomy 32: 3, 4.
J.T. Yes, and then he goes on to depict the condition of the people: "They have dealt corruptly with him".
Rem. Moses makes a touching appeal to the people in his song: "Do ye thus requite Jehovah, Foolish and unwise people? Is not he thy father that hath bought thee? Hath he not made thee and established thee?" @Deuteronomy 32: 6.
Rem. The song seems to be very wide; Moses calls on the heavens and on the earth (verse 1).
J.T. Yes, it is very wide.
{191}
J.S. Is there anything corresponding to this in the New Testament?
J.T. I do not know. Of course you do not always get everything in the New Testament. There are things in the Old Testament which are not necessarily repeated in the New; the fact that they are in the Old Testament is enough. There are things new and old, and their instructions are applicable for all dispensations. You see how the testimony is linked together in a living way.
Ques. Does verse 2 of the song (@Deuteronomy 32: 2), "My doctrine shall drop as rain, My speech flow down as dew, As small rain upon the tender herb, And as showers on the grass" suggest that the ministry of a leader does not die with him?
J.T. I think that as Joshua was Moses attendant all the time he was never lifted up to the level of Moses. Hence he needs a good start.
Ques. Is Timothy a product of Paul's ministry?
J.T. Timothy was Paul's child. Paul said, "I have no one like-minded". Why should he speak thus of a young man? It was because there was no one among the older brethren.
Rem. The new leader would not reproach the old one.
J.T. We see how the thought is worked out in Joshua. He is associated with the song which Moses wrote; and we see how he continues after Moses death: "And Joshua the son of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him; and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as Jehovah had commanded Moses", @Deuteronomy 34: 9.
J.S. You said that Joshua did not rise to the level of Moses.
J.T. He did not. When Joshua began his ministry, he is spoken of in terms that would humble him: "And it came to pass after the death of Moses
{192}
the servant of Jehovah, that Jehovah spoke to Joshua the son of Nun, Moses attendant, saying, Moses my servant is dead", @Joshua 1: 1, 2.
H.S.D. What may we understand by the words, "as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee", @Joshua 1: 5?
J.T. It is not so much leadership there, but the inheritance is the important point: "Every place whereon the sole of your foot shall tread have I given to you". In @Joshua 19, we see that the priest comes first in connection with the distribution of the inheritance: "These were the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed by lot in Shiloh before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting". It is now more a matter of state in the people.
Rem. State is necessary in connection with the inheritance.
H.S.D. Is it fellowship?
J.T. Yes, we are set alongside each other now, and there is likely to be need of much adjustment, so that things are done in the presence of Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers. It is a question of spiritual power among the saints.
A.F.M. What is the difference in @Joshua 18: "And the whole assembly of the children of Israel gathered together at Shiloh, and set up the tent of meeting there; and the land was subdued before them. And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes whose inheritance had not been distributed to them. And Joshua said ... Provide you three men for a tribe; that I may send them, and they shall rise and go through the land, and describe it according to the proportion of their inheritance"? Joshua seems to take the lead there.
{193}
J.T. Probably you have something more in your mind.
A.F.M. I thought there was a contrast between chapters 18 and 19.
J.T. In chapter 18 I think you see an end of the encampments. Shiloh represents the gathering centre, "to him will be the obedience (or gathering) of peoples". The tabernacle as set up at Shiloh became a test to the people. The two-and-a-half tribes built an altar of their own, but Phinehas and the princes made the tabernacle the test: "if the land of your possession is unclean, come over into the land of the possession of Jehovah, where Jehovah's tabernacle dwelleth", @Joshua 22: 19.
Rem. So that the truth of the assembly enters into everything; anything that is contrary to it pertains to what is sectarian.
Rem. The assembly is the pillar and base of the truth.
Rem. You said Shiloh was connected with the gathering of the people.
J.T. Yes, it is the gathering centre; it is a type of Christ.
Ques. How may the distribution of the inheritance be seen now?
J.T. It is a suggestion of the place one has among the saints. They make room for you. It is a serious matter if they do not. The distributions were made in the presence of "Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun and the chief fathers of the tribes", meaning that the whole spiritual power was there.
Ques. Is there sovereignty in the distribution by lot?
J.T. Yes, and the distribution is made at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
Ques. There was difficulty at Corinth in recognising the sovereignty of God. Was it a lack of spiritual state?
{194}
J.T. I think so. Paul had to come in, as it were, and do things. The Corinthians were setting up leaders instead of recognising Paul.
Rem. The spiritual element seen in Eleazar and Joshua was not in Corinth.
J.T. It did not appear so. We see a beautiful picture of what we are saying in connection with Solomon. He is anointed with the horn of oil, when Adonijah was in rebellion: "And Zadok the priest took the horn of oil out of the tabernacle, and anointed Solomon: ... and all the people said, Long live king Solomon!" @1 Kings 1: 39.
W.B. The priest is the prominent person there, too.
J.S. It is remarkable that the horn of oil is taken out of the tabernacle.
J.T. They were a group of men associated with the priest: "And Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David's mule, and brought him to Gihon", @1 Kings 1: 38. These men were not with Adonijah.
Rem. Solomon is a type of the Lord.
J.T. I think the Lord has His place when the assembly recognises the Spirit. In @2 Chronicles 5 we see that: "they brought up the ark, and the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the tent ... . And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the oracle of the house, into the most holy place". The tabernacle merges into the temple.
A.F.M. The staves were drawn out.
J.T. There is the thought of permanence in that.
Ques. Do you think that the expression, "increases to a holy temple in the Lord" (@Ephesians 2: 21) refers to what is eternal?
{195}
J.T. I think it refers to the millennium.
A.F.M. "Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men" suggests that God came as near to men as possible.
J.T. Yes, it suggests the closeness of God to men; not so much the grandeur and glory of Solomon's reign.
Ques. Is there not an eternal thought in that?
J.T. Yes, the staves drawn out means that there will be no further wilderness experience.
W.B. What is the difference in David preparing a place for the ark and pitching a tent for it, and Solomon putting it in the temple?
J.T. David's act suggests what is provisional.
Ques. Do you think that the final movement of the tent suggests the present moment? Is there not a comparison for us today with what was done at Shiloh and Solomon's act?
J.T. I think the ministry of Paul presents a fixed state of things. In the early part of the Acts, the saints continued to go to the temple; but after Paul's ministry that state of affairs ceased.
{196}
READING ON @NEHEMIAH 1
@Nehemiah 1: 1 - 11
F.I. What is the setting of this book in relation to the previous book?
J.T. It would appear from the first chapter of Ezra that he presents the divine intervention, God acting of Himself to bring about His thoughts; He acts outside of His people in Cyrus, whereas here you will observe that it is from the point of view of the exercise of one of the people. These two things run together in God's ways -- God's sovereign action to bring about His thoughts, using whom He will, and then the exercise in His people who are found in relationship with Him, and who feel the conditions existent which are the outcome of their own guilt, their own conduct. So that what we have in @Nehemiah 1 is what this brother or person has to say. It is a very interesting side of the thing -- what he has to say as having gone through all that is recorded in chapter 1. They are the words of Nehemiah, a man who has had to do with God about things, who has humbled himself and has helped the people of God in very remarkable ways; so we do well to listen to what he has to say. He can say much that will be a guide to us in similar circumstances. The book of Ezra is an account of what God did; it is more historical: it begins, "In the first year of Cyrus king of Persia", and goes on to tell us what God did. The writer's name is not mentioned; it is just to tell us what God did. It says, "That the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia".
But here in this chapter we get the words of Nehemiah, a man, as I have said, who has been through things with God and whom God has used;
{197}
Ezra would more correspond with divine intervention generally, as in the law and the prophets; Nehemiah is more in agreement with the Psalms, what one has been through.
Ques. Do you think the name 'Nehemiah' which means 'Comfort of Jehovah' throws any light on the book?
J.T. It says, "that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God", @2 Corinthians 1: 4. He evidently proved God in his experience.
Rem. Ezra seems to deal more with the house of God, whilst Nehemiah is concerned about the walls of Jerusalem.
J.T. That is so. Ezra deals with the house.
Rem. They say, "the wall of Jerusalem is in ruins"; would you mind saying a little about that?
J.T. You would expect Ezra's ministry to have to do with the house, he being a priest. We have his genealogy carefully given to us, right back to Aaron; he is a priest and you would expect a priest to have to do with the house of God; God selected him for that purpose. Nehemiah is the governor and his ministry, I suppose, would take character from that, for he has the city before him.
Ques. Would it refer to the preservation of things?
J.T. Quite. The Lord is pleased to be Governor to us in our small way now: "the government shall be upon his shoulder" (@Isaiah 9: 6), meaning the universal government of God.
Haggai and Zechariah the prophets have to do with the recovery. Haggai treats of the governor, and Zerubbabel is called the governor in that book, but those he ruled over were a mere handful as compared with what David and Solomon ruled over, but he is a type of the Lord in His contentment to be Governor to us in our small circumstances; so
{198}
that there is on the one hand that which regulates with authority, and on the other hand we have Joshua the priest, maintaining what is due to God, Godward. The same thoughts, I suppose, may be traced in Nehemiah and Ezra. There is the government of God which goes on among us, and the Lord is pleased to exercise that office, the office of Governor. Presently He will be Governor universally, but He is content to be with us now.
E.S.H. It is very touching to think that we prove the Lord in this way in these days of weakness and outward ruin.
J.T. Nehemiah is occupying himself with the city; he had that in view.
Ques. Is that why the Lord is presented to us in @Matthew 2 in such small circumstances: "And *thou* Bethlehem, land of Juda, art in no wise the least among the governors of Juda"? Does the Governor come to light in connection with the feeble remnant that appreciate His rule, in view of the universal rule?
J.T. Quite. And so it runs right through Matthew. He is Governor. Government is emphasised in Matthew more than in the other gospels, even Pilate is called the governor. Government is the subject, so that in the end we are to apprehend the Lord in that light. It is not a question of His coming to our side or the exercise of grace, although grace is there, but rather that we come to Him; He sends a message through the angel to the women, "go quickly and say to his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and behold, he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him". It is not, 'I shall see you', but "they shall see me". If you want to see the king, he does not say, 'I will see you'; but you want to see him, you are the one in need, you have something to ask. Of course, if the king wants to send you somewhere, it is another matter. But Matthew is on the ground that you have a petition to ask and you
{199}
want to see Him; you have to seek out the Lord. Hence He says, 'they shall see Me in Galilee'. In John it is, "I will see you again" (@John 16: 22), that is to say, His love for us would take Him to see us. In Matthew it is more distant, more government and authority; it is a question of One who has got everything in His hands; and, as in responsibility, you must go to Him; you can do nothing without Him. He says, 'You will see Me there', and then it says that they should see Him in the appointed place: *they would see Him*. Then He came up to them and they worshipped Him.
Rem. The Lord is presented in that way in Matthew and at the end of that gospel it is recorded that He "stood before the governor", @Matthew 27: 11. The true Governor Himself is witnessing before Pontius Pilate a good confession; He is the One who is going to have universal sway, the blessed and only Ruler, King of kings and Lord of lords (@1 Timothy 6: 15, 16).
J.T. Just so.
Ques. What would answer to the exercise of Nehemiah as the result of the report that is brought to him?
J.T. I think he presents an exercise that is coming to those who have the light of God. He says, "Hanani, one of my brethren, came"; he is in relation with the brethren, he recognises that he is not the only one, because it says in verse 11, "O Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants who delight to fear thy name". He is not like Elijah, who thinks he is the only one; he recognises others; this is a wholesome thing to be reminded of.
Ques. Would it answer to 2 Timothy conditions, pursuing "righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those
{200}
that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart", @2 Timothy 2: 22?
J.T. There is no doubt about them being there; they are there.
Rem. It seems that the one who brought this report was quite in sympathy with Nehemiah.
J.T. It says, "Hanani, one of my brethren, came, he and certain men of Judah"; there was a movement on their part; doubtless they had come all that way in deep concern, and they recognise that this brother was in a position to be of service, and they were not amiss, for he says, "I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, who were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem".
Ques. Would you say that the Lord is taking account of our exercise?
J.T. Yes. I think Nehemiah might rise to be a sort of type of the Lord; he is in a position to serve here: but, anyway, he recognises them as his brethren and that they had come.
Ques. Does not the fact that he enquires "concerning the Jews" indicate reproach?
J.T. I think so; only before that you have "one of my brethren", that was their relation to him, and then there were the "men of Judah"; that is no mean term; it would remind us of greater things, Judah's place. The term 'Jews' would denote reproach, they were brought down to narrow straits.
E.S.H. Judah speaks of sovereignty on the one hand and strength on the other, "the lion which is of the tribe of Juda ... has overcome so as to open the book", @Revelation 5: 5.
Ques. Would it correspond to those who wrote to Paul in relation to the state of things at Corinth?
J.T. Yes, "it has been shown to me concerning you, my brethren, by those of the house of Chloe, that there are strifes among you", @1 Corinthians 1: 11. When he speaks of the one that they were to put
{201}
away out of their midst he says, "It is universally reported that there is fornication among you", @1 Corinthians 5: 1. But the state of division that existed amongst them was mentioned to him by certain of the household of Chloe. They had not written about that, although they had written to the apostle (@1 Corinthians 7: 1); when we write about anything, or make enquiry, we often do not ask the question that should be asked. The real difficulty was division amongst them.
Ques. Would the residue being in affliction and reproach apply to the present moment?
J.T. That is how things are, is it not? If you look abroad and see how things are among the saints, or if you take account of them locally, you have to admit that there is great weakness.
Rem. Nehemiah is a man who felt things, but then it is to be noted that there were others who felt things; these men who came to him felt things; it was a terrible story they told. But evidently Nehemiah was more with God and they discerned it.
J.T. The question may arise as to how much we feel things with God.
E.S.H. With Ezra it is a question of the house, is it not?
J.T. We want to get at the house. This brother (because that is what he is) wants to know about things and it is very important to get a true estimate of things as they are. If you are to serve the people of God, you want to have a true estimate of the conditions, and then the next thing is to bring in all the help you can. The first thing is that he humbles himself. Who can help in this matter? It says, "it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat and wept, and mourned for days, and fasted, and prayed before the God of the heavens", and so on. He does not appeal to the God of Israel, that is to say, he has right instincts, he is intelligent. It would be unbecoming for him to appeal to the God of Israel
{202}
here. It is "the God of the heavens"; that title relates to what is universal; it refers to what Nebuchadnezzar had to learn, that the heavens ruled. The Jews, although having ancient privileges, had to take their place with the nations. Nehemiah claims nothing on that line; he addresses the God of the heavens. Then he goes on to cite Scripture and certain promises that God had made anticipating these circumstances, and he brings this scripture to bear on the position.
Ques. Does he recognise in that way that the whole position is forfeited on the responsible line?
J.T. I think so; "Call his name Lo-ammi; for ye are not my people" (@Hosea 1: 9); they had no claim on God on that line; it was a question of the God of the heavens acting for them.
Rem. You do not even get the God of Jacob referred to; there is the recognition of the conditions that had come in and Nehemiah identifies himself with it all.
Rem. He falls back on the mercy of God.
J.T. He does, and he recognises in the title, the God of the heavens, that Israel had forfeited their privileges; he fasted and prayed.
F.I. Ezra recognises the same condition amongst the people of God, and yet he prays to the God of Israel.
J.T. Well, I think that is the priestly side. Nehemiah represents the government. A priest can always have access to God; he takes things up on spiritual lines, but the two things go together; we cannot ignore the government of God. Nehemiah would teach us to bow to the government of God, and not to assume that things were as they should be.
Ques. Do you mean that we have to distinguish between our private intercourse with God and our public standing?
{203}
J.T. That is just the thing. Publicly you do not claim anything. You have forfeited all, but inwardly, according to John's ministry, you have access to God. The things are all there, but they are not named. Generally, with John the things are there; there is "the beginning", they are there, but you do not name them, nor do you claim them.
Ques. It speaks of the wall of Jerusalem being in ruins, and its gates burned with fire; what is the distinction between the wall and the gates?
J.T. The wall is protection. The gates represent administration, and give access also to what is inside. There must always be the idea of administration at the gates, because it is a question of letting people in; so the angels are at the twelve gates of the holy city and the names of the twelve tribes are inscribed. It is a governmental, administrative thing, indicated in the number twelve. The wall being broken down would mean, in our day, that the principle of fellowship -- that which excludes evil, would have ceased, and that there was no idea of something inside to which you had access. There might be something individual, but there is nothing going on in the way of administration or spiritual movement or access to what is of God, nothing going on in a systematic way. Fellowship implies that we are brought back to the divine order.
E.G. The walls are broken down, the gates are burned with fire; would one be on the line of responsibility and the other divine judgment coming in? There could not be any administration according to God, if the walls were broken down.
J.T. The conditions were most deplorable; there was nothing either for God or for man, you might say. The walls were broken down, that is there was no protection for the things of God; and there was nothing going on in the way of administration.
{204}
Rem. These things were spoken of together by those who were sympathetic with God. Nehemiah, on the one hand, and those who came with him on the other.
J.T. That is how the matter begins on our side. In Ezra God begins Himself. In 1 Samuel the ark was taken and, unless God acted, everything was hopeless. But God did act, he acted among the Philistines so that they came up against a stone wall, they could not do anything. What were they going to do with the ark they had taken? As a matter of fact the ark dominated them, they were afraid. It was really in charge among the Philistines, so that the diviners say that it is a question of letting this go; there must be release; they quoted from Exodus -- what Pharaoh had to come to, and what the Egyptians had to come to: they had to let the people go. Well, who did that? The people could not have done it. It was Jehovah who did it. They had to let the people go. So they say, 'Now what you must do is, take two milch kine, on which there has come no yoke'. That was the tacit acknowledgment that they really had not taken possession of the ark at all, that they could not keep it, it was too great for them. "And send it away that it may go. And see, if it go up by the way of its own border to Beth-shemesh, it is he who has done us this great evil". And the milch kine went straight forward on the way to Beth-shemesh, which was the place of the ark. There was the acknowledgment that God had come in of Himself. That is what you get in @1 Samuel 6. Well then, what is the corresponding state of the people? God is acting thus against the Philistines on their account; what is the state of the people? The next chapter tells us that the people came to Samuel and acknowledged their guilt and they poured water out before the Lord, corresponding really with Nehemiah; it was from their side and Samuel takes
{205}
a sucking-lamb. It is not now something upon which the yoke had never come, that was the ark; but it is a sucking-lamb, it is something that is dependent, that is our side. If God has done that for us, then we are to be dependent on Him all the time. A sucking-lamb is a dependent creature, and it is offered up to God as a whole burnt-offering -- it is one idea. And then it says God thundered with a great thunder on the Philistines. He did that in answer to the sucking-lamb. So that God's sovereign action on the one hand, and our dependence on the other, is the way of deliverance.
Rem. Nehemiah shows us how recovery in regard to separation and administration begins with himself.
J.T. That is the thing to see; they are the words of a man who has gone through all this and they are worth listening to. And so he goes over the ground and he says, "Let thine ear now be attentive"; he is dependent on God, he is speaking to God, "and thine eyes open, to hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee at this time ... confessing the sins of the children of Israel, which we have sinned against thee; both I and my father's house have sinned". He does not exonerate himself at all. Well, God will hear that. "We have acted very perversely against thee, and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the ordinances that thou commandedst thy servant Moses. Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy servant Moses, saying, If ye act unfaithfully, I will scatter you among the peoples; but if ye return to me and keep my commandments and do them, though there were of you cast out unto the uttermost part of the heavens, yet will I gather them from thence, and will bring them unto the place that I have chosen to set my name there". That is a most remarkable prayer, because he acknowledges that Israel is not on a different footing from the nations,
{206}
it is a question of the God of the heavens. But then God had spoken about them in these circumstances, and Nehemiah knew the scriptures well enough to quote them.
Rem. Does this correspond with the second book of Psalms, where Jehovah's name is so much omitted? The writer of the first psalm in the second book remembers having passed along with the multitude to the house of God, and his soul is disquieted within him; but he says, I will yet praise Him.
J.T. Yes, one of the sons of Korah is the writer; in the second book the people had no claim on God.
Ques. Would you say a word on the application of the spirit of Nehemiah's prayer to ourselves today?
J.T. It is a full acknowledgment of the guilt of the professing body. It contemplates a knowledge, I think, of the addresses to the seven assemblies in Asia, that is to say, what the Lord says to each assembly. Nehemiah here is able to refer to a scripture that fitted in with these circumstances. If you know the addresses to the assemblies, you will know what fits in with your own time, because that is church history, and you can cite that. If you can locate your position in the history, then you will know what word fits, because the Lord has a word to say to each assembly, and the Holy Spirit enlarges on that whatever it is. You are intelligent as to what fits in with your own time. There is an authoritative word to every assembly. But you are not called to hear that, that is put down, that is written, that is read; what the Lord says is written, but what the Spirit says is not written, "He that has an ear, let him *hear* what the Spirit says to the assemblies". That is for the present time, what the Spirit is saying. If you have your ear open for that, you will know the word of the Lord that covers your position and you can cite it.
{207}
Rem. So that it would enable you intelligently and feelingly to pray for all God's people.
J.T. So that you will put yourself in "the rest" (@Revelation 2: 24) -- not the Ephesian church, nor Smyrna, nor Pergamos, nor exactly Thyatira, but you can find out just where you are by the subject of the addresses to the assemblies, and then you will know the scripture that fits. Now, Nehemiah knew the scripture that fitted the position, showing he was conversant with Scripture.
Rem. His attitude also was suitable.
J.T. I think that the word in 2 Timothy is very striking on that account. "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work", @2 Timothy 3: 16, 17. He knows the mind of God, he knows the scripture that applies to his own times, he is fully fitted. You will find in 2 Timothy and in John remarkable assertion of the authority of Scripture.
Ques. Is what is written prominent where conditions are abnormal?
J.T. Scriptural authority is asserted. So that, after the Lord was raised. John tells us, the disciples believed the scripture and the word that Jesus had said (@John 2: 22).
Rem. The Scriptures in that way would correspond to the word of the Lord.
J.T. Well, they do, they are authoritative. You find that a man like Philip brings them in in regard of Christ: "We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the law, and the prophets, Jesus, the Son of Joseph, who is from Nazareth" -- that is whom he had found. He knew that; he was conversant with Moses and the law and the prophets.
{208}
Rem. The Lord said, "Ye search the scriptures" (@John 5: 39) and "the scripture cannot be broken" (@John 10: 35); that is a comfort to our hearts in a day of ruin.
J.T. So that Nehemiah here knows where to go to get a scripture. He could remind God of a promise which fitted. He might have gone to other scriptures where God had spoken of certain things as to which He would fulfil His promise, but this scripture fits exactly. He says, so to speak, 'You said this in view of these very circumstances: remember, I beseech thee'.
Ques. Does the scripture you were referring to earlier in the week, in @John 11, answer to our own days?
J.T. I think so, there is nothing pretentious in the thought of gathering together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad (@John 11: 52). It is what God is doing.
Ques. Do you think it would help to remind God of any promise that relates to one individually as well as collectively?
J.T. Certainly scriptures that fit us individually can fit also the assembly's position; one gets comfort in it. God loves to be trusted, He loves to be taken at His word. He is faithful. The apostle twice over in addressing the Corinthians, says, "God is faithful". We can reckon on anything on His side.
In the addresses to the seven assemblies, the Lord has spoken in view of every possible circumstance that can arise in the history of the church; there is a word for every epoch. You want to know what place is yours, and make that the basis of your exercise. With us there is the additional thing, that the Holy Spirit speaks. We are not told what He says, the point is to listen to what He says, and if you do, you will have understanding of the times and you will know what Israel ought to do (@1 Chronicles 12: 32).
{209}
You will know what God will do, because He has committed Himself in what the Lord has said to each assembly, and you know what to expect. The Lord has spoken an authoritative word to every assembly and that is written down. We do not have to hear that, we have to read that; it is written in a book and sent to the assemblies to be read. But we are not asked to read what the Spirit says, it is to hear what He is saying, a constant ministry.
Ques. Would that apply universally? It is not only what the Spirit is saying locally.
J.T. You hear whatever He says; it is not only what He says to you locally, but what He says to the assemblies, to all of them.
Ques. Would it be in keeping with Scripture?
J.T. It would, particularly with what the Lord says authoritatively, and there is a premium on reading it. But it would take libraries to contain what the Holy Spirit says, it is to be listened to.
E.S.H. The thought of returning is very important, then the keeping of the commandments and the statutes and ordinances -- it is very applicable to us in our day.
J.T. Yes, "if ye return to me, and keep my commandments and do them, though there were of you cast out unto the uttermost part of the heavens, yet will I gather them from thence". One has been encouraged to pray for the brethren in all the great religious bodies, at the greatest distance; you can begin with the Romish system, then there is the Greek system, and the Lutheran and then the Anglican and all these independent bodies in this country and America; the brethren are in all these things; but it says, though they be scattered to the uttermost part of the heavens, yet will I gather them; God will gather them. First there is the returning and then the keeping of the commandments. Shear-jashub means "a remnant shall return". God says to Isaiah,
{210}
"Go out now to meet Ahaz, thou and thy son Shear-jashub, at the end of the aqueduct of the upper pool, on the highway of the fuller's field", @Isaiah 7: 3. That is one of the principles of our times; "a remnant shall return". Am I to be amongst them? That word might be circulated everywhere; it is a divine pronouncement. That boy was a testimony to Ahaz that that was going on, "a remnant shall return". Am I amongst them? That is the thing here. Then the next thing is to keep His commandments, the principle of submission to the will of God; "He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me", @John 14: 21. God will bring us back from the uttermost distance, as He says here.
Rem. God will carry out His own thoughts if there is the returning to Him.
J.T. What comes out here is not God's sovereignty as in Ezra; but Nehemiah is to show that there is a corresponding movement of the brethren, and that runs right through; God provides for our day, but it is on moral lines; God acts on moral lines; He acts sovereignly, but on moral lines; there is the principle of returning and the principle of keeping His commandments; where these things are He will bring you to the utmost limit of blessing, where His Name is set, and that is where you get everything; all the spiritual things are there for us. It is well to begin intelligently as to the God of the heavens; it is not God in relationship with us but the God with whom we have to do; the privileges conferred have been forfeited, but in His mercy He brings us back to them all. Then you get the principle of gathering, and then, "I ... will bring them unto the place that I have chosen". That was a spiritual thing. That is what was said in @Exodus 15: He would bring them in and plant them in the mountain of His inheritance, in the place where He had chosen to dwell. You would surely know when you were there.
{211}
<blockquote> "And see! the Spirit's power <br>Has ope'd the heavenly door, <br>Has brought us to that favoured hour <br>When toil shall all be o'er". (`74:5)</blockquote>
It is a spiritual thing.
Ques. I suppose you could always look for this amongst those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart (@2 Timothy 2: 22)?
J.T. Yes; they are there. Nehemiah goes on to say here, "prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man". He is not occupied with the place of the king, he is before the God of the heavens; the king was only a man to him now.
Ques. Why does he say that he was the king's cupbearer?
J.T. I do not know whether it has a spiritual reference; that is what he was, anyway; he had access to the king; but before God he was just a man, he was not anything more.
E.G. He recognises that the hearts of all men are in God's hands.
J.T. He does, indeed. He says, so to speak, 'this man is in charge of things' -- it ought to have been a son of David or Solomon, but it is just this man. The Lord recognises Pilate as having power, and yet he says, 'You would have no power at all except it were given you from above'. He recognises that the Romans were there in the government of God, and He submits to it.
{212}
DIVINE REGULATION
@Luke 5: 3 - 11; @Luke 19: 1 - 10; @Luke 9: 12 - 17
I think we shall see in the scriptures we have read that there is divine regulation, a subject that the evangelist Luke expresses having in view the order that is becoming to the people of God. For divine order cannot be seen in us save as we are subject to divine regulation; nothing is more foreign to God than independency, that is, in man.
We see in the physical systems around us how everything is regulated by law, and therefore you have order and benefit to man. Apart from the recognition of order or divine regulation, there must be catastrophe, of which we have indeed evidences from time to time in physical things, but, alas, much more in moral things, for it is the moral things that man has to handle. He could do little or nothing to interfere with the great bodies which God has created for his benefit, even as to the earth itself upon which he is, his power of interference is small, but in the moral things that God has introduced here, man has had a great deal to say, and catastrophe after catastrophe have ensued.
But the Lord came into this world as the poor wise man in Ecclesiastes, in order to deliver the little city, for the things that God had introduced for the regulation of man in the way of systems had become reduced and were apparently at the mercy of the enemy, for it says that a great king came against the little city and built bulwarks against it, but there was in that city a poor wise man who, by his wisdom, delivered the city. It is in the gospel of Luke that we get the poor wise man particularly, although he is that throughout the New Testament; in this gospel we have Christ come in lowliness and obscurity, but
{213}
presently the action of wisdom became evident, and consequently the sure deliverance of the city from the attack. So I feel encouraged, beloved brethren, to call attention to Luke from the standpoint of divine guidance and direction and regulation, for obviously the principles which God introduced are for man; they are to be wrought out by man. For as by man came lawlessness, so by man came resurrection of the dead and righteousness, and the setting out of divine regulation, and all that came in in Christ, who was subject to God in every detail, growing up before Him as a tender plant, increasing, as we are told, in favour with God and man, so that when He reached the age of thirty the voice out of heaven says, "*Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight", @Luke 3: 22. He answered to God and the Holy Spirit came upon Him in a bodily form as a dove -- *a bodily form*. It abode upon Him so that now He was here in a public way for ministry; to effect, so to say, the deliverance of the little city.
This must be worked out in man, and so you find in Luke that great stress is laid upon faith. Zacharias was in every way blameless, he and his wife Elizabeth, and trustworthy as to their walk; he, too, conformed to the outward regulation of the priesthood, serving in his order, yet he was unbelieving. So that we may be outwardly regulated apparently, and yet inwardly unbelieving. As Gabriel therefore comes to him and announces to him that he is to have a son according to his prayer and supplications, he cannot believe the glad message. He was unbelieving, and so was rendered dumb for a season until the answer should come to his prayer. We are thus reminded in the beginning of Luke that for the working out of divine principles in us there must be faith.
The regulation is of a moral kind, and comes as a result of the subjection of the heart in faith, so Paul
{214}
says, "Ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching" (@Romans 6: 17); teaching, then, beloved, affects the heart. Zacharias was dumb until the child was born, John the baptist, as we speak of him, but then he opens his mouth and blesses God. He is now a priest by faith; he is a believer. That, standing at the beginning of the gospel, reminds us that everything in this dispensation is on the principle of faith, and not on the principle of sight, and whilst it is the great gospel of prayer, prayer must be in faith or it is ineffective.
The Lord, I believe, begins this service of divine regulation in Peter, and so He enters into his house, as in chapter 4, but as far as the record goes Peter got no help from the visit, although the gain came to his wife's mother, a great advantage to him doubtless, making things easier for him in his house, and God may make things easier for you, yet it may not touch you yourself.
It was a very striking sign, the restoration of Peter's wife's mother, but there is nothing said about the effect of it on Peter, and yet there cannot be a doubt that the Lord had Peter especially in His mind in going into his house. We are not told that He was invited in; it would appear to be an act of the Lord, for He knew what a great servant Peter was to be, but there is nothing said as to the effect of it in Simon, and so the next movement of the Lord is in relation to Peter's business. It may be that he was more interested in his business affairs than he was in his house. It is often the case with us, and we may well be reminded of the danger of excessive attention to business and neglect of our houses. What you look for in a christian is balance. The Lord had not yet approached Peter in his business relations. He now entered into Peter's boat, we are told. It was not accidental; it was not, the only boat there, but it was the one the Lord selected. He had Peter in
{215}
His mind; much was to be worked out in this man; the Lord knew what He was doing and so He asked Peter to move the boat out into the water. It was not a command; it was not an order; it was a request. The Lord is extremely tender with us in all His dealings; He would avoid wounding unless a wound is necessary, and so He *asks* Peter that he would draw out into the water, and then He speaks from that boat. This was an immense advantage for Peter, and yet it does not appear that he was in any way affected. He had failed to be affected both in his house and in his boat, but when the Lord finishes, He addresses Peter. He does not ask him now; He directs him to launch out, as you will observe. He says, "Draw out into the deep water, and let down your nets for a haul". He is coming near now to Peter's soul, and in the perfection of His service to every one of us He knows just when to do the thing that is necessary. There is never a bow shot at a venture with the Lord; the aim is always taken, and the object reached; so that He directs at the right moment. Instead of asking, it is now a question of testing.
Peter says to Him, "having laboured through the whole night we have taken nothing", that is, he was doubtful. The Lord had said, "Draw out into the deep water, and let down your nets for a haul". There is no hesitancy in these words; they are most direct words, and this is divine direction, but Peter is doubtful. But in his doubtfulness he is submissive. He says, "but at thy word I will let down the net". Thank God, Peter is saved! Not actually saved yet but potentially saved. He is obedient, "at thy word I will let down the net". That was all the Lord asked him to do; He did not appeal to him for confidence; He only directed him to do that one thing, and he did it.
Now perhaps there is someone here lacking in that
{216}
thing. Peter did it! His feelings had nothing to do with the result; the result was not to be through his feelings; he made it perfectly plain what his feelings were, but they had nothing to do with the result of obedience. You see there is the question of the power of God coming in; whatever it is that is confronting you, whatever your feelings, if the word is plain to you, obey and you will be regulated. Peter is now under divine regulation. See the result -- the great draught of fishes. Now it was a partnership, and there was another boat in the partnership and other men also. Possibly they had never had a better day's business than that under divine direction. You may be sure of it, beloved, that by simple obedience to the word, whatever it refers to, there will be prosperity, for the power of God goes with the word. Well, now it became the occasion of light entering into Peter's soul, for the fishes were a detail after all.
Peter was in the Lord's eye, as you are and as I am, and we are told that he fell down at Jesus knees; now that is the result of submitting to divine regulation. The Lord did not tell him to do that. You see the effect of light in the soul so that you move in the light that comes into it, but there is no light in your soul until you learn to obey. The light in the soul becomes operative. "But at thy word I will let down the net" is submission to what is precursory to the light coming into the soul, and in that light Peter moved. He fell down at Jesus knees; at His knees! That was a matter of instinct; it was perhaps the first definite spiritual movement in Peter. It is not a question now of intelligence, but of instinct, for instinct led him to fall down at His knees. His spiritual history is beginning, the history that stands out in Scripture by itself, and now comes the adjustment.
I speak of this one point in relation to our households
{217}
and businesses. The Lord teaches us where He can be effective, and so instead of Peter being affected by the prosperity of the movement, he draws the ships to shore and leaves all. He is settled in regard to his business; it will not hinder him permanently again. Later he did come back but he would not be permanently hindered by his business again. It says that he had the word from the Lord that he was to be a fisher of men. You see the gain of coming under divine regulation, and the irreparable loss in refusing it. Had Peter refused to act upon the word of the Lord he would have been irretrievably lost, but he obeyed.
Well now I wish to carry this thought on to Zacchaeus, for it is in him you see the regulation of the Lord as entering into his house. It does not appear, as I said, that Peter was affected when the Lord entered his house, but when Jesus entered into the house of Zacchaeus (and we need our houses regulated, for if we are to be in the assembly right our houses must be right) he was affected.
So we are told that the Lord passed through Jericho; He entered it and passed through it. What thoughts were in His mind as He entered that city and passed through it? He would remember Rahab; what spiritual history was connected with that city! Nothing would be omitted in the Lord's mind as He passed through it. It had been subjected to a curse, as you will remember, and he that rebuilt it had suffered the penalty. He entered it and passed through it, and Zacchaeus appeared. He was the chief tax-gatherer, he was rich, but we are reminded here that God is no respecter of persons, for in the assembly "the rich and poor meet together; Jehovah is the maker of them all". It is a great triumph that the rich man is brought in and his riches are devoted to the interests of God. They are not to be despised, as we see in the case of Barnabas, and the man
{218}
himself we see at Antioch. Zacchaeus is said to be rich but his riches do not add anything to him morally, nor do they ever. At best they could only be a sacrifice of a lower kind. Zacchaeus was a big man in the community, doubtless, for money always gives you a stature there, whatever your character. But when it comes to Christ and getting a view of Christ he was small in stature and could not see the Lord as the others did. Others were taller than he, but nevertheless he was genuine although little, and so he desired to see the Lord, who He was. A very worthy motive. Not mere curiosity; it was a genuine desire to see the Lord, who He was; a desire one would be glad to see in anyone. The Person is being attacked everywhere, so it is a worthy motive to see the Lord, who He is. Zacchaeus rose up then, and climbed into a sycamore tree. In other words, although he had a worthy motive he is unregulated; it was not in keeping with the position that he should be up in the tree when the Lord was on the road. It was unworthy of him to be up in the tree, for had he remained on the earth the Lord would not have had to look up to him. He was little in stature; he was taking advantage of circumstances to elevate himself, and it is so sometimes with the rich. Rich people know that they have an advantage according to man, and they assume it enters into the house of God, but it does not! All circumstances shall be removed; a tree can easily be removed but the tree was not removed here; Zacchaeus was removed, and that was to his credit. How was he removed? It was by word of the Lord; he was capable of being removed by the word of the Lord. Now how does that come to you in your circumstances? He would say, "make haste and come down" and He adds to it an incentive, "today", He said, "I must abide at thy house". "I am coming to remain in it". He was a man of small stature, but as He says to Nathaniel,
{219}
"when thou wart under the fig tree, I saw thee". Zacchaeus would see the Lord in his house; what an advantage to have the Lord in your house! He says later that "salvation is come to this house".
Whatever your motive, whatever your desire, submit to the word of the Lord, and make haste and do it. He made haste and came down. Well, this brings in persecution, for you may be sure that as you give Christ a place and as He associates Himself with you, others will complain, and that is what happened here. You see it will at once cost you persecution if you come under divine guidance. Make haste and do it; immediately he does it, there is complaint. The Lord indeed is complained against. Zacchaeus was a tax-gatherer, should the Lord be in such a house as his? Now Zacchaeus stands up and says "Lord". Ah, what a fine title that is! How much do we say 'Lord'? In @1 Corinthians 12: 3 it says, "no one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit"; and so Zacchaeus is confessing the Lord. He says, "Lord".
It was as much as to say, 'I have got to answer to You now in regard to this money I have'. He is coming under divine regulation. He was reputed to be rich, but now he has to answer to the Lord with regard to it, and he says, "Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor". Well, that is not a small amount, even for a rich man. It is well to measure ourselves with persons that Scripture presents to us. Now he says, "and if I have taken anything from any man by false accusation, I return him fourfold". That was a good return, a liberal return, and the Lord says, "This day is salvation come to this house". He is a saved man, and his house is saved. He is regulated by the Lord; salvation is of the Lord; it is an acknowledgment that one is saved, and one's house. "Inasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham". He is now a noble; he is brought into the family of
{220}
faith; he is owned to be that by the Lord. There is no family like it. He had riches, but riches do not give you family status, for the Lord gives him this indeed. He is a son of Abraham. Where is there status like that? There is none.
Well, all that, beloved, is by coming under divine regulation; and now the final thought that I had was in chapter 9. This has reference to collective regulation, for it is obvious that we are to be regulated personally in our businesses and our houses if we are to have a portion in the assembly, and so in chapter 9 what you find is that the twelve introduced this subject, the feeding of the five thousand. The twelve were those who were specially selected to be His administrators on earth; those who were known to have part in the Lord's service. Well, they take account of the multitude; what are they going to do? Instead of taking up their responsibility as the twelve, they are shirking it. They are putting it on to the Lord. We must never do this! He loves to see us do the thing rather than put it on to Him. He says nothing about it; they put it on to Him although what was to be done was perfectly plain. Is it not often so locally that what is to be done is perfectly plain, but we put it off? He will be with you if it is according to His mind. They would be belying His character by sending them away hungry. They had been with Him long enough to know that He would not do that; they had seen Him do things and now comes the word that they should do it. Then why not do it? God says to Moses, "Why dost thou cry unto me? Speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward", @Exodus 14: 15. If the thing is plain, then do it, and so it is here, the twelve address the Lord and He says to them, "Give *ye* them to eat". What a test! They had just been talking to Him about the wonderful things they had done; now He says to them, "Give *ye* them to eat". They had
{221}
not much means to do it; they said nothing about the little boy and did not make mention of what they had, but what I want to come to is *the division into companies*.
This is also mentioned in Matthew but not so specifically; Luke mentions only one number -- in companies of fifty. Well, you say, 'What has that to do with food?' It is the Lord's direction and that is what I am at. There can be no questioning the Lord's directions; any disregard must be to our loss and the loss of the saints. They do it. That is very fine, for here His direction is accepted and carried out. In other directions they had utterly failed, to their loss. He would praise us for anything that we do that is right, but what about the things that are not done? Well, here is specific direction. They are to make them sit down in companies of fifty, and they did it, and then He takes the fishes and the loaves and in the sight of these companies He lifts up His eyes to heaven and blesses them and breaks and hands them to His disciples, and they hand them to the multitude. All were filled and there were left over twelve baskets full. You can tell how many companies there were: divide five thousand by fifty. That is the result of coming under divine regulation; the need is met. It is a very important side of the truth, that is, the food question. If there is to be food there must be regard for divine regulation, and then food comes in abundance. There are twelve full baskets left over.
Well may the Lord help us every one to adhere to divine regulation. There are hundreds of those who have neglected this and have turned aside from the Lord, but as He says, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", @John 14: 21. Let none flout His commandments. He says, therefore, "he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest
{222}
myself to him", @John 14: 21. So you get fresh thoughts of Christ in the manifestation, but in regard to divine regulation you get no freshness and no ministry unless you keep His commandments, so may the Lord help us to keep the directions, for His name's sake.
{223}
THE TRUE LIGHT
@John 1: 4 - 9; @John 8: 12; @1 John 2: 8
I have been thinking of light, dear brethren, in view of this meeting, particularly of the 'true light' which is said to lighten every man, showing that however much is said of light in the Scriptures, and however important it is as viewed by itself, yet in the divine mind men were in view in it. God, I need not say, always worked in the light in whatever He did, so that it is said in @Genesis 1, before He began, "God said, Let there be light. And there was light". The operations that followed were in it, and as they proceeded, they were seen in relation to one another. As day after day developed, the divine thoughts became clearer, and were obviously coordinated, always in the light. But when we come to John's gospel, we have the divine mind as to light, that it had man in view, man as such; "every man", not simply man as a race but every member of it. Whatever his nationality or antecedent, every man was in the divine mind in regard of the light. So that everything from the very outset was done in the light. God never operated in the dark. Hence we find that in the laying of the foundations of the earth, those present knew what was being done. Although God does not always give an account of His matters, yet in the laying of the foundations intelligent beings knew what was being done. He has not been pleased to give an account of many of the things that are visible to us, physical phenomena. That is within His prerogative; He is not obliged to give an account of these things, but at the same time all has been done in the light, and those present are cognisant and interested, so that we are told, "the morning stars sang together", @@Job 38: 7. They sang
{224}
*together*, a beautiful tribute to unity even then. We may be assured that whatever is alluded to, they were engaged with the same thing; they sang together. They sang with the spirit, as I may say, and they sang with the understanding. They knew something of what God was doing, and then it adds, "all the sons of God". These allude surely to mature beings, persons of intelligence. They were all interested, and so interested that they "shouted for joy". They saw what God was about. The book of Proverbs opens up to us further that wisdom was there. The morning stars and the sons of God say nothing about men. Wisdom does. Wisdom carries the thought forward and speaks anticipatively, anticipating the actual realisation of the divine thought in that He says, "my delights were with the sons of men", @Proverbs 8: 31. You see, beloved brethren, what a note of intelligent jubilance runs through. In wisdom you have Christ personified; He was not simply occupied with the general scheme of God, infinite as it was, but particularly with the *habitable* parts of God's earth. He speaks anticipatively, seeing what was in the divine mind and knowing it, knowing more than the morning stars and the sons of God. He spoke of the habitable parts of God's earth; His delights were with the sons of men.
Now, therefore, you can see, dear brethren, how John's gospel fits in with all that. Although as stated here, "All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made", @John 1: 3. What is in view immediately is men, and hence the statement, "In him was life; and the life was the light of men". In the expression 'true light', it is not meant that the light previously referred to was not true light. Physical light, of course, is true to a point, the sun and whatever other light there may be in the physical system, but God had reserved the thought of the true light for men. It was something
{225}
that should become a substantive, not merely an abstract, thought. It was to be something here within men's range, something that men could touch. And so it says, "In him was life; and the life was the light of men". But so as to prepare our minds for the thought, we have to dismiss all earlier conceptions of light for the moment, for hitherto light dispelled darkness, so that darkness was driven by it into its own area, and a name given to it. The light was called Day. It ruled and dominated. They had not existed together. Here, however, we are prepared for the new thought in that we are told that the light, the true light, "appears in darkness, and the darkness apprehended it not", and that, moreover, witness has been borne to it. No one needs to call attention to the sun as it shines in the heavens. It is there; nothing is hid from its heat. Its light comes to all the earth, and as it rises, the darkness is driven out of the way. In fact it negatives the darkness, so that in its presence darkness ceases. The new thing has to be apprehended, and therefore we are told that the light shines in darkness and the darkness apprehended it not, and that attention has to be called to it. So that we are told immediately, "There was a man sent from God". That is not merely historical; it is moral. It is a man that was with God, and was sent as being 'with Him'. He came, we are told, for a witness of the light. He was not it, the Spirit tells us, although the Lord later pays a beautiful tribute to John. He says, "He was a burning and a shining light", @John 5: 35. It was more local; he burned and he shone. You can see as those Pharisees came to him to be baptised, how he burned; as he called them a generation of vipers he would wither them up. But the light was there: he was a burning and a shining light and they rejoiced for a season in it. But it was local and national. The Holy Spirit here says, "*He* was not the light". That is to say, he
{226}
was national and partial, designed of God to be so, for it was a question of saving Israel, and that all should believe on Christ. But he was not the true light, and then the Holy Spirit tells us what that was. "The true light was that which, coming into the world, lightens every man"; that is Christ. He is indiscriminate; He is impartial; He shines on *all*.
Now the Holy Spirit goes on to tell us how the witness was borne. John says, "He it is of whom I said, A man comes after me who takes a place before me, because he *was* before me". Again he says, "In the midst of you stands, whom ye do not know ... the thong of whose sandal I am not worthy to unloose". You see the beautiful witness, the kind of witness to this Light. He was in their midst. May it not be, beloved, that there is that of God in our midst standing whom we know not? We are always tested. It is a constant test among the people of God -- that which is of God in our midst. Here He is not acting. He is not preaching. He is not working. He is *standing*, and yet He is the great Creator of the universe, "whom ye do not know". You see what is of God amongst us, possibly inactive because of ourselves, becomes a test. John says, 'I did not know Him, but I was on the look-out for Him'. You see the thing is to be on the look-out for what is of God, for God is never inactive, as the Lord says later, "My Father worketh hitherto", @John 5: 17. Then John goes on, "he who sent me to baptise with water, *he* said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit". That is what God said to him. You say, No wonder John knew. But that is not all that is said about John. It is said that John saw Him coming *to him*. It was when John saw the Lord moving, not standing, that he discerned Him. It was not the Lord's preaching, it was not the Lord's miracles, it was His moving.
{227}
When John saw Him coming *to him*, he says, "Behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world". John has got the thing. Before the Spirit comes on the Lord, John has eyes to see. That is what John's gospel would lay upon us, the importance of being able to see the light, whatever it be, as it shines. The life shines; it radiates as light, but you have the substance first. The life is there. It is not a question of sermons or even miracles, it is the substance, the wonderful thing that has come into manhood. I am not now speaking of His deity, as is so emphasised in this chapter, but the life. The life was there, you see, that which was intended to be light, the light of men, and as it moved, it radiated. The thing was there, and as the Lord moved towards John it was radiating. He saw it. Multitudes were there doubtless; a most extraordinary day among the Jews was that day. The light of life was radiating in the simple movement of Christ to John. Thousands were moving to John, some of them vipers. They were doing what the Lord was doing physically, but how different! Why should He come to John? He had never sinned. That holy life, delightful under God's eye, was perfect. Why should He come to John? You see, John had spiritual discernment. He had eyes to see. God alone can give that, and if you have not got eyes to see this light, I would advise you to turn to God. It is shining, the true light now shines. Here, it is, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men", but the first epistle of John says, "the true light already shines". But He is coming to John, and although many from all parts are there, only John discerned in that movement the Taker-away of the sin of the world. Never a light shone like that light, the light of the taking away of the sin of the world. It was the true light; it was the light that was needed. It is the light that every soul of man needs if he is to be with God. He has
{228}
got to get that light, the light of the taking away of the sin of the world. John was baptising. He was administering figuratively, death. So Jesus comes to him, and John names Him. There is not a word said as to him having a communication about that. The word to him was, "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit". But John discerned Him before that. The light was radiating, as I have said, the light of the taking away of the sin of the world, and the baptist was affected by it.
I wonder if that light has shone into every one of our hearts. It is the foundation. We are not in the true light apart from it. We must begin with the fact that sin is taken away by Christ. This gospel will have the spiritual thing in us, and so in discerning Jesus the baptist names Him the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world. John says, "I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God". Now there is another point, and I stress it, because without it you are not prepared for the new commandment, because the new commandment is the true light that is shining now. The next day John was standing and two of his disciples, and the Lord is seen walking. We are not told where He was going, but it was consequent obviously on the previous movement. He is walking, for as He removes the sin of the world, He is free to walk. He is walking so as to be called attention to. Well, you say, I can see that. Yes, but can you? Look at these two men standing by John -- one of them Andrew. They had been under John's ministry. Surely they would see now. But do they see? They do not see. John says, "Behold the Lamb of God". He calls attention to Him. That is the principle of it: attention has to be called to things. You say, 'Why did I not see that before?' Well, why did you not? It may be you have been cavilling about it. It may be you have been
{229}
saying, 'I have been going on these lines all my life and am content'. But here is something you have never seen. Why have you not seen it? Attention is now called to it. Then they saw it and were moved by it. Now that movement in them I take the liberty of calling life, for light in itself is not the power of movement. Life is that. The principle is that as the true light shines into your soul, it becomes life there. It becomes, as I may call it, a substantive, so that it radiates from you. The true light shines from you. The Lord emphasises the fact that life was there, for He turns and sees them following, for that is the direction of the movement. It is what may be called astronomical; all is governed by one great principle. There is no room for lawlessness in this light. It is true to itself. So they move towards Him, they follow Him. As long as you cavil and quarrel with a thing, you are in darkness in regard to it, whatever the thing may be. If the thing is there to be seen, move in relation to it and your movement will be light to others. So Andrew, one of the two that abode with the Lord that day, goes after his brother. That is the way it works. The present time is the time, dear brethren, in which the brethren need to be brought together. Andrew found Simon and brought him to Jesus. Then the Lord looks on him and gives him a name; not indeed that the name could be applied yet; He says, Thou *shalt be* called Cephas. It was potential. Peter would be a stone. The Lord knew that when He looked upon him. It is all a question therefore of what you are to be, this light shining into your soul. It becomes life in your soul, and the light that shines from that is the true light. "The true light already shines", @1 John 2: 8.
Well now, beloved, I want to show just here that material for the assembly, which Peter represents, is the ability to take in new things which the Lord may
{230}
call attention to. We are told in this passage what 'Cephas' means. We are also told what the word 'Rabbi' means, that is to say, the interpretation of the words is given. When this is so, you may depend that the Holy Spirit calls special attention to these words. The two disciples called Him Rabbi, meaning that they had known discipleship before. But now they had transferred to another Master, they were willing to leave John for Christ on account of His superiority. And so it is that Peter comes in as assembly material following. They go out and bring others in. Andrew finds Simon and brings him, then he is given a name which means 'Stone', a spiritual thought. In the corresponding passage in Matthew the Lord said, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona. That is the believer, I apprehend, as seen in Romans, the responsible man blessed, which goes on. But here, he is not blessed. That is not the side presented in John. It is simply 'Cephas', which corresponds with the other part of Matthew, "*I* also, I say unto thee that *thou* art Peter". That is a spiritual thing, and I connect it with @Acts 19. In that chapter Paul, having passed through the upper quarters came to Ephesus. Apollos was at Corinth holding, as I may say, the responsible line there, for the Corinthian epistle refers to us down here as we are, in flesh and blood, whereas the Ephesian epistle is more the spiritual thing. And what qualifies for that? Paul asks, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" @Acts 19: 2. You see it is a question of the Holy Spirit when you come to the assembly. They say, "We did not even hear if the Holy Spirit was come". And they relate what they had believed. They were walking up to the light they had, which is a very fine thing, but then the question is, What are you going to do with further light? Are you able to take in new thoughts from God? The apostle goes on to speak to them of Jesus and the glad tidings
{231}
of their salvation. He refers to it later in writing to them, that they had believed the "glad tidings of your salvation" and they had been sealed with the Spirit; that is to say, they had embraced the thing. You must have noticed that Paul made full allowance for the ministry of John. He fully credits it. Blessed ministry, but it was not the true light. What you want is the full, the true light. If not, you will not be ready for further thoughts from God, you will miss them. Many are missing it, they are unprepared to receive fresh things from God. Some say, 'There is nothing new now; there has been no new light these many years'. Think of people saying that, as if God had stopped working, as if the Holy Spirit were quiescent, and as if the temple of God ceased to exist. It reminds one of what the scoffers say, "since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning", @2 Peter 3: 4. No light is there, beloved, no light is shining there. But thank God there is light shining, the true light is now shining. The Holy Spirit is down here operating in the saints. There is life in the saints, and the light is shining, the true light, in them. It is, "the true light already shines" and "the darkness is passing". It is now; that is the idea. And so these Ephesian believers gladly commit themselves and Paul lays his hands on them, a spiritual element. Then they receive the Spirit, twelve men at one time. They were prepared; assembly material is marked by readiness to receive whatever is of God. They gladly received the ministry of Paul; they receive the Spirit. The great structure at Ephesus is a habitation of God in the Spirit.
Now all this fits in with chapter 8 and the epistle. It is a question of following the Lord. He is moving and He says, "he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life". You say, 'Such-and-such an one has light'. You refer to his
{232}
ministry, but that is not the idea. I am not leaving that out, because ministry would be in life. John's ministry was living, full of Christ. He said, "Behold the Lamb of God". But what the Lord says here is not that. It is not His ministry, it is a question of life. "In him was life". That is the idea, so that He says, "he that follows me ... shall have the light of life". That is, light of that kind, light coming out from the substance. That is the kind of thing, "the light of life ...".
I want to say further, beloved brethren, that the presence of the Spirit here, and all that preceded in this gospel, is necessarily in view, the food in chapter 6, and the coming down of the Spirit as from a glorified Christ in chapter 7. These are in view if there is to be the light of life. It is what is here, the constitution built up on the living bread that came down from heaven, the flesh and blood of Christ. Then the reception of the Spirit is from a glorified Christ. That is what I understand to be the application of the passage at the present time. You are following the Lord, you move out of the world. You are following the Lord and you have the light of life, a living state of things. One has often pictured pioneers in, say, the western continent, the New World. They were concerned about the light of life in a material way. They avoided the deserts, and sought out the rivers as they went west. It was a question of life, for man cannot live otherwise. Life in that sense is vegetable life, of all moment surely to these pioneers. So it is now. What lines am I pursuing? I do not go into the desert to live. I may be there in the government of God, to bring me down to nothing. My affections, my needs lead me to where the people of God are. How may I find them? The people of God are where the light is, and where the Spirit is, and wherever the Spirit is there is life. The Spirit is life, we are told, and you see the fruits of it among the saints. Oh,
{233}
you say, you are occupying us with the saints. Well, I am following the Lord, and with Him you find that He is thinking of the habitable parts of the earth. He is occupied with men. "He led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of habitation", @Psalm 107: 7. You are to find it, the habitable parts. There are men and women living together in a spiritual sense. That is what I understand by the light of life. Wherever this is true, God operates in it and souls are being drawn in that relation. It is a question of whether I am living, as the Lord said, "Altogether that which I also say to you", and again, "out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". Where God is working, that will be observed. It is not merely that we have the Bible rightly interpreted and understand its principles, but we want life.
Well, now I want in closing to show that all this is involved in the new commandment in John's epistle. The epistle deals with life, with something very tangible. It was what his hands had handled, what he had seen and heard. It was no abstract thing that John was treating of. It was a substantive, what was seen in a living Person. If He went and dwelt at Capernaum, what a thing it would be to live next door to Him! If you sat down at table with Him, the light was shining. Now John is dealing with that. He says, I do not write unto you a new commandment but an old one. No spiritual ministry will discard what *has been*. The old surely was as much of God as the new, whatever ministry had been received earlier, it could not possibly be displaced by the new. John the baptist's ministry was of God. The Lord challenges the Jews as to it. It was of God, but it was not the true light. And so no ministry that is of God, however ancient, can be discarded. It has its own value; it stands. But then it may not be everything. "I write no new
{234}
commandment to you, but an old", he says, so as to emphasise that the old stood. What was the old? The word which they had heard from the beginning, no doubt the ministry of Christ, the word they had had, that is how it should read. The word was what was from the beginning, but it was what they had already heard. It is the ministry of Christ, the gospel presented to the twelve. It is the objective side, what is presented in the gospel, and that stood. I am not going to detract from that. That is not to be displaced at all. Do not be afraid of anything that God has presented to you, it stands. No new commandment will displace it. It will enhance it.
Then in the next verse he says, "Again, I write a new commandment to you". Why a new one? That is the whole point. The new commandment, it says, "is true in him and in you". Are you afraid of being occupied with that? If you have got this verse you have got the true light. The new commandment is what is true in Him and in you, in Christ and in us. And then he says, 'because'. That word 'because' is confirmatory; what he is going to say proves it. Because the true light now shines. It was shining. It was obvious therefore that the new commandment, true in Christ, had expelled the darkness by becoming true in the saints, by the Spirit. Marvellous fact. Is that going to come to an end? Not at all. That is going on. What is become true in us has come into this world, and has come to stay. The true light is shining and the darkness is passing. This verse is simple christianity, and anyone who does not accustom himself to the new commandment, to the principle of the new commandment, must miss it. It is what God brings in. It is true that everything is out, since the departure of the apostles, but the Holy Spirit retains everything here; there is never anything old with Him. So that the word in the addresses to the assemblies is not 'He that hath
{235}
an ear let him hear what *the Lord* says to the churches', no; for what He says is written down for each, but, "let him hear what *the Spirit* says". We are not told what the Spirit says. It has the character of something new, in the sense of something fresh. We must all face it; we must be sure that we are not quarrelling with it, because if we quarrel with that, we shall be in the dark as to it, and that will affect us generally. It is the readiness to receive what God gives in the way of something fresh -- that we are characteristically assembly material, and thus the true light now shines through us. May the Lord bless His word.
{236}
FRUIT-BEARING AS A RESULT OF SOWING
@Luke 8: 2 - 21
J.T. I have been thinking of fruit-bearing as a result of the sowing; as it is said here, "The seed is the word of God". In Luke, before we have the parable introduced, certain persons are seen with the Lord -- the twelve, whose moral beginnings are represented in Peter's conversion, and then certain women who had been held by wicked spirits and infirmities, of whom Mary Magdalene from whom seven demons had gone out, was the representative; that is, there are those who are with the Lord who present the work of God in its moral setting. The moral effect of the work of God in John alludes more to what is inward or for eternity, so the disciples are seen inside at the end of that gospel. These all followed the Lord at the outset, and are seen to appear with Him. So John is the inward side; we go in in virtue of it to have a part in the Father's house. The work of God in Luke is more outward in its bearing, and fits us to have a part before the day is over in this world; morally speaking, it is that with which God can identify Himself, so that we are known in our localities as those who were once serving sin and Satan, but are now with God and going on with Him; and so Mary Magdalene is representative of what we were under the power of Satan, but now she is with the Lord and in company with the others. They have substance, and they minister to the Lord of it. The Lord is not ashamed to have such as these in spite of their public reputation. He accepts them and respects their substance, but it is His. The work of God takes effect upon them and the moral features of the assembly are seen in them, according to Luke, so that in chapter 24, as they are gathered together,
{237}
they are saying, "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon", the erring one. It is the sphere of grace and all who compose the assembly are subjects of grace. We are to be gracious. A woman like Mary Magdalene would hardly be severe on others; she would not tolerate sin; she would know that she would need grace. Simon Peter has not only sinned, but he is a sinful man. That is the kind of man he was -- sinful. It was in contact with the Lord he discovered that. As represented in Peter, the company with the Lord had been sinful persons, and in the woman they are represented as sinners. Chapter 7 tells us she was a great sinner -- a five hundred pence debtor. We like to cover up all the bad side of our histories, and make much of the good side, but Luke would not have us to do that, but would like us to bring into evidence what we are, and what we have been, and what it is to have been saved from our public reputation, and in spite of that public history, that the Lord "is not ashamed to call them brethren" and not ashamed with such histories as this. The work of Christ was so effective that we are with Him, and we are used by Him.
W.A. Would that represent the full result of grace?
J.T. It is the full result of grace in the woman. Seven demons denotes perfection of wickedness.
W.A. I suppose the Spirit of God moves towards a full result of grace in us.
J.T. Mary Magdalene was a great sinner, and you cannot bring in any form of sin that she did not know. Therefore, she would be gracious towards sinners, and would tell them how to get free from it. Paul had experience. "Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the first". He could tell any one of them how to judge himself. If we are humble, it is to our advantage. If I have
{238}
been saved from drunkenness, I can tell any one how to be saved from it. Though saved from drunkenness, nevertheless I am not to be ashamed to tell what I have been saved from. So Simon is brought in peculiarly in this book in the way that he is converted. The Lord came into his house in chapter 4 and healed his mother-in-law, but apparently that did not reach him. The Lord spoke wonderful things out of his ship, but apparently he did not get help. There was no confession until the Lord ordered him to "draw out into the deep water and let down your nets for a haul". Instead of asking him to do it, He orders him to do it, and Peter's salvation lies in the fact that he was submissive to the Lord. He says, "at thy word I will let down the net" and when he saw the bountifulness of the result he realised that he had to do with a Person that he did not know was there. He had judged that there could be no fish about for he had toiled all night and caught nothing, and according to all the rules he knew of, there could be no fish there, and so he tells the Lord this. He is sceptical about the result; he was going by experience, but human experience is always deceptive in the things of God. You have to do with the Lord, and He is above all human experience. He is in His own domain in the sea. What Peter did not know the Lord did. Salvation lay in the fact that he was submissive. He was not sure of the result, but he says, "at thy word I will let down the net". He got a great draught of fishes, so great that the net broke. So he says, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord". I suppose he would refer back to many things. Possibly what he felt most was his unbelief. The very worst form of sin is unbelief. He felt unfit for the Lord. He represented the twelve. The Lord had to do with each one doubtless to bring them to the same point. He does not tell us so, but John says, "I suppose that not
{239}
even the world itself would contain the books written". What wonderful and glorious things He was doing! It just gives us a minimum of what He does to let us know the kind of thing that is going on. Here in the twelve we have the moral foundations going on. Here is a man who is sinful. He knows what others are, too, there is no exception. We do not expect from others what is not there. That is a great thing in the assembly of God in its public character. You know what is in people because you know what is in yourself. These twelve men had been the subject of prayer. The Lord was a dependent Man, He spent the whole night in prayer before calling them. In spite of the fact that they had been dealt with judicially as we see in Peter, the Lord turns to God as example for us. Thus we come to discernment of what God has given, but that is not enough, we can never do without God.
J.N. Does He say this with a view to their having substance?
J.T. I was thinking that. Then another thing that comes out in chapter 7 is the woman was a lover of Christ. Wisdom says she gives those who love her to inherit substance. Look at the regard with which wisdom holds its lovers. They get substance. Luke is most practical as to this.
Rem. It would be well if we could take account of the fruit, or substance, as coming out under these new conditions that you indicate under grace, because in all these people that are made prominent you get some different feature brought out as to their past history.
J.T. You get a wonderful company of people. The Lord is going about from city to city and from village to village preaching the gospel. There is a wonderful company and all these are with Him. Demons are cast out, wonderful things are being done. No wonder you would like to be in a company
{240}
like that; there is something extraordinary about it, but if you are to be in it you must be like those who form it. You cannot be added to the company as you are naturally. People of all kinds have been allowed to join it, and it is this that has made christendom.
R.S. It is not a question of quantity but of quality.
J.T. That is the thing -- quality first. Quality must be by the word of God. God has begun and He is going to finish.
W.A. It seems that being in contact with the Lord in a personal way is the test presented here.
J.T. Yes. Mary Magdalene was one from whom the Lord Himself had cast out the demons. It is a great thing to come in contact with the Lord.
Rem. I was wondering if the seed sowing had produced these people.
J.T. I suppose that is the thing to call attention to. These people were His own handiwork. He shows what His idea is in these people who were with Him.
R.S. So Paul says, "God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness", @2 Corinthians 4: 6. It is God Himself that is shining.
J.T. That is the idea indeed. What a company! The twelve, Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward and Susanna and many others -- wonderful companions, all God's handiwork. So in Antioch, another relative of Herod was there too. Grace oversteps natural prejudice. Herod was a fox; the Lord said, "Go tell that fox". He saves the wife of his steward. In Antioch Herod's foster-brother. Manaen, was there too in that company. So it is with Christ, He selects people from all quarters.
Rem. Luke would help us in our outlook on the world in general.
J.T. I think so. Luke helps you as an evangelist. The work of God selects from all classes.
{241}
Rem. This makes it a great test for us in speaking to people about their souls as we often are much influenced by natural prejudices or feelings, and making differences.
J.T. Luke would suggest that throughout this beautiful picture; in chapter 7 we have the evangelist; he took account of the woman who was a sinner, also of the centurion, a Roman soldier, who was on the best of terms with the Jews, for he had built them a synagogue. He is on the very best of terms too with his servants; he was a good master. All that kind of thing you get recorded in Luke. There is no attempt to store up feeling, for it is a question of getting souls saved.
Rem. You get souls whether it be the centurion or the servants or a poor woman like Mary Magdalene, or the wife of Herod's steward. It is grace operating. No matter how great a sinner, there is room for all.
J.T. Luke is the only one who tells us that one of the malefactors on the cross was saved. God's assembly is composed of this kind of people, so that He makes you gracious about other people, but firm against their sins, because sin is sin in the eye of God. It is remarkable what we read of Mary Magdalene, "from whom seven demons had gone out", as if their place was made such that they could not stay there. It is most remarkable, "had gone out". I suppose the work of God in us makes us unfit for them.
Ques. Would you say the work of God Himself preceded this work?
J.T. It did. That is the thing that comes out "Good ground" -- good ground is the work of God.
Ques. Is it possible to have a very great deal of light, and miss the true object of Christ?
J.T. I think so. You might have light and doctrine, and may lack grace. The sons of Zeruiah were hard men; they were not subject to David.
{242}
The present dispensation is grace reigning through righteousness; so we must not overlook grace.
Rem. In @Luke 7: 48 the Lord said to the woman, "Thy sins are forgiven", but to Simon the Pharisee, "Her many sins are forgiven; for she loved much", as if to emphasise grace.
J.T. You get substance in that way; wisdom causes those who love her to inherit substance. The thief on the cross said, as he was suffering excruciating pain, "we indeed justly, for we receive the just recompense of what we have done; but this man has done nothing amiss". Death would suggest he had to go through the just judgment of God.
W.S. Recovery comes in the way of righteousness.
J.T. David allowed his kindness of heart toward Absalom to let his sins pass. We see how David allowed him to come back without judging himself; he evidently thought he had done enough, being two years without kissing him. Absalom did not care about his kiss; he wanted his throne. He was an unrighteous man, and David suffered the consequences.
Rem. Your thought is to see the lines by which fruit of the right kind is to be produced.
J.T. The Lord went about preaching the gospel and He has got results by it. The seed is the word of God and fruit is borne. Fruit is only borne in one kind of soil and that soil is an honest and good heart. That heart is not natural to you and me. If we look into our hearts naturally, terrible things come out; thirteen wickednesses according to Mark (@Mark 7: 21, 22); nothing but evil comes out, and that by birth; only the Lord can bring the right kind of soil. The Lord says here in giving an explanation, "But that in the good ground, these are they who in an honest and good heart, having heard the word keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience".
{243}
J.N. I was wondering about the fruit; there is decline in Matthew, increase in Mark, and a hundredfold here.
J.T. That is very interesting. You will have observed that the Lord gives an explanation of the good ground. He does not repeat an hundredfold. He gives an hundredfold in the parable, but not in the explanation of the parable. He gives in the parable the instance of fruit-bearing, and with the explanation 'patience'. His thought is that we are to grow in it; that is the hundredfold line. The full result of that is bearing fruit with patience.
Ques. Is that the same word as endurance?
J.T. Yes. Patience is to have its perfect work. "Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord". One of the greatest things with God is patience. Think of how He sent His prophets, and look at the period of time covered by the prophets ministry.
W.S. So that there is no rushing of things in God's realm.
J.T. It is a great mistake in the house of God to rush things, to not give time.
R.S. Is the zenith of grace reached in Luke?
J.T. Yes. I was thinking the zenith of grace is the Lord on the cross saying, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do". Stephen is very near to that, but his is a more limited prayer. He says, "Lord, lay not *this* sin to their charge", but the Lord says, "Father, forgive them". The counterpart of that is "that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all nations beginning at Jerusalem". That is where He gave His body -- the maximum of grace. When Jesus died it was not from weakness, for He cried with a loud voice; He knew He was dying and what He was saying, so that the centurion says, "Certainly this was a righteous man". Well now, that is the kind of
{244}
fruit God looks for, according to Luke -- men who have the light of that One. So the Lord says, "no one having lighted a lamp covers it with a vessel or puts it under a couch but sets it on a lampstand, that they who enter in may see the light".
R.S. Would that be the work of God?
J.T. God has shone out and what is of God is going to come out. "They who enter in", that is the touch relative to our fellowship. It is blessed to be where the light is; you cannot be anywhere else if you are with God.
J.N. It results in testimony.
J.T. We feel what a great thing it is to have things right. The Lord is the true light that already shines.
W.C. Is that always the effect of grace?
J.T. That is right. The Lord says, "there is nothing hid which shall not become manifest"; nothing but shall come to light. Those of us who know God know that some time everything will be manifest in our midst, and so the Lord says further, "Take heed therefore how ye hear". The word of God is to be heard aright, but now you find that there are people who have things and people who *seem* to have things. The people who have things will get more and those who seem to have things will get less. That is how things are. "For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and whosoever has not, even what he seems to have shall be taken from him". We do not want to be among the class that seems to have things, but among those who know that they have them.
Rem. "The destruction of the poor is their poverty", @Proverbs 10: 15.
J.T. The application of this is all around us. There are those who seem to have things and you will observe that in recent years gradually things have
{245}
been taken away from them; the so-called denominations are losing what they have got.
R.S. We get the same principle in Matthew one man built his house on a rock and the other on the sand.
J.T. That is the idea. Both have a house; one comes to nothing, the other stands.
Rem. Would not the thing be to give the Spirit His place?
J.T. You have not got the articles of faith by writing them in a book; they have to be in your soul, and that is by the Spirit.
Rem. Does "bring forth fruit with patience" suggest that it is out of diverse conditions that this fruit will come to light? So James in reference to the prophets who have spoken in the name of the Lord as examples, speaks of suffering affection and of endurance that they passed through, draws attention to the endurance of Job and seeing the end of the Lord.
J.T. The end of the Lord was reached with Job. His brethren came and each gave him a gold ring, showing that the end of the Lord was reached in him. With a person under discipline, if the end of the Lord is not reached, you cannot give him a gold ring, but if it is, the brethren will surround him and give him a ring, then he is restored. A ring represents a token of affection. The ring being round, there is no end to it. It is to be for ever.
R.S. "I had heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye seeth thee: wherefore I abhor myself and repent in dust and ashes", @Job 42: 5, 6.
J.T. Very beautiful that. In verse 10 of the last chapter, we read that "Jehovah turned the captivity of Job, when he had prayed for his friends; and Jehovah gave Job twice as much as he had before. And all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, came to him, and they ate bread with him in his house, and
{246}
they condoled with him, and comforted him concerning all the evil that Jehovah had brought upon him; and every one gave him a piece of money, and every one a golden ring", @Job 42: 11.
R.S. That was a fine time.
J.T. Yes! Genuine recovery; these were not only tokens of affection to himself, but he is restored to fellowship with his brethren. He was not to be a poor brother any more. He was a real gainer from the discipline.
Ques. Why is it the endurance of Job in James? When we read the book of Job we see that what marked him was standing for his own reputation and defence, up till the last chapter; but James puts it in a different light.
J.T. Job's history began well, and the Lord credits him with that. Satan tried to get Job to deny God in his affection but in all that Job did not sin with his lips. He justified God before Satan in not being impatient. He said, "Jehovah gave, and Jehovah hath taken away; blessed be the name of Jehovah". Satan departed; he has to go. Now God takes him in hand. He takes great account of justifying Him before Satan. Satan wanted to make God a liar. It was endurance; the loss of his children, and cattle; his body suffering, and yet he never charged God foolishly. Everything was between God and himself. It was a question of God's dealings with his soul. After that Satan is shut out.
Rem. It says, "In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly". Then the three friends of Job came to him and sat down with him for seven days and seven nights but did not speak a word to him. Satan had said that Job would curse God, but he did not.
J.T. Another thing comes out here in the thought of God; not only fruit bearing and substance, but relationship with Christ. "My mother and my
{247}
brethren are those who hear the word of God and do it". The first is kept by patience, and the second in doing it. I keep it and bring forth fruit with patience. By doing it I am marked off as one of the brethren of Christ. So that we want to do the thing and to be the thing before we can express it.
W.S. That would be in line with Luke's ministry. In Matthew it is "whosoever shall do the will of my Father who is in the heavens", but here it is hearing the word of God and doing it.
{248}
THE POWER OF THE LORD IN DELIVERANCE
@Luke 8: 26 - 56
J.T. We had the early part of this chapter yesterday, presenting as it does the Lord in the exercise of His service, the twelve being with Him and certain women who had profited by His service, ministering to Him of their substance. The Lord is seen in His public service with those who were associated with Him in it. The apostles represented by Peter (chapter 5), had come to the judgment of sin as to their state, and before opening that day, the Lord prayed all night. He spent the night in prayer before He called the twelve; so that they represent such as He would use in the ministry, persons who have judged sin and judged themselves sinners, thus presenting to us in the twelve the kind of men that are to be of use; then the women such as Mary Magdalene, out of whom seven demons had gone, also are marked by similar moral features. They had ministered to Him of their substance; and then a great crowd coming together, He speaks the parable of the seed sowing in order that the result of the testimony should be in regard to those persons who associated with Him. He says that the good ground is an honest and good heart which, having heard the word of God, bears fruit with patience. Having heard the word of God, you keep it and bring forth fruit with patience. Thus we have one side of our public position in those who bring forth fruit with patience, and who have things, and who are marked off as doers of the word; keeping the word of God and doing it, they are marked off as the brethren of Christ. I thought it might help us to see in the second part of the chapter the other side, the power of Satan acting
{249}
first in the women and the other side represented by this man, who had demons, coming out of the city. We are reminded of what cities are; a shameless condition. It says, he "had demons a long time, and put on no clothes, and did not abide in a house, but in the tombs". Being a man coming out of the city, these features remind us of what the city was. He "had demons a long time"; he was a man experienced in demoniacal possession, but spiritually it would be a man versed in the ways of Satan, experienced in these ways. The work of the Lord in him is that the demons come out, and he is found at the feet of Jesus, sitting, clothed and sensible. We have now a man who would have been long versed in the ways of Satan, and in whose service he would have been shameless, now the very opposite, sitting, clothed and in his right mind, and sensible. This man is now available for the Lord; not only is it a question of fruit bearing, which would apply to all brothers and sisters alike as having honest and good hearts and keeping the word, but, as to our side, commissioned to "Return to thine house and relate how great things God has done for thee". That is the side, perhaps, that we need to be reminded of, because it is in connection with this that we get gift. As you begin to relate how great things God has done for you, power would come in, and enable you to do it according to God.
Rem. Does this side represent the natural man away from God?
J.T. Yes, and we find that with this man there is disregard of personal control, a shameless condition; the house is disregarded. He did not dwell in a house; he put on no clothes, but abode in the tombs.
Rem. I was thinking of Cain; as abandoned of God, he went and built a city and dwelt in it.
J.T. That is the idea, I am sure. It is a shameless state to put on no clothes.
{250}
Rem. God clothed Adam, but Cain went out from the presence of the Lord.
J.T. Adam was taught how to put on clothes by God, for we read that "Jehovah Elohim made Adam and his wife coats of skin, and clothed them", @Genesis 3: 21. This man would not be that. As Paul said, "if indeed being also clothed we shall not be found naked", @2 Corinthians 5: 3. And then the house is disregarded; the shameless personal condition seems to me a striking picture of modern times.
W.A. This would be really the characteristic features of what is seen in every man.
J.T. It is a shameless condition; thus pointing to the city as truly abandoned to wickedness, dead morally, no response Godward. There is nothing for God in all that man can get up in the way of recreation and pleasure. That is where the man dwells. The divine order of things is totally given up. The man lives with demons, not only one, but with a legion, and they were there a long time. All these things are developing rapidly now.
Rem. Would "a long time" cover the whole course of man's life?
J.T. I suppose that is the idea; long experience in the ways of Satan.
Rem. "There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof is the ways of death", @Proverbs 14: 12. This man is found dwelling in tombs.
J.T. It is well that we should have a picture, dear brethren. Perhaps in this part of the country you are not so confronted with such things, but they enter into even the smallest hamlets; in principle they are found in every community of men. It is well for us to see them as they come under God's eye.
Rem. One feels that it is well that that condition of things is exposed to us, so that we have reached an estimate of the character of the power of Satan that exercises its influence upon men in this world,
{251}
and where men as his agents are pushing things on for their own pleasure.
J.T. The man met the Lord, it says, "A certain man out of the city met him". That is what the Lord has met, and what we may expect to meet. In the early part, verses 22 to 25, He has power over the wind and sea. Satan as prince of the power of the air comes in in a very subtle way, so that he has a direct influence on man. "The spirit who now works in the sons of disobedience", @Ephesians 2: 2. He works in men, the sons of disobedience. They are developed in it, like this man, "a long time", but he met the Lord.
Ques. How do you apply that today?
J.T. The action is on his side. Initiative is on the side of evil. The sequel shows that the Lord is not carrying things in this section of the world, where things are against Him. This is how we find things now, not a general revival or any great movement of God, but a state where, in the main, things are against us. Evil has the initiative; evil can move. The man met the Lord. The movement is on the side of evil.
Rem. The Lord is not dealing with it in a general way, in mass, but in individuals, breaking Satan's power and delivering them.
J.T. The first thing to see is that this man is dominated by evil; that evil has the initiative, so that the Lord is met by him on arriving. You will observe that He "arrived in the country of the Gadarenes, which is over against Galilee". Galilee was the place of the Lord's own sphere, and as you will see He returns thither in the power of that return, the people receive Him gladly; the influence is very favourable there; but in the country of the Gadarenes, the influences are against Him. Worldly influences are dominated by Satan. The man met
{252}
Him. Paul, I suppose, could be taken as a type of the world dominated by Satan. He left Jerusalem with letters from the high priest breathing out slaughter against the disciples of the Lord. He represents the world as dominated by Satan. He was going to Damascus; and he was thus taking the initiative. The Lord met him. He related what great things had been done for him. That is what one would like to do; to relate things. We see how Peter and then Paul himself can relate so beautifully what the Lord had done for them. Paul was the most gifted, perhaps, of servants and could relate in a most beautiful way what the Lord had done for him. He did so on more than one occasion.
Rem. One feels this is what always takes place with one who has had to do with the Lord. He has something to say about it.
J.T. In relating it, you get on wings; you begin in a simple way to relate what the Lord has done for you. But it is here what "great things God has done for thee". In Luke it is always God. You begin to relate what great things God has done for you. You get on the wing sometimes, and moving on as Paul did when he was relating it to Agrippa. So powerful did Paul become that Festus cried out, "Thou art mad, Paul; much learning turns thee to madness". "I am not mad, most excellent Festus, but utter words of truth and soberness". "This was not done in a corner. King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets?" The king says, "In a little thou persuadest me to become a Christian". Paul said, "I would to God, both in little and in much, that not only thou, but all who have heard me this day, should become such as *I* also am, except these bonds", @Acts 26: 24 - 29. He was in the enjoyment of the great things which God had done for him and was relating it most powerfully owing to the experience he had had in it.
{253}
Rem. If we had more of that in our preaching sometimes, we would be more effective.
Ques. Would you say that with all the schemes of social improvement by which they try to better the condition of things, they have failed to cover their shame?
J.T. Yes. This man represented rather the city, the shamelessness. Men who speak froward things are truly shameless.
Ques. What would the state of this man represent -- a sinner or one who has the knowledge of sins forgiven but unintelligent as to the character of the world or the system he is in?
J.T. He represents the world in its shamelessness. He takes the lead in things. Such men as those who write -- men who speak froward things, authors, men who write books and plays and amuse people, and whom unintelligent people call leaders of thought, leaders of the world. That is what is in view. They are long versed in these ways and the power of Satan. There is personal shamelessness, and disregard of the house; the family thought is broken up, for churches are depleted, and where God placed a record (for God has been there) there is no regard for God; there is no response to God. Places of the dead emphasise the times.
Rem. Would you say that all carries weight in the world?
J.T. Yes, quite!
Rem. The standards are all wrong in that way.
J.T. Yes. They are ever against what is of God. We shall see, as has been remarked, that God made coats of skins and clothed Adam and Eve therewith. Cain was disregardful of that, the family thought being broken up. That is recorded in Genesis, brother slays brother.
{254}
Rem. The state of Babylon in @Revelation 18: 2, 3, depicts the dwelling place of every unclean thing; what this will be in its full bloom.
J.T. Yes. Of the foolish woman, it says, "her guests are in the depths of Sheol", @Proverbs 9: 18. One who goes in does not know that her guests are there. That is where men find their entertainment; men are given up to the dead, where God has no response -- where there is no life.
Rem. In Ezekiel God showed the prophet what people could do in the dark. It is the only sphere they can work in. You cannot have things like that in the light.
J.T. The prince of the power of the air is what God contends with. The change here is so delightful; the man is clothed and in his right mind. This is the kind of man alluded to by Paul; in writing to Timothy, "God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion" (@2 Timothy 1: 7), so that he may be able to do the work of an evangelist, when relating how great things that God has done; he is free to do that.
J.N. Was he quite in order to go into the city when he was told to go unto his house?
J.T. The Lord said, "Return to thine house and relate how great things God has done for thee", and he went away and "published throughout the whole city how great things Jesus had done unto him". I do not say there was any reproach in it. It was happy news; certainly it was fine service from the Lord's standpoint, as testifying what the Lord was doing. The man related the things as he apprehended them. It would be in relation to the testimony of God. I think it is very fine to go to the city, though, as you say, he was sent to his house. It certainly does say, He went that way into this city, which, of course, would be a wider sphere. The woman in @John 4 went to the city where she was known, showing
{255}
what work was effected in her. "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" She presented the thing as she apprehended it, which is the most effective way.
J.N. In Matthew it is two, here it is one.
J.T. It gives us man as a system. You find two in many instances in Matthew, but in Luke it is what might be in any one person. Matthew deals in twos, in setting up a system of man in the world, but in Luke it is a matter of taking individuals out of the world, where things are seen at their worst, dominated by Satan; this particular individual was a long time under him, but now he becomes of service to Christ.
Rem. Luke is more the abstract side. He met the man going out of the city. You can see the pattern of the man inside the city.
J.T. That is what I thought. God was working in the man. We see that in Saul of Tarsus; when he saw Jesus he fell to the earth.
In verse 28 we have the man addressing Him as Son of the Most High God, and evidently the demon has something to do with it. Then, "What is thy name? And he said, Legion". I think man's responsibility is seen in what is said. His will is under the influence of the demons. They influence what he says in calling Jesus the Son of the Most High God, diverting from the real point. That is not the point now.
J.N. What is the point now?
J.T. That He is Lord. Satan will never say that. Peter said, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord". Satan will never say that. This man could not say that. He was brought to it later, when the demons went out.
Rem. When the Lord commanded the unclean spirit to go out of the man, the demons had no question as to His authority; they besought Him that
{256}
He would not command them to go away into the bottomless pit.
J.T. Satan would divert us from that, as at Philippi. You will remember how the woman said, "These men are bondmen of the Most High God".
Rem. What a triumph! The Lord allows the demons to go into the swine and they rush down to destruction, but the man is sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind. What a testimony! That soul would be a trophy for Christ and well able to relate what great things God had done. He would be in the same condition as the twelve already there. It would be a great help to the twelve to see how the Lord had dealt with this man.
J.T. He was entirely a disciple of Satan; but from the unordered state of things he was brought into the ordered state of things. It is such a state that the Lord takes the man out of, so that the power has to be superior to the power of Satan. The next man is Jairus. He is another man. He has a daughter, showing now the suffering from death, and in the meanwhile between this coming into view and raising up of the girl, Jairus's daughter, we have a secret thing which is neither Satan's power nor death, but something of the state in which another is, a secret plague, not a question now of satanic power or of death, but of what another has become secretly and for a long time, and as the man had been under the power of Satan a long time, so with the woman, she had been twelve years in this state. Solomon says, "they shall know every man the plague of his own heart", @1 Kings 8: 38.
Rem. This is not partaking of anything in this world?
J.T. No. You may shut yourself up in anything and never see such, and yet this incident shows up our circumstances, and they are shown up perfectly by God, and met.
{257}
Rem. She had come to the age of responsibility.
J.T. The child -- yes! The girl is dead, not as a consequence of sin. She has just come to the age of responsibility, which shows the state we are in. It shows how truly helpless our state is as men, women and children. The circumstances are infinitely hopeless. First, satanic power; second, secret plague, and third, death of the child not because of sins but because of sin. "Death reigned from Adam until Moses, even upon those who had not sinned in the likeness of Adam's transgression", @Romans 5: 14.
Rem. In @1 Kings 8: 38. Solomon says, "what prayer ... soever be made by any man ... when they shall know ... the plague of his own heart, and shall spread forth his hands toward this house; then hear thou in the heavens". If you discover the plague in your own heart, He will hear that one. The woman discovered it.
J.T. She knew one there who had virtue, and if she but touched the hem of His garment virtue would come out. The Spirit is the solution to this. It says she was immediately healed. The woman declared unto Him before all the people for what cause she had touched Him, and how she was healed immediately. And He said to her, "Daughter, be of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace". She is brought into relationship. We see here what is meant when it says virtue goes out of Him. It was in her touching the garment, showing how power, virtue, increase, were going out in all that was connected with Him. "Daughter" -- that would be a familiar touch. In a certain sense there is virtue in the garments apart from His Person. I think the garments refer to what is here in the saints. In @Psalm 133 you have the skirts and the garments. "The precious oil upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, upon Aaron's beard, that ran down to the hem of his garments", @Psalm 133: 2. The garments are
{258}
not Himself, that is quite obvious. It is what is immediately and intimately related with Him. She knew that. It was the garment He had on, that the woman touched, not one that He had taken off.
Rem. So that He really came out from @Psalm 133.
J.T. Everything hinges on that. She is brought into relationship with that Person who says, "Be of good courage, daughter; thy faith has healed thee; go in peace". So that in this case you have a new thing -- the christian side. @Romans 7 deals with relationship, because in @Romans 8 the son is brought into the family, having received the spirit of adoption; we are now under the light of purpose, under the family influence. The case of the little girl is more a spiritual matter; for when the Lord came to the house, He did not allow anyone in save Peter, John and James, and the father and mother of the child, that is to say, we have family relationships now in the woman; the term "Be of good courage, daughter" sets her in relationship with them. We reach what is spiritual. It is a question of raising the dead, and so it is the households, the family. He brings in three disciples, the most spiritual, Peter, John and James, and the father and mother of the child, so that she is brought in, raised up into the spiritual side of things.
J.N. Is that why He puts out the others, the weeping and the wailing, the flute players and minstrels?
J.T. That is what I thought. Matthew enlarges upon that. The sentimental things are put out, too. We get in christianity music very much developed. It is no help spiritually. It may be very nice, but we have to guard against natural sentiment at this point; things are too serious to be regarded naturally. The woman had enough of it, but she is now brought into relationship with Christ. She does not want to break the link; she is part of the garment herself.
{259}
As a result of this, there is life, not flesh, spiritual life brought into christian relationship and set in the family.
Rem. It is not a question now of weeping. What He would have them to take account of is the power there is for recovery. We want that, but to have it, we have to put out the flute players -- sentimentality, etc., which you refer to.
J.T. So that Peter, James and John represent the spiritual side. Peter represents authority, the administrative side, administration according to God; John, the family touch, affection; James, I think, is wisdom. These are the kind of influences we need. The father and mother of the child represent the family, and in addition to that, we have the Lord Himself. The girl is brought in there. What is seen is a young fresh life. So He took her -- the child -- by the hand.
Rem. He enjoined them not to tell anyone about it.
J.T. It is not for the world. You do not want to bring things down to the world. You must maintain a line of demarcation between the one and the other. If you carry out these precious things to the world, they will not listen. It is not that you do not preach the gospel; it is that this kind of thing is not to be told. Your life is hid. This is our life in principle. All this is going on in a hidden way. You are raised in Colossians in freshness -- fresh young life. He commanded that something be given her to eat. That life has to be sustained. He is the food of our life.
Rem. I was wondering as to the Lord taking her by the hand.
J.T. "When Israel was a child, then I loved him" -- taking him by the hand, but when it is taking by the hand, it is not identification, but support. He laid both His hands on the woman in chapter 13. That is identification.
{260}
FOOD
@John 6: 1 - 13; @John 21: 5 - 13; @Luke 24: 41 - 43
These verses of scripture speak of the subject of food, an important subject in all connections, whether it be material food or spiritual, but particularly if it be spiritual; and whilst the scriptures treat of literal food, literal bread and fish, yet the meaning is spiritual. @John 6 suggests an important lesson for believers in our own times, for that gospel is intended for our time.
You will observe that the passage begins with "after these things Jesus went away beyond the sea of Galilee", note, *beyond* it. Chapter 5 deals with occurrences at Jerusalem, the religious centre in those days, which have their corresponding features now. That chapter brings out the opposition of the Jews; indeed the opposers are the Jews as such, not the leaders, although their leaders are more prominent in the synoptic gospels in the opposition than the Jews as a class, reminding us that circumstances arise when the masses are opposed, not only the leaders. Years gone by, but within the memory of some of us, were marked by opposition of great leaders. These remain, but their teaching so permeated the masses that we are now confronted with that kind of opposition. The masses are leavened, a very serious matter, because they are like the sea, which as it is lashed by the wind, becomes overwhelming, and so we find in chapter 10 that the Lord is surrounded by the Jews, who took up stones to stone Him and then He leaves them. He escaped out of their hands. He finds His way out, for in this gospel no human strength, nor skill of man, could in any way retard the Lord. He was free, being a divine
{261}
Person. He could in no sense be prevented by any circumstances of strain arranged by Satan, so He leaves them, we are told, and next we find Him beyond the Jordan where John baptised at the first. These conditions of Jewish opposition necessitate first principles; that we should be clear, that we should clear ourselves, and in the open, take on and identify ourselves with first principles.
Well now, chapter 5 brings out that kind of thing, the opposition of the Jews. The Jews persecuted Jesus, and sought to slay Him, we are told, and so He goes away beyond the sea of Galilee, and the crowds come to Him. They come to Him and He goes up into a mountain, that is to say, we have a new position taken up. He is away, far away, beyond the centre of religious influence and power, and He takes up a position on the mountain, another very important suggestion. Under these circumstances, He was withdrawn from the level of current ritual; He is on the mountain and His disciples are with Him. Precious touch, beloved brethren! It is our privilege to be with Him in such circumstances -- at a distance from the religious centre, in elevation, above the strain, and in the healthy atmosphere, as you might say, of heaven. But the crowds come to Him there, proving that there is such a thing as a movement towards Christ in those circumstances. What a happy, blessed thing to be with Him in them and to see the movements of men coming to Christ! In this gospel He is generally the centre of attraction. Then we read He lifted up His eyes and saw a great company coming to Him. He is not indifferent, however many, and now the question is about feeding them, and He takes the initiative here in the matter. In the other gospels the disciples take the initiative; indeed they propose to send them away, but the Lord takes the initiative here in regard to this crowd, this multitude of people that had come to Him, and He says to
{262}
Philip, "Whence shall we buy loaves that these may eat?" One questions oneself as to what one would say, if one were thus challenged by the Lord, because five thousand people before you is a large number, an excessive multitude, and the Lord says, as it were, 'Now, Philip, what about this, how are these people to be fed?' Then the Spirit of God adds, "this he said trying him". Why should He try Philip? Well, Philip was a very important disciple, and the more important, and the more prominent the disciple is, the more he is to be tested. Philip shone earlier, as you will remember; in chapter 1 it was he whom the Lord Himself had found. He is distinguished in that way, and He found him as He went into Galilee. He is the Lord's own fruit. He used no instrumentality to convert Philip; Philip could say, 'The Lord Himself found me'. Nobody could claim to have been the means of conversion; the Lord did it, and then Philip finds a man in his own movement; he finds Nathanael, that is to say, Philip has a record. He has become distinguished among the disciples, and now the Lord would test him. It is all very well to get converts and to find your Nathanaels, but then these people have to be fed. One hears of thousands of people being converted by preachers, but what about the food? I know of men who preach and get converts in numbers, and they virtually avow that they have no means to feed them. They send them here and there with notes of commendation, but to find food for them is out of the question, and so here the Lord tests Philip, what about this? Immediately Philip is thrown back on mercantile thoughts. Whatever his occupation had been, it is a question of two hundred pennyworth. Well, that meant that he is not spiritual on this point, for he says, 'Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them', that is to say, it is beyond our resources.
{263}
Well, that is Philip. He and Andrew are coupled in this gospel three times: in chapter 1, in this chapter, and in chapter 12. In the last instance Philip comes into contact with the Greeks and he and Andrew go up and tell the Lord about them, that is to say they are occupied with persons coming. Very important, but what about the food? How are these people to be fed? Then we are told what Andrew says; we are told so that there must be no misunderstanding that he is the brother of Simon Peter, the agent by whom Simon Peter was brought to Jesus. He is a man of note. Peter could not say like Philip that the Lord found me. It was Andrew who found him and brought him to Jesus, so that Andrew thus had distinction. Well, what is Andrew saying about the food? He says to the Lord, "There is a little boy here who has five barley loaves and two small fishes", note, a little boy. That little boy is more important now than these two great men -- these two men who had distinction. He has got something, and so Andrew and Philip are disqualified on this point. Now they could not afford that, nor can any one of us afford to be disqualified on that point, for the examination day will surely come, and the marks would show the appearance, whether good or bad, and we cannot afford, beloved, to lose on this point, the question of food, or to be without the means of helping people in this regard, and so the Lord takes what the boy had. Now he is "a little boy". You may be sure there is something in that. The fact that Andrew calls him a little boy is a further evidence of where Andrew was -- that he was minimising everything, and you may be sure that he who has what is wanted for the moment will be minimised in the natural mind. Who is he, whence is he, where are these qualifications? Do *you* have the food? That is the point; we have to get it. The little boy had it. That to us would mean that the thing locally is to
{264}
make provision for every one. Who has any, however little? We are not to quench the Spirit; we are not to despise prophesyings; if we do, we shall shut out these little voices and we shall find ourselves without any food to eat, distinguished persons, distinguished Philips, distinguished Andrews, but nothing to eat. A poor substitute! Levitical renown without anything to eat. We need not seek renown of that kind. We want something to eat, and hence beloved, the thing is, whatever little there may be, make room for it. The Lord takes it up and blesses it. The little boy is not asked to distribute it. He is not asked to give thanks for it, the Lord does that, nor are the disciples asked here to distribute it. The Lord Himself takes what the little boy had. See how the Lord takes it out of his hands, as it were. It does not pass through the hands of the disciples. It goes direct from the Lord's hands to feed the people. It is taken direct from the little boy, and thanks is given for it, and then it is passed to the people who need. The disciples are first ordered to make the men sit down; and we read there was much grass in the place. There was no crowd to thank for that; they did not make the grass; John would bring in the power of God in life. Grass is a symbol of life and is one of the first things mentioned in the Scriptures as the evidence of life, and it says here, "there was much grass in the place". Now the food is passed round, and they all ate as much as they would; there were no limitations whatever. It is not that each one could have a little, but as much as they would. It is the magnitude of divine provision, that is to say the enlargement of what there is from any little boy or girl, any brother or sister, who has the Spirit of God. Five words it may be with the spirit, with the understanding, or some note of thanksgiving, or a hymn with the spirit, and see how it goes round, how every heart is touched. The Lord has done that.
{265}
I go on now to the next passage which deals with persons who have gone astray. I wonder how many in this room have not. In John it is a question of the children of God, scattered abroad; that is the way he puts it, but then in this last chapter it is more than that, there is a definite movement on the part of responsible brothers. One says, "I go a fishing", and some of their names are given. Seven of them go fishing. It is Peter who says, "I go to fish", and then others say to him, "We also go with thee", that is to say, you have a definite movement away from the truth. Now I am only speaking of this question of food. The Lord says to them, "Children", what a subduing word; that is, they had been astray, they have had their own way for a while. It is very beautiful in Luke where this same Peter had strayed and denied the Lord, it is said, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon", that is to say to that responsible man who had denied the Lord. It is a question of grace, but in John it is "children", in keeping with the family thought. The Lord would soften our hearts. He would touch our hearts, that in all these movements the family thought has been missed. He has the family thought in view. "Children, have ye anything to eat?" Have you anything to eat? He is not asking anything for Himself, I will come to that in a moment. It is a question of *them*. He is thinking of them after all these movements, "Have ye anything to eat?" Did He need to ask that question for Himself? Not at all, but to bring out the fact for them to press it home upon them, for that night they had caught nothing. They answered Him, "No". Very humble admission, no disguise, for if God is working you cannot hide, for the Lord knows. He knew all about it, but they owned it, and that was the happy part. They had caught nothing. Well, He says, "Cast the net at the right side of
{266}
the ship and ye will find. They cast therefore, and they could no longer draw it". A remarkable thing because locality is intimated there. In the similar passage in Luke, where Peter in early days is directed by the Lord to cast in the net, there is nothing said about the locality, it is simply, "into the deep"; "Launch out into the deep", in keeping, I suppose, with the human side of Luke, the great sea aspect of humanity; the net is in the deep. It is let down there, but here locality is intimated as if we were more restricted in John. It is intelligible; but restricted to the favourable side, for the right is obviously the favourable. It is the side of power, that is God is working there, and you may be sure, beloved, that all our efforts are in vain unless God is working. Whatever we may be, it is a question of the work of God; that is the point in John. "My Father worketh hitherto and I work". It is a question of the work of God; that God is working. The work of God never ceased for them. How important to be directed to the point where it is the Lord, where power is, where power is active -- the right side, and there is no question about it. They do not argue with the Lord as Peter did earlier. Down goes the net, and they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes. It is not the immensity. It *is* an immense draught, but it is countable, one hundred and fifty-three, a large draught. That is the result that you may expect where God is working.
Well now, that is something there to eat, but then the Lord has something for them to eat besides that. When I am coming back I find that the Lord has something all this time. Where He got it, must be left with His divinity. Where did He get it? He had it. There was the fire, the fish, the bread, all set in order. The Lord is doing it. You see how tender He is to us. He would not pass by the weakest of us, but yet He gives us to see that He is divine, and that
{267}
He is thinking of the family. He is thinking of the children of God. One would love to catch the movements of His heart with regard to the people of God, scattered, and particularly those leading, leaders, persons who are given the honour such as are given here. Well, there is the fire and the fish and bread all ready. Then He says, "Bring of the fishes which ye have *now* taken", that is to say, it is just *now*. It is fresh, fresh evidence of the work of God in my soul. I am under the Lord's direction. I have got something. I have taken it just now. It is not something I have carried over for years and learned from books, it is what I have got *now*, and it is fresh. There they are and they brought them up, and then the Lord says, "Come and dine". This is no ordinary matter, it is not a mere question of meeting the need, it is a dignified word this word "dine". You see what the Lord would do for us, beloved, in owning Him. "Cast the net on the right side", and in all this recognising that it is the Lord. John says that first. John says to Peter, "It is the Lord". They are not like people looking around for another house. "It is the Lord". They have caught sight of the Lord, and that settles everything. "It is the Lord", he says, and they are so sure they cease asking questions. None of the disciples durst ask Him, "Who art Thou?" They knew it was the Lord. There was no doubt about it. We want to be certain about things. John would have us to know things, to be sure about them, and he says, "these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name", @John 20: 31. So that they know it is the Lord, and He spreads the dinner, and He is inviting them to dine. The christian is no ordinary being, and the Lord would impress upon you that you are not ordinary. You belong to the family of God. Now there is the dinner spread; *He*
{268}
has done it; *He* has done it *Himself*. Precious fact! He goes forth to serve. In chapter 13 He served in washing the feet; now He has cooked and served the meal. Think of that! Think of the service of Christ! Is He not worthy of coming back to in the most unqualified way? He wants you. He looks out over christendom and He sees the children of God and He would die to "gather together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad", and He would make the way as easy as possible, as attractive as possible, but then He would have His own way, and so you see what follows with Peter. He had His own way with Peter, but before He dealt with him, he is fed, he dined. It is a very remarkable thing that in the Scriptures the Lord deals with us while we eat. He challenged the disciples that one of them should betray Him, while they were eating. It is important to feed people if they are to be helped. You see the whole point, beloved in this respect, is having the food. The Lord had it. In chapter 6 a little boy had it, and the Lord enlarged it, but it was there, and there is little attached to any one of our meetings unless there is some food, something for the children of God to eat as they come and as they go. They would have something. Thus God is working. "Bring of the fishes which ye have now taken".
Well now, that was all in John, but I want now to say a word about Luke. The Lord says to the disciples as coming in amongst them, "Have ye *here* any meat?" It is not now, 'have *you* any?' He is not working in regard to this. In John it was a question of their having it for themselves, but in Luke it is not so much that, as have you got any in the place. "Have ye *here*". In Luke it is the local place, with John it is generally persons apart from where they are, but with Luke it is where you are, as well as who you are. In John it is who you are. The Lord
{269}
comes to the place because you are there, but in Luke it is who you are and where you are, hence it applies to the localities where the people of God are, where they are accustomed to gather and assemble for the Lord's supper. The Lord challenges us as to what we have *here*. We have much in Christ in an objective way, so while we have got everything in Christ, thank God it is intelligible. Eternal life is in Christ, heaven is in Christ, everything that God has got for us is in Christ; but what the Lord asks is, What have you *here*? That is the thing. You may have the objective side and have nothing subjectively. "Have ye anything here to eat?" He says. That comes home to every locality where the people of God are; then it says, "they gave him part of a broiled fish". It is a question now of whether there is anything for the Lord. Think of Him wishing to have part with us! We should be exercised always that there should be something for the Lord, not only for us, but for the Lord, as David says, "I will not give sleep to mine eyes ... until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob", @Psalm 132: 4, 5. "Have ye anything here to eat?" and it says they gave Him a part of a broiled fish and of an honeycomb. Now, dear brethren, I would press this. The Lord expects to have part with us, and He challenges us as to what there is, as to what there is *here*, *here*, in this city of Aberdeen, what there is here as we meet week by week. Those gathered together in @Luke 24 were saying certain things. They were saying, "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon". Very important. That was the knowledge they had. They were speaking about it, and the two who had returned from Emmaus were saying that He was recognised by them in the breaking of bread; as they were saying these things, the Lord Himself stood in the midst. It is very important to be saying the right things, and I am
{270}
sure that it is important that what we say in the assembly should be right, should be reverent, according to God. "Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God ... let thy words be few", @Ecclesiastes 5: 1, 2. It is a question of the quality. Well, the quality is to be according to the Lord. He loves what has been said. He Himself stood in the midst and says, "Peace be unto you", but that is not all. He comes in on what you are saying, but how is He going out? This is now how He comes in, how is He going out? Is He going to have nothing? Is He merely to quieten our spirits as He does in this case, for they are perturbed, and then go out as He came in? No. He comes and expects things, so to speak. "I am come into my garden", He says, "I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have drunk my wine with my milk", @Song of Songs 5: 1. I have eaten it. He says, but how could He do it, if it were not here? So here, He can easily say, 'I have been here and have had part in their honeycomb and in their fish'. They gave Him a part, not all, but a part. It is a question of His having part with what we have. They gave it to Him and He ate it. He ate it before them. What an experience to see Him eating what you give Him before you. These are spiritual things. The Lord is to be apprehended spiritually, so that He has part in what we give Him. He took it, we are told, and He did eat before them.
Well, that is all, dear brethren. You can see how important this food question is -- food in regard to what we need for the multitude, also for the returning ones, and then for the Lord Himself. How wide the bearing of food is in the Scriptures!
{271}
ADJUSTMENT IN RELATION TO SOVEREIGNTY
@2 Samuel 7: 1 - 29; @1 Chronicles 28: 1 - 6
J.T. I have been thinking of this chapter as indicating that as one generation passes away and another comes on the scene, there is a need of adjustment so that relations may be according to God and the testimony carried on in the coming generation in accord with His sovereignty. Paul, in writing to Philemon, speaks of himself as "the aged", one who because of his age and experience has a moral right to speak and to exhort Philemon to receive Onesimus even as himself. There was need of adjustment in their relations; so here in @2 Samuel 7, we find a servant of God, with the very best intentions and desires towards God, needing adjustment, and he got it. In Chronicles he is seen in the light and good of the adjustment, and in the full acceptance of the sovereignty of God. It is striking to observe the many references to divine choosing in that scripture. David stands up upon his feet and his thoughts are full of divine sovereignty. His own position as king was due to it; Judah's position in the tribes was due to it, and the place that his father's house had in that tribe, and his own place in the family, as well as Solomon's position as the chosen of Jehovah, were all matters of divine choice.
D.L.H. How would you apply these thoughts to us today?
J.T. It is of great importance that the relations between the elder and the younger brethren should be rightly adjusted according to God. The nearer one gets to the end, the greater the sense one has that God is over all: "One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all", @Ephesians 4: 6. So the Lord Himself, according to @1 Corinthians 15,
{272}
will refer all back to God; He will deliver up the kingdom to God having "annulled all rule and all authority and power", that "God may be all in all". All things being put in subjection, the Son Himself takes that place in the ultimate adjustment of things.
The end of John the baptist's ministry shows the hearts of the fathers turned to the children; they are taking into account the generation to come. John himself had a great experience as born into a disciplined house. Zacharias had prayed for a son, but when his prayer is to be answered he has not faith for it. Nevertheless, Elizabeth and Zacharias are in the line of the Spirit, so that later, they call the child's name John; they have been adjusted. John is born in a spiritual setting.
H.H. Where do you see this thought of adjustment in connection with John?
J.T. In connection with what is said as to the turning of the hearts of the fathers to their children; it was the result of his ministry. There was solicitude on the part of the fathers, for those who would come after. Paul speaks of Onesimus as his own son, but in sending him back to Philemon, he is exercised that he may have his full place among the brethren, not that he should come among them as a slave, that is, at a disadvantage on account of his earlier history, but as fully restored to receive a place among them as "a beloved brother", even as Paul himself. The fact of his having run away from his master might affect his return among the brethren, and place him at a disadvantage, but Paul desired that he might be received "not any longer as a bondman, but above a bondman, a beloved brother ... in the Lord".
Solomon had a special place with David; he acquired it as his father's son, "tender and an only one", as he himself says; then too, he is born into royalty. David came into it by divine choice in the
{273}
sovereignty of God, but Solomon was born into it. He was at no disadvantage from his early history, for he was born into divine favour. Jehovah loved him and He named him Jedidiah, meaning 'Beloved of Jehovah'. So with John the baptist, he is born into a spiritual realm in his father's house, but that has to be confirmed and recognised.
I think those in the position of elders today should see to it that only what God has made of us should rule in their estimate of us; that none should be taken up and regarded naturally, or according to natural qualifications, or judged according to what pertains to us naturally. It is the responsibility of each of us to see that that is so in regard to ourselves, but then it is also the responsibility of the elder brethren to regard us only according to the work of God, and what God has effected in us. Paul was concerned as to how Philemon would receive his slave; he wanted to ensure that he would be received back in a suitable way.
Rem. As a brother beloved.
J.T. Quite so. Very often we hear reports of what a man was when he was young, but what does that matter to us; what is he *now* as the subject of the work of God?
H.H. Peter was a fine brother at the end of his second epistle.
J.T. Quite so. Here in 2 Samuel, David had reached the zenith of his spiritual desire and power, but he has to be adjusted in spite of that. He had to come under adjustment, even though Nathan says to him, 'Well, David, all that you do God will accept', "do all that is in thy heart". But will God accept it? In that night something comes to Nathan; God has something to say to him. I think that what is to be impressed upon us is divine greatness -- what God is -- the universal bearing of God; "one God and Father of all". What an immense
{274}
thought that is! Solomon later says, "the heavens, and the heaven of heavens, cannot contain thee!" The instruction here is made to turn on the coming generation, on Solomon. David was passing off the scene, but God had chosen Solomon; He had someone to follow; the point is, would David submit to the adjustment of his thoughts? Well, we see perfect submission on the part of the king, to what God insists upon.
In @1 Chronicles 28, we read "king David stood up upon his feet"; though he was an old man, yet he speaks here by his own strength as acquired of God, and he speaks for God. "Hear me, my brethren", though he was king. The burden of his speech is the sovereignty of God, the sovereign choice of God -- yet he says, "Jehovah the God of Israel chose me out of all the house of my father ... for he has chosen Judah to be the prince ... and of all my sons ... he has chosen Solomon". Solomon was a young man, only about twenty at that time, "young and tender", but God had chosen him just as He had previously chosen David out of all his father's house. We should have been concerned that such a young man should have such a heavy responsibility; well, let us support him. God honours the old brother, although His choice may fall upon the young one. The spiritual side, the 'pattern' of the house was with the old man. David gave to Solomon what he had received "by the Spirit"; he recognised that God's choice had fallen upon the young man. There is a beautiful adjustment between the age and experience of the elder, and the sovereign choice of God falling upon the young. You find no jealousy here; the house is great; the work is great; the young man will need all you can give him. The young men today need all the support and help that can be given them. The elder brother has a greater apprehension of Christ and a deeper experience, but
{275}
he is not jealous in it. He knows what he has got; he knows his own experience with God, and he recognises that what he has received is for the *coming* generation; he is solicitous for those who are to follow.
Then another thing has to be recognised: God reserves His sovereign rights in regard to His house. It is *His* house, not yours, and He not only gives the pattern of it, but He chooses the builder, and He adopts the builder, for He loved Solomon. It is more than sovereignty; for God adopts what He loves. We are lovable potentially. He takes us up in the gospel on the ground of sovereignty, but He adopts us on the ground of lovability. Solomon was not adopted when he was born, but he was loved when he was born, and eventually, he is adopted.
Rem. We are loved of the Father, "because ye have had affection for me".
J.T. Yes, it is *because* "ye have had affection for me", the Lord says. Solomon does not give us the responsible side, it is a question of divine, sovereign choice. David says of himself that he was chosen from the sheepfolds and, speaking of God, that "he took pleasure in me". Before David proved himself Jehovah had chosen him because He loved him. Solomon was born loved, but Jehovah did not choose him then, but later on he says, "I will be his father, and he shall be my son", @2 Samuel 7: 14. So David says of him, "Jehovah ... has chosen Solomon my son".
J.T-y. Would it be the recognition of divine sovereignty that led David to prepare the material for the building?
J.T. I think love led him to do that; the material was all prepared by him, but the recognition of divine sovereignty which chose Solomon would preserve him from any sort of jealousy. God is still acting on this line -- the right of divine choice. One passes
{276}
away very restfully in the knowledge that God acts sovereignly; He chooses whom He will to follow. He will never be at a loss. Abraham was the subject of God's choice, indeed, it has been so right down the ages. The apostle makes that point in regard to Israel in Romans. It affords great restfulness to those who are aging if they recognise that God has made His choice of a succession. If you look at 1 Chronicles you will see how perfectly restful David is in the anticipation of his own departure. God had already made His choice in Solomon.
In 1 Kings, divine choice was interfered with; Adonijah was there, and David had been neglectful; he had not observed the movements of the usurper; he did not know anything about it, hence divine choice was interfered with. But in Chronicles, David was not decrepit, he did not need to be warmed, he stood up upon his own feet; he spoke with kingly power. He was passing away, but he recognised that God had made His choice; God was doing things; God had made choice of this young man, one who was yet young and tender, and David knew that God would see him through. Nevertheless he is anxious that the elders of Israel should see him through, too. David and the others with him had made provision for the house, but the work was great, the house was to be great, and Solomon would need to be helped in every possible way. David knew what he was talking about, he knew God had made His choice, but here was this young man Solomon, and how is he to be maintained? God would see him through, but what about his reception by the elders of Israel?
Some of us who are middle-aged are still subject to failure in judgment. Scripture shows that we may miss God's mind even at the very height of our service. When it was a question of the blessing of Joseph's sons. Joseph was not in the mind of God as to it, great man though he was. It was the *old* man
{277}
who had the mind of God, and who knew what God was doing; Jacob crossed his hands wittingly. That is a solemn instance for the middle-aged. Joseph was remarkable as a young man; he had had the mind of God, and Jacob had rebuked him for speaking of it, but at the end, we find it is the old man who has the light of God, and the younger man is not intelligent as to what God was doing; he says, "Not so, my father".
Ques. What age was Solomon when he spent the thirteen years in building his own house?
J.T. He was still a comparatively young man, not yet sixty.
D.L.H. He made a mess of things before he was sixty.
J.T. He did indeed. But Scripture presents him as a lovable young man; he was, as he tells us, "a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of my mother", @Proverbs 4: 3. He had the utmost regard and respect for his father. It was so with Onesimus and with Timothy in regard to Paul. There should be no occasion for friction between the old and the young, for the old need all that the young have, and the young need all the help that the old can give. All that David had came down to Solomon; the preparation was all made for the house.
J.T-y. "Thou art the man" seems to have been completely blotted out of the mind of David and from the minds of his brethren, as he stands up here. Often we hold an early failure against our brethren -- it was not so here.
J.T. I think we see with what respect Paul regarded Barnabas even though he had contended sharply with him at one point; so too, with Peter. Recovery after failure is as much the work of God as conversion; we have to recognise it and honour it as such.
{278}
J.T-y. You would pray on that line for those who are out of the way?
J.T. Indeed yes. David in 2 Samuel was conscious of the very best intentions in speaking to Nathan of building the house, but the word of the Lord came to Nathan "that night", and the adjustment comes in. Both David and Nathan needed it. Reaching a certain point in soul history does not mean that we are safe from the need of adjustment. God goes over the ground and says, as it were, 'What about you, David? I never proposed to any of the judges of Israel to build Me a house'. It was very probing to the heart that God should raise the question 'Why are *you* doing this? Did *I* ask you?' One might have been very successful in certain lines of service, but that does not fit you to build God's house. God would choose His own builder.
Well, David accepts the adjustment; he bows to it. He gets into the presence of God and he sees that He has means by Him of doing the thing. God says to him, 'I want you to know what I have in My mind'. God has things in His mind; He may not use me at all, but His mind is there to be entered into, if I seek His presence and sit before Him.
Rem. @Numbers 7: 89 is striking in that connection: "when Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with Him, then he heard the voice speaking to him from off the mercy-seat", as if the Lord would say, 'It is for Me to speak, not you'.
J.T. He is constantly interested in what is going on, and to be enquired of always. David is referred back to the very roots of his history, and he never once refers to building the house after this. He sits before the Lord but he does not mention it. In his own consciousness he says that refers to God, He is going to see to that; it is no matter for me. God is going to build His house by a son, not by a soldier. David is learning in reality now; he 'tarried'
{279}
before the Lord; he was not rebellious, he was bowing to the sovereignty of God. He moved in and tarried before the Lord, and he says a great deal about what God had in *His* mind, but not one word as to what had been in his *own* mind. He recognised that he was not the right kind of man; he had shed much blood. The scoffers say that all things continue as they were, but God is not asleep; He has a mind about everything. Why, even a sparrow does not fall to the ground without Him! He thinks of every meeting, of every local meeting, and every individual, too.
Ques. Does it show that priestly state is needed for the apprehension of the mind of God? Nathan was a prophet, and David was a king, but there is no mention of the priest.
J.T. That is very striking. But after all it is a priestly movement on the part of king David; he went in; that is a priestly movement, he acts as a priest. He goes in and acknowledges the will of God, and bows to it. His work is greatly enhanced through this experience; it is "after this" that he smote the Philistines; his service is not over, for it is necessary. The Philistines need to be set aside; they would stand in the way of Solomon and the work of building, and David smote them. All that was necessary, so his work has to go on. But God's sphere is another thing, and who should build the house; that remains in the sovereign choice of God. David goes in to God; he goes over the ground with God and he bows to His will. As I tarry before the Lord. His mind is confirmed to my soul.
{280}
LIFE (1)
@John 1: 4, 5, 29 - 42
A.N.W. Would you mind saying a word explaining what you mean by life in its present aspect?
J.T. I was thinking of the way it is presented in the Scriptures. In the Old Testament, the synoptic gospels and Paul's epistles, it is generally presented as a future blessing, as answering to the mind of God for the future; being definite blessing which He commands; whereas John brings it in as a present thing, so that one has it on the principle of faith, agreeing with the well of water springing up into everlasting life. I thought that is perhaps what we need -- to see the thing in its present availability, so that whilst the thought of life is varied as applying to vegetables, cattle, fishes, birds and man, we have it in its wide range in the material creation. John brings it within the compass of intelligent affection where it can be apprehended by those who love the Lord. "In him was life" is the statement here. In his epistle, John dwells on the family idea, that is those who loved the Lord and were near Him and had to do with Him; they saw Him with their eyes and handled Him with their hands, showing that He was available to them. It was not something at a distance or that which required investigation by scientific knowledge, but it was in a living Person, seen, heard and handled. That makes it very tangible, too, for us who love the Lord. It is not something theoretical but practical and substantial. That is what John would emphasise, hence he introduces the subject of life early in his gospel.
A.F.M. Would you mind distinguishing for us between life as breathed into man's nostrils by Jehovah Elohim, and the proposition of life as under
{281}
law, then what we have in the Spirit, as in @Romans 8, and what you have just brought before us?
J.T. I suppose the breathing in @Genesis 2 suggests that God would be on intimate terms with man, breathing into his nostrils the breath of life. There was no such intimate transaction in the other features of creation, although life was there: the earth was caused to bring forth grass, herbs and fruit-trees, that was at the command of God. The Lord says in @John 12: 50 in regard to eternal life, that it is the Father's commandment. Again it says, "Let the waters swarm". It was all God's fiat. So that life in its variety of forms comes into evidence by His word. It was all a result of the word or commandment. On the third day it is vegetable life. On the fifth day you have two species of creatures, the one inhabiting the waters, the other the air, they are marked by the principle of development outside of themselves. Then the remainder on the sixth day, the beast of the earth after their kind, cattle and creeping things. That is another kind of life, all at the command of God's word. It was what was in His mind to create. He might have made one kind only, but He made many kinds. Then we have man, and the counsel being taken in respect of him, and God's intimate relations with him, so that whilst he is a living soul in common with others, he is made a living soul by the divine breath. Jehovah Elohim breathed into his nostrils the breath of life -- a most intimate transaction, which indicates what He had in mind, that man was to participate, so to speak, in His own life. That is how the thing stands in Genesis in relation to the creation, and undoubtedly implies that God would have variety of life.
A.F.M. Adam's life was forfeited through sin. Then there was the proposition of life by keeping the law: a man that did those things would live by them. I thought it might help us if you would say a word
{282}
upon this, and also in regard to life in the Spirit, as in @Romans 8.
J.T. Our brother was referring to life on the principle of law keeping, and to its bearing in relation to the Spirit. I suppose the law demonstrated the sinfulness of man because he transgressed it; he disobeyed the commandment; but it also demonstrated his dead state, he was simply lifeless. He had no power, like the man of @John 5. It says the law "was weak through the flesh", @Romans 8: 3.
W.C.G. Do you think that verses 29 - 34 would suggest the service of Christ to restore man's intimacy? You mentioned that breathing into his nostrils indicated intimacy.
J.T. That is very interesting. Our brother's thought links on with that. In @Romans 8, through the weakness of the flesh, not only the sinfulness of it, God could not give what He promised by the law, it was weak through the flesh. Man was totally unable to fulfil the law; it not only convicted him as a transgressor, but exposed him as impotent, like the man at the pool, who said, "I have not a man", @John 5: 7.
W.C.G. Our chapter touches upon Christ's service Godward. The Lamb of God takes away the sin of the world, and it is His service to us to baptise us with the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Romans works it out showing how you reach that point. It brings out the guilt of the transgressor and the impotency of man's flesh. It says, "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit", @Romans 8: 3, 4. Then the same chapter shows that the mind of the flesh is death, but the mind of the Spirit is
{283}
life and peace; the Spirit is that to us. He brings us into intimacy of life, so that we have breath. Not only have we the breathing into us, but there is the breath in the christian, for he says, "Abba, Father", by the Spirit. He recognises his relation with God in intimacy, and that opens up the way of approach to God in worship, the result of the service of the Son.
W.C.G. What precedes that in Romans corresponds with the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world. He serves God in accomplishing divine righteousness, and makes way for service from us in the gift of the Spirit.
J.T. In regard to, "In him was life", the life showed itself. You see how life appears in the varied features of creation; and science is largely occupied with that. But here you have life in a Person, and that is the great theme for faith; the intelligent inquiry of those who love the Lord would be, How may I discover it? Well, John the baptist says, "In the midst of you stands, whom ye do not know". The Lord was not moving as yet. The substance of life was there, but it was not yet moving so as to be taken cognisance of by intelligent persons, but now He is moving, that is the reason for suggesting verse 29, for life is discerned in movement. Life is discerned in the varied forms in which it is seen under man's eye, but now it is seen in a Person. He stood among them, but they did not know Him.
C.A.M. "The light of men" would involve what you have stated.
J.T. Quite. It is a question of men, not of any special class, and it is a question of the thing itself not as the result of investigation, but in shining. The light is to be apprehended on the principle of shining, and the principle of shining is on the principle of movement, so that by movement you have this
{284}
radiation. It is seen as emanating from Christ, as you begin to inquire into it.
A.F.M. It is there in its source?
J.T. Yes, in the way of life. That is the reason why I think John's gospel is so appropriate in taking up the subject of life, because it gives you the thing in a Person in whom it is in no way dimmed. It is there in the source of it.
W.C.G. "In him was life" might be paraphrased 'In Him was the fountain of love'.
J.T. It is seen in that way. The Lord was standing among them, then He moves, and John the baptist is the first to see the thing and give it a name, so that he becomes the model. He saw the Lord coming to him.
A.R.S. When Job was longing for a mediator, had he any idea of life?
J.T. Yes, he had, for he says, "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and the Last, he shall stand upon the earth", @Job 19: 25.
A.R.S. He looked for a man. In John's gospel the Man has appeared.
J.T. That helps, because life coming in enforces what God is in creation. God Himself comes in for Job and follows up Elihu in calling attention to the creation, ending up with a description of two great beings, one of whom He calls behemoth, the chief of the ways of God, which is a very significant term, and he was so designated, for life displayed itself in him; all his power was in his loins. Then He speaks of another creature whom He calls leviathan, who is king over all the proud beasts. These represent certain features in creation that were intended of God to affect Job, and they did, because as soon as God finishes, Job says, "I know that thou canst do everything", and that includes His working in resurrection. That is to say, the power of life is there, and that is very wide.
{285}
A.R.S. Would you say that before @Genesis 3, where man sins, there was not the necessity for life as we now have it? Man disobeyed and was told he must die, and now God brings in eternal life.
J.T. The thing was there before sin came in. The idea was there in the breath that was breathed into Adam, and then the tree of life was in the garden; the testimony was furnished, but the presence of death made the necessity of life evident.
In verse 29 where the baptist saw Jesus coming to him, that coming had to do with His death as come in flesh. John knew that that matter had to be settled; sin must be removed. It was the first form of life's movement, that was light. John the evangelist in his gospel, sets things in astronomical relations. The first idea is movement; light is radiated by movement. What did this mean to the baptist? It meant the Lord was able to solve the whole problem of good and evil.
G.W.H-r. Hence in the garden there were both the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
J.T. Quite.
J.S. Would you regard "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us" as movement?
J.T. It was in the movement but the light was not shining as yet. So that John says, "In the midst of you stands, whom ye do not know" (verse 26).
Rem. Coming into the world He sheds light on every man.
J.T. What follows "the Word became flesh" is "we have contemplated his glory". That is radiation.
Ques. Something to be seen?
J.T. Yes, persons are there and are beholding the thing. Take Moses: he saw the bush was not consumed, and when God saw the interest of Moses. He says, "Moses, Moses". You observe the thing, and that gives you distinction.
{286}
A.N.W. How far does verse 5 go: "The light appears in darkness, and the darkness apprehended it not"?
J.T. That is abstract; it refers to the whole ministry of Christ on earth. The condition of man was such that although the light appeared, the darkness did not apprehend it.
C.A.M. This light coming in dispels the darkness and confusion in the various characters, where the rays of it reach them.
J.T. That is what I think we may see. John the baptist is singled out as the first one to see it. He saw Jesus coming to him. Now that meant a good deal, John knew what He represented exactly. He himself had baptised, he was administering death typically in his own ministry.
A.F.M. If in John's statement in regard of the sin of the world being taken away the question of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil is settled, would the next day answer to the tree of life, when he says, "Behold the Lamb of God"?
J.T. Yes. The Lord is free now to walk. Life is seen in movement and is available, so that the two disciples hearing John speak follow Jesus. That is the beginning of a company, of which He is the Centre.
A.R.S. Wherever there is life there is movement.
J.T. Yes, and the light radiates by movement.
Ques. What is the action of light?
J.T. It shines. The life was the light of men. What is the first light you get? It is seen in the One moving to John. Figuratively He is going to die. That is the form the light takes, for the first thing is to deal with the question of sin. He taketh away the sin of the world. John is able to put a name on the Lord's movement directly, he says, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world".
{287}
W.B-w. You get the same idea in the command in Genesis: "Let the earth bring forth", which is followed by movement (@Genesis 1: 24).
J.T. So in "Let the earth *cause* grass to spring up" (verse 11); it was God who put the vital element there.
W.B-w. Even in verse 1 of @Genesis 1 you would say there was movement.
J.T. Yes. God did not create the earth separately from the heavens. It had been submerged, and now it was to fructify and bring forth.
Ques. In these operations of God do we not see His pleasure in life?
J.T. Very true. It says, "The earth is Jehovah's, and the fulness thereof", @Psalm 24: 1. Man came on the sixth day, into conditions in which he can live. It is a beautiful scene; there is a special place made for him amidst every evidence of life.
W.C.G. I think the first help a soul gets is as he is put into correspondence with John the baptist: "stand still, and see" (@Exodus 14: 13) was the word to the Israelites; they stood still and saw the salvation of God, and so we stand still and see God's activities towards us.
J.T. Some of us were saying the other day that at the Red Sea there was divine activity; God was in the cloud and went before them; then He removed in the cloud, and went behind the people, it was the activity of His love for their salvation; then He looked out on the Egyptians and embarrassed their camp; then He took off their chariot wheels. All was love's activity in Israel's deliverance.
A.R.S. One of the great reasons why it is so important to get hold of life is that in the power of it we triumph over death.
J.T. I think that is what John had in mind to show. The Lord goes down into death and in the power of life He breaks the power of death. He has
{288}
annulled death and brought life and incorruptibility to light by the gospel.
W.C.G. So as a person stands and sees, he sees that herein is love, not that we love God but that He loved us. That corresponds with the taking away the sin of the world.
J.T. I think what is so beautiful in the baptist is, that he had a message from God about Christ. He had a word in regard to this movement. There was in him the ability to discern the life, so that he says, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world". When he saw the Spirit descending upon Him and remaining upon Him he says, "he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit", but the movement towards him was discerned by John himself.
A.F.M. He discerned what the Lord would do. I suppose we need to see, do we not, that in His taking away the sin of the world, there would be in result a universe of law-abiding subjects, and in order to live we must form an integral part of that universe now?
J.T. So that the baptism of the Spirit, which follows, brings in the necessity of life as in the Spirit.
J.S. How do you view John, as he sees Jesus coming to him, as representative of the spiritual?
J.T. It was figurative. Death was the penalty of sin; John was baptising, and baptism was a figure of death. The Lord coming to John was light to him, in that John was in that peculiar position. It is not like the Lord coming to you, or to me, as a believer; He comes to John in that initial position.
W.T. In verse 29 was it a general thought in John's mind, whereas in verse 36 is it like individuals, and then the assembly coming in?
J.T. What you can see is that the life was radiating in John the baptist. It was when they heard John speaking that they followed Jesus. It is not what he said, but that he was speaking, that is to say, his
{289}
vocal powers were energised by that Object, from whom light was radiating. The two disciples heard John speaking; so that you see it is not so much what you say, but the spirit in which you say it that touches the heart.
C.A.M. The Lord has "brought to light life and incorruptibility", having abolished death. It seems to emphasise the fact that He was really a Man among us.
J.T. "The life was the light of men". It is a reciprocal transaction, which means that the light of life was in Him, and when that light comes *to* me it becomes life *in* me.
C.A.M. It is the same light that shone then on men that shines today.
J.T. And it becomes life, and hence it radiates, and therefore it spreads, and so becomes general. Life may be seen radiating in speaking or moving. Here it is seen in speaking as in John.
A.F.M. So that the order is, life, light; light, life.
J.T. That is the continual repetition of the two great principles. The light becomes life, it is continual radiation, until the whole universe is filled with it.
A.N.W. But with God moving, too.
J.T. It is all connected with the operations of the Spirit.
W.B-w. It lightens every man that comes into the world, but we do not see every man enlightened or moving by it.
J.T. The thing itself is there. It sheds its light upon everyone. They are not like John if they see the light and do not move in response to it.
W.B-w. It says, "has shone in our hearts", @2 Corinthians 4: 6.
A.J.D. What do you suppose the Lord meant when He said, "ye will not come to me", @John 5: 40?
J.T. It was their *will*. Just as it is in this chapter, "His own received him not".
{290}
G.W.H-r. Life was in creation, but death came in through sin, but in God making Himself known in Christ there is displayed the power to cope with that situation.
J.T. It is in Abraham that this great principle of resurrection life is brought to light: "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lowest, Isaac", @Genesis 22: 2. He is raised from the dead in a figure, and the first recorded burial follows that.
G.W.H-r. In @Genesis 5 there is so much spoken about dying, and yet shortly after that there comes to light this great principle of almightiness in God.
J.T. God would not let the antediluvian world pass away without the testimony of this power also, for Enoch did not die. He was a family man and went through things; so that whilst the testimony of life was there, it took on a very practical form.
T.A. 'Life' and 'eternal life', are they the same?
J.T. They are interchangeable expressions throughout Scripture.
A.N.W. You would not go so far as to say, 'In Him was eternal life'.
J.T. The great thought is that of life. You see the word 'eternal' is just an adjective qualifying life. It is life of that particular kind.
G.W.H-r. "Jehovah commanded ... life for evermore", @Psalm 133: 3.
J.T. The word 'eternal' is used to show that the life is continual in duration.
G.W.H-r. "And this is the eternal life, that they should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent", @John 17: 3. Of course this life lies in the knowledge of God.
J.T. Eternal life was promised before the world began; it was no afterthought on God's part (@Titus 1: 2).
W.C.G. There are three great movements of divine love in Christ: "God so loved ... that he gave"
{291}
(@John 3: 16), then "He who, yea, has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all" (@Romans 8: 32) and then "Having raised up Jesus" (@Acts 13: 33). The effect is that we love God and, as we do, life is plainly seen.
J.T. John, in referring to it in his epistle says, "The eternal life, which was with the Father", @1 John 1: 2. He means by that that it was seen here in Christ as with the Father. It was now here under the eyes of the apostles; it was manifested to them.
A.N.W. John reported this that we might have fellowship with the apostles in respect of eternal life.
J.T. He does not say that the word 'eternal' is for me, but the life is there for you and me. We know there is no end to it. It is because *death* has come in that the word 'eternal' is used.
A.J.D. What is eternal comes into a time scene.
B.T.F. Were those who were around Him as a company in life before the Lord went into death?
J.T. Scripture does not speak of it as being possible before Christ died. He came that we might have life and have it in abundance, but that could only be by Christ dying for us and rising again.
W.C.G. Do you emphasise the word 'eternal'? Life goes into what was purposed for us. Would not that be when life manifested itself? "In him was life". It came to light that love had designs, and those designs would be connected with eternal life.
J.T. The word 'eternal' stands out in contrast to the temporal interventions of God. His commandment is life eternal; a wonderful thing, meaning that this life would not be temporal, but for ever.
A.R.S. Would it be right to say that eternal life is for the earth?
J.T. Well, it seems to stand in that connection. We are to reign in life by Him; we who were in death (@Romans 5: 17). You could not separate that from eternal life, because it is the same thing; then
{292}
in Revelation, where the different families are mentioned. John says, "I saw thrones; and they sat upon them, and judgment was given to them; and the souls of those beheaded on account of the testimony of Jesus, and on account of the word of God; and those who had not done homage to the beast nor to his image, and had not received the mark on their forehead and hand; and they lived and reigned with the Christ a thousand years: the rest of the dead did not live till the thousand years had been completed. This is the first resurrection", @Revelation 20: 4, 5. It is an important thing to see that they lived and reigned with Christ, because they had been cut off by death. They are to live in the presence of the universe, as forming part of the display. I think the idea of life as the triumph of God will be seen, not only in the earthly saints, but in those that are heavenly as well.
G.W.H-r. Every family is marked by that principle.
J.T. In the eternal state death will be no more, which means that it had existed. There will be some testimony in its non-existence.
Ques. Are eternal life and life inseparable thoughts?
J.T. The word 'eternal' is simply an adjective qualifying the life; what we have is eternal in character.
A.F.M. In @John 17: 3 life is said to be in the knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ; also in @1 John 5: 20, "He is the true God and eternal life". Why is the name 'Father' omitted in the foregoing verse?
J.T. To "know thee, the only true God" shows that the Father remains in the absoluteness of the Deity; the Son has become Man, and the Holy Spirit is here because Jesus is with the Father, so that the Father is before the soul as representing God, all that God is objectively. But how? We apprehend Him in the Son. But then, we apprehend
{293}
the Son, not only as representative and expressive, of God, but as according to what man should be before God. That is a necessary element of knowledge; the true kind of man that God has before Him is Jesus Christ, One truly Man, but as Son. This is the necessary moral element to be apprehended, and it is what John saw. When you come to John's epistle it is, "He is the true God and eternal life"; the thought of Father does not come in there either. It is what Christ is personally; I apprehend in Him, as "eternal life", God's full thought of blessing for man.
C.A.M. So that the word 'Father' in John's gospel regards God in absolute Deity?
J.T. The term Father represents God in the absoluteness of the Deity. The Father never became incarnate. He remains in heaven, God.
W.C.G. Really "God, the Father".
J.T. In other words, all that God is. The Son and the Spirit, of course, having their part in that.
C.A.M. It is not the thought of the incorruptible Deity here?
J.T. No. He is not alluding to Him in that light, but to what is revealed in One become Man. That is where the knowledge of the true God is found; but then there is the side of manhood, the Man that is here is "Jesus Christ whom thou has sent". The two ideas run together, and are two necessary features before the soul.
T.A. You would connect the Son with the Father, and the idea of eternal life with the relations of God and men?
J.T. I think so. If you leave out the word, 'eternal' from @John 3: 16, it does not alter the life for us; but *eternal* life is held out for perishing man.
T.A. So that the believer has it. Is it brought in to show the contrast, "may not perish, but have life eternal"?
J.T. God sees men perishing, but He does not want
{294}
them to perish, and so He provides eternal life for them.
Ques. Is eternal life enjoyed on the earth?
J.T. Certainly. "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren", @1 John 3: 14.
A.N.W. The lawyer said, "having done what, shall I inherit life eternal?" The Lord said to him, "this do and thou shalt live", @Luke 10: 25, 28. The Lord said that advisedly.
J.T. Oh! He did. The allusion is to the law. The Lord answers a man according to his condition. There is no question of eternal life in the answer, it is the application of law, so that the man might know that he was impotent. Eternal life is not brought in for that, the law is.
Ques. Life was seen by John in looking upon the Lord as coming towards him.
J.T. The thing is to be able to take in the light. There was life represented in that movement. That is what we may see tonight, life in movement. You may go far afield and yet not get the thing; the light must be followed, or you will never reach the life. Here was one man, at least, who could see it.
W.C.G. "*I* am the light of the world" (@John 8: 12); the thing is to follow that light.
J.T. And so here. These two heard John speaking, there was life in the speaking, and they follow Jesus, indicating the great principle brought out here. Then the Lord turned, and saw them following, that is another movement; and He says to them, "What seek ye?" They had heard John speaking, he was the greatest teacher up to that time; what light was suggested to their souls in hearing him speak. His was the voice of a teacher, and that voice created a living current, so to speak, and that current bore towards Christ.
G.W.H-r. These two disciples got into it.
J.T. The Lord saw them following, and said, "What seek ye?" The light had become effectual
{295}
in them, and the next thing is, they say to Him, "Rabbi ... where abidest thou?" The Holy Spirit is pleased to give us the meaning of the word 'Rabbi', that is, 'Teacher', so that we may know how the light affected them.
G.W.H-r. Now commences the teaching. They apprehend Him as the Teacher now.
J.T. This current has brought them into relation to Christ, but they want a teacher, and the Holy Spirit is pleased to tell us what the word 'Rabbi' means, so that we might understand what is in their souls. The great teacher's voice directs them to a greater Teacher. They are ready to leave the one for the other. That is a great point in John, and is of present value and application; that the people of God should be ready to give up one teacher for another, for Christ.
J.S. It is done in affection.
J.T. Yes, what is wanted is that the saints should turn to Christ in a living way. We are baptised in view of that; we are made to live.
A.R.S. When the light from Christ shone into Saul's heart did it produce life in him? He was told to get up, and that showed movement; did it go as far as eternal life?
J.T. The question of eternal life is to meet our needs here. In a dark room what you need is light, and that was what Saul needed. Then if God is thinking of man as perishing, this eternal life is for him. God knows what life is; He knows what He is Himself, and therefore the life must be abiding.
G.W.H-r. And He knows you need to be transferred to the new teaching.
J.T. New teaching of a higher order. The first followers called Him the Teacher, showing the kind of light that was moving them.
A.N.W. It involved that they had learned the secret of the thing.
{296}
J.T. Undoubtedly. Now they want life, they want teaching in view of life, not at college, but in the home. Christianity is not learned in a seminary, but where He dwells.
G.W.H-r. And so we go out, as having the benefit of that teaching.
J.T. The light radiates in Andrew. He finds Simon and brings him to the Lord.
C.A.M. The light will enable us to behave in that way, if we follow it.
B.T.F. Would you say that life would be the divine thing shining out?
J.T. I think so. The new commandment is really that. John says, in the first instance, "I write no new commandment to you", for the truth had been circulated by the word which they heard, and he has regard to what they had learned from the ministry of others. But he says, "Again, I write a new commandment to you, which thing is true in him and in you", @1 John 2: 7, 8. It is true in Christ and in us; that is, life is not only in Christ but in the saints. As it radiates from Christ, so from us. The darkness thus is passing and the true light now shines.
O.A.R. The radiancy in John was the result of the worth of the Person of whom he was speaking.
J.T. So that in contrast to behemoth, all of whose power was in his lower affections -- right enough in their place, with John the baptist it was a question of speaking -- lungs, throat and lips are all in activity, so that others should be reached.
A.J.D. A spiritual man thus speaking would direct the hearts of the saints to Christ.
A.F.M. @John 3: 16 then, would be what you present to people perishing; what is contained in the word 'Rabbi' would be more the instruction in regard to eternal life with a view to testimony.
J.T. It leads up to the assembly, because I think it heads up in Cephas, "which interpreted is *stone*".
{297}
LIFE (2)
@John 3: 12 - 36
J.T. For the benefit of those who were not present at our last meeting, it might be remarked that we would do well to consider the subject of Life in this series of readings; particularly because of the cases of sickness and weakness amongst us at the present time, and on account of many falling asleep; so that in spite of these afflictions, and the pressure occasioned by them, we might be in victory. As it says, "but thanks to God, who gives us the victory by our Lord Jesus Christ", @1 Corinthians 15: 57. Victory is life out of death. I thought that the subject is appropriately introduced in this gospel by the statement that, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men", (@John 1: 4); so that we meet with the subject immediately in this gospel, not in an abstract way, but in a concrete way in Christ. In Him was life, and it was so presented to men that it affected their lives. It was pointed out that chapter 1 dwells on the movement of Christ; the radiation of light is seen in movement. The word for light denotes life in movement and energy; and we noticed how the Lord was introduced by John. It says, "he sees Jesus coming to him". John saw the Lord coming to him, and he said, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world", as if he discerned that form of life. Coming to John implied that the Lord was going to die. He said later that the Father loved Him because He laid down His life that He might take it again, that is in another condition; so that the Father has a free hand in Christ having taken up life again; then the next thing John sees is the Lord walking, and says, "Behold the Lamb of God". Walking is another feature, and two of his disciples
{298}
hearing John speaking leave John and follow Jesus, and then when the Lord turned He saw them following, and asked them what they sought, and they said to Him, "Rabbi ... where abidest thou?" So that it remains perhaps to see the further witness in the way of movement in chapter 1, for the life is thus brought in in a very active way before it is introduced as the gift of God.
A.F.M. Would Jesus coming, walking, and abiding be the three features of life?
J.T. I thought that.
W.B-w. Does the coming involve the revelation of God?
J.T. Coming to John would indicate that the Lord was going to die, because John was baptising. He was administering death figuratively; so that the suggestion in his mind was that the Lord would take away the sin of the world by His death. God was declared by Christ's presence here in all He said and did, including His death (@John 1: 18).
A.F.M. Would you say the death of Christ includes both the declaration and the revelation of God?
J.T. Yes. I think God was declared in creation at the outset. Without creation there could be no declaration of God, but it began in this new and full way, I judge, as the Lord commenced to be in movement and to minister.
H.S.D. Is revelation more intimate than declaration?
J.T. I think so.
B.T.F. The Lamb of God would imply his death.
J.T. Quite. The Lamb of God takes away the sin of the world. The reference, you mean, is to the sacrifice?
B.T.F. Yes.
A.F.M. Does the second clause of that verse involve a further work by which sin is taken away from the universe?
{299}
J.T. Not only sacrificially, but by power. In the Revelation the Lord is seen as the Lamb prevailing. The suggestion of a lamb is of one who suffers passively. The Lamb is the Sufferer, but the Sufferer is also the Lion of the tribe of Juda. John sees the Lamb as having seven horns, that is to say, in the perfection of power; so that in both the Lamb and the Lion there is power to remove all ungodliness from the earth: to remove sin actually, not only sacrificially; the Lamb does that, but it is as the Lion of the tribe of Judah that He prevails.
A.R.S. Would taking away the sin of the world involve the abolition of death, because death follows sin?
J.T. Quite. The last enemy annulled is death, for death is regarded as an enemy. For faith, the Lord has abolished death and brought life and incorruptibility to light.
W.B-w. Do you think that John gave expression to these things in what he said?
J.T. One's mind is turned back to @Genesis 2, because all Scripture hangs together. @Genesis 2 brings out the movements of life. The creatures of life are named by Adam. He is able to tell by their movements what names to give them; but here is a kind of movement never seen before, and John is enabled to name it.
A.R.S. Did the Lord come to John because of who John was, as His forerunner?
J.T. I rather thought it was because he was figuratively administering God's judgment as baptising, that the Lord came to him; it was when he saw Him coming to him, not simply moving, that he named the action. John could discern by the movement that there was life in it.
A.R.S. Is this coming to John the same as in Matthew, alluding to His baptism?
{300}
J.T. The Lord came and was baptised, according to the other gospels, but none of them speak of His coming in this way except John.
A.N.W. What suggests the Lamb to John at this juncture? In @Matthew 3 he is baptising and those baptised are confessing their sins; would it suggest the Lamb to John?
J.T. I think it is the intelligence that John had; he was a marvellous vessel, for he was filled with the Holy Spirit from his birth. He was doubtless prepared for this, so that he could discern what was there. I judge it was plain to John that the light was in the movement, and he named Him the Lamb of God because of the light that shone.
J.S. Discerning Him as God's provision.
J.T. As compared with other lambs, which were types. He was *the* Lamb of God.
A.F.M. Why is the same expression, "Behold the Lamb of God" used by John when he sees Jesus walking?
J.T. I think the allusion is possibly to Nathan's parable in @2 Samuel 12. The lamb was cherished in Uriah's house, and David had ignored what Bathsheba (the lamb) was to her husband. It suggests what is pleasing as ministering to the affections. The first expression, 'Lamb of God', would refer to the lamb of @Exodus 12.
A.F.M. That is helpful and makes the two thoughts intelligible.
J.T. The first reference is to the Lamb viewed sacrificially; the second to the Lamb as an Object of affection.
B.T.F. Would you say that John in baptising entered in a remarkable way into his work? Was his baptising really a figure of the death of Christ?
J.T. Well, I think it was a figure of God's judgment. He represented that, and this movement of Jesus, in coming to him, suggested to John the
{301}
sacrificial idea of @Exodus 12. Now we have the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world, not only sacrificially, but in power, I think.
B.T.F. So that John is glad to announce that in connection with what was a figure of the judgment of God, that there was the One there who would bear that judgment in order that the sin of the world might be taken away.
J.T. Just so. And then it says he did not know Him, which I think is a tribute to John, as stated before the Holy Spirit came on Christ; because he goes on to say, that the One who sent him said, "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit", @John 1: 33. He takes away the sin of the world as the Lamb of God; that is a negative thing although it is an act of power including His sacrifice, but then He brings in the positive thing, that is the baptism of the Spirit, so that sin is replaced positively by the Spirit.
C.A.M. Would it be right to say that in his testimony of this Person John had an apprehension of how great the Person was, and on that account he recognises He is the Son of God?
J.T. John says, he saw and bare record that this is the Son of God. That is a tribute to the greatness of His Person; he discerned in the Spirit coming down and abiding upon Christ, that He was the Son of God.
A.F.M. When you speak of the greatness of the Person in John's view, do you include other thoughts that come out in respect of the Son of God. His living voice and resurrection power, for example, or just the Person Himself?
J.T. This is as far as John goes. He could hardly be expected to convey the full thought of the Son of God; he simply bare record that He was the Son of God; but other things came out to enhance this
{302}
record of John. The Lord says, in speaking of the sickness of Lazarus, "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified by it", @John 11: 4. Then in @Romans 1: 4 it says, "marked out Son of God in power, ... by resurrection of the dead". That is another view of the thing; He is *declared* Son of God by resurrection of the dead, including His own resurrection.
A.A.T. Was this a revelation to John?
J.T. Yes, so far as it went.
W.B-w. John would know the limitation of the lamb in Egypt.
J.T. Yes. It did not take away the sin of the world. When you come to the Son of God, there is finality, whatever He did was finished, not partially so. That is the great thing to arrive at in the knowledge of Christ: things are completed in Him. His great service goes on and is carried right through until He gives up the kingdom to God, and then He Himself is subject, but everything is finished before He gives up the kingdom. Not that the idea of the kingdom is lost, because He carries it through in the feature that He Himself is subject. It thus remains in a beautiful and touching way!
Ques. You were speaking of the power side as well as the sacrificial. Is that represented in the Red Sea?
J.T. That is right. The Red Sea and the Jordan represent the power of God in Christ going through death. In the first chapter it is said of John that he stood; he is no longer moving, for his work is finished. The movement is now in those who heard him speak; introducing, as it does, a new thing in principle, namely, christianity. The Lord turns and sees them following and asks what they sought, and they say, "Rabbi ... . where abidest thou?" That is to say, they enquire for the home where they may be taught. This teaching is very different from teaching in a college. These disciples came and saw
{303}
where the Lord abode, and abode with Him. It is no longer the schoolmaster of the Old Testament, but teaching in the home by One who has liberty in it, and who is in the house for ever. That is what we are introduced into: teaching in the home by the One in whom all the fulness of the Godhead dwells.
B.T.F. Where is the example of that?
J.T. In chapter 8 the Lord tells the Jews who believed on Him that if they abode in His word they were truly His disciples; they should know the truth, and the truth should set them free. Then He speaks of the Son abiding in the house for ever, and if the Son set them free they should be really free. Galatians shows that the law was a tutor up to Christ, but that was not in the home; those under law were in the place of minors, as children; but now you have persons who desire to be taught, and they wish to know where He abides.
A.F.M. So that in Galatians you get, in contrast to the law as teacher, the Spirit of God's Son sent into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father. In @John 1 the same result would be reached.
J.T. Yes. You have things just touched on in John's gospel without their being named. You are to discern them.
Ques. How do you account for the intelligence of their question?
J.T. It shows how they profited by John's ministry, but they see a better. They get into the current of it, and in that current they are carried along and remain there.
T.A. Nicodemus recognises in the Lord a teacher different from himself.
J.T. That will help us in considering chapter 3. It introduces the same idea of teaching. Nicodemus does not ask about the home; he says, "we know that thou art come a teacher from God", but this thought of the home in chapter 1 and the marriage of
{304}
chapter 2, form an introduction, showing what is in the mind of God to be reached in this gospel.
T.A. Do you think there was a glimpse in Nicodemus soul of the Person who gives life?
J.T. He came to Jesus: there was movement on his part, and that is what the Lord honours, I believe, with life.
A.F.M. These men are set in movement for the home, and what follows is, Simon is found, and the Lord names him Cephas -- stone.
J.T. We might see, before we pass on, that movement of life in the assembly is touched on in this introduction so that you may be prepared for God's design. Then you have the movement of God in the Jewish remnant: the Lord would go into Galilee, and He finds Philip; we are told Philip was of Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter, to make it clear that he was of that place. That is to say, the Jewish remnant is linked on with the whole work of God; and then Philip finds Nathanael, and Nathanael is shown as representing a lower form of spiritual life. Cephas is the definite name given to a higher form, which points to the assembly. Then the Lord calls Nathanael an Israelite indeed, which is also definite, but not so definite as the name Cephas, nor does it involve a change to a new thing, a living stone. A living stone is material for the assembly.
J.S. Do we have in Nathanael the taking up of the remnant in type?
J.T. I think so, he represents that.
J.S. Cephas would represent the assembly.
J.T. The Lord looked on him, as if the thing brought before Him is very specific, and said, "Thou shalt be called Cephas". It was not an optional name.
A.F.M. So you get in this chapter the setting forth of the purpose of God in the assembly, and the ways of God with Israel culminating in millennial blessing.
{305}
J.T. That is the introduction. In the next chapter you have the third day. Millennial joy is introduced and the complete end reached.
B.T.F. When the two disciples followed Jesus they abode with Him that day. Is not this a figure of family affections found in the assembly?
J.T. I think that is right.
J.S. In connection with what you have been saying, how do you fit in the last paragraph of chapter 1?
J.T. It introduces the millennial scene, as on the third day you start with that. At Cana we have the beginning of signs, which means there are other signs to follow: "This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, ... and his disciples believed on him", @John 2: 11. It is also a time of believing.
H.S.D. So that John saw the first sign of life.
J.T. Here it is a sign bringing in the millennial joy. The Lord did it for them; He will yet do it for all.
A.F.M. Do you make the morrow of chapter 1: 43, a kind of introduction to chapter 2?
J.T. Yes.
A.A.T. Did I understand you to say that movement was the evidence of life?
J.T. Yes, as John presents it here.
A.A.T. There seems to be movement on both sides.
J.T. Well, that is the idea. Life in Christ as in movement was the light of men. The light that shines into your hearts becomes life. That is to say, light according to God is not an abstract thing; it is the result of what is concrete, of life. This is basic right through in respect of life. It is a question of how much is radiating from us.
J.S. It is only as we move according to God that light radiates from us.
J.T. Quite. All other movements are in lawlessness. In John the idea is that God sets things in
{306}
movement in that way. The Son is life, and everything is to move in relation to Him.
C.A.M. I suppose light is movement in itself.
J.T. That is right.
H.S.D. Does headship come in here in relation to movement?
J.T. I think we take character from whatever we see expressed in Christ. I suppose headship in Colossians, for example, is intended to show that Christ is not appointed Head, but that He *is* Head. It is undeniable.
J.S. In John life and love are made very much of.
J.T. Indeed, more in John than in all the rest of the New Testament.
T.A. At the close of this gospel the Lord said to Peter, "Follow me". There is the suggestion of movement right through.
W.B-w. Nathanael gets the light through Philip.
J.T. And then the solution of Nathanael's enquiry was found in responding to Philip's invitation to "Come and see". There must be movement.
A.F.M. That word on movement is helpful: there may be those present who are exercised and desirous of help; but what the Lord looks for is response to the word, "Come and see".
B.T.F. As reaching that point, no doubt souls receive light from the Lord, and the light which shines into them radiates from them.
J.T. That is to say, it extends. The thought is that the life is the light, and reciprocally the light is the life; an apposition, as we might call it, for the two things are equal. The light becomes life, and correspondingly it becomes light, and so radiates and extends.
C.A.M. The movement is astronomical in figure and, I suppose, somewhat difficult to explain, but it seems to be more the nature of the thing.
{307}
J.T. A movement may be guided by a star; that is you get the advantage of some unit in the moral system, or of "the ordinances of the heavens", as they are spoken of in Job, implying that they are for man's benefit. It is to the credit of the Magi that they saw His star: they were able to discern whose it was, whereas John is dealing, not with an isolated unit such as His star, but with Christ as moving everything, and everything as moving in relation to Him.
A.F.M. He is the "Sun".
J.T. Whereas the star points you to the Sun.
A.F.M. Will you say a word about the temple?
J.T. In regard to His Father's house; I think the passage shows that whilst He is bringing in the wine of joy for men. He is thinking of what is due to the Father; He says, "My Father's house"; therefore we must never leave the Father out. Whilst life is the great thing to be exercised about, we must never leave out the rights of God; hence Jesus says, "My Father's house". Also it was written of Him: "The zeal of thy house devours me", showing what a Levite He was. Then the next thing is the temple the material house is to be replaced by the temple of His body. He says, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up". The Lord selected the word for temple in wisdom; it denoted the inner shrine of the house of God, and is suggestive of the body of Christ.
Ques. How does that stand in relation to former teaching?
J.T. It is a development of what is suggested in the name Peter and includes the mystery. It is essential to understand that the teaching we are brought into is private in character, like the 'within' of @Matthew 13: 36. Here the true temple is the Lord's body, the continuation of which is seen in the
{308}
saints as the assembly of God. That is what we find at the end of chapter 2.
C.A.M. You would say we do not need what is material to understand this?
J.T. Many do not understand it, and the effort is made to reduce everything to the level of the natural mind: to deny what is esoteric teaching. There is this inside teaching of which the Jews were ignorant, for they did not understand the Lord's challenge "Destroy this temple". They thought He spoke about the material temple. Nor did His disciples know, till after He rose from the dead.
W.B-w. Do we get in @Ephesians 2 the house, and in chapter 3 the mystery?
H.S.D. The temple is where the light of God resides.
J.T. That is right. It is only by the light of the temple that either Colossians or Ephesians are understood; but we need to be initiated in the truth.
A.F.M. Do you think that, in a certain sense. Nicodemus became initiated by what the Lord presented?
J.T. He represents the kind of thing that is initial in christianity. "There was a man from among the Pharisees". He is different in kind from what had gone before. He does not go all the way, but represents the initial idea.
W.B-w. What do you say about Andrew not leaving Simon till he got him to the Lord?
J.T. He finds, not simply Simon, but his own brother Simon, meaning that you begin with those near to you.
W.B-w. He did not stop until the work was finished.
J.T. The whole point is bringing persons to the Lord.
J.S. Does not chapter 3 give us the new beginning?
J.T. Chapters 1 and 2 are introductory, and now
{309}
we are starting at the bottom. We have got the kind of man who comes by night, but he comes to the Lord. He says, "we know that thou art come a teacher from God". He recognises that He is a Teacher and is from God. Then he connects what Jesus did with God. He says, "None can do these signs that thou doest unless God be with him". He gets the benefit of the miracles by connecting them with God.
H.S.D. The Rabbis of Jerusalem could not do such works.
A.F.M. They saw the signs of the previous chapter, but did not connect them with God. The Lord did not commit Himself to them.
A.R.S. When Nicodemus left he was enlightened; he came in darkness but the Lord's presence dispelled it.
J.T. You would hope that he did not leave. I should judge he never left the Lord in principle. He was in the wrong position in chapter 7, but in a right and suitable one in chapter 19.
Rem. The situation was like the sun shining on vegetation: it would cause it to grow.
J.T. The same principle that is in the earth was in Nicodemus. In @Genesis 1 you have a certain principle of the earth, so that in it God has His place. The principle is that of fertility; but for that there would be no fruit. In @Genesis 1 God said, "Let the earth cause grass to spring up": He *caused* it to do so. I think Nicodemus represents that here, i.e., the subjective thing, so that life becomes effective in you. The Lord begins to speak to him and in doing so sows right seed.
A.F.M. Could the word "cause" of @Genesis 1, be applied to Nicodemus? There was the element there that could be affected by the light.
J.T. Yes. Unless God gets a response there will be no movement.
{310}
C.B. What are the earthly things of chapter 3?
J.T. The earthly things are those which refer to new birth and the kingdom. The point of importance is the soil, and the Lord is dealing with that. He is referring really to @Ezekiel 36, having in mind the fertility of the soil. If you have not that you get no crop.
A.R.S. How do you get that?
J.T. God gives it; He puts it there, or the soil, so to speak, would not bring forth.
B.T.F. You were speaking of Nicodemus as one in whom there was a work of God.
J.T. I think the earth of @Genesis 1 represents him, in view of fruit for God. There must be fertility in the soil.
A.R.S. It is God who puts fertility there; that is His work, and then the servant can follow with his work.
J.T. Otherwise the seed would be sown on the rocky places.
A.R.S. I suppose in the case of the eunuch there was fertile soil, and then Philip was sent; and so with Cornelius.
A.N.W. The word is, "It is needful that *ye* should be born anew". It was not within the province of man to do this. It must be of God.
J.T. I have heard of men preaching as if they could effect it in men; whereas it is presented as a necessity, which only God can bring about.
W.G.T. Does @Genesis 1 represent the negative side first, in order that God might bring in what is positive?
J.T. That is right. So that on the third day the dry land appeared, and what follows is the idea of fertility, for God made it so.
A.F.M. New birth in man is really the result of a divine communication, it is not simply an operation but a communication.
{311}
J.T. Quite. The work of God takes a certain form in man and lays a basis for family relationships. It is not a vegetable figure, but the idea of a family that God has before Him in it.
B.T.F. Would you connect earthly things more with the kingdom, and heavenly things with heavenly light?
J.T. That is chapter 3. The Lord is preparing in that chapter for christianity. It takes the epistles to Colossians and Ephesians to develop the heavenly side; the Lord in His teaching does not go that length, but the basis of it is laid here. It takes Paul's ministry to develop it, showing that christians have to be prepared for heavenly things. This heavenly light is introduced to us in relation to heavenly things.
J.E.H. What had the Lord in mind? Did He connect the thought of new birth with christianity?
J.T. Yes, and also eternal life. Christianity is presented to whosoever and received by all who would be wise; but the teaching of Paul from Romans onward would be: Everything must lead up to what is heavenly.
C.A.M. The Lord says, "If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe?"
J.T. The development of those heavenly things awaited Paul's ministry; what is evidenced here is the wisdom and skill in the way the Lord met Nicodemus.
A.R.S. Does fertility imply life?
J.T. Well, from a vegetation viewpoint it does, so that grass, herbs and trees are the first witness to fertility in creation.
Rem. Paul speaks of God shining into his heart.
J.T. "It is the God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts", @2 Corinthians 4: 6. It is the same God who spoke in @Genesis 1
{312}
that shines in the gospel. The shining is now in the face of Jesus Christ. It shows how Scripture is bound together.
A.F.M. You were saying that it was reserved to Paul to advance upon the heavenly things, but in John's gospel itself, was there not some development of the heavenly?
J.T. The germ of everything is found in this gospel, and that is of particular interest. The Lord intimates what was there, and would have Nicodemus to be ready for it. His object is to bring the earth into accord with heaven.
A.R.S. Must you have light before you have life?
J.T. That is, light becomes life as you receive it.
Ques. Is there a difference between the heavenlies in Ephesians and heavenly things here?
J.T. Heavenly things are the things that relate to heaven, but the heavenlies are not only the things that relate to heaven, they are the sphere of the heavenly things as well.
W.B-w. Why is the brazen serpent introduced here?
J.T. It shows how this great subject has entered into it: the Lord speaks not only of it in an introductory way, but He shows that we should participate in the thing. Nicodemus was the kind of man He could deal with, so that He begins at the bottom, and brings in the necessity of new birth; then we have His own part in it: "as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up, that every one who believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal". The Lord immediately touches your heart by that statement, for you are not going to enter into it carelessly, but as touched by the sufferings of Christ; and the serpent lifted up is representative of the thing that caused the damage.
C.A.M. It is the giving of Himself here, but in
{313}
chapter 12 it is as "lifted up out of the earth" that He draws all to Himself.
J.T. I think so. In chapter 12 it says, "this he said signifying by what death he was about to die".
J.S. Introducing the serpent here is to trace sin to its source.
J.T. So that the passage brings together the source of the evil and the source of the blessing, the one having its origin in Satan, the other in the heart of God.
B.T.F. Would His being lifted up imply that He is the Object of faith?
J.T. Yes, but as lifted up in chapter 12, He is the centre of attraction; it is for the world to see that. In chapter 3 the lifting up is in view of man's sinful state: "God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh", @Romans 8: 3.
Rem. This lifting up causes movement: "And I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me".
J.T. Here it is that you might enter into the thing with feeling; it is the Son of man that is lifted up. It was a question of the sin of man; for, as Son of man, He is on man's side, so that He has opened the door for all men.
T.A. For whosoever.
J.T. Yes.
A.F.M. The great end is eternal life. The brazen serpent was introduced by God in view of the land of Canaan. How do you regard eternal life? Is it enjoyed individually as well as collectively?
J.T. I think the general thought of eternal life is collective, only you must have life individually first.
A.F.M. In the gift of the Spirit we have life potentially, you would say, answering to the springing well.
J.T. That is the way it is taken up in @Romans 8: 10. "The Spirit life on account of righteousness".
{314}
A.F.M. Then in regard of testimony, if the light becomes life in us, and this radiates from us, would you connect it with the individual or with the company, as the sphere of life?
J.T. I think with the individual as part of the company. The Lord is not showing how the thing works out here. Nicodemus was not clear, but was listening to Christ, and we need to listen to Him more and more. The introduction includes the whole thing as in His mind, but we have to come to that in the chapters which follow, in order to reach the full thought.
Ques. Does chapter 3 introduce us into eternal life?
J.T. It shows what is the great thought of God for us, and is what the love of God has devised for all believers, that we should not perish but have eternal life; and the land is the place of it. The brazen serpent is the beginning of the thing, but is rather the negative side of it; the positive thing is the land, as it says in @Proverbs 15: 24: "The path of life is upwards for the wise ..." I am not yet there in body, but can be in soul and spirit. It is important to see that you belong to the land and have part in eternal life. It is presented in chapter 3 from the divine side. In the chapters that follow we learn how we come into the gain of it.
B.T.F. It is a definite blessing that God has in His mind for the believer.
A.R.S. Do you think that the man that fell among thieves was in the good of eternal life when he got into the inn?
J.T. No, he was on the way to it. The home of chapter 1 is more where you get it.
A.F.M. The Father's house of @Luke 15 would be more the sphere of it than @Luke 10.
A.N.W. Verse 16 of chapter 3 shows us that those
{315}
who believe have eternal life, rather than how they get it.
J.T. Quite so. Of course, there is the thought of his not perishing, and of being led into the full blessing of eternal life.
W.B-w. Do you think we ever get it without experiencing death morally?
J.T. No. Chapter 3 gives us the full thought of what is in the mind of God for us.
J.E.H. Would you enlarge upon it a little?
J.T. It is quite clear that eternal life applies to a certain class, that is, to believers, but the chapters following chapter 3 show in what way we do not perish but have everlasting life.
J.E.H. Are all believers within the promised land?
J.T. Those who believe on Him, according to John's gospel, are.
A.N.W. In chapter 3 the Lord is presented for faith as the Son of man lifted up, in the first instance, and then as God's only-begotten Son.
J.C. Does not believing imply continuity?
J.T. It does. The whole gospel has our advancement in faith in view, so that the believer has these things and is characterised by them.
W.B-w. Would you say that a person might believe certain things and not have eternal life?
J.T. Every *genuine* believer has it.
W.B-w. But young believers might not be in the gain of it.
J.T. Life here is viewed from the gift side: God is speaking to you about what He is giving you.
Rem. The last verse of chapter 3 has the same idea: "He that believes on the Son has life eternal".
J.T. It is the kind of person that has it. The first thing to see is the love of God. It is not the great love of God yet, but it lays the basis for it. It was left for Paul to bring out the great love of God as in Ephesians. We were perishing, and God brought
{316}
eternal life in that we should not perish. The Lord had heavenly things in mind, and was fully competent to speak of those things. Neither Moses, nor Elijah, nor Isaiah could do so. The Lord announces what was now on hand; it awaited Paul's ministry to develop it fully, but the Lord was laying the basis for that. In this gospel the basis is laid, so that you come from the love of God to the great love of God; God has given us eternal life and made us sit down together in the heavenlies.
A.N.W. What does the word 'so' of verse 16 convey to you?
J.T. Not only the gift, great as that is, but the result of it. It would not be sufficient to express the love of God in the way of gift alone.
J.S. Is it more on the mercy side in verse 16?
J.T. Well, you have the love of God: "God so loved". It is the same Speaker, whether it be through John here, or Paul later. The Lord is bringing all this out; who was in heaven while on earth. The thing is to be great enough in our souls to take in the heavenly things of which He was speaking.
W.B-w. The 603,550 men of war, whom Moses and Aaron numbered, perished in the wilderness.
J.T. Yes. It helps us to see the necessity of having the thing on the principle of gift.
A.F.M. This chapter is a wonderful unfolding of light to Nicodemus.
J.T. Yes. You are now in the presence of One who is in heaven, but who is the Son of man; as such He is One to whom you can get near and hear, for He is ready to unfold the thoughts of God. Stephen sees Him through the opened heaven, and testifies to Him there; hence you have the riches of God's mercy and the greatness of His love.
W.B-w. Do you refer to His present place in heaven? He was on earth at the time of this chapter.
{317}
J.T. O! He was, but He was morally in heaven, and as Son of man. It is as the Son of man that He is available for us. God has secured everything for us in One who was perfectly subject and obedient. The speaking is now from heaven, and of heavenly things.
J.S. What do you say regarding verse 35: "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand"?
J.T. I think it is to bring out His great position in administration. All things are now in His hand, which supposes subjection on our part. The administration today is toward christendom, later it will be toward Israel and the nations blessed with them.
J.S. "The Father loves the Son" would involve His manhood.
J.T. Quite.
A.F.M. The Father loved the Son because He was perfectly subject, and obedient to Him, as you stated earlier in a similar connection.
J.E.H. It is remarkable that the Lord says, "He that is not *subject* to the Son", showing that unbelief is really insubordination to Him, and that the insubject shall not see life.
W.B-w. How far does the mediatorial side go?
J.T. It goes on even in eternity; for the Lord ever remains in the position of Mediator between God and men, otherwise we could not have maintained relations with God.
W.B-w. Will it not be given up when the Son delivers up the kingdom?
J.T. No, I think not.
J.S. What has been entrusted to Him by the Father is not subject to recall: "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand".
J.T. In verse 21 we see how the work of God comes to light; the subject of it practises truth and comes to the light. Wherever the truth is practised
{318}
by one, that one comes to the light that his deeds might be made manifest that they are wrought in God.
A.R.S. How do you reconcile our brother's remark that, what has been entrusted to Christ is not subject to recall, with the Son giving up the kingdom that God may be all in all?
J.T. The kingdom is given up, but that is because the end for which it had been established will have been reached. It will take place when the Lord shall have put down all rule; but the principle of it is retained in that He Himself is subject.
J.E.H. One of the greatest lessons to learn is subjection.
J.T. The whole scene is yet to be marked by subjection, and it is a great feature which will characterise the eternal state of things.
W.B-w. Is not the mediatorial work of Christ exercised more in time rather than in eternity?
J.T. Suppose His mediatorial work ceased when we got to heaven; that would not do. We shall need Him as much there as here; and we shall find Him equally available for us as Mediator when we get there.
T.A. 'The Lamb is there, my soul'.
J.T. Quite so, but He is also the one Mediator between God and men.
W.B-w. Will the necessity for that position continue?
J.T. Of course it will; God is infinitely beyond us, hence we shall always need the Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus; we could not take divine things in apart from Him, they are too great for us.
A.F.M. His mediatorial work began even before He became incarnate, and goes on in eternity.
J.T. That is, in creating the universe He acted mediatorially, but He had to become man in order to be the one Mediator between God and men.
{319}
A.F.M. Is the thought of the Mediator kindred to the Head?
J.T. The former is Godward to man, the latter manward to God. Divine wisdom is all there.
A.F.M. So that whilst the Lord will be subject to God eternally. He will occupy the unique positions of Mediator and Head?
J.T. Quite so. What a delight to know that He will always be there!
{320}
THE ASSEMBLY IN LOCALITIES
@John 12: 1 - 3; @Matthew 26: 6 - 13
I have been thinking, dear brethren, of the idea of locality. The divine way in the economy of the assembly is to develop it in localities. Bethany represents the idea, I believe, expressly, both in John and in Matthew, and indeed elsewhere, but particularly in these two evangelists; John occupies us with Bethany throughout chapter 11 and into chapter 12.
The subject begins with Bethany, saying that Lazarus was of it and that it was the village of Mary and her sister Martha. It thus stands out in the chapter as the village of certain ones thus named and loved of Christ. Nothing can be more interesting than the subject of the love of Christ, especially as it is connected with persons whose names are given and whose locality is given. So that John the evangelist enlarges on these three in connection with the place. He also refers to another, a nameless one whom Jesus loved, not in relation to his town. Others are connected with their towns, such as Nathanael and Philip and Andrew in this gospel. But John, the nameless loved one (we say it is John, but Scripture does not; it is an inference) is of great interest. But the fact that his name is not given is that we should not be occupied with him but with the thing, that is to say that there was such a person as that, such a person that was loved of Christ, that He could actually love a person individually.
That is how John alludes to himself; and he stands over against one who professed to be a lover of Christ, namely, Peter. As if John were to put two pictures in front of you and ask you which you preferred. He would say, 'Here is a man who says he loves Christ, and there is one whom Christ loves'. These two are
{321}
interesting pictures. I need not ask you which you prefer, or which is the more attractive. The more attractive of those two pictures is the one which presents the man whom Jesus loved. I say, 'I would like to see that man; I would like to look at that man'. You say, 'Why?' Because he must have been a very lovable man. Not that the Lord Jesus does not love unlovable persons in the abstract, and works with us until He makes us lovely. If He loved Mary, He loved Martha. But Martha was not nearly so lovable or lovely. In the abstract she was the same as Mary. The Lord knew what He could make out of her. He would work until He made her lovable. That presents the disciple whom Jesus loved as a most attractive picture. I should like to meet him.
You would see something about him that distinguished him from all the others, for we must never forget that while the Lord can love in the abstract, He can love in the concrete. He has a perfect idea of what is lovable; what is lovable in His mind is perfectly so. We must accredit the Lord with that keenness of appreciation of the perfect, of the lovable. So that John must have been a remarkable type of disciple. I see Peter. Well, he has been saying that he loves the Lord and the Lord challenges him as to this, as you will remember, saying, "lovest thou me more than these?" @John 21: 15. Not, 'lovest thou Me?' but, "lovest thou me more than these?" There cannot be a doubt, beloved friends, in regard to the lovable one that there was as much love at least in him for Christ as there was in Peter. He is not saying it. But the Lord knew. He did not challenge John about his love. In fact when Peter says, "Lord, and what of this man?" the Lord says, "If I will that he abide until I come, what is that to thee?" As much as to say, 'You have no need of anxiety about him; if I love him, you need
{322}
have no anxiety about him'. What was the lovable one doing at that time? He was following. That was what he was doing -- the best evidence of his love. "If any one serve me, let him follow me", @John 12: 26. That was the test of true devotedness in service. He followed. That was what John was doing. Peter need not inquire as to that. The Lord says, "If I will that he abide until I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me", @John 21: 22.
Those are the two pictures hung up in John's gospel, the one who professes love and the one loved. I need not suggest which you would prefer to be. I wish to be among those that are loved, the disciple whom Jesus loved. No name is given, no township is given, simply that there was such a person as that and that he had certain privileges. He was in Jesus bosom (@John 13: 23). The bosom is not to be leaned on. It is a soft, restful place, an inlet. It is not support; John was in Jesus bosom while at table. Then he leaned on His breast. That is what the loved one did. There was reciprocation of affection. He was free, he could take the advantage that He gave, the bosom and the breast. They are different words. The one is an inlet, the other strength, the frame-work of the breast. But the loved one understood both, he was in the one and leaned on the other.
When we come to this section, it is persons in the town. That is to say, in Michigan City, that is the town, the town of Lazarus, Lazarus of the town, and the town of Martha and Mary; the town of special interest to Christ, not only the persons, but the town because of the persons. That underlies the assembly in the place. That is what is in view in the chapter. And so in order to make room for the beginning of chapter 12 it is said that the Lord went down to a city called Ephraim, near the desert, not Bethany. Bethany was not in the wilderness. But He was rejected. The leaders of the Jews were taking counsel
{323}
how they might kill Him; it was a terrible situation there in Jerusalem. And He goes to a town called Ephraim, which means fruitfulness, as you will remember. And He sojourned there with His disciples. That is to say, He indicates that He, as rejected by this world, would go near the wilderness, unto a town that was there and sojourn there with His disciples -- suggesting that although rejected by His brethren after the flesh, there would be fruitfulness, great increase; Ephraim refers to that.
The beginning of chapter 12 is in order to bring out what Bethany was in His mind, what was in Bethany for His eye, for Him. I hope to show from Matthew what there was there in a public way. The two things run together, what we are under the Lord's eye and for the Lord's heart and what we are under man's eye. And so here you will observe the Lord six days before the passover came to Bethany, where was the dead man Lazarus. That is to say, the Lord thought of one in that town who had no part in it politically, socially or even commercially. He was not a leader in it. Whether he worked with his hands is another matter, whether he provided for his sisters is another matter, but he was not alive and not a part of the place publicly, he was "the dead man Lazarus". 'Lazarus, do you not vote?' 'No, I do not vote'. 'Why not?' 'Well', he says, 'I belong to that world and the resurrection'. That world. Could anybody deny it? When the Sadducees came to the Lord and questioned Him as to the resurrection. He says, "... they who are counted worthy to have part in that world, and the resurrection", @Luke 20: 35. That world. What world did He speak of? Not this; that world, and the resurrection. Lazarus was one of those. Nobody could deny it in the place.
'You see I do not vote', he says. And the very best reason that he could give was that he did not belong to this world. He was dead. "So also *ye*,
{324}
reckon yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus", @Romans 6: 11. That is that world. You see, Zoan, as we have often remarked, is the representation of this world; Hebron, of that world. And that world was built before this world. So that that world was no afterthought with God. It was in His mind before this one ever existed, about seven years, a complete period of time, before this world. In @Isaiah 19 it says, "The princes of Zoan are become foolish", politicians, statesmen, the princes of this world. Paul speaks of the hidden wisdom of God, "which none of the princes of this age knew", they did not know it.
So the Lord came to the man that belonged to that world, and was counted worthy of that world and the resurrection, the dead Lazarus. He had raised him, too. That is another thing, "... whom Jesus raised from among the dead". He came Himself, as if He would say, 'I respect this place because of this man. He gives character to it in My mind'. It was "where was the dead man Lazarus". And the Lord is fully justified in His choice because there they made Him a supper. They were of that world. This world does not make Him a supper, they counsel to kill Him. But those of that world and the resurrection entertained Him at supper. And Lazarus was one of those. It was not the Lord and Lazarus only, but those. That world is a very large conception and they made Him a supper. Lazarus was one of those who sat at table with Him. So there is a company in a town dead outwardly, but inwardly risen with Christ by faith, as it says, "ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", @Colossians 2: 12. We are to live in our souls in relation to Christ. The town of Michigan City knows nothing about that, but the Lord knows about that. He thinks of you in that light and comes in that connection and is not disappointed.
{325}
I hope He is not. This is in order that He should not be. If He elects to come in that connection, He finds something. I proceed no further there.
Matthew presents the assembly here as representative of Christ. So that if anything is to be settled, it is to be told to the assembly. There is that here in the place that represents the Lord in that light. It is a public thing. Corinthians speaks of the Jew, the gentile and the assembly of God. That is not Bethany. It is not a question of being risen with Christ, but here under man's eye; according to what we were before, but now changed, only the public history remaining. It could not be blotted out, it remains. Hence what you find is not that He came to Bethany, but being in Bethany -- why is not stated; but being there, He was in a certain house. Whose house? Simon's house. Who was Simon? A leper. He was not a risen man, not a dead man even. He is a man of the place, known in the place. In spite of the fact that he is a leper, the Lord Jesus is in his house. He knew his secret history, whatever the public knew about him. Like another Simon, "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon", @Luke 24: 34. That Simon had just denied Him. The Lord knew Simon's heart. Whatever the denial, the oaths and the curses, there had been the tears of repentance, and the Lord knew that. That is all that is stated. "And he went forth without, and wept bitterly", @Matthew 26: 75. The historical fact remained that he denied the Lord. It is known to us two thousand years later. It has been known ever since. He denied the Lord.
Simon the leper here had a loathsome disease at one time. It had ceased to work. He is not a leper now, or the Lord would not be there. He is not literally a leper, so it is his history, what he is publicly. He is a cleansed leper, but a leper. As Paul himself
{326}
says, "I am the chief of sinners", "I am", not 'I was'. It is his public history. Everybody knew he persecuted the church. But he was not doing it now. He was loved of Christ. Simon the leper is not a leper now really. But his reputation was there. So we have to accept these things. In accepting them we gain, you see. "Jesus ... in Simon the leper's house". It does not say that He came because Simon was there. He came to Bethany where Lazarus was. It does not say that He came here where Simon the leper was. 'Why' is not the point. He is there. He may come to localities to rebuke. He is seen walking in the midst of the golden candlesticks with feet like fine brass. If He comes where things are not right, He would rebuke. But being there He is in the house of this man. He accepts what is there. Who was Simon? A leper. No doubt he was a true disciple of the Lord. He was in his house. One might have gone in and said, 'You do not know what kind of a man this is. Do you not know this man is a leper?' As they said elsewhere, "This man receives sinners and eats with them", @Luke 15: 2. Did He not know? Certainly He knew. But He knew more. He knew the secret history; whatever the public character may be. He is occupied with the secret history, as Simon Peter later said, "thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I am attached to thee", @John 21: 17. The Lord knew what was going on in his heart. The Lord is not concerned about your public history now. It is a question of being right inwardly, so that being in the house of Simon the leper is not the leading thought. The leading thought is Bethany and the woman, not Simon the leper. He is not specially designated like Lazarus. He is not Simon of Bethany. Lazarus is Lazarus, he is designated as of Bethany. Simon the leper is there and the Lord accepts what is there. It was in that house, being in Bethany in Simon the
{327}
leper's house; being in Bethany is the leading thought. He has something for the locality. Being in it, He accepts the house open to Him. He can go in there. He makes His own provision; as in the gospel of Luke He says to Zacchaeus, "today I must remain in thy house" (@Luke 19: 5), and that in the teeth of the feelings of the crowd around Him. They rebuked the Lord for going into such a house because Zacchaeus was a tax-gatherer. The Lord knew what was in his house. "I must remain in thy house". "Today salvation is come to this house". And He vindicated His host. He says, "... he also is a son of Abraham". The Lord went not by outward appearance. He looks on the heart.
Now He was in the house of Simon the leper and being there a woman came. It is the public position. That is what I had in mind particularly, beloved, to speak about, "That also which this woman has done"; it is a public thing. "Wheresoever these glad tidings may be preached in the whole world", He says, "that also which this woman has done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her". What did she do? She came in. She is called a woman, not Mary. It may have been Mary; in fact, I suppose it was Mary of Bethany. But it is in the public position, not in spiritual lovableness, that is not the point. The point is the public see a woman doing something. They do not need to know her name. It is a woman that is doing it. She came. It was her doing, she came in and she had an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and she poured it. There was no niggardliness about it, no making a show, like Ananias and Sapphira. There was liberality in what she was doing. It cost her something. She poured it on His head -- a public act. What am I publicly? What my past history may have been is all dealt with in the death of Christ. He touched the leper. How? By dying. He identified Himself with the leper, and cleansed
{328}
him, and now He can be in his house. You see my history publicly is dealt with, whatever people think about me, I have a good conscience towards God, I am righteous, I am clean, clean every whit, whatever the public may think about me. And the Lord brooks their feelings. And He was in that house and a woman came in. It is a woman who is doing it, and as I said, she pours this ointment lavishly upon His head. That is to say she is virtually saying that she loved, regardless of the clerical principle. She is not afraid to say that, 'This blessed Man here is my conception of a servant of God'. She pours it upon His head. 'And He does not agree with all this hierarchical system at all'. You see what a testimony is in that. The disciples, as it reads here, were incensed because of this. It was lavish waste. That was their judgment. We have got to brook all that, beloved; to be true to Christ we are acting intelligently, faithfully, affectionately. It is a testimony. It seems very little. Certainly reproach attaches to the house of a leper. But she is doing this there and the Lord defends her. He says, "Wheresoever these glad tidings may be preached in the whole world, that also which this woman has done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her".
Now you see, dear brethren, the two sides: what we are under the Lord's eye, as in Colossians, and what we are under man's eye, as in Corinthians. The two things go together. In the first we have a visit from the Lord, we entertain Him, so to speak. And there the worshipper is named, Mary. Because she is known inwardly, not her name outwardly. She is known within. Mary came with a pound, a measured amount. It does not mean that she only had that pound. But she measured the amount, brought it and anointed His feet, not His head. It is not for the public in John; it is private; it is intelligent recognition that those feet were carrying Him to the
{329}
grave. His feet were wiped with her hair; and the house was filled. It is all inside, a private thing. The house was filled with the odour of the ointment.
But here in Matthew it is what this woman has done that is to be mentioned wherever the gospel is preached, the public thing, what goes with the glad tidings, devotedness to Christ and recognition of Him as representing the idea of service, because it is His head, I suppose an allusion to what the Lord was in infinite intelligence. She anointed His head. But He says, "my body". "... In pouring out this ointment on my body ...". That is to say, the Lord is thinking of the vessel. He was a vessel here doing the will of God. She had in her mind the idea of a vessel. And what can we be, dear brethren, publicly in this world for God save as vessels here for the will of God? I must carry that into every position in life. I am in the town, in my business, for the will of God. Of Him it was said, "Lo, I come (in the roll of the book it is written of me) to do, O God, thy will", @Hebrews 10: 7. In the volume of the book; I suppose it is the greatest of all books; in the heading of the roll or the volume of the book, "it is written of me". There are many books mentioned in the Scriptures, such as the book of Jasher. The great theme of this book is, "Lo, I come ... to do, O God, thy will". It is morally the greatest of books; a divine Person takes His place among men for the will of God. Hence the first word in this gospel is 'book': "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ". The other book tells us the motives of His heart to carry out the will of God. This one is the generation of Jesus Christ. "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ". The will of God was so brought out here in His generation. Abraham was for the will of God. Beginning with Abraham there were forty-two generations in which men were for the will of God. He is going to die. This woman says, 'I see it, a vessel for the will of
{330}
God'. She had anointed His body. He does not say, 'My head', but "my body", a vessel for the will of God. The Lord said, "Wheresoever these glad tidings may be preached in the whole world, that also which this woman has done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her". It means if I am converted I am to be a vessel for the will of God. If not, what is my conversion worth? Romans works it out. I am to present my body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is my intelligent service. That was her service. She was intelligent. She knew what she was doing. She anointed His head, a vessel for the will of God publicly. In this town, as in any locality, the assembly is composed of vessels here for the will of God. That is the setting of Bethany in this gospel.
So that the two things run together, what we are as before God, risen with Christ, sitting at table, intelligent, the house filled, and then as those who publicly are lepers with no reputation. The Lord is pleased to be with us. He accepts whatever there is, being in the house of Simon the leper. The point is Bethany. He accepts what is in the town. Being in that house He is anointed publicly. The thing is to be publicly mentioned wherever the gospel is announced. If there is a body, there is a vessel here for the will of God. We present our bodies holy, acceptable, which is our intelligent service. May God grant it to us for Christ's sake.
{331}
GUIDANCE IN THE DIVINE HIGHWAY
@Matthew 2: 1 - 12; @Luke 2: 8 - 20; @Luke 22: 7 - 13
I have been thinking in reading these scriptures of the great need of guidance. So that my remarks will follow under the head of guidance. And so I have selected, as I said, these scriptures in Matthew and Luke respectively, both of whom are concerned about the assembly, what it is, and how we find our way so as to have part in it. Hence in Matthew we have a movement from the east, a movement under guidance. These wise men represent an occupation, one in which there may be a suggestion of Christ, not one in which we are honoured by a divine visitation, but one in which there may be a suggestion of Christ. I have no doubt that the suggestion in their case arose in connection with their regular employment; God graciously condescends to meet us where we may be.
They say, "Where is the king of the Jews that has been born? for we have seen his star in the east". How much inquiry comes up in one's mind, not curiosity as to the circumstances under which the star appeared. The Holy Spirit never gratifies curiosity. He gives sufficient to show that God is moving. It is said that God made the stars. Undoubtedly He made this one. It is within His province to do these things. Astronomers may tell us there have been none made in this way. But why not? How easily God could prepare, as He did, for the occasion exactly what we are told. And so a star. How easily God could prepare one calculated to remind these wise men, who knew the stars, of Christ. It is within His province to do this. So that they call it His star. As I said, we may inquire curiously how did they know that it was His star? God knew it, beloved.
{332}
They did not make it. God made it. He could easily pattern it after Christ, for all that. It was so made and it so appeared that these men recognised in it His star. It was His.
And so it is that in our occupations, some of them may be such as to forbid the divine presence in them or visitation, and yet affording some suggestion of Christ, some reminder of Christ. It is all here on the surface, what I am saying. In a few words and sentences we are told of one of the most memorable things, the most remarkable things, that ever occurred in the east. And these men were guided.
Well, now I want to show you that whilst they moved in the right direction generally, that is to say to the capital of the Jews realm, they were deflected, which is very common when divine guidance is afforded. So that they reached Jerusalem and make their inquiry, "Where is the King of the Jews that has been born?" They have no question about that, that He is born; it is a question of locating Him. You see what we want, beloved friends, is certainty in what we are doing, and God ever furnishes us with the means of certainty. So that they are not in the least doubt as to the birth of Jesus. The Holy Spirit tells us in the previous chapter in the verse preceding the one I read, that He was born. They had not a doubt about it. Where is He? they do not say, 'Is He born?' but, 'Where is He that is born?' You see they were certain of that. It is a great thing to begin our spiritual life with certainty. If we begin in an uncertain way, we are likely to continue thus, like a reed shaken by the wind. Theophilus was written to by Luke with the express intent that he might be certain of the things that are "fully believed among us". And so God afforded these men certainty.
But then you see they were deflected and made an inquiry from the wrong people. Herod heard of it. He is called the king here. You can easily understand
{333}
that he feels himself uncomfortable in his royal position. For a man who was born king has to be reckoned with. And so he is troubled and all Jerusalem with him, showing the influence the man had. Jerusalem was with him in this. All is to remind us of the danger of being deflected as we get a bit of light from God. You are certain of the thing, you have not a doubt about it, but now you are making inquiry from people who are likely to becloud your path and create uncertainty.
However, they have recourse to the Scriptures. But the Scriptures may be used for murderous and lying purposes as here. We have murder and lying in Herod. He intended to destroy the child. And he lied. He said he was going to worship Him, but he has recourse to the Scriptures. He makes inquiry of the priests, the leaders, the scribes of the people, who readily tell him from the prophet Micah that Messiah, the Governor, was to be born in Bethlehem. And Herod, being concerned, appears very communicative and confidential. Persons who will confidentially instruct you and help you on your way but have in their hearts a murderous intent have to be guarded against. And he tells them where to go. They might well divine that Herod surely must be a trustworthy man.
They took his counsel and made their way to Bethlehem and the star appeared. Not a glimmer of it around Jerusalem. We are to beware, you see, of being deflected and finding ourselves in areas where the star does not appear. It is the light for the moment, what God has given you for the moment; keep it and do not be deflected! So that as they make their way to Bethlehem, the star appears over the little Child, not in the manger now, He is not called a Babe in Matthew, but a little Child, a young Child. They rejoiced with exceeding great joy as they saw the star. It was well known. You can
{334}
understand their remarks to one another, 'We are on sure ground now'. What an atmosphere Jerusalem must have been for them! The more spiritual they were, the more they would sense the attitude of Jerusalem, its coldness and chilliness. Beneath the recourse to Scripture were murder and lying, sure marks of satanic operation. Now they are on sure ground. One knows it well, sure ground in the soul; you know where you are; you have not a question. Here is the star. His star. It is over the Child and it is over where the little Child was. He is the Object.
You see their hearts are moved. It is the King and the King of the Jews. And look, beloved brethren, at the absence of all national feeling at this moment. They might have left the Jews out and said, "the King", but no, "the King of the Jews". There is no Samaritan rivalry there. Divinely affected and touched, they had the mind of God. The east has come in for blessing, undoubtedly, on those lines; subordinated to the Jews, God's ancient people through whom He ruled. Their hearts are touched as they see the star. How sure they are! It is over the Child. And they enter into the house. They take out of their treasures gold, and frankincense, and myrrh, and present their gifts, fulfilling the prophecies of old. And they worship.
Well now, that is one side of the subject. The sequel follows: God says virtually, 'Now you must not be deflected as before'. He intervenes in a dream. And He says, 'Do not go back to Herod; do not be deceived by his quoting the prophets'. They were men who knew the stars, which may be taken to represent the principle of navigation. You see if a navigator finds the location of the sun, he can take his bearings. Here they had found the Sun, the great Sun, as I may say. The star directed them there. And now God says, 'You have got your bearings'. You cannot sail your little bark until
{335}
you get your bearings. So God says, 'Now you have got your bearings; but I warn you against the rocks'. As if He were to set a beacon light on those rocks of Jerusalem, 'Do not go that way or you will be stranded on the rocks; you will make shipwreck, if you go that way'. They returned *another way*. It is for you to find that. If you are a good mariner, you will. You know the high seas. There are how many ways in the ocean? Who can tell? It is a question of deep waters. They returned another way. That is to say, they did not take that way. That was the point. Beware of the rocks. The whole religious system with all its hierarchical ramifications is studded with divine beacon lights of danger. Beware of those parts. Take another way. It is not their own wills. It is another way. There are such. But do not take that way. They returned another way. They had found their centre.
You see it is a wonderful thing to find your bearings in relation to Christ. There is the mighty ocean, the seven seas, so to speak, including them all. And the navigator knows, if he is one. But he has found his centre, the location of the sun. He returns another way. But he returns. They find their own land. They went back, beloved friends, not now trusting to the light of the star; they had seen the King. Each could say truthfully, "mine eyes have seen the King". What a moment in your heart's history when the believer sees the King! "Mine eyes have seen the King". What a tale they could tell in their own land as they returned another way unmolested, as we may be sure. They found themselves in their own location, wherein to testify of the King.
Now I proceed to Luke. It is another set of circumstances, not wise men, so called, not stars, but shepherds, humble men. There is no discredit, to be sure, on the wisdom of these wise men, for there was doubtless the wisdom that God gave them. We need
{336}
that. But then the apostle says, "For consider your calling, brethren, that there are not many wise according to flesh, not many powerful, not many high-born", @1 Corinthians 1: 26. As regards divine selection, there are not many of such. And so Luke in keeping with his presentation of Christ, brings in the shepherds, humble men. Their occupation is difficult, they are keeping their flock by night. They were of that country, they belonged to the neighbourhood of Bethlehem. They were not far away from these holy happenings in Bethlehem. They are engaged unselfishly. Let us remember, beloved brethren, that God takes account of our employment. These men were engaged unselfishly, keeping their flock by night, when others were enjoying themselves, during the census time, in the towns and villages of Judah and elsewhere. People had flocked to the towns. True enough, it was at the emperor's command. But you can understand what men and women are, as flocked together in the towns, what happens. These men were not there, but engaged unselfishly in attending to their flock.
And now it is not a star, which suggests distance, but the angel of the Lord was there by them. He could identify himself with them; it was another scene entirely. And the whole scene is lit up with the glory. I am now in the pathway with God, very definitely. The angel of the Lord was there by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them. And he says, "Fear not, ... for today a Saviour has been born to you". It is for you now. I am reminded of divine interest in me. "To you". "And this is the sign ..." I am speaking of guidance. "And this is the sign to you". A sign that they would understand, God graciously taking account of our capabilities. They would understand a manger, being shepherds, men who tended flocks, as the wise men would understand stars. So that the sign is, "this is the sign
{337}
to you: ye shall find a babe wrapped in swaddling-clothes, and lying in a manger". It is the same blessed Person who is presented as the King in Matthew, but now as a Babe. That is to be the sign, the Saviour indeed, Christ the Lord, but the sign.
And so as to fortify them and qualify them to make the search in the right spirit a multitude of the heavenly host were there; they were occupied with praise, as if heaven were to say, 'If we were searching, we would do it like this'. Having a sense of the dignity of the One, how they would do it -- how Gabriel would have done it! how Michael would have done it! It is heaven coming down into the environments of the shepherds to impress them with this wonderful Person. I am lifted up out of myself, drawn to heavenly company. It is meet that I should be. If I am to understand aright as regards Christ I have got to see how they regard Him in heaven, how they do things there. Luke brings heaven in here, as he does when he speaks later of the sheet coming to Peter.
And so they depart, having fulfilled their mission. For the heavenly hosts are at the bidding of God. Everything is done in infinite precision. They do His will -- mighty angels. If the histories of heaven were written, there never were such occurrences as these. And the shepherds were brought into it. Think of being brought into that! And the result is, "Let us make our way then now as far as Bethlehem, and let us see this ..." It is not a question of guidance, but of how to get there. Be sure you get there where the Babe is and do it now. "Let us make our way then now". It is for you to do it. Much has happened. You have been in wonderful environments. It is for you to do it now. And they do it. And they find the Babe. You could see the shepherds making their way into Bethlehem. Where would they go? They had a word, not a star, the angels had all gone,
{338}
but they had the sign by word, they had the word of God. Where was the Babe? In a manger. You will not find them knocking at houses, human dwellings. They know where to go. Being shepherds, they would understand these outhouses. Think of the Lord of glory being in an outhouse, think of it, beloved! These men knew what outhouses meant, farm-houses, where the horses fed. That is where they would go.
We have got to accept these things. The Lord of glory, in divine wisdom, has come in that way. These humble shepherds know about these things. They were not star-gazers, but flock-tenders, and they knew what these things meant -- mangers, stables. It requires humbleness of mind to go by the way of God. You would see them making their way by some poor place to the outhouses where the horses fed. The Lord of glory was there. That was wonderful. You see heaven had come down. What would Michael or Gabriel care whether it was a manger or a palace? But it was a manger. The shepherds would know, you see, they would know. They would think in themselves of the difference between the heavenly hosts, the scene come down, the glory of that One as so indicated, and that lowly place where He lay in swaddling-clothes, lying, it says, "lying in a manger".
Mary and Joseph were there. And the shepherds had no hesitation, they speak about these things, they speak of what the angels told them. It is much better for young christians speaking about the Lord to use the words of the Scriptures, of the Spirit for the moment. They are more effective than elaborate sermons. They speak what the angels told them. There was wonderment in the neighbourhood. No opposition here. For it ought to be added that the Holy Spirit does not cast any aspersions on Bethlehem. It suggests no opposition in the manger. It was not
{339}
deliberate. Luke never presents that side. It was just that there was no room for Him. He was content to accept it.
And here soul history begins. I have been speaking of the history of heaven. The next of importance is the history of souls in the light of heaven, what goes on in souls. Mary represents that in Scripture. And so we find here that she kept these things in her mind and pondered them in her heart. That is where she pondered them. Soul history began and she began to take account of things in relation to the Babe, the things that were said about Him. And she began to ponder in her heart. She acquired the knowledge that cometh of reflection.
Now a word as to close guidance. You have guidance as to the King, who is in charge of everything. One rests in confidence knowing Him, the King. Luke presents the Man, the Lord Jesus, coming in in lowliness and weakness as the Babe. I have reached Him in both aspects under divine guidance. Now I want to know where He can be received. And I, therefore, read in @Luke 22.
The Lord is concerned as to the order and suitability of the place where the passover is to be kept. And He gives us indication of guidance as to how to reach it. Not only is it a passover, but the breaking of bread, the Lord's supper for us. And so He sends Peter and John, as we are told, to prepare. You see, now it is a question of what He would have. What He received as He came in was the manger. But now it is what He would have. You want that place. You want to be there. You want nothing less than that. He sends two trusted, tried servants, Peter and John, to prepare. And He says, "as ye enter into the city"; the city will afford you no guidance but -- "a man will meet you, carrying an earthen pitcher of water". So that if seeking guidance to this spot you may look for the man like yourself,
{340}
an earthen pitcher. For the vessel in these cases invariably suggests the person, what he is. He has got an earthen pitcher, an earthen pitcher of water.
One is reminded of Elihu in the book of Job. In speaking to Job he says, "I also am formed out of the clay". "I also". Job was certainly. As if Elihu would say, 'I have been nipped off by the potter like thousands of others'. He was a man like Job; he would not terrify him. And so this man with the pitcher of water is a sample man. He knows that you also are of clay, nipped off like himself.
I heard of a man in the city of Paris who had the office of a bishop in an episcopal church there, an English church. An exercised christian went to him and said he had exercises he would like to be met. He frowned upon him. He said, 'Why come to me? Have you seen one of my deacons? I have too much to do to attend to you'. These are the words of the man's wife, a christian. There was no sympathy. The Lord Jesus is the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, where our feelings are. He has got a soul. "Now is my soul troubled". He is capable of feelings, beloved friends. The man with a pitcher of water has got a soul. He thinks with you; he feels with you; he hears your exercises. He seeks to help you. He has got an earthen pitcher. And it is a pitcher full of water. You see he has got something. "Follow him", says the Lord, "into the house where he goes in". That is another important feature of guidance. "Follow him into the house where he goes in; and ye shall say to the master of the house, The Teacher says to thee, Where is the guest-chamber where I may eat the passover with my disciples? And *he* will shew you a large upper room furnished: there make ready".
Now you see I have got the spot into which the Lord can come. It is furnished. And so the next verse tells us the Lord came and placed Himself.
{341}
Luke, ever keeping accurately to the idea of order and comeliness in the assembly, tells us that the Lord placed Himself at the table with the apostles, the twelve. The twelve were with Him.
That is all, dear brethren. I think that in following those three phases of guidance we shall not want. We shall be in the divine highway with certain step. We shall be assured of our position. We are where the Lord is recognised, where He has rights. In Mark it may be translated 'My guest-chamber'. It is His. You want a spot like that where the Lord has absolute right, where He can come in and open up His heart as He does to His disciples, saying, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer". May God bless the word.
{342}
ENNOBLEMENT
@John 12: 1 - 3
What has come to me in connection with these scriptures is the idea of ennoblement. And it has occurred to one that John's gospel furnishes this, perhaps more than any others. One indeed would look for it in view of the presentation of Christ in it from the standpoint of His Person. So that, in view of His presence here and His visitations, the idea of ennoblement in the saints is connected with Him in their local settings as in their general or universal relations. Both ideas are found in the gospel. In this passage we have the local relations of the saints, all having in view the visitations of Christ. Thus, throughout chapter 11 what is emphasised is Bethany. Lazarus was of it. And it is said to be the town of Mary and Martha. So, obviously, the local setting of the relations of the saints is in view. There should, therefore, be dignity according to God found in them. You will recall in this regard, how it is said of Israel that, in the place where they were regarded as *not* His people they should be called the sons of the living God. That is in the same place. That is the change from degradation to ennoblement, that in the locality where the reproach attached to us, there is now ennoblement under the eye of God.
Those of us who are in any way acquainted with the Old Testament will remember how Barzillai the Gileadite, with others, entertained and maintained David in his rejection; as he fled from Absalom, it is said that Barzillai, with others, brought beds, and vessels, and earthenware, and wheat and barley, the comment of the Holy Spirit being that he maintained David. He did it suitably, but it was because he was a great man, a man of means. You will recall how
{343}
the widow of the prophet who was in debt was, from the sale of the oil, enabled to pay her debts and to live on the rest. You will recall also how in the scripture in @2 Kings 4 she is immediately followed by a great woman, the Shunammite. She also represents this principle of entertaining and maintaining a vessel of the testimony of God. You will recall how she saw the prophet and regarded him as a man of God. She really represents the greatness acquired by the process of paying one's debts by the Spirit -- that is the oil -- and living on the rest. The 'rest' refers to the income which remained to her, and typically also refers to the Spirit; this income never becomes exhausted. And as one realises the resources of the Spirit, one thinks of the testimony, one thinks of others. We begin to think of the Lord's people, and to love them, and to do for them, and to feed and clothe them if necessary, or to minister to their spiritual wants according to our measure, and it is remarkable how much of this even a young convert can do if he has any energy. Thus the Shunammite is really a continuation of the widow made comfortable in her circumstances. She had enough and more, for @Romans 8 is that life and peace is with the christian. The mind of the Spirit is life and peace and the Spirit, it says, is life on account of righteousness, and by the Spirit we cry, "Abba, Father". Further, the Holy Spirit is said to intercede for us with groanings that cannot be uttered. We prove the resources of the Spirit and we have the mind of the Spirit. Then we begin to expand spiritually and to be enlarged and to share what we have with others. So this woman sees the prophet passing and she recognises that he is a man of God. That is a mark of one advancing in the Spirit through self-judgment, that you begin, not only to see the saints as attractive, but to see that they are the vessel of divine testimony.
So she calls him a man of God and finally proposes
{344}
to build him a chamber on the wall. And we are told that it was furnished. It had a bed in it. That is an important matter. It is an important matter in regard to entertaining in a spiritual sense. It means conditions of rest. A table and a candlestick and a seat! It was furnished sufficiently, but not lavishly, but sufficiently. That is what one would expect as one advances in the Spirit, in the resources of the Spirit.
Then again you have in the days of Elijah the prophet another remarkable example. He was sent, the Lord tells us, to a widow, a widow in Sarepta, it is said, as the Lord mentions it. He mentions the famine and the duration of the famine, so as to enhance the position. The spiritual mind is attracted to the Old Testament. His mention of it opens up to us a vein of truth, so we turn to the passage and find the widow. Jehovah says to the prophet, "go to Zarephath, ... behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee". He had commanded the ravens to feed the prophet, which was a much inferior service. That was mere feeding, and he was to drink of the brook. The ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning and in the evening, and he drank of the brook. You can understand that the service was crude. There was no table, no candlestick, not even a vessel! There is nothing said about cooking or baking. It was a great provision, but not such as was becoming to such a great man as Elijah. Nevertheless it was the provision of God.
The brook dries up and then the Lord says to him, "Go to Zarephath, ... behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee". The ravens had not maintained him. They had fed him. They brought him bread and flesh but they did no more. The torrent came down, but it did no more. All else had to be done by the prophet. But the widow woman has an added suggestion. We have a person under
{345}
divine command. And she has vessels, household vessels, fence the prophet mentions vessels immediately. There is no mention of a vessel with regard to the ravens. Bring me "a little water in a vessel". Then, "a morsel of bread in thy hand". You see we have reference to vessels, and it is to remind us that in the service of maintenance our persons and all that we have are laid under tribute, so that the service should be such as is befitting the greatness of those whom we serve. So without going into details with regard to the widow of Sarepta, she says much about her poverty, but in result she is well off, for the little that she had continued on for a whole year. It is now a question of order and suitability of service. The water is in a vessel, the bread in the hand, the meal in a barrel, and the oil in a cruse. Things are where they should be. But she is tested as to whether the testimony has the full place with her. So she says, "I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse; and behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die ... go, do as thou hast said; but make me thereof a little cake first", @1 Kings 17: 12, 13. It is not a morsel but a whole idea. It means the whole person, for the testimony involves the whole or complete idea. So the word of the Lord comes in, "The meal in the barrel shall not waste, neither shall the oil in the cruse fail, until the day that Jehovah sendeth rain upon the face of the earth", @1 Kings 17: 14. And "she, and he, and her house" -- notice the change from her son to her household, all lived on the meal and the oil for a year. Then she is addressed as the mistress of the house.
I only touch on that, but you can see how the maintenance comes in. It is the exact word used in the better translation. It is not simply feeding, but maintaining. That means the providing of everything.
{346}
So here in this passage you have the idea of ennoblement. In this section the Lord is ministering in relation to the remnant of Israel. In the end of chapter 10 He went to the place where John baptised at the first and many resorted unto Him, and it says, "John did no miracle: but all things that John spake of this man were true. And many believed on him there", @John 10: 41, 42. He then goes on into chapter 11 and at the end of that chapter is rejected, but after raising Lazarus He comes to a city of Ephraim, which means fruitfulness, and sojourns there with His disciples. You have a company now and His movements are in that relation. Thus in the beginning of chapter 12 He comes to Bethany where Lazarus was. It is one who had been the subject of all the service of the Lord at Bethany -- where Lazarus was! He is the ennobled one. Not ennobled after this world's fashion but in relation to *that* world! That is where ennoblement of any value belongs. All that attaches to this world in the way of ennoblement passes away. It is of no real value. Lazarus ennoblement is in relation to that world, so it is "where Lazarus was which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead". Then it says, "There they made him a supper". It is a question of locality. It does not say that Lazarus did it, or that Mary did it or that Martha did it. It is in the abstract. There they made him a supper. Lazarus is the prominent figure. It is where he was, as if to represent the nobility of that world, which is in keeping with Christ. The Lord goes to such a company and Lazarus is one of those that sat at the table with Him. It is a question of the nobility of the company. It is a man who had been dead and whom Christ raised -- one of the most remarkable things that could happen. They come forth -- those that have done good and those that have done evil. But not all together. There is at least a thousand years between. The
{347}
ennobled remnant come out -- and with what power, with what nobility of movement as they come out! They come forth in the resurrection of life. What a noble company! Think of the nobility that will attach to the risen, as the Lord says, "they who are counted worthy ... that world, and the resurrection ... neither marry nor are given in marriage, ... equal to angels and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection". That is nobility. Lazarus is an anticipation of that. Think of the dignity attaching to him! He is called out by name. "Lazarus, come forth. And the dead came forth". That means that he was really dead, as indeed Martha says, "He is four days there". It is such an one as that. Hence in order to carry the thought into this chapter where Lazarus was, it says it is where the dead Lazarus was. That is to say, he is, as regards this world, as dead as he was when he was in the tomb. He has given up all social links. He is dead to whatever he was in this world. He is the dead Lazarus, but whom Christ raised from among the dead. Martha served but Lazarus was one of those that sat at meat with Him at table. And Mary anointed His feet. That is nobility.
In Matthew and Mark it does not say that He came to Bethany but it says, "being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper". We cannot disregard our histories whatever they have been. They stand publicly, and we have to accept them. We know our ennoblement, and that is for faith, but what is external is another matter. I speak, however, only of the dignity seen in relation to the interests of Christ and the maintenance of the testimony of God in our localities, that we might have an apprehension of its greatness, and, in the sense of it, that we might entertain and maintain what is of God.
{348}
LIFE IN RELATION TO CHRIST'S WORD
@John 5: 1 - 29
This chapter views life in relation to the word of Christ, involving intelligence in those who hear it. There is the word in the earlier part of the chapter and the voice, involving more the thought of relation with the Lord personally. These are two features of the chapter -- the word and the voice. The word conveys the thoughts of the Person, and the voice is more the Person Himself. You know a person by his voice. Lazarus is an instance of one who heard His voice: he comes in in verse 28: "All who are in the tombs shall hear his voice". I think he represents that state. Then in verse 25, "An hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that have heard shall live", we have the present time really; when we are here in the flesh, not in Christ actually but in a moral sense. In both cases it is the voice. The person is presented in the voice. The word is more command, and thus you have intelligence. Those who have done evil, will hear His voice, too, which will involve His authority. The Person will be recognised, but not known in that intimate way; the demons even recognised Him. John in @Revelation 1: 12, says, "I turned to see the voice that spake with me". He sees the voice of the Person and it was needful, because there was power in it. The man who was raised up at the pool of Bethesda said, "*He* said to me, Take up thy bed, and walk". What the Lord said conveyed His authority from God, and was the reason for the man walking; he was doing what he was told to do. Mary sat at His feet and heard His word, which conveyed His mind and involved that she had intelligence. That is the detail of it. Here it is more His
{349}
authority as a man on earth, but as conveying His mind. Here, in the infirm man, the word comes first. I think the Lord is asserting the authority of God. The state of the man was deplorable, for so many years there, and he says, "I have not a man", it alludes, no doubt, to the want of sympathy and compassion, he was unable to go into the pool himself. The five porches here would point to the weakness of the thing; it stands for the old covenant, which had certain advantages for man; and was marked by weakness and unprofitableness. It was named Bethesda, or 'House of mercy'. It had its limitations, but was an expression of the mercy of God. The multitude there shows the ineffectiveness of the system: "In these lay a multitude of sick, blind, lame, withered, awaiting ..." The words "in these" pointed to the state of things. They were lying there with their diseases. I suppose that the blindness, the lameness and the withered condition, all show that it was the very opposite of life! The angel troubling the water had its part in the old dispensation. The law was ordained through angels in the hand of a mediator. Now we have a divine Person Himself here in Christ first, and secondly, in the Spirit. There is the difference here between an angel and a divine Person! Anyone can picture to himself the condition of these people lying in those porches waiting for the moving of the waters. The waters were not living themselves, nor did they suggest life. Had there been a law able to quicken, then righteousness would have been by law. It was only an angel's touch that gave the waters movement, so that the position here was extremely weak: "Whoever therefore first went in after the troubling of the water became well, whatever disease he laboured under". I think it is a type of modern christianity, where things are stagnant. There is little or no visitation, no quickening. The prayer book remained the same for three hundred
{350}
years! You see the thing remains the same for century after century. There may be some angelic visitation, but that is all.
The sheep gate here makes way for chapter 10. The Shepherd was already here and the teaching leading up to chapter 10 is found in chapter 9. The Lord does not make anything of the gate in chapter 10. He, Himself, is the door; it is not like an entrance to the city, but to a flock. He presents Himself as the door. This impotent man is typically in life now but I think in a very initial sort of way. It is not spontaneous, but rather movement under command of the word. It is an important thing, however, for young christians that they *do* move. Further down the chapter you have the voice, and connected with that the Person brought to your attention. Chapter 4 is more the Spirit; here it is the Person Himself that comes to your aid. There is a suggestion of the righteous requirements of the law being fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit, in the man walking; he tells the Jews that he is moving at the word of command of the One that had healed him. But he did not know Him; this shows the importance of teaching, because you may bring the Lord into persecution, in not knowing Him. The man represents one in whom the work is not complete, who has got the gain of the word. And the Lord has left him as a test. He is not like the man of chapter 9, for there the works of God were manifest in him. It says, "After these things Jesus finds him". That is, after he had tried to witness for Christ, and not knowing Him, had failed. The man in chapter 9 goes on to the knowledge of the Son of God. He is ready for it; this chapter shows how you may get benefit from Christ and yet come short in the knowledge of His Person. The Lord finds him in the temple. The man of chapter 9 does not go to the temple. If this man had confessed Christ, he
{351}
would have been persecuted instead of Jesus. He does not go on to the knowledge of the Person, and so makes no real headway. It says, "After these things Jesus finds him in the temple, and said to him, Behold, thou art become well". But instead of moving on spiritually the man went and told the Jews that it was Jesus that had made him well. And for these things the Jews sought to kill Him. But why did the man tell them? You do not want to go to those people because they are characteristically persecutors. It was in this sense that the angel said to the Magi that they were not to go to Herod. If the work of God had been normal in this man he would not have gone to the Jews. In telling the Jews he was more with them than with the Lord. It is like people getting blessing and going back to the religions of this world. It is a poor thing for one to receive blessing from the Lord and become an agent of persecution! The Lord does not speak disparagingly of this system; but the manner in which the Lord had wrought in him should have been an indication to him that he should leave it. He had lain at Bethesda for thirty-eight years, the number no doubt indicating the period of the Jews suffering under the government of God, and they would suffer more, under God, as a result of denying the word of Christ. The "something worse" has happened to them. The man becomes a type of those who gain from Christ outwardly but who suffer far more under the government of God, as a consequence. The man in chapter 9 shows how persecution becomes our deliverance; but this man here is a type of Christendom benefiting outwardly and yet coming in for worse things. The word of Christ was the word of God as far as it went. In fact the Father had wrought from the outset and the Son had wrought, and it was there for the benefit of the Jews. In verse 17 the Lord says, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work.
{352}
For this therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he had not only violated the sabbath, but also said that God was his own Father, making himself equal with God". This was intended by the Lord to bring out His relation to the Father, that He was not only working here as vested with divine authority, but was working in relation to His Father. It was the Father and the Son working. The Father was not before known as the Father but here He is brought to light: "My Father worketh hitherto". So you see that when the revelation is once made, you can go back to the Old Testament and apply the terms according to their present light. "My Father worketh hitherto" would be the works of grace in the Old Testament, as the clothing of Adam and Eve, for example. The miracle of healing might have been wrought upon one who was unregenerate. The work of God is equal to that. This was a sign like the others in John's gospel; it is not a question of the *person* on whom the sign was wrought, but of there being a moral element in each of the cases. This man is introduced to bring out that the Jews themselves were subjects of the word. Indeed, I think that James in his epistle goes on these lines, that Christ had come in relatively to the nation and they were taken up in that light, so that James says, "Be ye doers of the word and not hearers only". The Lord in saying to the man, "sin no more" calls attention to the danger the Jews were in, they were still in the position of sheep, but instead of appreciating grace, they, throughout the chapter, are His persecutors. It says of them, "wrath has come upon them to the uttermost", @1 Thessalonians 2: 16. The man gets gain, but all his movements are in relation to the temple system, and the Jews. As a nation they came in for the benefits of the Lord's presence amongst them but did not go on; but the door of mercy was opened up in Christ for the remnant. The "worse thing" would
{353}
be judicial blindness which is seen at the end of chapter 9. The Lord gave the man an opportunity to find Him by going away, but instead of doing this, he goes to the temple and the Lord finds *him*. In the case of the man in chapter 9, He waited till they cast him out, and so lets the testing have its full course. This is a very solemn warning to christendom today, for it stands now in the same position as the Jew did then. It says in verse 18, "The Jews sought the more to kill him because he had not only violated the sabbath, but also said that God was his own Father, making himself equal with God". So the truth is now before them, that God was His own Father and He is charged with making Himself equal with God. The Lord does not deny it, but "answered and said to them, Verily, verily, I say to you, The Son can do nothing of himself save whatever he sees the Father doing: for whatever things *he* does, these things also the Son does in like manner. For the Father loves the Son and shows him all things which he himself does; and he will shew him greater works than these, that ye may wonder. For even as the Father raises up the dead and quickens them, thus the Son also quickens whom he will". Now the truth is out -- it is the Father and the Son working. It is God Himself here in grace. In verse 24 it says, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that he that hears my word, and believes him that has sent me, has life eternal, and does not come into judgment, but is passed out of death into life". Now you have the *word* stated fully. It is not hearing literally but hearing in the true sense of the word, and quickening morally follows. The truth of eternal life is on those lines. The Son is speaking and there are those who hear what He says. If there is a work of God going on, wherever it is, the Son will be heard. Verse 24 brings out the position clearly. The Lord is here speaking and where the work of God is He will be
{354}
heard. It is a question of the mediatorial position of Christ. He is sent and everything that He is doing is done as the Father would do it. Everything that the Mediator does is what God would do. The Father raises up the dead and quickens, and the Son quickens whom He will, to bring out the principle in this chapter that the Son is equal with God. Quickening, I think, has to do with the whole being -- you are made to live. Raising has reference to the position, whether actually in the grave or morally dead. The thought in quickening is *what* you are, but in raising it is *where* you are. The power of God puts you out of one position and brings you into another. The word of Christ and the voice of Christ are made effectual at the present time by the Spirit. If you have a divine Person here all is carried out through Him. The presence of the Holy Spirit here means actual intimacy with the state of things that exists. So that quickening today is by the action of the Spirit. Ministry may enhance it, but it is the definite act of God, as new birth is also. The valley of dry bones is an example of being made to live; breath goes into them; that is a type of the Spirit. It is typically God raising up Israel. Everything that is done, or is wrought, in the saints, is done by the Spirit. He does not speak from Himself; He is the great power for carrying on the work. What He hears He speaks. Whilst, of course, He is a divine Person, yet He is speaking what He hears. It is a remarkable example of unity of action. It does not say here that the Son raises the dead, because it is quickening that is more immediately before the Lord, that is more emphasised than raising the dead. I do not think that the Father raises the wicked dead. The Lord Himself was raised from among the dead by the glory of the Father. It was delightful to the Father to do it. We shall be raised similarly. But as regards the raising of the wicked dead it is the Son that does it.
{355}
The raising in @Ephesians 2: 6, is not our being raised out of the grave, but rather elevation. In Colossians our being raised is before quickening. In @Ephesians 2 it refers to exaltation or elevation; we are raised together. We are made to live before we are raised. The being raised is change of position. Ephesians anticipates the rapture, we are raised or caught up after we are taken out of the grave. It says here, "All who are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall go forth". It may be said that the wicked dead come forth and they do, but in what power we do not know. They that have done good come forth in the power of life. So that the idea of power is in the Person, power to raise out of the grave. Quickening comes in, not in regard of the dead literally in the tombs, but of those dead morally. "An hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that have heard shall live". It refers to ourselves, or to persons, who have heard the voice of the Son of God. We must distinguish between His word and His voice. The word denotes intelligence as to His mind but, as in verse 25, the voice implies the Person. So that you have a type before you as being made to live. You are living in relation to the One who quickened. I think we are made to see the relation of the word to the quickening. It involves intelligence and the voice involves His Person. We are not said to be quickened in Romans but in Colossians and in Ephesians. It is an advanced thing that is dealt with. It is when you begin to apprehend the voice of the Son of God and it applies to us here in this world. With regard to the valley of dry bones, it is figurative, and alludes to the Jews, where they now are, grovelling in their commercial pursuits. When the Lord comes to take His saints to glory the question will follow of their being raised. There is no question there of quickening in resurrection. The voice refers to the
{356}
bringing of the saints out of their graves. The Lord's voice also raises the wicked dead; they will prove the authority in it; and will know that they have to do with the Son of God, but we know His voice in love; as those morally dead we hear His voice and live. The wicked dead will hear it by and by, but we hear it now in the way of life. The man in chapter 9 goes on to the knowledge of the Person so that he worships Him.
{357}
GUIDANCE
@Matthew 2: 1 - 12; @Luke 2: 8 - 16; @John 8: 12
In reading these scriptures I am thinking about guidance; they furnish instruction under this head, instruction that is needed particularly as the darkness thickens. Apart from the guidance indicated in these passages and others like them, we would miss our way and the favour of the present provision that God has made for His people, if not His purpose. We have to distinguish between the purpose of God "the eternal purpose", as it is said -- and His present provision, but for both we need guidance. I selected Matthew first because he introduces the subject in connection with what we may call the learned class, those occupying a more elevated position in human society, for God is no respecter of persons and He has the same light for all.
But the guidance is from heaven; it is not the outcome of human culture or learning or study, it is furnished from heaven, for however much men may discover and read in the heavens, they have not put anything there. What is there is placed there of God, and so we find that there was a star called "his star". A light had been furnished according to the circumstances of those who were to be enlightened. God deigns to take account of our circumstances, and to meet us as we are, and to furnish light through that which we most readily understand. These wise men, as they are called, were accustomed to reading the heavens in their profession, and the shepherds were accustomed to the sheep and the countryside in their daily calling, and God gave each light according to their circumstances. We may be sure that if light be needed, the guidance is there, and it is there within our range; it is placed within our range
{358}
according to our intelligence and understanding so as to leave us without excuse; so the star appeared to these wise men.
Whether others saw it I know not. There is no evidence that it was specially for a few; it "was appearing" and God furnished it, so much so that it was known by these men as the star of the King; it was "his star". There was no question in their minds, and so assured were they that it was "his star" that they came in the direction it indicated to see Him. It was no mere curiosity; they came to worship Him, and they came devoid of all national feeling or prejudice. What tends to darken many is local or district feeling. But a star has nothing to do with those matters. A star is heavenly and its bearing is general, and so, those who followed the light it furnished recognised the "King of the Jews"; they said nothing about the Son of man but spoke of Him "that is born King of the Jews".
Well now, I just mention these things in a practical way, but I wish to show you how we may be diverted even though we may start out aright under heavenly guidance, for Christ must be ever the object of heaven's indications. As we see here, heaven was occupied with Him and all the light furnished from heaven had Him as its object. A sign had been brought in for men -- for the nation as in Matthew, for men as in Luke, for the family of God as in John. A sign had been brought in and so the light furnished has that blessed centre in view. So these men found their way, as being guided by the light, to Jerusalem.
Now, a remarkable situation existed there, such as christians have to do with in moving with the light. There is the official class and they have influence. You will observe the tidings brought by the wise men caused trouble to Herod and that the trouble extended; as we read, "and all Jerusalem with him", showing that when evil is active, although there may be local
{359}
feeling and prejudice against the ruling and official class, yet all that is submerged and the ruler's feelings prevail. It is remarkable at the present time that the official classes are coming specially under influences of opinion and their influence is prevalent. Why should they be troubled in regard to such a movement, a movement of worshippers -- men affected purely by the light of heaven and governed exclusively by that light. They had moved in it, and yet it causes trouble to Herod and to all Jerusalem with him. Then another feature comes out; this official class recognised the Scriptures in a way. Herod gathers together, as we are told, all the chief priests and the scribes; they are all at his call, and he enquires of them where the Christ should be born. You see how Scripture may become a blind as used by ungodly persons or those in an official position. We have to be on our guard, for how deceptive this was! Herod pretended to be governed by the dictates of Scripture. "Go", he says, "search out accurately concerning the child, and when ye shall have found him bring me back word, so that *I* also may come and do him homage".
So the wise men moved toward Bethlehem. Divine light will not lead you in the way of the official class. There is no evidence that the star had led them to Jerusalem. We may learn from that how easily we slip off the divine highway, indicated by the heavenly light, by recognising what is historical, the position of Jerusalem. Heaven furnished the light, not Jerusalem. Matthew always makes a point of discrediting Jerusalem. If we are to be rightly in the assembly, we must read Matthew for he delivers us from what is traditional, from what has historical reputation, whether national or otherwise. He always emphasises heaven as taking precedence of earth and that light comes from heaven. So that as they moved towards Bethlehem the star went before them, and
{360}
when they saw it they rejoiced with exceeding great joy as it stood over the place where the little Child was.
It may be there are those here who need such guidance. You love the Lord and the light of the Lord has come into your heart. As with the magi, the light may not be great but it involves that He was born, and that He was born King. So they sought Him, and as the star was over the place where the little Child was, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. It moves one to dwell on the fact of the work of God, for it was a sovereign act of God that He should intervene in this way, for could He not make a star that should suggest Christ? Why should He not make a star and cause it to appear so that it should suggest Christ to us? But it was"his star", and these wise men discerned it; they had no question about it, and they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.
We may thank God we can get clear, even for a moment, of the official religious class. The wise men are out of the range of that class; they are away from them, and they are occupied with the King of the Jews. How different from Herod! The King of the Jews, but He is still a little Child, and they find Him in the house. It is all on a dignified plane in Matthew; it is not a manger but a house with Mary His mother. The little Child comes first, the mother comes second, whereas in Luke the shepherds find Joseph and Mary, but the wise men find the little Child and its mother, and having opened their treasures, they present to Him gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.
I just dwell on these details, but what I want to come to particularly is this, that they depart to their own country another way. If you are clear of Herod, do not go back there; whatever you do, whatever way you take, do not go back that way. Now, that other way is left to you. It is not that your will is to come in and to choose one of your own, but the
{361}
point is it is "another way". Many, alas! having got clear of Herod and Jerusalem, have gone back there. The other way is the way of faith. The word is ever, "Woe unto you". Woe unto you, towards officialism, towards the recognition of the religious order, towards Jerusalem. We are emphatically warned not to go that way. May God preserve us, dear brethren, enabling us to take the other way, that is to say, the spiritual way. The idea of the other way is found throughout Scripture. I refer particularly to Rahab; she illustrates it strikingly from James point of view. She received the messengers, we are told. We have been noting the idea today of reception, and the reception of the messengers by Rahab is a striking illustration of the principle. She received the messengers, it is said. They were not spies in that respect, according to James; they were messengers; they represented Joshua, and Joshua represented God and the mind of God. There are such today, and we ought not to leave out or ignore the great principles of God, the principle of representation, the principle of a messenger, of one bearing tidings or trusts. They were like that, they were messengers and Rahab received them and concealed them with the stalks of flax which she had laid out on the roof to dry; that is to say, as over against her previous history, she was beginning to be spiritual. This flax was not spun or woven, it was in the making, it was spread out to be dried, but it was sufficient to conceal the messengers. Hiding is a great principle spiritually, but what I refer to is that she sent them forth another way. The way of God is not the ordinary way, the way of God is another way, not one, however, that leaves room for our wills or independency. It means it is not the natural human way, it is the way of faith. And so these wise men escaped the influence of Herod and they departed into their own country another way.
{362}
I go on now to Luke for another view of this great subject, and what we find there is a different class. They are shepherds, that is, we have come down to a lower stratum of human society. It was a remarkable time; the chapter records that our Lord was born in Bethlehem. The cities were crowded with people but these shepherds were abiding in the field keeping watch over their flocks by night. They were occupied legitimately; they were occupied unselfishly; they were employed in the care of others, and that at the expense of themselves. We have been reading today of Jacob who tended cattle, and how that by night the frost consumed him, and the drought, too, by day. The tending of cattle is onerous service, but these shepherds were occupied unselfishly and at cost to themselves, and it says, "an angel of the Lord was there by them". It is a different view; it is not a star in the heavens. It is more honourable, it is a greater privilege to have an angel of the Lord, a living being, by you, than to see the light of a star. Such is the way of grace in Luke. "An angel of the Lord was there by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them". It is grace in a living Person coming to you where you are. He is there by you. Whether it be a saint or an angel, the principle is the same, indeed a saint by you is greater than an angel at the present time, for he is one indwelt by the Spirit of God able to convey to you something of Christ. "The glory of the Lord shone around them". Great things are portended. Then there is the word, "Fear not ... for today a Saviour has been born to you". There is nothing like that to the wise men of the east; not a word is spoken to them as far as we know. They had guidance, they were given instruction, but these shepherds had guidance and they had light, the angel of the Lord being there by them. He came down to where they were, for such is grace; he was "there by them, and the glory of the Lord
{363}
shone around them", and the word comes, "to you".
That is how Luke presents it. It is not a question of getting rid of Jerusalem and bringing in the authority of heaven; it is a demonstration of the grace and sympathies of heaven, and that heaven thought of them: "today a Saviour has been born to you in David's city, who is Christ the Lord". Then we read, "suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host"; that is to say, heaven comes down in volume; such is heaven from Luke's point of view. You are not only to be led, you are to have understanding and feelings as to what heaven is. The multitude of the heavenly host would bring the very atmosphere of heaven down to these shepherds. What a scene! What interest heaven has in every one of us! It is to impress us that God would have us enlightened and understand what heaven's feelings are in regard of Christ and of ourselves: "to you".
The multitude of the heavenly host here are speaking about God. If you care to go among the multitude of God's people, that is what you will find. Normally they are occupied with God. "Glory to God": and that is one of the best signs you can get as to where Christ is, where He is revered. A company of God's people together are occupied with God, they are not occupied with the affairs of this world. There were many things going on. Caesar had decreed a census should be made. Matters of great importance were happening in the empire, but the heavenly host spoke about God and of glory to Him in the highest. Luke lifts us in that way. "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace". That would never come from Rome, however many times a census was made; Augustus could never bring in peace. If kings make a census of the population it is generally to find out the potential military power. That is not peace. "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
{364}
peace, good pleasure in men". The very atmosphere of heaven is brought down, as I said, and conveyed to these shepherds, and then as the angels were departing to heaven the shepherds moved with haste. The point is to move with the light. Great things are ahead of you, great things were ahead of these shepherds, and so they said one to another, "Let us now go even unto Bethlehem", it was not simply that they said it in their hearts, but one to another. That is another feature of the people of God -- the mutual side; they speak to one another; that is to say, light having come in, let us move in it, and let us move in it now. Let us not delay. Whatever it be that God gives light about, let us move in it now. "Let us now go", they said one to another, "even unto Bethlehem". And they went and found exactly what the light indicated. If there are those here who need light, what I am saying is of the utmost importance. God graciously gives light, but the point is to move in it and now. "Let us now go", and they went, and it is said they "found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger".
You can see these shepherds going into Bethlehem, not to high places. The wise men doubtless reached the court, and had an interview with Herod, but these men were not accustomed to kings palaces and receptions by monarchs. They were rather accustomed to outhouses, to cattle houses, and that was where the Lord of glory was. Think of that! Divine guidance, therefore, does not lead us to the high places of this world, to the embellished buildings of this world. No, but to the back streets, it may be, and the outhouses. These shepherds made their way to Bethlehem; they would not go to the hotels or the fine residences, the light did not indicate anything like that, but a Babe in a manger, wrapped in swaddling-clothes. It was a sign; it is a small thing, a despised position, but divine light indicated
{365}
the manger as the spot where the Lord of glory was. He who was the theme of heaven and who now became the theme of these shepherds, for they began to speak about Him.
Now, to finish I go on to John, and as you might expect, guidance now is a question of life. It is no longer a little child, no longer a babe wrapped in swaddling-clothes, but it is a living Person here speaking Himself. We are on more mature ground now. It is a word for all of us, young and old. "I am the light of the world; he that follows me ... shall have the light of life". He Himself is now the guide. It is not simply a guide to Him now; He is going somewhere. In Matthew and Luke He had come in from heaven and heaven was pointing to Him, but now He is going out. John always has in view that He is going out of this world. He is going somewhere, but then He is on the way and that way is to be strewn with life, the *light of life*.
If you go as a pioneer to any new country, you must be governed by this principle or you will die. Pioneers follow the life lines in all new countries; they take the line of the rivers which are the life lines of any country, that is to say, the influence of the rivers produces life. I am speaking of the thing literally, but many spiritually take the desert where there is no water. You do not want that; you want the line of life, and the Lord says that if you follow Him that is what you will get. "He that follows me ... shall have the light of life". The life always moves and produces results, and these are to be the guides, so that in John it is a question of discovering where the life is. A single eye following the Lord Jesus will result in this, that you will have the light of life, you will find those in whom the Spirit of God is working, you will be led there, you will not be led into any sterile plain, into any association in which the Spirit of God is not operating.
{366}
What makes room from John's point of view for the Spirit of God is the commandments. The great drift has been away from the commandments of the Lord, and so He says, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him", @John 14: 21. That is to say, you have a manifestation of Christ through the commandments, then the Holy Spirit will operate in relation to that manifestation and there will be an enlargement of it, a working out of it, so that it gives character to the saints. That is life. Hence if you are single-eyed and seek the Lord you will find life, the light of life, you will find those in whom the Spirit of God has room to act. Where the commandments are not kept the Holy Spirit is shut out; you cannot associate the Spirit of God with a lawless course whether individual or in any collective way. The commandments must first come before we can have the action of the Spirit, and the action of the Spirit means life, "the Spirit is life", and you have positive evidence of life in following the Lord. So that, as He says here, "He that follows me ... shall have the light of life".
Well, that was what I had in mind. There are many young ones who need guidance -- we all need it really -- to be kept on the divine highway, and I would especially commend to you that beacon light that is set up to warn you from Jerusalem and Herod. Do not go that way; whatever you do, do not go that way, go the other way, and that is the way of faith. You will escape the influence of Herod, and then, as I was saying (how simple it is) if your eye is single, you will find those in whom the Spirit of God is acting, you will find evidences of life. Keep away from the sterile thing, whatever pretence there may be, however fair it may look, keep away from it. Keep to the life-line, keep by the rivers, as it were,
{367}
keep by the line on which the Spirit of God is moving. There you will get life. The action of the Spirit means the action of life. There is life, and warmth, and food among the brethren; there is everything you need all through following the Lord Jesus as the Light of the world. It is no partial light, it is no sectarian light: John ridicules all sectarian movement, he says, "The true light was that which, coming into the world, lightens every man", @John 1: 9. So the Light of the world is a universal idea; it is for all, but the follower of the light has "the light of life".
May God help us, beloved brethren, to see to it that there is the life in our meetings, and that there is food and warmth in them that form guidance for the young believer.
{368}
"WHY LINGEREST THOU?"
@Acts 22: 16; @2 Samuel 19: 11, 12
I am thinking tonight of those who delay in the settlement of their souls relations with God. There are many in this class. There has been no delay on God's side. When the fulness of time was come He sent forth His Son, and as need came up in detail, we find great activity on God's part to meet the need. He never delays, but hastens when the need is evident: we see in the well-known parable in @Luke 15 how the father ran to meet the returning penitent -- he *ran*.
In the Old Testament even this was foreshadowed. Isaiah, who is the leading evangelical prophet, speaks of his own conversion and relief, for there is not only repentance but relief. Repentance is one thing, but that is our side. Isaiah said, "Woe is me! ... because I am a man of unclean lips". He judged himself, and he also had a judgment of the people around him. He was no worse than those around, but he was as bad, so he said, "I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips". How did he discover it? "For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts". The King came within his range. That was one thing. Many arrive at that stage, and we thank God for it. Heaven is moved in every instance where there is true repentance, but that is not the end. God opens a door of repentance, but then, in addition to that, there is remission of sins. The light of God only makes one more miserable, but forgiveness and remission give relief. And so the prophet, as I said, repented. He felt his condition and owned it. "Woe is me", he said. That word 'woe' is a strong word; it is used many times in his book, for the evangelist does not hide from us the consequences of sin. No
{369}
evangelist will hide the sadness and consequences of sin, and Isaiah speaks of these. He says, "Woe, woe, woe" to certain persons, but he says it of himself, too, and that is the end of the matter for him. Then you see the activity of the seraph, he who covered his face and his feet and flew. That is a power beyond what is natural; to the christian it is the power of the Spirit, to the evangelist it is the power of the Spirit. The seraph flew, it is said, showing how alert God is, so to say, and He has agencies to relieve need, that is, felt need. Every one has need, but it is *felt* need, the acknowledgment of the guilt, that God would remove. So one of the seraphim flies, we are told, and takes the tongs. The seraph did not die for Isaiah; no evangelist can save you. He takes the tongs, but he does not touch the coal. Jesus the Saviour felt the full weight of the divine wrath -- no other; we can only take the tongs, as it were. So he took the tongs from the altar and a coal, that which was to consume the sacrifice and did. It has done it, for Jesus has suffered the full weight and awfulness of the judgment of God. He said, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" So the seraph takes the coal from the altar and touches the lips of the penitent. That is the manner of procedure; the lips being the organs of sin they become the medium of it; the poison of asps being under the lips, they convey what man is in his guilt. So the lips are touched and it is said, "thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged". What a relief to the penitent! Thus we see that from the divine side there is no delay whatever.
But then, there is delay with many who, although the light of God has come to them, stop and stifle their consciences, and go into the world and have their fling in it, holding themselves at a distance from the people of God, asserting, it may be, their independence; they hold themselves aloof, they are not
{370}
moving. Others indeed, come to the gospel meetings and listen attentively to what is said, and speak of it, and say it was a fine word, and yet there is not a single move, not a single bit of relief in the soul. The gospel presents wonderful things to men.
I read in @Acts 22 about a well-known penitent. Never was a man more repentant than Saul of Tarsus and never should a man be, for he was a terrible sinner. He needed to repent, and the Lord had him in His mind and saw to it that he did repent. Afterwards he said of the Lord that He "loved me and gave himself for me", that is to say, the Lord had loved Saul before, and in due course the light shone into his soul, and he fell to the ground. But here he is in the house of a christian and he is speaking well of a devout christian whose name was Ananias living in Damascus. Possibly we should never have heard of him were it not that he had come into contact with Saul, for he was a devout man, a pious man and he visited this penitent in the house where he was. Well for him he was there. Well for you that you are here. You are surrounded here tonight with great interest, by people who are interested in your soul. Most of us have been praying for those in need tonight. It is well for you that you have turned in; whatever motive, whatever the influence that has brought you, it is well that you are here. You can get converted here easier than outside; you can get help here; you are within the range of the Spirit's activities, and so was Saul, for the Lord had been before with Ananias and had prepared him to receive this repentant sinner.
The Lord has His agents here upon the earth, as we see in the book of Ezekiel; the Lord is seen above in the amber spot, and all below is under His control. The wheels and all that wonderful array of power described in @Ezekiel 1 are under the control of a Man in heaven. Those cherubim with straight feet, who
{371}
went straight on and did not turn as they went, are under the control of a Man in heaven, and so are the saints, and so was Ananias. The Lord said to him, "Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me". He prepared Ananias to receive this repentant sinner, and he was in the house of one called Judas, and Ananias goes to that house. The Lord had prepared him to go, and he said wonderful things to him; he is telling him about what God had in His mind for him. "The God of our fathers hath chosen thee", he says, "that thou shouldest ... see that Just One, and shouldest hear the voice of his mouth", @Acts 22: 14.
There is much that I could tell you tonight about the purpose of God, and what His thoughts were about you before the world was. God was thinking of you before the world was, and Ananias was telling Saul about God's thoughts -- that He had chosen him to see the just One, which is morally the greatest sight in the whole universe -- the One who had come into this world, who loved righteousness and hated lawlessness, the One who went to the cross on account of righteousness. What a wonderful witness grouped around that cross! You remember the dream that Pilate's wife had. God would call attention to the just One. Pilate had Him before him; Matthew tells us that He stood before the governor. Think of the Lord of glory standing there. He was at the bar ostensibly, but really Pilate was at His bar. Who was the greater? The just One. So Pilate's wife sends to her husband and says, "Have thou nothing to do with that just man", or righteous man, not that innocent man, but that righteous man. Judas called Him an innocent Man, but Judas never learned righteousness. You say he repented; no, he had remorse, and he spoke about innocent blood, but it was righteous blood he had betrayed. Pilate's wife was different. Doubtless God had been with that woman. We hear nothing of her afterwards -- in
{372}
Scripture anyway -- but she learned that Christ was a righteous Man. She says, "Have thou nothing to do with that just man; for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him". Pilate had not suffered anything as yet on account of Him, and so, what can I say as to Pilate? Shall he not suffer many things in a future day on account of Him? His wife already was suffering. Doubtless she was feeling the need of a Saviour, and that Saviour was standing before her husband. Pilate washed his hands as if that could clear him, but nay; Jesus goes down being condemned as guilty -- but He was a righteous Man. The centurion again says, "In very deed this man was just". The most wonderful sight, as I may say, morally, is to see the just One, not a just man, but *the* just One.
Now, this is what was told to Saul, that God had chosen him to see the just One and to hear a voice from His mouth. What a privilege! Many of you have heard the voice of Christ through His servants, but that does not save you. Now, Saul was listening to these things; they were very blessed things, they were right things, they were wonderful things, and he was hearing them. Ananias says, "The God of our fathers hath chosen thee, that thou shouldest know his will, and see that Just One, and shouldest hear the voice of his mouth. For thou shalt be his witness unto all men of what thou hast seen and heard", @Acts 22: 14, 15. Now, these were very great things, that is to say, they were the mind of God about him. So the gospel conveys the mind of God in regard of man, what He has in His mind regarding men, what He will do for man, how He converts him, how He works in him, how He forgives him, and how He gives him the Spirit; it is said, "whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified"; indeed, there are predestination, calling, justification and glorification; all these
{373}
things are in the mind of God for all. But then, you may hear all these things and say they are very good, but you are sitting there and not moving, they are not affecting you, your conscience is not reached by them. Is it not beautiful, you say, but what about that conscience? what about that past history of yours? what about your responsibility in all these matters? For God works with responsible beings, not with the animals of the lower creation, but with persons who have consciences and who are moral beings who have to answer to God. Then, what about you? what about your responsibility in this matter? What was Saul doing?
All the narratives of his conversion are commendable to him, save this one incident, as far as I remember. In the first record (@Acts 9), Ananias needs and receives adjustment, but not in this one. In this one there is this little bit of condemnation, and it is a most serious matter; it had to be mentioned, and Saul mentioned it himself. Ananias had to say, 'Saul, why do you tarry in the light of all this?' There he was, inactive. What about you here tonight? You have heard the gospel times without number and perhaps enjoyed it, for it is about you; it is about Christ, of course; it is the "gospel of God ... concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord", but then, it is also about men, it is about you; it is the mind of God about you. You will remember those two persons in @Luke 7. There was Simon on the one hand and the woman on the other, and the Lord spoke the mind of God about them both. "When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both". Who was moved? Certainly not Simon; he got no good out of it at all. Why? He was not moved by it; he remained Simon the Pharisee, whereas the woman does, and the Lord said to her, "Go in peace". "Thy faith hath saved thee". She had something and it showed itself. She had already
{374}
justified herself in her attitude towards Christ, for she had acknowledged her sins in her weeping."Seest thou this woman", the Lord says. Could He say that of you? could He call any one's attention to you as a model repentant person? Heaven loves repenting persons. There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repents. "Seest thou this woman?" The Lord calls attention to her. Simon was oblivious to it, he was adamant to it. There was no movement in the man, and so with Saul here. "Why tarriest thou?" What hinders you? why are you not a happy confessor of Christ? The difference is that one had moved on in the light, and had appropriated what had been presented, but the other had not. Why not? "Why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptised".
Now, this was of very great significance with Saul. It meant the complete cutting off of that in which he had lived. He was a Pharisee of the Pharisees; he had been brought up according to the strictest sect of his religion; he was an educated man; he lived in it. He was a missionary from Jerusalem with a mandate from the high priest; he was a great man, and that must have meant much. The Lord said to His disciples in Mark, "He that believeth and is baptised". It is of great force there. It is not a question of when he was baptised, but *is* baptised. It means that the world is left behind. I have placed baptism -- identification with Christ in death -- between me and the world. The gospel is not intended for people to remain in the world. If you remain in the world, you only adorn it if you are a christian -- content to build it up and strengthen it. "He that believeth and is baptised". I say, I am a baptised person, not simply that I have been baptised historically, but I am a baptised person, that means a buried person. "So many of us as were baptised into Jesus Christ were baptised into his death". For a Jew like
{375}
Saul it meant much; it meant the turning of his back on the whole Jewish world, and he was not doing that yet. And it may be you are not doing it, and that you do not want to give up the world. If the brothers say, What hinders you? you cannot tell them, you will cover up the real cause, maybe; you may say it is the school books, you will have a lot of excuses, but the real cause is this, you are hankering after the world. That is it. You do not want to give it up just yet. If you can have Christ and the world, you will be satisfied. But there is no relation whatever between them. Do not be deceived. Christ is infinitely far away from the world. He died to it and He lives to God; you cannot have Christ and the world, but you can have Christ tonight. "He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved", @Mark 16: 16. "Arise, and be baptised". That is the force of it. It meant something in those days; it meant a complete break with the world, and that is what Saul was not prepared for just then. But he arose. According to chapter 9 he had no difficulty about it, because the Holy Spirit does not wish to throw any reflection upon the thing in that chapter, but in this chapter Saul says it himself. Chapter 9 is the report of the Spirit, and this chapter is Saul's own account, and like a truly converted man he tells us he was slow to be baptised. He is a transparent believer, and he tells us that he had need to be told to move.
So, tonight, I do urge you to settle this matter between your soul and God. Do not tarry, do not delay over it. "Why tarriest thou? arise and be baptised, and wash away thy sins". Is it not worth while to blot out that sinful history? You know you have sins. More than others? No. I know that I am not innocent; I know from Scripture and my own heart that you are not different from others, for "all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God". Sins of omission and sins of commission, the
{376}
heart-knowing God has reckoned them all. "Wash away thy sins". You say, I thought it was the blood of Christ. So it is, "the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin", @1 John 1: 7. But then, what about my past public history? Am I not going to let the people know that I have cast in my lot with the Sin-bearer, that all my sins have been borne away by Him, and that I have gone down under that wave in Christ? My history is blotted out. Baptism is a figure of that, and my friends and neighbours, my connections all are to know it. Baptism is a public matter; it is the wiping out, as before God, of a guilty past, so that I begin over again. I have done with the world, I walk in newness of life. "Like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life". Now you are different. I have no confidence whatever in converts who do not become different and change in walk and ways. You are different; it is "newness of life".
Now, in the passage in 2 Samuel, we have the same thought, only that it is a question now of bringing the king back, as the passage states, which involves Christ's place in your heart in the house. Some have delayed, it may be. They have been baptised, the sin question is settled, they have confessed the Lord, they are quite clear on that side. They have on the armour of light, but what about the house? what about the king? what about the place that Christ would have here? You see the wonderful thing is, although He is exalted in heaven -- "being by the right hand of God exalted" -- He seeks a place in human hearts. He looks at that tiny heart of yours and says, I would like to be there. Think of the Lord of glory desiring that -- that my heart might be a dwelling-place for Him. "Son", He says, "give me thine heart". The book of Proverbs is really an unfolding of His desire as the King's Son to have a
{377}
place in the hearts of the sons. "Give me thine heart", He says.
Hence, David sends those two noble persons, Zadok and Abiathar; he had them by him. Now we are on priestly grounds. It is not the mere evangelical service I am attending now. I am seeking to be a priest with a message from the King to you, that He in all His infinite greatness and glory desires a place in your heart. It is a message from the King. "King David", it says. And the message comes by those two nobles who had been with him in his rejection. "King David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house?" It is King David, and he has chosen important men, men of experience, men who have shared his rejection, priests unto God, and he sends them to the elders of Judah. They are responsible, and you are responsible now in regard of that heart of yours. Romans makes us responsible beings as justified; it makes us particularly responsible as regards our bodies. The Lord claims them. He seeks an entrance into your heart. That is the thing. So, as I said, I would speak to you for a moment, as it were, as a priest, as a representative of the King, I would beg of you as responsible, as having a heart, and as having a body, for the King seeks that and He has a right to it. He says, "ye are my bones and my flesh". Think of that! Think of Christ recognising that relationship with you! He says, I want that heart. It may be it is full of other things. How many things one might mention. I am not speaking of wicked things, because I take it your heart is purified by faith, but the Lord wants to get into it, and He says, 'Wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the king?'
Here we are around you. We have opened our hearts to Christ. We come together on the first day
{378}
of the week because our hearts belong to Christ, "when the doors were shut". We shut out all else to make room for Christ, and why should you be the last? Let me appeal to you. Why should you be the last to bring the King back? He seeks a place. He says, "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me". That is the appeal. It says, "the speech of all Israel is come to the king, even to his house". Here we are witnesses to it, and there are thousands of others likewise. We have brought the King back, so to say; He has found a place in our hearts; why should you be the last? He says, "ye are my bones and my flesh", and "he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah", we are told, "even as the heart of one man".
May God grant that your hearts may be bowed and yielded up to Christ. He seeks them. He who has gone into mansions of glory on high deigns to enter into your heart; He seeks and claims a place there. Why should you be the last? and then it is said, "say ye to Amasa, Art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? God do so to me, and more also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the room of Joab". That is, Joab is to be cast out, one who has proved utterly unfit as the man after the flesh in the service of God. Christendom is full of such, and God is calling for men to take their places, for the work has to be done, the conflict goes on, and the King needs you. It is an appeal to you, not only to bring the King back to His house, but to have part in the conflict, in the great war between light and darkness, and as the light comes into your heart, as Christ has a place there, you pass it on to others. Every gospel preaching is a conflict between light and darkness and an effort to rescue souls. Christendom is full of Joabs who are not doing the work, but David
{379}
wishes to replace those in his service. The Lord wishes persons in whose hearts He has got a place to be captains in their place, that is, to lead on in the war between light and darkness, that men may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God. May God bless the word to you.
{380}
FORMATION IN EXODUS (1)
@Exodus 2: 11 - 25; @Exodus 6: 1 - 6
J.T. I thought we might be helped in seeing the formation that takes place in the early chapters of Exodus, leading up to the collective features spoken of in chapter 12 where we have the assembly spoken of. In verse 3 of that chapter it says, "Speak unto all the assembly of Israel", and again in verse 6, "the whole congregation of the assembly of Israel". Perhaps the Lord may help us to see, in the meetings we may have, that the believer goes out of Egypt, as formed of God in some degree, not only as an individual unit, but as belonging to a corporate whole spoken of in chapter 12 as an assembly. The two words used in that chapter are very significant. The word 'assembly' describes the corporate idea -- the sense of responsibility corporately, and the word 'congregation' is inclusive of all the members of it -- all the persons -- *each one* having a responsibility. So that we go out in the presence of the power of evil that is already organised. These early chapters show us what was in the mind of God initially, in Exodus, and how it was portrayed in Moses; the spirit which is suitable to us as going out of the world is portrayed in Moses, in the leader. The book begins with the names, "These are the names of the sons of Israel who had come into Egypt; with Jacob had they come, each with his household", @Exodus 1: 1. God thus indicates at the very outset the dignity of His people as "sons of Israel"; it is a spiritual designation. Then we see that in coming in, they come in as Jacob came in, that is, under divine direction. He was the depositary of the promises of God and they came in with him. They were related to the vessel in whom the light was, and in whom the
{381}
promises were. So that it says, "with Jacob had they come, each with his household". Then we have the names and the number of the souls. God is thus at the very outset impressing upon us what we are in His sight, and how He takes account of every one.
Ques. Is it not striking that, in @Genesis 49: 2. Jacob addresses his sons as "ye sons of Jacob"?
J.T. Showing that the link is there in a vessel, in one person. It is always that. In taking up Abraham there was one person in whom the light of God was deposited. It was all tending to Christ in whom every promise is yea and amen. So that as the gospel is received, it is received in relation to Christ.
Ques. Is your thought that each one of us is attached now to the One in whom all the promises are?
J.T. That is the idea.
Rem. And likewise that we belong to that vessel down here that is specially the object of His affection.
J.T. So that the whole lamb -- a bone of which was not to be broken -- brought that One near, in that He became the food by which they were to be built up. It is one whole idea; that is ever in the soul. You go out of Egypt in that way and thus become material for God's holy purposes as impressionable. The passover renders us impressionable for the yearling lamb was four days in the house; he would become endeared to all in the house. The principle is that one Man has become endeared to the inmates of the family. Then He was slain. The death of Christ impresses itself. It is impressionable people that God can use; it is on the fleshy tables of the heart that God writes.
Ques. What is the thought of the food that they eat?
J.T. I was saying they eat the lamb, one whole, no bone of which was to be broken, so that they go out as built up in that way. And it was accompanied by the unleavened bread. That is the end we might
{382}
reach in a few readings on this subject; it is in the mind of God from the very outset in the reference to the sons of Israel and Jacob.
Ques. Are the names mentioned in order to bring before us that God has not given up His thoughts in regard of His people?
J.T. Quite; that is very interesting.
Ques. Is there any thought why Joseph is mentioned as in Egypt, in @Exodus 1: 5?
J.T. Joseph was in Egypt as they came in. That was an immense thing; they came under his personal influence. That was a divine position; they were there under divine direction with Joseph ahead of them.
Ques. Here they are called the sons of Israel. Jacob rises to the height of his new name. Then it says with Jacob had they come; does that convey that they had not learnt what it means?
J.T. It is a beautiful combination there. Jacob is the responsible head, but Israel is the spiritual side.
Ques. What do you see in the households here? The apostle speaks of "members in particular", @1 Corinthians 12: 27. Would the Lord have us to realise how greatly we are loved?
J.T. So that here it says, "with Jacob had they come, each with his household". There is a general relation to the head -- the depositary of light -- each having his own responsibility, each of his household.
Ques. So that at the outset of this formation, is it that you find yourself in divine care?
J.T. That seems to be the force; that was what God impressed Jacob with, that in going in He would be with him. Jacob had his misgivings at Beersheba, but God said, I am the God of thy father, meaning He was the God of Isaac. That was the light in which Jacob went into Egypt. Things are already secured in a risen Christ so he would have no misgivings
{383}
whatever. Things are secured for us. In the blessing of Jacob, the blessing of the tribes, he saw the whole responsible side -- bringing down the discipline of God, but everyone is blessed, even Dan, in spite of the fact that he was a traitor. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. They are set up in that light. The position of Joseph in Egypt involved much for them. They had a good start in these surroundings. They were already accustomed to the idea of oppression. Abraham himself endured it in the very day in which God announced that the period should be so long. It says, "a horror, a great darkness, fell upon him", @Genesis 15: 12. He went through it in principle. The four hundred years were not spent literally in Egypt but it was there in principle. Now I think we should see that in chapter 3: 22 every woman was to ask of her neighbour, utensils of silver, and utensils of gold, and clothing. They were to put them on their sons and daughters and to spoil the Egyptians. That is the first thing that is alluded to; it really refers to the spiritual gain of the exercise. You go out with spoil. It is mentioned here that the women did that, showing how the households are brought in, how the women are brought into the thing. We have to look out for our sons and daughters, that they have got these clothes on, that they come out of Egypt with spoil.
Rem. In view of God's habitation.
J.T. Yes; in chapter 35 they have all got something and they bring it in abundance. Then the family principle is introduced at once. In chapter 2 God takes up a special family. If He intends to set out anything He will make a selection to bring forth His best. Therefore He selects this man and his wife whose names do not appear in this chapter; they appear in chapter 6, showing that they represent the family idea. God intended the family to be continued on the priestly line. He takes up a family
{384}
and gives them every possible advantage to set out His thoughts.
Ques. Is that why Stephen speaks of Moses being with the assembly in the wilderness?
J.T. I think so. You have to take up the history of Moses and see the whole bearing. Stephen enlarges on him; he begins by saying he was fair to God. He was an exceptional child; he is one of the exceptional children of Scripture as if God would say, I have set out the whole history of this man from his birth to his death -- to his burial, for God buried him. Whereas with Aaron his brother we have not a word as to his infancy, nothing until he was eighty-three years of age. With him it is the developed idea introduced at once. Then Miriam, the other leader, is not mentioned by name till she is ninety-five years of age. In the prophets God says, "I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam", @Micah 6: 4. They went before them so that they could be seen. We have no history from the outset save of Moses; we have one man's history, but the others are introduced as fully developed and their histories are not given.
Ques. What is the link as to formation in regard of that?
J.T. Formation is secret. Secret history with God is what ought particularly to be looked into. It is not that Aaron did not have a history with God, too, because in chapter 4 God introduces him, saying, "I know him". That means that Aaron had had relations with Him. He could speak well; he must have been speaking to God. He represents secret history, and without that we are sure to break down. I think we have to take the three: Moses, Aaron and Miriam, as conveying one whole.
Ques. Would Moses not have had a secret history during the forty years in the land of Midian?
{385}
J.T. He had a secret history as every one of us should have, otherwise we are of no account at all. The Lord says, "Enter into thy chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father", @Matthew 6: 6. That is secret history, where people are not looking at you, but God is. He is listening to you; He loves that.
Rem. It must have been the result of secret history when he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter.
J.T. Yes, that went on whilst he was in Egypt. Even in the Lord's history we have nothing mentioned from the time He was twelve until He became thirty. That is, we have a record of His infancy and then one reference to His boyhood. But then, think of all the words of that life! what was in that life! The principle of the life of Jesus is compression -- the infinitude of compression into an outwardly small compass of time -- thirty-three years. "Go ye and stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life", @Acts 5: 20. Those thirty years were not empty years; they were infinitely full. They were full for God. Think what He found in that life! "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", @Matthew 3: 17. Others such as His mother and His brethren had opportunity to see something of that life; they had opportunity, which none others had, of seeing that secret history.
Ques. Do not the breathings of the Psalms fill out that gap?
J.T. Yes, you get Him cast upon His God from the very outset. That gives us a clue as to what that life was.
Rem. I was wondering if we shall learn anything of that secret history. There is the treasuring of the manna in the golden pot.
J.T. Yes, there is. And so in the upper room at Jerusalem it is specially noted that Mary the mother
{386}
of Jesus and His brethren were there. What are they there for? They are there as wealth; that is to say, they possess unique wealth. All that experience with Jesus in those thirty years was there in them. The Holy Spirit would know how to use it. Although Mary never spoke a word in the assembly, the wealth was available.
Ques. Is that all gathered up in regard of family conditions? I was thinking of what you said as to the three leaders. Is it not all based on the family idea?
J.T. They represent the family of this chapter.
Ques. Does not leadership flow out from the family thought?
J.T. That is secret history. In the upper room we have the names given of the leading ones, but particularly Mary. There is no other woman mentioned by name but Mary. What a wealth of feeling and intelligence unspoken was involved there.
Ques. And what about His brethren?
J.T. Well, they would see Him in the workshop, in the field and in a thousand ways. All that was not lost. The Holy Spirit would imply that somehow or other that is all in the church. The Holy Spirit knows how to bring it out.
Rem. It says that Mary kept all these things in her heart.
J.T. Yes; that enters into the idea of the body in Paul's ministry -- what was expressed of Christ here. The fact that I do not say anything does not mean that I have not got something in my mind. The fact may be that I am not led to say anything. Take the sisters; the fact that they are silent does not mean that they have not got treasure; it only suggests what an organism the church is. Take the human body as a figure; there are organs that you are not conscious of, but they go on working to one end. The presence of the Holy Spirit here is a
{387}
mysterious, yet a real, thing. Paul speaks of things he was not allowed to utter; that refers to the sisters. The fact that a sister is in silence does not mean that she does not possess wealth. But the Holy Spirit knows how to bring that out.
Ques. Is not that experienced in the silence of the morning meeting?
J.T. Yes, the wealth is there. If you think of people that are well off, as a figure; they do not need to speak of it. The silence in itself speaks. Paul had the most wonderful things in his soul for fourteen years which he says were not lawful to utter. But that does not mean they were not there and did not affect his ministry.
Rem. It says of Lydia that her heart was opened to receive the things spoken by Paul; she would be receiving substance.
J.T. Yes, the point there was that her heart had been opened to the things. That did not mean that she was speaking about them.
Rem. So that whilst silence is good, the thing is sure to come out.
J.T. Yes; it is sure to show itself. Now this family begins here. It is a man of Levi and a daughter of Levi. In chapter 6 we are told that the daughter of Levi was Jochebed his aunt. There was a strong family link between them. It was a levitical family without adulteration.
Rem. Say a word as to Miriam.
J.T. Well, she is called the sister of Aaron. She is first mentioned in chapter 15: 20, where it says, "Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron". That is the first mention of her by name. Undoubtedly she is someone that represents the subjective feature. She is introduced abruptly as a prophetess. How did she become that? It is not that she was a prophetess just then. She was that, but it is not because of what she says in this chapter. She was that, like
{388}
Philip's four daughters; they prophesied -- it was not that they were prophetesses. But they did the thing. What can you say if the prophesying goes on; you must listen to it.
Rem. It is in that way that the mind of God is made known.
J.T. Yes, it was there in a woman called a prophetess. Evidently she was no boastful person. It says all the women went out after her with tambours and dances. That is to say, she was a woman of influence. They would not have gone out after a person that talks but has no substance; that is not going to influence people. Martha was not the one that the Jews went after; it was Mary (@John 11: 45). That shows the influence of a spiritual person.
Rem. Perhaps we have dwelt too much on the failure side.
J.T. Yes, but think of Miriam's age! She must have been ninety years old.
Rem. Aaron and Miriam do not help us much on the public side.
J.T. No, but their private history is very important. Aaron is over eighty when God says, "I know that he can speak well". Then He says, "Aaron the Levite" (@Exodus 4: 14), not 'Aaron a Levite'. The idea must have been expressed in him. So Miriam here is already a prophetess. She has influence among the women of Israel.
Ques. Is not Aaron called the saint of the Lord, in the Psalms?
J.T. Yes, "Aaron the saint of the Lord", @Psalm 106: 16. Now in the passage we have read Moses has had this experience in Egypt in Pharaoh's house. It is very striking that as the ark was opened the babe wept. That is, I suppose, it is a spiritual touch, that he would be a man of feeling, not hard-hearted. God can use only people that are impressionable. Paul was *praying*, but Moses was *weeping*.
{389}
Rem. I was noticing that these burdens become the subject matter for praise. @Psalm 81 speaks of removing his shoulder from the burden.
J.T. Moses looked on their burdens. It says, "It came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out to his brethren and looked on their burdens; and he saw an Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, one of his brethren", @Exodus 2: 11. The word "Hebrew" in this section of Scripture denotes reproach; it is used here more than anywhere else. It denotes the reproach attached to the people of God. He saw an Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, one of his brethren. He did not despise the people, great prince though he was. He regarded his brethren in the light of their reproach.
Ques. Does it not show what a man of feeling he was? There is a great deal said about tears in Scripture; God takes great account of them.
Ques. Are these feelings produced instinctively?
J.T. Yes; what you get in a child like this is instinct.
Rem. You mean that these impressions led him to do just the right thing although it was premature.
J.T. That is the idea of a child; you cannot speak of it exactly as intelligence. The child has instincts, and they are the surest evidence of the work of God.
Rem. The wisdom and learning of the Egyptians had not extinguished them. The instincts were right, but he is not acting from the family position in slaying the Egyptian.
J.T. No; he carried into this a great deal of what he was in Pharaoh's house. There was a sense of his personal power and he was possibly a skilled military man. He carried all that into this transaction, but overlooked the fact that it would have taken a long time to slay all the Egyptians in that way. To kill a whole nation one by one and hiding the bodies in the sand is a big task. Even if he could slay them one
{390}
by one, there was still the difficulty of hiding them in the sand one by one. But God hid them at once under the waves. What God can do in a stroke will take us a million years to do.
Before slaying the Egyptian he turned this way and that way, like the politician. The politician has to do that to get the votes; he looks this way and that way. But the man of faith does not do that; he looks up.
Rem. @Hebrews 11 passes over this incident and goes on to when Moses was very great. There would be a difference in the thought.
Ques. Do we have to learn to be intelligent in order to be church material?
J.T. Yes; you have to learn to do things intelligently. "I speak as to intelligent persons", @1 Corinthians 10: 15.
Rem. At this stage he was very far from being ready to be a leader of God's people.
J.T. Yes; he had it in his heart, but he had to go through a great deal.
Ques. Whilst intelligence develops under the influence of God, I suppose instincts remain. "If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things", @1 John 3: 20. That would be instinct. Do we always possess these instincts?
J.T. Well, typically they are the fruit of the work of God. It is not a question of nature, but of being born again.
Ques. Would you say there is a difference between the instincts found in Moses as a boy and those that characterised Nehemiah in a day of brokenness? His weeping is connected with his first exercises in relation to the wall and the gates.
J.T. That is very nice. All through Scripture great stress is laid on that spirit -- on feelings. In the book of Lamentations, "For these things I weep"
{391}
(@Lamentations 1: 16) would convey the spirit of Christ in that sense.
Rem. The weeping would be in relation to what was due to God.
J.T. Quite; then it says that Moses went out on the second day. That ought to be an advance on the first. He saw two Hebrew men striving together and he said, "Why art thou smiting thy neighbour?" That was good.
Rem. We need not be afraid of the way in which God dealt with him behind the wilderness, as ultimately the purposes He has for us will be brought to light.
J.T. I think we shall see that. The word led him to flee. It says that Moses feared and said, "Surely this thing is known". The circumstances become the occasion of his leaving Egypt. Then the way to Midian was very long, but evidently he gained in the way because he sat by a well. He is virtually saying, 'My methods have been all wrong'. He sat by a well; that is the very opposite of taking things in his own hands. The well acts of itself. That will be in my favour. He is virtually saying, 'I can depend on that and not on my own power'. That is the key to all that follows -- the reliance on the power of God. In that way he becomes a prepared vessel.
{392}
FORMATION IN EXODUS (2)
@Exodus 3: 1 - 10; @Exodus 4: 27 - 31
J.T. It was remarked this morning that these early chapters in Exodus typically set out, among other things, the formation which takes place in believers as believing in the gospel, culminating in chapter 12 in which we have the idea of the assembly presented: "The assembly of Israel" -- a word signifying a corporate whole in which there is responsibility to God. Then there is the word 'congregation' in the same chapter, implying all the persons severally, each also having a sense of responsibility. So that in coming into the assembly outwardly, young believers come in already formed in measure and possessed of certain wealth, for they were to go out of Egypt with substance. The believer thus coming in does not impoverish, but rather enriches, the assembly. It was pointed out that the book begins with the sons of Israel coming into Egypt under divine orders, as we learn from Genesis. Each came with Jacob, as the depositary of the light of God and the purpose of God. But each came with his household; that is, the family idea runs through. Then it was remarked that in chapter 2 we have the family whence Moses sprang, leading to the development of the family idea in Aaron and Moses and Miriam. The authority of God is seen in Moses, brotherly affection and priestly service in Aaron, and the prophetic word, as well as the service of song in Miriam. So that chapters 3 and 4 are set before us as preliminary dealings of God with Moses, bringing Aaron in.
Ques. What did you say about the well -- you made a remark about it?
J.T. Well, I think we noted that Moses began in his own energy in slaying the Egyptian and hiding
{393}
him in the sand -- a futile effort. And as fleeing into Midian he evidently learnt -- evidently had learnt as abiding in Midian -- that deliverance is not to come by natural effort in us, but by the Spirit; that is, typically. In chapter 2: 15 it says, "He sat by the well", meaning that he recognised a power outside of himself, which in the New Testament is the Spirit. The Lord Jesus sat also on the well, and as He sat there He opened up the truth of the Holy Spirit (@John 4). The power which springs up in the believer is the power by which things are to be done here now.
Ques. You were speaking of the mount of Olives as being the Spirit's power. Would you connect the two?
J.T. Quite. The well is so suggestive of a power acting in itself; it is not a stagnant thing, it is a spring. The way that Moses served in relation to that is further instruction; it says, "The priest of Midian had seven daughters; and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs, to water their father's flock", @Exodus 2: 16. In Moses sitting in that position he sees others moving in relation to that well. That is to say, he did not initiate the idea of the use of it. We have to learn in that way that we have not initiated, or inaugurated, things, especially the power of God; it is there, and others have known how to use it, so that we come into that. Seven women looking after their father's affairs -- the father's flock, they were typically unselfish believers without any official place, but unable to cope with the circumstances, so that the deliverer is on the scene. Moses was really a deliverer in the mind of God from the outset, but he undertook to do it in fleshly energy. And now these seven women are in need, and the obstacles are too great; there is opposition. It says, "the shepherds came and drove them away; but Moses rose and helped them, and watered their flock". Moses now is the deliverer, but not in the way of
{394}
smiting anyone; he had learnt that lesson. He does not smite the shepherds; he does not slay any of them. The point was to help these women, that is to say, the position of the deliverer is to deliver -- the positive thing. The women are helped; it says, "Moses rose and helped them". The shepherds would drive the women away, but Moses rose and helped them, and watered their flock. That is, the point is to help.
Ques. Would it be a marked day in one's history when one comes to this -- to the well?
J.T. I think so. I thought we might be helped here to see that it is "Not by might, nor by power", that is, physical and human power and might, that the work of God is carried on, "but by my Spirit", as it says in @Zechariah 4, and how that is exemplified now in Moses helping the women. That is the principle of the moment, to help people, not to destroy them.
Rem. One would think that Moses learnt that lesson very soon after he got into Midian. It says he sat by the well before he helped these people.
J.T. You feel that to help people requires the recognition of the Spirit. Sitting by the well would mean that he would be taking in in his soul the sense of what that meant. Later on Israel sang to it -- a fuller recognition of it as having digged it; here it is already there.
Ques. Would that principle be in line with the word "helps" in @1 Corinthians 12?
J.T. I think so. You feel that is the line we ought to be on now, and indeed always. You do not pretend to be inaugurating anything, it is taking up what exists; these women had done this before doubtless, and they knew what to do. They fill the troughs with water; Moses did not teach them to do that. But they needed help, and one can be a help; I am sure each one should seek to be a help.
{395}
Rem. A vision appeared to Paul of a man saying, "Come over ... and help us".
J.T. Just so; that is what was needed.
Ques. Do you suggest that as a result of sitting by the well he has a sympathetic understanding of what is needed, and he rises to meet it?
J.T. Just so; the point was to help these women. It was a hard-hearted thing for the shepherds to drive them away -- that is the kind of thing that goes on in the world, the people of God are given no quarter, no consideration, but here is a deliverer -- a mighty deliverer -- and he delivers; that is the thing. The thing is done, he waters the flock.
Ques. How would that apply at the present day?
J.T. Well, we were just remarking about the helps spoken of in 1 Corinthians. Each believer ought to be a help. Indeed, if one is not a help he is perhaps a hindrance.
Ques. I suppose you would say it is the shepherd spirit that is marked here?
J.T. That is the thing. The other shepherds did not have the spirit of shepherds. There are such in this world that believers have to contend with -- those in the place of shepherds, but instead of allowing you to drink of the Spirit of God they drive you away. That is the position around us today. But the thing is with His help to get the flock watered. You know the water is there, you have been sitting by it; and these women were doing their work well, they filled the troughs.
Rem. There were seven of them -- the perfect number.
J.T. Yes; you have something to say about that?
Rem. Well, I was just thinking what a beautiful nucleus there was for the Spirit of God to work through there, first through Moses, and then through them.
{396}
J.T. These seven women of them belonged to one family, and were occupied in their father's affairs. It does not appear that they had a brother, there is nothing said about a brother. It is a subjective state of things. Seven women like these were defenceless and exposed. What an immense thing it is to be able to help such -- to water their flocks. Moses had come into a ready-made order of things, and he rises to the occasion.
Ques. Is there any link between the seven women here at the outset of things, and the five daughters of Zelophehad at the end of Numbers?
J.T. There may be. The point with them is that they appreciate the inheritance of God; that is, they appreciate what has come down to them. Women that are spoken of in Scripture usually denote the subjective work of God, to be worked out in our comings together, and no doubt we have here a suggestion of that.
Rem. The apostle says, "help those women which laboured with me in the gospel". It is very beautiful.
J.T. Very good.
Rem. These shepherds seem to be like the disciples, who would have sent the multitudes away. The Lord said, "Give ye them to eat", @Matthew 14: 16.
J.T. Moses had that spirit, you mean?
Rem. Yes, and the shepherds seem to have had the spirit that the disciples had -- they would have sent them away.
J.T. Yes, so that they are not really worthy of the name. Persons who would drive away seven women are not worthy of the name of shepherds. Yet they talk about having *their* flocks. If you want to get the saints to the truth of the Spirit they will hinder you. It interferes with their position.
Ques. Would these shepherds be in line with those in Ezekiel who are spoken of so solemnly, who hinder and spoil the pastures and the waters?
{397}
J.T. Quite so. And you find in Zechariah, the Lord, typically, destroys three of them; God is so against this kind of shepherd. Then we have the right eye of the worthless shepherd utterly darkened, and his arm clean dried up; that is the governmental action of God against him. In the meantime we have to contend with them; we do not destroy them. The point is to help the people to get to the water. Then it says that when they came to Reuel their father, he said, "Why are ye come so soon today? And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water abundantly for us, and watered the flock". That is, they are in the good of the deliverance, but have no knowledge of the man; they miss the point. It is often the case: people enjoy deliverance but overlook the Man -- the Deliverer. He was a remarkable deliverer, but all they could say was that he was an *Egyptian*. But then a deliverer like that needs attention. In @Romans 7 the deliverer becomes the husband. "Who shall deliver me out of this body of death? I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". That is, "another man", that is indicated in the beginning of the chapter, becomes the husband. So that we must not neglect the Deliverer. And so Reuel says, "And where is he?" That question might very conveniently be put to many of us -- 'What about Christ?' They left Him outside.
Ques. When you speak of the opening of @Romans 7, do you mean that we should be married to another?
J.T. I referred to it because of the idea of deliverance. @Romans 7 begins with the thought of being married to another, "even to him who is raised from the dead"; and then the chapter works out how you arrive at that, that the Deliverer becomes the Husband.
Ques. Would Moses be like an Egyptian? They took him for an Egyptian.
{398}
J.T. Well, that is the way they regarded him; they did not enquire very much about him. I suppose they just looked at him outwardly. But christians are not to be content with that. The Lord challenges the disciples: "Whom say ye that I am?" @Matthew 16: 15. It is for us to find out and know who He is.
Rem. The nine went away, and only one came back (@Luke 17: 18).
J.T. Yes. So that Reuel said to his daughters, "Where is he? why then have ye left the man behind?" Why should we leave Christ behind, after such a deliverance as that? Why not make some provision for Him? He has made wonderful provision for us. Wonderful indeed that He should think of anything we could make for Him; He values any provision we make for Him. He loves us.
Rem. Everything is secured as coming under the new husband.
J.T. Yes. So Reuel says, "Call him, that he may eat bread". That is, make some provision for him. Reuel had the right thought. So that it says he was content to remain: "Moses consented to remain with the man". You see how the Lord, typically, accepts the situation. You think of Moses, a prince in Egypt, what circumstances had been his, and now he is content to dwell with this man in a foreign country and look after his sheep. There is no complaint with Moses at all. Jacob went to Syria for a wife; everything there was on the principle of wages, but there is not a word about wages with Moses. And after forty years we find him still looking after the flock of his father-in-law Jethro. See how thoroughly unselfish he was; he was with his father-in-law for forty years and asked no wages; no thought of wages.
Rem. Does not the company in @John 12 provide for the Deliverer?
{399}
J.T. Yes, that is very good. "They made him a supper". That is what the Lord is looking for from every young brother and sister. We have to learn how to provide for Him, because we are so selfish.
Ques. Do you think Moses would be content to remain?
J.T. Well, he respects Reuel; he is content to remain with the man. That is, he respected the right feeling that was in the head of the house. It is not a question of Zipporah, he gave him Zipporah afterwards; but all now hinges on the respect he had for Reuel. And the link formed between him and Reuel continued; you never hear of any complaint on the part of Moses.
Ques. Would the forty years bring in the meekest of men?
J.T. I suppose it did. He sets out here a fine principle for all young believers, that is, the principle of contentment in our circumstances. He is content to remain with the man, although the circumstances were so different from what he was accustomed to. And he remains there all these years, and now at the end he tended the flock of Jethro his father-in-law; so that we should have no doubt it was an unselfish act. "Moses tended the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian".
Ques. Does the acceptance of the government of God and circumstances stand at the threshold of all entry into what is of the assembly?
J.T. I am sure it does. I am to be content in whatever circumstances I am. To be content is a fine point to reach.
Rem. That would give continuance and endurance.
J.T. It is the acceptance of the government of God in one's circumstances, and then you find that that same government will act against what is in your way in due course. And so you find in verse 23, "And it came to pass during those many days, that
{400}
the king of Egypt died". "During those many days", that is, the days in which Moses is accepting the government of God humbly, "the king of Egypt died". That was God acting against the enemy; you may reckon on that. We may have to wait but God will act for us.
Rem. The same government moves the king out of the way.
J.T. So that Joseph came out of prison and the word of the Lord tried him; the king sent and loosed him and let him go free. We must not miss the forty years of education in accepting the government of God. Moses was content to remain with the man. You might say. He is content because he has Zipporah, but that is not the point, it is the *man*. He consented to remain with the man. He had respect for that man. He was his employer, as you might say. It is not easy to serve an employer, it is often irksome. There seemed to be no good relations between Jacob and Laban, but here there are; he is content to remain with the man. Zipporah is a secondary thought.
Ques. Do you think it is the result of sitting by the well?
J.T. I am sure it is; you find it in the Spirit -- by the Spirit of God you do these things. Then the removal of Pharaoh was a very remarkable thing. In the course of those days, that is, while this is going on, something else is going on, too; you can reckon on that. "And the children of Israel sighed because of the bondage, and cried; and their cry came up to God because of the bondage; and God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob; and God looked upon the children of Israel, and God acknowledged them". That is, in the course of the government of God all this comes about. The children of Israel are crying; that is, the four hundred years
{401}
is ending; they had done their work the four hundred years they were in a foreign land. And everything converges on one point: the time had come for Moses ministry. So that every one of us may be sure that God has something for him to do and as His government works in him, the occasion of it is also determined. The government of God works in that way.
Rem. So that all things work together for good.
J.T. That is it, to those who love God.
Ques. The Pharisees said to the Lord, "Get out, and go hence, for Herod is desirous to kill thee", and the Lord answered, "Go, tell that fox, Behold, I cast out demons and accomplish cures today and tomorrow". Do you get the principle there?
J.T. Yes. What can Herod do if it be the will of God? "Go, tell that fox"; the Lord unmasked him, you know; he is a fox. The Lord is not going to be turned aside for a fox.
Ques. If the government of God and circumstances are accepted, will God clearly indicate when the time comes for the movement?
J.T. I am sure He will. And so this final act of Moses, I think, brings him into the presence of God. It was no accident; God was watching for this. It says, "Moses tended the flock of Jethro his father-in-law ... And he led the flock behind the wilderness, and came to the mountain of God -- to Horeb". That was no accident, it was a spiritual thing that God had been working up to.
Ques. Would the thought that he *led* the flock indicate that he had acquired the qualities of leadership?
J.T. I should say so; he was doing the thing well; he led them, he did not drive them. And now there is one of the great divine appearings in the Old Testament. From the time of Abraham on we have this great feature of divine appearings. Moses
{402}
had had to do with Reuel, and Pharaoh, and now he is having to do with God. He has been doing very well, now God says, 'How are you going to do in My presence?' He is brought face to face with God -- that is a fine touch. I may be doing well, so far, under the government of God, but now I have to represent God. One great feature in ministry is to represent God, and if I am to represent God He must appear to me -- I must meet Him face to face. How am I going to do there?
Rem. It says, "Moses ... was afraid to look at God".
J.T. Yes; he was not like that when he said, "Let me ... see thy glory", @Exodus 33: 18.
Ques. Was not that a proper impression at the beginning?
J.T. Well, I think it was comely. It says, "And the Angel of Jehovah appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a thorn-bush: and he looked, and behold, the thorn-bush burned with fire, and the thorn-bush was not being consumed. And Moses said, Let me now turn aside and see this great sight, why the thorn-bush is not burnt". That is, he is now being tested. I think that we may do well in other circumstances, but when it becomes a question of having to do directly with God, you are tested supremely. Nothing really can test me more than having to do with God.
Rem. And then it seems as if the Lord was very observant as to how Moses really did take it; when He saw that he turned to look, then it drew forth something from God.
J.T. Yes. God is testing him as to what he will do. When he turned to look, God called him by name.
Ques. So would you think by that that there is a sense in which we are able to draw God's attention?
J.T. I think so. In a way you know what God is by considering the divine movements in yourself.
{403}
God loves what is lovable. He loves sovereignly; He can love us when we are unlovely; then He loves what is lovable. It was morally very lovable in His eyes that a man should turn to see *why* the thorn-bush was not consumed. The man's mind -- his intelligence -- is active; God loves that.
Ques. What does the thorn-bush indicate?
J.T. I think the smallness of the circumstances in which the people of God were to be found.
Ques. What does it indicate by being burnt and not being consumed?
J.T. I understand that God should be in the midst of the people, and yet the people are not consumed. He does not intend to consume us, but He intends to consume all that is contrary in us. So that throughout the wilderness history this is what is seen, you know.
Ques. Would this be similar to what the Lord said to Samuel when He said, "Samuel, Samuel"? Here He says, "Moses, Moses". Is that a term of endearment?
J.T. O, it is that you are now distinguished in heaven. Moses had done remarkably well in Reuel's house, but now what does heaven think of him? That is, I have got to reckon with heaven. I may be well thought of among brethren, but what does God think about me? -- that is the most important thing of all. I may be deceived because the brethren may esteem me too highly, but God never does that, so that I have got to reckon with God, what does He think about me? So, when God calls your name out twice it means that He has a great place in His mind for you. The archangels would say, 'There is a man that has a great place in His mind'. "If any man love God, the same is known of him" (@1 Corinthians 8: 3); that is, a man is taken account of in relation to his love; that is what God is looking at, not his knowledge, but his love.
{404}
Ques. Does the way Moses is led indicate the way God would lead us all? That is, he acquired the heart of a true shepherd in leading the flock; and then he is to learn here that without holiness no man shall see the Lord.
J.T. That is right. First God notices the fact that he turned aside: "Jehovah saw that he turned aside to see, and God called to him out of the midst of the thorn-bush and said, Moses, Moses!" (verse 4). His name is called out twice. One mention of the name would have been sufficient if it were merely to call his attention; but, "Moses, Moses!" shows the great place he had with God.
Ques. On account of the way he had moved?
J.T. Yes, on account of his turning aside to see this sight -- how the thorn-bush could burn and yet not be consumed.
Ques. It is called a "great sight". Is it a picture of another sight when they stood and watched the One who wore a crown of thorns?
J.T. Quite. It is really like a man's gift: if God is to use you He will bring something specially to your attention, and if you do not see that, then you will never serve according to His mind. You may carry on activity, but you will never carry on according to His mind; you will not know your work.
Rem. The way that God called Moses here must have attracted Moses greatly to God.
J.T. He would never forget it all his days. "The good will of him that dwelt in the bush", @Deuteronomy 33: 16. The good will, that is a term that is well-known in commercial lines; it does not amount to much in very many businesses, but it means a great deal in God's affairs. "The good will of him that dwelt in the bush". Moses entered in relation to the good will of God who dwelt in the bush; he proved the wealth of that in all his ministry.
{405}
Ques. Why is the word 'thorn' used in connection with the bush?
J.T. O, because it is an insignificant thing.
Ques. Does it carry any thought of the cross?
J.T. Well, possibly; it is an insignificant bush, it is not of much value.
Ques. Do you mean by the good will the thoughts of goodness and blessing that God had even for His people Israel?
J.T. Yes, that is right; and all the resources that were at Moses disposal. This is his commission; the second paragraph shows that it is his commission. When later on he was worried with his work and said to God that he did not know why he should be burdened with all this people, he had forgotten the good will -- the wonderful resources that were at his disposal. And so God says to him, You take seventy elders and come to the door of the tent; I will be there. And He spoke to Moses; that is, He honoured Moses, but He took the power off Moses and put it on the seventy, showing that He had furnished them with abundance to carry on.
Ques. Would this be similar to what you were saying about the mount of transfiguration -- the sovereignty of God in bringing them into the divine presence?
J.T. Yes. God came into such circumstances. Can I be content to be in them? Moses had begun with accepting the reproach, and this reproach is to continue; it is not to be lifted.
Ques. Would you say that the whole of Moses service, and the ministry he received, was embodied in this thorn-bush?
J.T. I think so. This is the impression he got at the outset, and this is to give character to his ministry. He is to serve in humiliation and reproach, but the good-will was there.
Ques. Would you connect God saying here,
{406}
"Moses, Moses!" with His words in chapter 33, "I know thee by name"? That was at a very critical juncture.
J.T. Yes; later on He came and talked with him as a man speaking with his friend.
Rem. It was after Isaac was offered up that God called Abraham by his name twice.
J.T. That is right; he was distinguished by that action. And now Moses is required to take off his sandals, which would, I suppose, denote the divine presence, for it was no less than that; for whatever circumstances God comes into, His holiness remains. God can never be but what He is. God in Christ -- God was there, come into lowly circumstances, but no less than God.
Ques. Does the fact that this same thing occurs with Joshua before the movement of the assembly into the land suggest the ground we are on in having to do with the movement of the people of God in any way?
J.T. I think it is your feet on the ground. David went up barefoot. It seems to be an acknowledgment of our unholiness, and to emphasise our appreciation of the holiness of God. But in the house there are no bare feet. The prodigal is shod in the house. In the house, as brought in in Christ, all unholiness is dealt with, and instead of bare feet they are shod; that is, sonship taken up in Christ. Taking off one's shoes is a divine requirement, that is to say, God would impress on us what we are in our natural state. Romans develops the thought of holiness: you have your fruit unto holiness through righteousness; it is righteousness unto holiness.
Rem. Jehovah says, "I am come down". Would the thought of the bush indicate how far He came down?
J.T. It does; it is very beautiful. As it says, He "humbleth himself to behold the things that are in
{407}
heaven, and in the earth!" @Psalm 113: 6. The ark later is the full thought of the smallness of the circumstances in which God came in in Christ. "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us".
Ques. Would you say that that would have a special application to our coming together on Lord's day morning -- taking off the shoes?
J.T. Well, in a way; but you come into the prodigal's position with your shoes on, that is, in the light of purpose.
Rem. I mean to say, there is particular reverence at that moment.
J.T. Well, that is right: "Be ye holy, for *I* am holy". Then in the next paragraph you have the commission. God speaks of having seen the state of His people, and what He would bring them into. He sets out His full thought -- to bring them into a land flowing with milk and honey.
And now He says in verse 10, "I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt". That was his commission. In closing I thought we might see in the end of chapter 4 how the message was delivered to them. Of course, much intervened because most of chapters 3 and 4 happens in this position at mount Horeb. The passage we read (verse 27) says, "And Jehovah said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him on the mountain of God, and kissed him". It would appear that Aaron had to do all the travelling; that is, it is to bring out the brotherly side -- what love would do. Moses here is a type of one who has light -- the man of God. Aaron, the brother, is the love side; how far love would go! Apparently all took place at the mount of God, so that the travelling was all Aaron's; God directed him to meet Moses. And then it says, "he ... met him on the
{408}
mountain of God, and kissed him". He would remind Moses of the great principle, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided", @Genesis 22: 14. Aaron is the provision. And then it says, "And Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah who had sent him, and all the signs that he had commanded him. And Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the children of Israel; and Aaron spoke all the words that Jehovah had spoken to Moses, and did the signs before the eyes of the people. And the people believed. And when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped". I was thinking we might see there the effectiveness of the ministry set out in this way. No greater tribute can be paid to a man's ministry than that it brings about a state of worship in the people of God.
Ques. Would what Moses said previously: "Who am I, that I should go ... ?" bring out the diffidence that is proper to service?
J.T. I suppose so, as to the humility of mind, though he went too far, did he not? He went too far in chapter 4: 10, "And Moses said to Jehovah, Ah Lord! I am not eloquent, neither heretofore nor since thou hast spoken to thy servant, for I am slow of speech and of a slow tongue. And Jehovah said to him, Who gave man a mouth? or who maketh dumb, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? have not I, Jehovah? And now go, and I will be with thy mouth, and will teach thee what thou shalt say. And he said, Ah Lord! send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send. Then the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Moses". That is, he went too far.
Rem. Something similar seems to come out in Gideon, that is, reluctance to move without proper confirmation.
Ques. Is the affection of Aaron for Moses such
{409}
that he helped forward his effective service to the people? Aaron serves perfectly here.
J.T. I suppose that enters into it; it established a remarkable atmosphere, you know, because you have two persons now instead of one.
Rem. Yes, I was thinking of the brotherly spirit.
J.T. Yes. I would say that Moses had the *light*. It is all well to have love, and Aaron had that, but that will not do in itself. What would he say to the people? He met Moses and kissed him. Well, that is not enough; that would not help much. The testimony lies in the words. Moses had the light of God.
Ques. In connection with the signs, is it that the people might believe -- something like that in John's gospel? The disciples believed on Him.
J.T. Yes. We do not speak of our love in testimony exactly. The testimony is Christ -- what God is in Christ, and Moses alone had that. Aaron could not have said anything about that; that is, he does not present that side, the side of light. What is to be spoken is in Moses.
Rem. So that affection would be governed by light.
J.T. That is the idea. "Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah who had sent him, and all the signs that he had commanded him. And Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the children of Israel; and Aaron spoke all the words that Jehovah had spoken to Moses". See how accurate it is; it is a question of what Moses received from God. Moses represents that side -- a man that has a gift; there is nothing said about Aaron's gift.
Ques. Would some of these words be: "I have surely seen the affliction of my people", and "I am come down to deliver them"?
J.T. Quite; that is, their hearts would be touched that God had come down. As He had come down to see the tower of Babel, and Sodom, here He comes down to deliver.
{410}
Rem. I was wondering if these two would be like the two you spoke of in Matthew with reference to the assembly.
J.T. Very much; it is that principle. You have two persons -- adequate testimony, adequate witness. Of course, they might also be taken to represent Christ as Apostle and High Priest; both these features are combined in Christ. And then the affection that marked Him. They "wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth". The mouth was a priest's mouth. "And the people believed. And when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped". That all refers to what Moses had; that was where the light came from.
Rem. This was far more effective than when he slew the man.
J.T. Yes, indeed. Now you have here the beginning of what we spoke of, that is, the assembly. He is not dealing here with the individual members, but with the corporate whole; that settles everything with the elders. Moses communicates the mind of God to those who were responsible, that is, the elders; the elders would be responsible to communicate it to the people. We shall see this, please God, more fully in chapter 12.
Ques. Is there a difference then between gathering all the elders of the children of Israel, and the signs that were done and the people believed?
J.T. I think it would be in its representation; we have to see things in that way, because there were probably two million Israelites in Egypt. Things are concentrated like the two midwives. There must have been more but they are representative. So here, the elders are representative. It is the idea of a corporate whole with responsibility.
{411}
MORNINGS IN CONNECTION WITH THE PLAGUES
@Exodus 9: 13 - 18; @Exodus 12: 1 - 6, 21 - 28
J.T. I thought we might begin with this passage in chapter 9, because it is the last morning of the series of mornings. Jehovah said to Moses, "Rise up early in the morning, and set thyself before Pharaoh". These plagues, or signs, are in two series of three, and are the last of four which began with this morning. Finality is reached in the course of dealings.
Ques. Why do you emphasise the mornings?
J.T. I think it should be noticed that this course of dealings is grouped under certain mornings. In chapter 7, verse 15, you have the first morning mentioned; then in chapter 8, verse 20, you have another morning, and the last in chapter 9, verse 13. The first morning introduces the course of plagues, beginning with the water being turned into blood; then the frogs, and then the lice or gnats. Then we have the second series, beginning with the flies, then the plague on the cattle, and ending with the boils. Then this chapter gives the beginning of the third series of plagues, which comprises the hail, the locusts, the darkness and the slaying of the firstborn, all looking on to finality. So that you have this remarkable address to Pharaoh: "I will at this time send all my plagues to thy heart, and on thy bondmen, and on thy people; that thou mayest know that there is none like me in all the earth. For now have I put forth my hand, and I will smite thee and thy people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth. And for this very cause have I raised thee up, to shew thee my power; and that my name may be declared in all the earth. Dost thou still exalt thyself
{412}
against my people, that thou wilt not let them go?" This is final. God is notifying Pharaoh of the final issue; and where you have a morning -- God beginning in the morning -- it is not an isolated act of God, it is a fixed course of dealings with a definite end in view.
W.H.M. Showing the urgency of the matter, is that your thought?
J.T. Yes; that there should be an issue reached. God has shown great patience with Pharaoh and his people, and now He notifies them that the end is in view, and that he is to be cut off from the earth, so that He sends His plagues to his heart.
Rem. "Rend your heart, and not your garments", @Joel 2: 13.
Rem. It is personal to Pharaoh here; but when it is quoted in Romans it is that all the earth might learn from God's dealings with Pharaoh, is it not?
J.T. Quite. Here it is that "my name may be declared in all the earth". Evidently God has in His mind in all this that He is to be known. But what we began with was not so much the effect of these plagues on the Egyptians but their effect on the people of God -- what formative influence they had. And so the idea of life, as we dwelt upon it yesterday, is to be noted, particularly in the plague of gnats or lice; the presence of living things, creatures. This idea runs right through the Scriptures: the living creatures in the book of Revelation. Creation itself was to live and overflow with life and praise to God. Here it is simply the beginning in a small way. The insects alluded to are extremely small but very penetrating; they were on man and beast, or as it may be translated, *in* man and beast. Here it is on man and beast, but it is such an insect as finds its way in to the skin, therefore although small it is effective; and there is no cessation, it does not come to an end. It is said that the gnats
{413}
were throughout the land of Egypt, "And the scribes did so with their sorceries, to bring forth gnats; but they could not. And the gnats were on man and on beast. Then the scribes said to Pharaoh. This is the finger of God!" Pharaoh's heart is hardened; he is stubborn. There is nothing said about a cessation of this. We have to understand these plagues from the standpoint of the New Testament, and we can see there that the divine thought is life. The Lord Jesus said He came that they might have life. And it is to continue; it is not a passing thing, it is a permanent thing, an eternal thing. But it has its effect here in testimony; it makes itself felt.
J.R.S. Are you thinking of what Paul said, "Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life", @2 Timothy 3: 10?
J.T. Well, exactly -- what he was; what christians are here as the expression of divine life has a telling effect. And then I think you have a sort of counterpart of this sign in chapter 9, beginning at verse 8, "And Jehovah said to Moses and to Aaron. Take to yourselves handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses scatter it toward the heavens before the eyes of Pharaoh. And it shall become fine dust over all the land of Egypt, and shall become boils on man and on cattle, breaking out with blisters, throughout the land of Egypt. And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it toward the heavens; and it became boils with blisters breaking out on man and on cattle". Now it says, "The scribes could not stand before Moses because of the boils". That is to say, they are overthrown, they are set aside. Already they had to acknowledge that it was of God, that the life was the finger of God, but now the testimony is moving on in increased power in Moses and they have got to go away. That is to say, you have something more than the mere dust of the earth, you
{414}
have the ashes of the furnace, which, in the light of the New Testament, must be connected with the death of Christ. The ashes of the furnace, it says, sprinkled toward the heavens. I think that we may see in these two signs the effective setting aside of the magicians; they are not only exposed, but they cannot stand. The testimony is moving on irresistibly.
W.H. Although these were judgments, you seem to be bringing forward something of real good and life to us.
J.T. Well, I think these plagues are not exactly like the book of Revelation; they are to bring down and weaken the world in my soul. They are tempered with mercies, and they apply at the present time, so that the people of God might be brought out of the world; that is, the world is weakened in my soul. They were *signs* to Israel, but *plagues* to the world; the judgments on the world are signs to me.
W.H. So that we are to learn from that and move out of the world.
J.T. That is the idea; the power of the world is weakened in the soul of the believer. We shall see in chapter 12 that they are already formed into an assembly -- addressed as an assembly, which means that these signs had a formative effect in their souls.
E.J.F. After the plague of hail there seems to be a movement with the servants of Pharaoh. Verse 20 says, "He that feared the word of Jehovah among the bondmen of Pharaoh made his bondmen and his cattle flee into the houses".
J.T. That illustrates what we are saying.
W.H.M. Showing how it was moving out.
J.T. The word, indeed, is beautiful and tempered with mercy. "Now send, and secure thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the field: all the men and the cattle that are found in the field, and are not brought home -- on them the hail shall come down, and they
{415}
shall die". So that it is a word for everyone from Pharaoh down, a world-wide testimony to bring your belongings home, away from the place of judgment. There is a home for them.
W.H. So that all we see going on would be the means of making us value and take up our own portion.
J.T. Quite; and we are compassionate towards the world, although they may be oppressing us. The word is to Pharaoh to take his cattle home, and those that feared Jehovah did it.
-.M. Would that illustrate "He that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him", @Acts 10: 35? The Egyptians who obeyed the word got the gain.
J.T. That is right; anyone who obeyed the word of the Lord escaped the judgment. So that you might say you have the "whosoever" gospel here. It is well, therefore, to look at these scriptures in the light of the New Testament; they furnish in detail what you do not get in the New Testament; but the New Testament gives you the key to them. So that the furnace, for instance, speaks of the death of Christ; He has been through the furnace. The Lord had said to Abram earlier (@Genesis 15: 13) that He made the covenant with him that His people should be four hundred years in the land not their own, and it says, "a horror, a great darkness, fell upon" Abram when the sun was going down. But it says, "When the sun had gone down, and it was dark, that behold, there was a smoking furnace, and a flame of fire which passed between those pieces". That is to say, God in Christ passed through. God Himself entered in to make covenant with Abram. Christ passed through the pieces, so to speak. It was the power of God, but there was the smoking furnace. And now as Israel is going out of Egypt there are the ashes of the furnace; it has done its
{416}
work. The testimony of the power of the fire acts against the Egyptians.
S.L. Would you say that God's heart is towards all men for blessing?
J.T. Yes, and however severe His judgments, they are tempered with mercy. So that whilst in our dispensation God's judgments may appear severe, yet there is the gospel, that all men might be saved. By and by, as it says in @2 Thessalonians 2: 11, 12, God will send strong delusion, and it is that they all might be damned; there will thus be a change, but that change has not come yet.
S.L. Would you say it is important that we should learn what God is doing?
J.T. Yes, and we should maintain the character of the dispensation. Whatever happens you want to keep in line with the dispensation of God.
J.R.S. Do you regard this as being the first indication that the way out of Egypt is through the death of Christ?
J.T. The ashes of the furnace indicate clearly that the fire has been there. The ashes became a means of testimony in this powerful way. They are "Sprinkled ... toward the heavens" -- there must be very great virtue in them.
F.I. Do you mean that the gnats indicate the sovereign work of God in the soul -- new birth?
J.T. That is right; it is life in a small way but effective, and as soon as it takes place in a man's soul there is a change in that person; you cannot but notice it. But then when you get the ashes of the furnace that is more, they have passed through death; and it is these ashes that become blisters in men and cattle.
J.R.S. So then, does that rightly follow the first movements of life?
J.T. Yes, I think so; I think the ashes would follow, and the connection with heaven is very
{417}
suggestive. Of course, we have only just touches here, but if you look at it in the light of the New Testament it is very suggestive. It becomes boils with blisters on men but only for their good, as a testimony, a heavenly witness to them.
H.C.L. Why is there a change with regard to the expression about the hardening of Pharaoh's heart? It says the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart in verse 12, before it speaks of Pharaoh hardening his heart.
J.T. That is judicial; what a man is is fast bound on him if he continues in it. You often find that, that men continue in a course of self-will; they are warned and pleaded with, but they become hardened in it, and God lets it go on; in fact, it becomes judicial. Of course, Pharaoh is the outstanding illustration of the judgment of God; he is the prince of this world, raised up for this very purpose; that God, as it says here, might show His power in him. But he hardened his heart first, you see. "Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice", Pharaoh had said; he was stubborn at the outset (@Exodus 5: 2).
Ques. Is "raised up" there raised up to the throne?
J.T. Well, raised up into this prominent position -- this kind of a man.
J.R.S. In this chapter, verse 13, God speaks of Himself as "the God of the Hebrews". Is this involved in our position and place with God at all?
J.T. He is said to be the God of the Hebrews earlier (@Exodus 5: 3 and @Exodus 7: 16); He takes the place of being their God. I think it is to bring out how God owns His people, however man regards them. He is their God; it says in Hebrews that He is not ashamed to be their God. And He goes further in saying to Pharaoh: "Dost thou still exalt thyself against my people" -- God stands out for His people. "If God be for us, who against us?" @Romans 8: 31.
J.W. Nobody -- unless one's self?
{418}
J.T. Quite.
-.M. Pharaoh thus stands out as a wholesome warning to those who seek to resist or oppose God.
J.T. Yes, that is what he represents. "Who hath hardened himself against him, and had peace?" @Job 9: 4. He stands out prominently for that purpose. God overcame, and not only that, but Moses overcame him. What you see here is the progress of the testimony -- how Moses increased in power, and how the plagues became more effective. So that the man Moses became very great in the eyes of the Egyptians as well as in the eyes of the people of God, and he stands out in speaking to Pharaoh in the end of chapter 10. Moses says to Pharaoh, "Thou hast spoken rightly: I will see thy face again no more!" He had the last word; God had given him that position, all working up to the dignity in which the people of God go out of the world. They are already victors before they leave. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world", @1 John 4: 4. We are not running away from it. One is speaking particularly for young people, that they might see the divine intent, that christianity is already a victorious thing; it was that before I ever heard of it, and it will continue to be victorious, so that we may come into it with confidence.
J.W. It is encouraging because it shows the awful power that the Lord has overcome.
H.B. You spoke last night about Moses becoming 'habituated to divine support'. I suppose that is what you see in Moses?
J.T. Yes; you can see how as he went on he conformed with the divine thought, that he was made a god to Pharaoh. God overcomes when He is in judgment, and so here He overcomes. I think it is an immense thing to see that God is inviting people to believe in Christ. It is a winning order of things; it is victorious. "This is the victory that overcometh
{419}
the world, even our faith". The victory is already won.
W.H. It is a vast realm of blessing that we are brought into.
J.T. Quite.
Rem. Moses "endured, as seeing him who is invisible", @Hebrews 11: 27.
J.T. Quite. Then there is the other side -- one of distinction and power and God shows what He thinks about it. He says, "I will put a separation between my people and thy people", @Exodus 8: 23. That word 'separation', as you will see from the note, is literally 'deliverance' or 'redemption'; it is what God thinks of us. And later it says, "But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast; that ye may know that Jehovah distinguisheth between the Egyptians and Israel. And all these thy bondmen shall come down unto me, and bow down to me, saying, Go out, thou, and all the people that follow thee; and after that I will go out", @Exodus 11: 7, 8. That is what Moses said to him, and it says, "he went out from Pharaoh in a glowing anger". He was not afraid of Pharaoh now, he was superior; God had made him that.
W.H.M. Do you think that the consciousness of that should be in our hearts? The superiority of everything belongs to the christian.
A.A. "Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good?" @1 Peter 3: 13. Even a dog will not move its tongue!
J.T. Quite. And this is all in the presence of the Egyptians; it is not what we are privately in the house of God, but what we are publicly bringing to light the honour that God puts upon His people. So no one need fear coming out openly for Christ, taking his place among the military of God, with those going out of Egypt with a high hand.
{420}
Ques. The idea of tomorrow is brought in in connection with each of these plagues which concern life. There is the morning and tomorrow. Does that mean there is a day of warning?
J.T. I suppose so. God gives people opportunity for repentance. What He does tomorrow is done with great deliberation, is it not?
Ques. Does all this set out what is embodied in the apostle's prayer, "the surpassing greatness of his power towards us", @Ephesians 1: 19?
J.T. Just so. And then what He does tomorrow is really from the gospel standpoint -- His judgment. 'Today' is grace, so that there is a mingling of grace. It is a reign of grace. If God gives a day, it is a day of grace; what will happen tomorrow is judgment.
Rem. Moses seems to have got bolder as the plagues were drawing to an end.
J.T. Well, I was thinking that; how he waxes bold even in the presence of Pharaoh. He says, "I will see thy face again no more" and in the next chapter, "he went out from Pharaoh in a glowing anger".
Rem. There seems to be a certain discrepancy between chapters 10 and 11 in that respect. It is because chapters 10 and 11 happen simultaneously. It seems that Pharaoh did see his face again.
J.T. That is not the point; when it happens is not the point.
Ques. Speaking of these plagues as signs for us, I suppose that the sense of the victory should increase as we go on?
J.T. You see how, as the plagues became more effective, Moses became bolder correspondingly.
Ques. Elisha prays, "Open his eyes that he may see" and the young man saw the horses and chariots of fire about Elisha (@2 Kings 6: 17). I suppose as Moses went on he understood the power of God more and more each day?
{421}
J.T. I am sure he did. David said, "The chariots of God are twenty thousand, thousands upon thousands; the Lord is among them", @Psalm 68: 17. It is a question of seeing what there is on our side. We need not fear.
Ques. "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith". Would not that increase with us (@1 John 5: 4)?
J.T. Well, it is already there. The point is that "this is the victory which has gotten the victory"; that is the way it should read. The thing is already established. Christianity is a victorious thing, as you come into it. "Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?" (@1 John 5: 5).
Rem. Yes, but it is not everyone who has come to know Him in that way.
J.T. No, quite; but it is an immense thing to come into -- a thing that is already victorious. You are to get personal victories. I have to get victory personally, so, "Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?" One has to come to that.
Rem. Like the man in @John 9 who was blind; he was led on step by step until he got into the full light.
Ques. Do you get the same thing in the Acts in Peter and John? The people, it says, saw the boldness of Peter and John.
J.T. Quite. It shines beautifully in Stephen; although he was murdered, he was victorious. The fact that we are victorious does not mean that we do not suffer; we may even be put to death. Victory is in that, not lying down but maintaining the dispensation. That must go on.
Rem. Stephen went out victorious.
J.T. That is what I was thinking.
Ques. Is it moral rather than material?
J.T. Exactly.
{422}
Ques. Would this be like the working out of the gospel? It says, "It is the power of God unto salvation", @Romans 1: 16.
J.T. Yes, to every one that believeth.
Ques. You said that these things were not done privately. Is that an important point in connection with the establishing of things -- a testimony?
J.T. I think it is. The idea of confession is what is open, is it not?
Rem. Yes; I was thinking how, in relation to the Lord Himself, everything was done publicly; He was condemned in open court. And in the establishing of things in relation to the apostles testimony, there is a public side to it.
J.T. Quite; so that there was the superscription in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, so that the whole world knew. Fellowship, I suppose, is public. In Corinthians it is a question of the character of the thing -- *of* the Son of God: The fellowship *of* God's Son, that is the dignity of it. But then, it is the fellowship of His death; that is public. There could not have been anything more public than the death of Christ; it was outside the gate. He carried His cross, and the superscription was in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, so that the whole world could read. And so the fellowship of the death of Christ. "As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come", @1 Corinthians 11: 26. That is the public side. Then there is the fellowship of the Spirit. There are two private sides to fellowship: the dignity side -- the fellowship of God's Son, and then there is the fellowship of the Spirit. But then there is the fellowship of His death, which is public. In John's gospel it is with the Father and the Son and with one another.
Rem. I thought that in relation to the public side that perhaps as Moses here increases in power and
{423}
confidence, so, as we are in any measure familiar with it, power and confidence in God is increased.
J.T. I am sure you realise that. As you go on in the truth your confidence in God increases, so that you wax bold.
Rem. How bold the apostle was in the presence of Agrippa! "This thing was not done in a corner", @Acts 26: 26.
J.T. Quite; he seemed to be less confident in the presence of the emperor. He said, "At my first defence no man stood with me, but all deserted me", @2 Timothy 4: 16. But he did not give way: "The Lord stood with me", and "I was delivered out of the lion's mouth".
Rem. He said, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course".
Rem. I suppose we all should understand the truth of this.
J.T. Well, I think so. Take a young sister or brother confessing the Lord in the office -- because that is the principle of all this; it is open confession -- confession with the mouth; though you may have hesitated, finally you do it, and presently you find you are a soldier. God gives you power when you need it. Then you increase in power -- the next time you have more confidence.
Rem. I was thinking you get confidence that you could not get without the confession.
J.T. You do. Many hesitate about taking certain steps; take coming into fellowship, they think there is so much needed.
Ques. Is it not the knowledge that the Lord is near that gives one confidence?
J.T. Just so.
Ques. And would the pillar of fire standing between the people and the enemy later on be confirmation of it?
{424}
J.T. Very, very fine. The pillar going round behind, that is very fine; showing what God is to us.
Rem. I was thinking of @Psalm 27, "The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?"
J.T. So that in chapter 15 here the song is the outcome of what is experienced. You begin by confessing the Lord humbly, and presently you find yourself singing this song: "Jehovah is a man of war".
Pharaoh says, "The wilderness has hemmed them in", as a good general would think, but he did not know that the wilderness was no barrier to them. It might be a barrier to an unconverted person, but it is no barrier to a child of God. The child of God does not want the world; the wilderness is his place. Someone has pointed out that Pharaoh made a speech to himself, saying *he* would do so many things. In chapter 15: 9 you have the enemy's speech "I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my soul shall be sated upon them; I will unsheathe my sword, my hand shall dispossess them". That is what he said, that was his speech; no doubt he made a sort of proclamation to his army, as great generals often do. But what is said of God? "Thou didst blow with thy breath, the sea covered them; they sank as lead in the mighty waters". Then, "Who is like unto thee. Jehovah?" That is what the believer says. God did not make a speech in that way, but the sea covered them; at one stroke He buried them.
Rem. They speak of what *the Lord* has done; the enemy says, "*I* will".
Ques. Would you say that the culminating point of these exercises is that the people are so moved in their affections that they cannot remain in Egypt?
J.T. Well, I think so; God has brought them up to this. They have profited by the signs, plagues to
{425}
the Egyptians but signs to the people, to the christian; they are light to you and you are formed according to them. You begin this morning and go through the series.
Ques. When are we clear of Egypt?
J.T. When are we or when am I? Which? Well, I think if we pursue now into chapter 12 we shall see that they saw the enemy dead on the sea-shore, and were able to sing. But you have to remember that this song has to be maintained. One might seem to be clear and yet begin to remember what he has left and hunger after it.
Rem. They went back in their hearts after they had crossed the Red Sea.
Rem. I was thinking, too, if affection for Christ wanes we are in danger.
J.T. Yes. Now, what may be noted in chapter 12 is the word 'assembly'. In the New Translation you will see it in verses 3 and 6. In verse 3 it reads, "Speak unto all the assembly of Israel", and in verse 6, "Ye shall keep it until the fourteenth day of this month; and the whole congregation of the *assembly* of Israel shall kill it". That is to say, you have two words: the word 'assembly', which is explained in the footnote as a corporate whole in which there is responsibility. The word 'congregation', which is said to mean that the whole is involved, only in its individual members. So that what we see here is that God has led His people up to the idea of a corporate whole; the young believer now begins to take his place in relation to the whole as responsible. There is the responsible whole, and then that I am a unit in it, but with my individual responsibility. That is what the word 'congregation' implies.
Ques. Very interesting. When do we reach this point practically?
{426}
J.T. Well, I think when the young believer puts out his hand to break bread he commits himself. When he is baptised another does it; that is not exactly his responsibility, it is in a way, but it is purely individual and another does it for him. Baptism brings him on to the ground of privilege, and it is for him to take up his privilege. But when he puts out his hand to break bread he is committing himself to a unity as part of it; and what goes with that is the acceptance of corporate responsibility. That is the idea of the assembly. However few or many there may be in a city like this they take up the idea of corporate responsibility; not every member of the assembly, every member may not be in it; but the thing is accepted, and that is what I think is conveyed in the word 'assembly'.
Ques. Does that include what you have spoken of as the public side, as publicly taking place in the breaking of bread?
J.T. Yes; they are known as in that body. "The assembly of God" for instance "which is in Corinth", @1 Corinthians 1: 2.
Ques. Can the privilege of the corporate position be touched apart from putting your hand to the Supper?
J.T. I think not; that is where you commit yourself.
Ques. Spiritual development depends on yourself then?
J.T. Yes, quite; and that in referring to the saints you do not speak of 'they' and 'theirs', but of 'us' and 'ours'. As soon as a christian begins to wane and become worldly you find he begins to speak of the Lord's people in the third person: what *they* do; whereas when he is bright and happy in his soul, when he has committed himself to God and to His people, he says 'we' and 'ours'.
{427}
Rem. He considers it a privilege to be associated with the Lord's people.
J.T. He does, and he accepts the responsibility of all that attaches to him.
Ques. There is no failure in the assembly?
J.T. No, as viewed abstractly; but from this point of view, the assembly of God in Corinth, I think there is. If you view the assembly as in Ephesians, then you are viewing it abstractly, and you may say there is no failure; but as regards its public position, as composed of men and women, there is.
Rem. I meant as to the counterpart of Christ.
J.T. Yes, viewed in the abstract we are the body of Christ, but we have to view it in its actual state down here, that is how Corinthians takes account of it; we know well enough what happened there.
Rem. There are the two sides, both equally true.
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Is @1 Corinthians 10 connected with the "congregation of the assembly"?
J.T. Well, the idea of corporate responsibility enters into both chapters. "We, being many, are one loaf, one body". I belong to that, and that is to govern me in my public relations, whatever they may be -- my house, my business, so that I never lose sight of my corporate responsibility, and that I involve my brethren in whatever I do.
Rem. If we speak of the saints in the third person we lose the blessedness of our own position.
J.T. Of course we do. We eliminate ourselves. You find in the epistle to the Hebrews the writer stresses that: "We have such a one high priest", and "Let us approach with a true heart", and so on.
Rem. In that way we come in for all the blessings.
J.T. Yes, quite. It is a serious thing to eliminate yourself. Why not commit myself to this people? God says, "My people". The God of the Hebrews;
{428}
He is the God of these despised people, and I do not want to cut myself off from them.
Rem. This is now the beginning of their history.
J.T. This is the beginning of public history, in which we are owned of God, on the ground of redemption, as the assembly. He had spoken of them as His *people*, but now they are the assembly. It is well to note these words here.
Ques. When we say 'we' I suppose we mean the whole people of God.
J.T. O, surely.
Ques. Should not we have compassion on others who have never really apprehended the truth of the assembly, and seek to help them -- even amongst ourselves? It would be a great thing to help others by being in the thing oneself.
J.T. Quite. You see the grand position they were placed in here: the assembly of Israel, and then the congregation as embodying all those members; so that every one is responsible, he is responsible individually and responsible corporately. These are immense positions in this chapter.
Rem. This is the light in which God views His people, and they are required by Him in this way.
J.T. Exactly; He will have an assembly.
Ques. You spoke of a young person seeking fellowship; what would you look for?
J.T. Well, I would look for love for Christ.
Ques. Affections touched by the passover lamb?
J.T. Yes, that is the idea here, that there is a tenderness. All these signs were intended to affect them, so that they would feel things. And now they have this lamb, as Moses directs, seized out of the flock and kept four days in each house. Am I affected by that creature in the house? That is to say, Has Christ come into my view so as to affect me? And then that He should be killed; by wicked hands, it says, crucified and slain. Does that affect
{429}
me? I think that every applicant for fellowship ought, in some little way, to be touched by this -- by Christ.
Rem. Anyone who has that love for Christ would be an asset in any company -- the very youngest brother or sister.
J.T. The point is to bring in wealth; that is kept in view from chapter 15 of Genesis to this point. We are to come out with substance. If one has not love for Christ he has nothing. Wisdom says she causes those that love her to inherit substance (@Proverbs 8).
Rem. On a previous occasion I think you referred to the Spirit in connection with one seeking fellowship. I was wondering if that came in here.
J.T. Well, I should say, love for Christ; there are many other things: whether forgiveness is known, whether the soul is clear of the consequences of sin through the death of Christ. If the Deliverer is known He is loved. The Deliverer becomes the Husband; so that coming into fellowship is like taking one's place as the wife. It is the bond of the covenant. @Romans 7 is the idea: that we should be to another, "even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God".
Rem. The expression "Your lamb", in verse 5, is a remarkable one.
J.T. Yes. "Your lamb shall be without blemish".
Rem. That would lead one to call things one's own.
J.T. Quite: "*Your* lamb". Very nice that, very fine; very touching for a young christian, that Christ is his.
Rem. So that the apostle in the New Testament spoke of "us" and "we".
J.T. Then in Canticles we see how love develops; the beloved can give an account of Him.
Rem. You have spoken on more than one occasion of @Romans 7; sometimes we despise that chapter,
{430}
but the first part that you mention brings in a very sweet thought.
J.T. Yes, I think it does; and in the end you reach the Deliverer, so that the Deliverer becomes the Husband. And I think that in taking your place in fellowship you will hold yourself for Christ; that is the idea of the assembly -- to be to another -- you are to the Lord. To sit down at the Lord's supper is to hold yourself for Christ, but in relation to all the others.
Rem. There is nothing so touches the heart as the sense of relationship.
Ques. Do you connect the four days that the lamb was to be in the house with the Lord's public ministry?
J.T. Yes, I think that is what it means. You see how those who stood by the cross of Jesus were affected. They followed Him from Galilee; from the time of the baptism of John until He was received up. It was from that place and for that time.
Rem. I thought in connection with "Your lamb" that the contemplation of the Lord in that way in the gospels, and seeing how it was so beautifully expressed in Him, would affect our souls.
J.T. They followed Him from Galilee; that is where the ministry began. I think the four days is more a question of time. Four is adequate witness; two might have done. Speaking of it from His own side, He said, "and the third day I am perfected"; that is to say, His ministry only took two days from that point, an adequate witness (@Luke 13: 32, 33). Four days goes beyond that; it is a full period of time given to those who love Him.
Ques. In connection with what you have said as to those taking up the breaking of bread, in some cases where there is real affection for the Lord there seems to be a reluctance to move on account of the
{431}
fear of breaking down on the line of responsibility. How would you help that?
J.T. Well, that is just what we are saying. God furnishes the income as you need it. That is to say, if God has taken charge of the expedition He has the purse; and you do not need to buy a ticket until you get to the railway station. And so it is, as we have to meet responsibility. God furnishes the means according to the need. The difficulty with many lies in their slowness to recognise this. When they come to the point they find that God has enough there to meet the need. Do not you find that?
Rem. Yes; I think it is important because there is sometimes a definite reluctance, not apparently from anything that is wrong but from this morbid fear of not being supported and breaking down. I think perhaps what you said earlier as to increased confidence in God, as seeing the way He can guide, helps from day to day.
J.T. The manna came down every day; that is the principle.
Rem. "Our sufficiency is of God", @2 Corinthians 3: 5.
J.T. Yes. Now to finish our subject; in the paragraph from verses 21 - 28 we have Moses presentation of the message. I thought we might notice the manner of the presentation of the message from God because it is really a word for those who may present the truth to souls. "And Moses called all the elders", that is to say, he acts on the word 'assembly'; the elders refer to that, to corporate responsibility. Moses presents the truth, so that it says in the end of verse 27, "And the people bowed their heads and worshipped. And the children of Israel went away, and did as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron; so did they". That is obedience and bowing of the heart to the grace of the ministry; they worship as in chapter 4. Then they went and did the thing that the Lord commanded Moses; blessing
{432}
lies in obedience. "So did they". There is nothing for us without obedience.
Ques. Do you mean that Moses presented this testimony as being in the good of the assembly? Is that what made it effective?
J.T. Exactly.
Rem. So the effect of the signs is to bring about this state of soul.
J.T. Just so.
Ques. What relation has what we have been following to Matthew?
J.T. As we have seen, it leads up to the assembly and the mountains round about it. Matthew, of course, is an advance on this.
Rem. Obedience is a feature of the assembly.
J.T. It is indeed.
Ques. What is the force of *seizing* a lamb?
J.T. I suppose it is securing it. It was not any lamb. In seizing the lamb we have to remember that it was to be a yearling male, so that there should be a complete type of Christ. You are to make sure of getting Him.
{433}
DIVINE MANIFESTATIONS
@Genesis 17: 22; @Genesis 18: 1 - 10
J.T. These divine appearings, given to faith in Genesis and later, are of special importance to us as in the period of faith, the means of these divine manifestations being now in the Spirit. They are not now angelic as of old; to us they are spiritual, not exactly miraculous, as in these cases, but nevertheless they are real, and are intended to make us spiritual and to impress us with what is divine. They would make us substantial in our testimony, that is to say, spiritual as to the element of obedience; so that these manifestations, or appearings, or impressions, should be ensured to us. It says here, that "he left off talking with him; and God went up from Abraham" (verse 22). Then what follows in the chapter beings out Abraham's implicit obedience in carrying out what was said to him by God, in regard to circumcision, in the very letter of it, not only as to himself, but as to Ishmael and all the men of his house. Now in that household, typically, the flesh was wholly disallowed, and room was made for the Spirit. Circumcision is not in the letter now, but in the Spirit.
H.E.S. Do we get in Genesis the great thoughts of God? It has been said that the first thoughts of God are the greatest.
J.T. Yes. So we come down to Jacob; that is a lower level. There are two distinct levels in Scripture: the lower as seen in the Corinthian epistles; the upper, in Ephesians. God begins on the upper level. He begins with Abraham and Enoch, types of the church; and thus Enoch, Abraham and Isaac typify the full thought as to the heavenly altitude; then in Jacob the ways of God are worked out on earth and the house of God is connected with Jacob.
{434}
Ques. By two levels, do you mean earthly and heavenly?
J.T. Yes, and both levels apply to us. There is what is here in the way of testimony; divine order is to be seen in a public way; so that we have a great deal in Corinthians in the way of instructions. Certain provisions were given before the apostle left them; he wrote others, and prayed that they might keep them; then he would give them further directions when he should come back. There are three revelations spoken of. That is the prominent feature in Corinth, and therefore all that relates to what God has here before men in a public way; that belongs to the side of things which we were calling 'lower', not in the sense of coming down to man's level, but in contrast to the 'upper' level, which has more to do with the work of God universally. The lower level is local; it is in localities we look for public order. In the universal aspect, there is one body, one hope, one calling, and all culminates for God, as in @Ephesians 4. We begin with the local company, but where we end is a question of spiritual power. Eternity, really, is the objective; the "calling on high of God in Christ Jesus", @Philippians 3: 14.
H.E.S. I suppose what would be accomplished on the Ephesian level would be "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages"?
J.T. I think that is what we should have before us. It seems that God begins on that level in the types. He begins with the idea of the church before sin came in, to convey His thought. So that a deep sleep falls upon Adam, and then Eve is formed out of Him. God does not like it if we lower that; we should be slighting His thoughts. He begins at the top, and indicates that that is His best.
H.E.S. Would you get the earthly and heavenly in Luke and John? In Luke He shows them His
{435}
hands and feet, but in John His hands and *side*.
J.T. Yes, quite. Luke brings in the lower level, but greatly emphasises the influence of heaven over it. He begins with a great dignitary -- Gabriel -- and then another angel standing by the shepherds, and then a multitude of the heavenly host. He maintains the order of God here.
H.E.S. Had you in mind that the knowledge of these manifestations is dependent on our state?
J.T. I thought so, from the bringing in of circumcision at that point in @Genesis 17; so that Abraham might have part with Him. He recognises God as moving on, and if we are to have part in this, we must disallow the flesh. Colossians would show that that is a very effective circumcision, "in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ" (chapter 2: 11); Abraham, too, goes in for the thing fully. God is not going on with the flesh; He has dealt with it fully in the death of Christ.
Now it says in verse 22, "God went up from Abraham" -- that is to be noted. The Lord says that if we love Him we shall keep His commandments, and if we do that He says He will "manifest" Himself to us (@John 14: 21). As God went up, Abraham is left to himself; the next verses show what he did; he went in for circumcision.
Ques. Do you think that if we were obedient to one manifestation we should get others?
J.T. That is what I think we see here. God will not go on with routine; it is a question of loving God and of what springs from that. Look at the life in the spring of the year -- what abundance and variety there is! God does not want regulations and that kind of thing; He desires order, but He delights in variety of life and spontaneity. So that if God went up, that is a movement which I believe the Holy Spirit would dwell on. It looks as if God is not going
{436}
on just yet; at the close of the next chapter it says He went away, which means He was going somewhere else; but here it says He went up -- He broke off, as it were.
H.E.S. Is that the character of the present moment?
J.T. Yes, as in the beginning of the Acts: "he was taken up, they beholding him". The Acts brings in movements. The angels say "as ye have seen him" -- they had seen Him going into heaven.
Ques. Would you say that every fresh manifestation would involve a fresh unfolding of God's mind and will?
J.T. I think so. God does not repeat Himself; there is variety in His movements. It seems that He loves to see what *we* will do.
Ques. Is it a test for obedience?
J.T. I think it is. When He goes up, you feel there is a distance. God is in heaven, and I am on earth. Now what am I going to do?
H.E.S. It has been said that dependence and obedience are the marks of the heavenly life. Would He carry our desires and interests in the same direction?
J.T. Well, exactly; as loving Him you keep His commandments, and you get another manifestation, so that there is continual freshness in the saints here through these appearings. Hence the next appearing to Abraham was very different from the previous one. In chapter 17 the first one had reference to circumcision; He did not say much, but He changed their names; that is to say, it was a question of ennoblement. If our names are changed, God gives us to understand that we are dignified. Sarah's name was changed; there was to be fruitfulness, multitudes of nations; but the flesh must be repudiated, and God enters into a covenant on that basis. It was a most interesting discussion that Abraham had with the
{437}
Lord, but the Lord broke it off. It does not say it was finished.
Rem. Abraham got enlightenment; he thought that Ishmael might live before God.
J.T. Yes, it was a time of adjustment, and enlightenment, and an ennobling time, so as to make them fit for His presence.
H.E.S. It seems that this goes with @John 14. The light of the Lord going away, and then the question of obedience involving whether we shall see Him again.
J.T. Yes, that is it. The Holy Spirit comes in and the Lord says, "Ye believe on God, believe also on me". The mind is directed to Christ and the realm of faith; the manifestations are in connection with that. After chapter 15, they are connected with a divine Person here; so that the meaning of these manifestations is greater then, and there is more confidence. In Genesis, He broke off speaking with Abraham; the next time it is quite different, because then, Abraham took the initiative, showing that he was ennobled. God would not allow a man who was not ennobled by Him, to do this.
Ques. Will you give us a little help on circumcision?
J.T. Well, I think that is Colossians. It is mentioned in Romans, and Philippians brings it in characteristically -- "*we* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh" (@Philippians 3: 3) -- you do not retain any of it; there might be danger of retaining some. Abraham in the presence of the covenant says, "Oh that Ishmael might live before thee!" Ishmael had a certain status; he was his son. The Galatians were on this line.
Rem. Is it because of his exercises that Abraham was so much at home in the presence of divine Persons?
{438}
J.T. Yes; I think the danger with us is in half measures. Abraham was on Ephesian ground. The second visit showed the thing had been taken out of the way; he carried the thing as far as those born in his house; there were no half measures with him.
Ques. You reach Ephesian ground by way of Colossians?
J.T. No doubt. You would be struck with the thoroughness of the thing. In Philippians the concision refers to persons who do not go all the way; they retain certain things. But in Colossians, they are all taken away. As with the cities of refuge it is said "thou shalt prepare thee a way" (@Deuteronomy 19: 3) -- the way should not be blocked.
Ques. Do these manifestations involve spiritual maturity?
J.T. We do not make much of age. There is a link between the old and the young, as between Abraham and Isaac.
E.R. I thought in that connection there was only eleven days journey into the land. The point is whether we are prepared to go the Lord's way. The Lord would carry us through if we were prepared to let Him have His way.
J.T. I am sure that we should not leave out that it involves suffering. But I think the Lord coming in the second time, in company, is to show that He can take His company into such a scene as that. Abraham was great enough for it. It is not God coming in to communicate, it is Abraham that makes the suggestion.
E.R. Is it not more communion than communications?
J.T. It is interesting that Abraham did not have to make any arrangements.
Ques. Is not the secret that he had circumcised his whole house?
J.T. Yes; we sometimes feel that we have reservations.
{439}
Rem. I suppose Lot could not maintain these visitations?
J.T. That is a good suggestion. The Lord did not go in to him; the angels went in. Lot had unleavened bread; he had something to eat, but it was a terrible condition of things. Abraham was outside of all that.
Ques. Would that suggest christians in associations here?
J.T. I suppose if the Lord essayed to go into some places of worship. He would not be allowed at all. These two angels were mobbed; they would not get a better reception now in the religious world. But the altitude Abraham is on is outside all that. He is a heavenly man. Then what you see in this incident is a development. It is not divine authority, but mutuality; "they said, So do as thou hast said" (chapter 18: 5).
Ques. Do you think it would show Abraham had a sense of what was due to such Persons?
J.T. I think so. You see his position, sitting in the tent door; not asleep in meetings in the afternoon from spiritual lethargy, but Abraham was awake, sitting in the tent door, and he saw Them, he would not like to miss that, which you might do by being asleep in the afternoon.
Rem. They seem to be regular occurrences.
J.T. Yes, exactly. The incubus of the flesh was not there. He was awake, vigilant; "he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, three men standing near him". It is a beautiful scene -- there is such a suddenness about it!
H.E.S. Lifting up his eyes reminds one of Rebecca, and likewise Isaac.
J.T. I think it is spiritual vigilance. Some people say, 'Well, I do not see it', it may be an important issue, but they do not see it. They hide behind the
{440}
fact; they make their blindness a virtue. But Abraham *saw*.
Ques. In the case of Isaac and Rebecca, was it mutual? Here it is Abraham's tent -- his side. In Laodicea they needed to see; they had to get to the Lord to get eye-salve.
J.T. Yes, I think that is important. They overlooked the fact that they were just ignoring their blindness.
Ques. Is this the individual or the company?
J.T. The idea is that the flesh has been dealt with effectively, and now he is not hampered with it. The incubus is very wearing down and tends to laziness and other things. It was in the "heat of the day" when he might have been sleeping. The thing for us is to have our eyes open. Christianity is not a system of ethics; it is that in which divine Persons have their constant part.
Rem. In @Acts 1, it says the Lord presented Himself living.
J.T. That is it, and then you get "Being assembled with them". "The Word became flesh" and "we have contemplated his glory". The apostles saw. There is a great deal to be seen even in these days.
Ques. What is the character of the manifestations now?
J.T. Well, I think they are spiritual. They come in in John when the Comforter is spoken of. They would all lie in the Spirit. The Lord loves to come into the company, be they many or few; to five hundred brethren at once, or to the twelve. But I think the Lord would have the greatest pleasure in the five hundred. I think that must have been very delightful in His eyes. You do not get that in the gospels, but it shows the result of the Lord's work. The apostle says "some also have fallen asleep", but most remained to that day. He seemed to value the thought of five hundred impressed with one thing at
{441}
the same time. The thing was a reality to them. How ridiculous it would appear to modernity; it would appear to them as "idle tales".
Ques. As to manifestations -- is it what the Spirit says to the churches?
J.T. Well, I think it comes in more in the way of ministry, in what He says to us. Then the Lord spoke to Paul, but He also appeared to him. In @Acts 26, Paul speaks of the Lord appearing to him so that he might be a witness and a minister of what he had seen, and "of those things in the which I will appear unto thee". I think there is not only what is said, but spiritual impressions are given. It is most important to get the impression, not only of what the Spirit says through ministry in actual words, but the impressions you get in the company of the saints. The impressions of divine Persons form your whole being.
Rem. So that here provision is made to hold Them; it is for God's pleasure.
J.T. Yes, how wonderful it is that God, in company, should wait while Abraham prepares. But we must not bring in other things to break the silence. "So do as thou hast said" is for the divine pleasure. Abraham brings in his household; he does the thing well. Think of the Upholder of the universe waiting on Abraham and his household.
Ques. What is the thought in the approach of three men?
J.T. I think it is heaven coming in so that we might understand it. God would educate us for heaven; it is a heavenly scene, so that we might become familiar with the manner of heaven. In the transfiguration you have two men, Moses and Elias, talking with Him. How simple it is! but Peter and the others were not equal to it, though they were afterwards.
{442}
Rem. "We will come to him and make our abode with him", @John 14: 23.
J.T. That is the idea. I think, too, that God loves our initiative; He takes the initiative in manifesting Himself, and all will be eternally on the line of divine initiative, not ours. But God loves to bring us in; it is the reflection of His glory for which He has prepared us. "Beholding your order" in @Colossians 2: 5. God takes us up on that ground. Moses and Elias had the initiative; they appeared; they were talking with Jesus. So here divine Persons accepted Abraham's proposal, he hastened to do the thing and did it well. Then Abraham stood before them, and They ate. It is a fine scene.
Ques. Was it not the effect of the Lord drawing near that encouraged Abraham?
J.T. I think the divine presence gives liberty; the nearer you get to the Lord, the more you are conscious of that.
Ques. Would you say a person like this would expect a visitation?
J.T. It rather looks as if he expected it. The last verse of chapter 18 suggests the finish. In chapter 17: 22, he left off.
H.E.S. What do the different foods presented by Abraham set forth?
J.T. I suppose it would be the meat-offering, not so much sacrifice; and the fatted calf would suggest the quality of it. Three would be witness; it is the quality of the provision that is suggested. The calf is "tender and good" -- and the milk is "thick and sweet", meaning, I suppose, the milk with all its richness. Thick milk is of great value as food; and sweet milk is palatable.
H.E.S. Would it be the "food of the offering" -- food for God?
J.T. There was no diminution in the type from the morning till the evening; he was as fresh in the
{443}
evening as in the morning. God had something from him. Here in the heat of the day, everything was right, the things were good, and the attendance was good; everything was desirable. And then what comes out is that Abraham has his part. In verse 9, They say to him, "where is Sarah thy wife?" Now God is going to speak. This seems to be a repetition, but it is brought in in a new setting, a new view. God is satisfied with us as coming in; then you would have a fresh view of Christ. He asks for Sarah. She had a part in the preparation of the meal. Abraham sat in the tent. Sarah was in her proper place; she was not out visiting. God says, I will certainly return unto thee. Christ will be brought in definitely. Sarah is the subjective side. The power contemplated is to be brought in livingly, in a subjective way by the power of God; and so when the time came, God visited her as He had said.
Ques. Is the thought here, that you get a further view of Christ?
J.T. It refers here to "the time of life" -- I think it would be Christ brought forth out of this state of things. Where was Sarah? She had her place in that state of things as in the assembly, in what was comely. In Peter, Sarah is a model; she had her place in the house. In a spiritual sense she represents the maternal place. Now God would come in in life-giving power, so that Christ might be formed in us. In Galatians Jerusalem above is our mother. Here it is the power of life subjectively.
Rem. Not simply light, but the thing formed.
J.T. Yes, and in the given time. The apostle travails in birth "until" Christ be formed in them. Sarah had been dishonoured, but now she is honoured, as it says, "After these things", and at the appointed time, she bore Isaac.
Ques. Do you suggest that Christ would be brought in livingly among the saints?
{444}
J.T. Yes, I thought Galatians gives us the travail; whereas in Colossians it is "Christ in you". It is very fine; it is the power of God.
Ques. Is that why Ishmael had to go out?
J.T. We must make a complete break with the flesh. The practical test is obedience. If we come together in the light of chapter 17, which answers to Colossians, self-judgment and circumcision, we shall get a visitation. There will be subjection in the part we take in the meeting. Abraham is a model to show that God can accept all that we do. These are matters of great importance, if we are to come into the good of the assembly. You see how God moves on. Isaac is introduced; Sarah is dignified; and then Abraham looks toward Sodom (@Genesis 18: 16). Now they are moving on as it says now, "Abraham went with them". And then Jehovah says, "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do" -- he is brought into the light of public events. God thus helping us to see how things are in the world; for we should not be indifferent to what is going on. So Abraham intercedes; he is thinking of the righteous. When Isaac comes in, the judgment of the world is imminent. Sodom is destroyed.
Ques. Would coming together in affection for Christ and all saints, be suitable conditions?
J.T. Quite. Abraham had all saints in view; he began with fifty and he dropped down to ten; God stopped when Abraham stopped. This movement is not going up, but going away to destroy the world.
Rem. So that divine manifestations have a different setting; this is that you get the mind of God?
J.T. Yes, "he will shew you things to come".
H.H. Is it not interesting that after the Lord was risen, His coming to the disciples was on the line of manifestations; as it says in @John 21: 1, "on this wise shewed he himself"?
{445}
J.T. That is very interesting. I think it is on the principle that He is on the way to something. And so with the two going to Emmaus; He tests their affections. He "made as though he would go farther", @Luke 24: 28. Another thing in that connection is as it says in Mark, "He ... would have passed them by", @Mark 6: 48. It is very searching, showing that He may pass us by; He thus warns us. But in this scripture it is very beautiful. He *stops* with Abraham.
{446}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD
@Romans 14: 17, 18; @Colossians 1: 12 - 14
J.T. These verses in Romans appear in the midst of instructions relative to a weak brother, how he is to be received and regarded amongst the saints, so that the verses serve to bring the subject of the kingdom of God before us in its practical bearing. It is a very wide subject, and each occurrence of the term in the scripture has to be read in its own context in order to be understood. This chapter brings it in in a very practical way, and the Lord may help us to see how it bears on our relations with one another, and our care for one another. It is a question of the reception of a weak brother, the subject runs into the next chapter, and it fits in to our everyday circumstances. In verse 17 we read, "the kingdom of God is ... righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", and it is really the outcome from the practical side of the death of Christ; the death of Christ in grace and power and then in love; it is His kingdom. That is the idea of the kingdom added to the knowledge of God, as presented in the epistle. That is what I had in mind in suggesting this scripture, and I hope that the Lord will help us. But it is important to get the initial thought, that it is the kingdom, added to the knowledge of God as revealed in the epistle. The idea of a kingdom was not new. It had been among men in the days of Nimrod; indeed, the idea of it is set out in Adam, for he had dominion. It was a well-known idea among the Romans; their empire had some features of a kingdom, for it had about seven different forms of government, each having the idea of a kingdom and rule. So that it was a well-known thought, but it is to be understood now as relating to God, and God's Kingdom.
{447}
Ques. Does the thought of the kingdom of God occur at all in the Old Testament?
J.T. I think Exodus brings it out, set up in the wilderness. I suppose the acknowledgment of God in the song (@Exodus 15: 1 - 18) gave Him His place: it was God celebrated. You find a statute and an ordinance in that same chapter, and the promise of God was that He would not put on them the diseases of the Egyptians if they would keep His commandments and His statutes. He was a God who would deliver them: He had borne them on eagles wings and brought them to Himself. Then Moses was the king, that is mediatorially, for it is a mediatorial kingdom. He was king in Jeshurun later on.
Then in David's ministry we have the same principle. At Ziklag as he is about to become king, he makes his statute and ordinance. He ordained that the part of those who remained behind with the baggage should be the same as that of those who go into conflict. It is not only for those who fight, but for the whole unit; so that we are living and breathing the thing, we are living in it and under its protection it is "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". It is a continuous, permanent thing.
J.J. Is the point in the statute and ordinance made at Marah, that we learn the meaning of the death of Christ for ourselves?
J.T. The water was made sweet when the wood was cast in; the wood was shown to Moses, it was typically Christ in His love entering into death for us. You feel how applicable a statute and an ordinance are as you realise the power of God in deliverance, and the love of Christ in going into death to take the sting and the bitterness out of it.
Ques. Is the kingdom of God founded upon redemption both in Exodus and Romans?
{448}
J.T. Exactly. It is God known in redemption -- such a God as that! I think it helps us to keep in mind the idea of the kingdom, added to the knowledge of God in redemption, as expounded in the epistle.
Rem. So that in @Exodus 6 and @Exodus 15 it is seen to be founded on the work of redemption, which would suggest the place which God would have righteously and wholly with His people.
J.T. Quite; within the sway of the spiritual influence that bathes the whole realm.
Ques. What is the difference between a statute and an ordinance?
J.T. The difference cannot be very much, but I think the statute is a permanent thing, a fixed, abiding principle which is unalterable. The ordinance is a lesser thought, the principle is more varied according to conditions. We have judgments, statutes and ordinances spoken of in relation to the kingdom.
I think a statute is a fixed thing, spiritually. David's statute was a fixed, permanent thing, it was never modified, nor would one have it modified: in fact, any formal law or statute of God, those who love Him would not have otherwise. I think an ordinance may be more applicable locally in assemblies, but the idea of a statute is universal.
Romans fits in with Exodus. You get the material for the assembly beforehand, in Exodus; and then it is set up, so that I suppose Romans and Corinthians run together. We have in @Romans 12 the principle that we are one body in Christ.
J.J. What would you say about Abraham in connection with the thought of the kingdom? Both Abraham and David are brought into Romans. Is it connected with them in some way?
J.T. In the sense of righteousness, I think. Abraham was under commandment, but there was no king in Israel in Genesis though there was one in
{449}
Edom. I think the idea of the kingdom is founded on redemption, that is the knowledge of God: God known in redemption, and righteousness, and peace. You could not speak of these things exactly in Genesis; the idea in the kingdom is the people put together under one rule, a redeemed people under divine rule.
J.J. Why is Abraham brought into Romans?
J.T. Is it not on the principle that he is the father of all believers? Maybe you have some thought.
J.J. I was thinking of the covenant that God established with him, that his seed should be as the stars of heaven and as the sand of the sea-shore for multitude. I wondered if that brought in the sphere that you are speaking of in purpose?
J.T. That would be in purpose, of course, but there was no king in Israel up to a given point. Esau had his kingdom, but Jacob had to wait; he says, "I have waited for thy salvation", @Genesis 49: 18. That is the principle that preceded the kingdom, he was waiting.
Ques. Are you suggesting the public bearing of the kingdom as well as the other side?
J.T. I thought I would come to Colossians afterwards as the kingdom of the Son of His love, but the idea of the kingdom here is redemption. It cannot be founded on the principle of man in the flesh; that is the principle on which all the kingdoms of the world have been founded. Esau represents that feature; he is the man after the flesh, he cannot wait for such a kingdom as that, so he immediately proceeded with his dukes, as it says, and kings. It is stated that there was no king in Israel, but kings were in Edom before they were in Israel, for the reason that they did not have anything to wait for. As the Lord says, "Your time is always ready", @John 7: 6. Man in the flesh never has to wait: faith has to wait God's time, and if we wait God's time we get the best; we shall
{450}
be better off in the long run because Esau's kingdom did not last, whereas the Lord Jesus was really for the house of Jacob for ever. Jacob was right in waiting.
Judah is the royal tribe. In the disastrous chapter after Joseph is sold into Egypt. Judah disgraces himself, but the royal line goes on, nevertheless. In @Genesis 38 the royal line comes in in connection with the most humiliating circumstances, showing what God is, in bringing in royalty. Hence in the royal line in Matthew's record you have such persons as Rahab and Ruth. That is not on the principle of flesh; were it on the principle of flesh you would not have these women mentioned; it is on the principle of faith, so that it is all of God.
Ques. Do we see the first principle of the kingdom in Abraham, that is, righteousness?
J.T. Exactly; that is the kingdom as we have it here, in its practical form. This chapter is not the dominion side, but would test us in our relations with one another, so that Numbers presents the whole of what we have in @Romans 14, because it gives us God placed in the midst of the tribes, and they centre round Him at His word. Every tribe has its own place assigned it; and God is dwelling in the midst in the tabernacle of witness: each Israelite is placed. In Exodus it is more God known in redemption, known in deliverance out of Egypt, known in carrying them on eagles wings and bringing them to Himself. God is now living or dwelling in their midst, and each tribe has its own setting; each man in each tribe, each man in each father's house; everyone has his own assigned place, and all under the governing influence of God dwelling in their very midst. So it is not simply the kingdom of the heavens (that is Christ in heaven) but the kingdom of God; which is to know God here, actually dwelling amongst us. It becomes intensely practical as to how we regard
{451}
one another, how we receive one another, especially a weak brother.
Rem. So in chapter 15 God is presented as the God of endurance, the God of mercy and the God of hope; it is the way in which God is presented to the soul.
J.T. Very good.
Ques. Is that why the exhortation in Thessalonians is that we should walk worthy of the kingdom and glory of God who has called us?
J.T. Quite.
Ques. Is that what helps us practically in relation to the truth of Exodus? We come into the knowledge of God as having redeemed us, and then into the thought of the rights of God in redemption; so that in Numbers we are prepared for the rights of God and are subject to one another.
J.T. Not God afar off, but God dwelling in our midst. God and the Holy Spirit *dwelling*, it says in chapter 8, which really corresponds with Numbers, because Numbers, I think, contemplates the truth of Romans actually taking form in Corinthians; where those who are the beneficiaries of the gospel become the material for the tabernacle where God is known. That is what is contemplated in Corinthians; not a God afar off, but God in us, and near us; He is known to be in us and His gracious sway and influence is pervading all. That applies to us at all times, whether we are gathered together or otherwise.
I think a weak brother brings an opportunity for the expression of what God is. "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God" (@Romans 12: 1) -- that is how the exhortations begin in Romans, with the compassions of God. A weak brother should be the object of compassion; he becomes really an asset amongst us and not a liability.
Rem. We are not to wait until his difficulties are all solved before we seek him.
{452}
J.T. That is so, and you cannot expect him to answer all the questions you put to him; you have to consider from whence he comes, and under what teaching he has been. Everything has to be taken into account, so that he becomes like a patient in the house, an object for attention and affection and the display of the divine nature and compassions.
Ques. The idea is that we nurse such? Moses had to nurse the children of Israel.
J.T. If a man wishes to impose upon us legal observances such as the observance of days, that would be error and must not be tolerated for a moment, but if it be due to ignorance arising from his previous history, we have to be very careful so that we may not destroy him.
Ques. Is it not that the legal brother and the wilful brother do not get help, and the weak brother does get help?
J.T. That is the line of this chapter. Galatians teaches us how to regard those who are wilful in their insistence on legal observances. They cannot be tolerated for a moment; but the weak brother has to be nursed.
Rem. There is a very wholesome exhortation to both, the strong are not to belittle the weak, and the weak are not to judge the strong.
J.T. That is true. In chapter 15 you have the energetic side, the strong. "We that are strong" -- energetic. I think if you look at chapter 15 you will be impressed with the energy of it. It is a question of the strength that there is.
The kind of brother that is contemplated here is not a wilful man, shutting himself off deliberately from the means that God has obtained for his blessing and God's glory. It was said, "Gather the people together, and I will give them water", @Numbers 21: 16. If a brother refuses to be gathered he shuts himself out from the water. It is an opportunity for
{453}
God to give refreshment. Therefore we are enjoined not to forsake "the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some is", @Hebrews 10: 25. It would be the line of obstinacy and would soon lead to the forsaking altogether of all the meetings, and drifting back into apostasy.
Ques. I suppose if verse 17 were true it would result in verse 18, and we should help the weak brother?
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Do you think that the weak brother would test us as to whether we were strong enough to help him?
J.T. That is what appears in chapter 15. We are enjoined to bear the infirmities of the weak -- the infirmities, not the will, which are two distinct things. The Lord can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but He will never brook our wills; so that a wilful brother is not regarded as a weak brother but as a sinful brother. A weak brother has to be borne with, and the stronger one is, the more one should bear with a weak one.
There is all the power of the kingdom to help the weak one, in contrast to the kingdoms of men which in general do not specially provide for the weak. In this country a good deal is done for the poor and unemployed, but the question is whether that really means what is understood as kingdom rule in this world; is it not rather the socialist idea of taking from the rich to give to the poor? That is not the principle of the kingdom of God at all; it in no sense impoverishes one person to enrich another. There need be no poor if we rightly understand it. There is so much wealth that we can give to the poor. Deuteronomy enjoins us to look after a poor brother.
Ques. So that the presence of a weak brother should enrich the meeting?
{454}
J.T. I think that is how it works; it means exercise.
Ques. I wanted to ask what place meekness had in connection with the people of God. Moses was the meekest man in all the earth and he was acting for the king.
J.T. That is true. The same was said of the Lord; He was "meek and lowly in heart" in the kingdom gospel, Matthew. I suppose it is important to see the particular setting of Moses in Numbers; Numbers contemplates the kingdom in operation, not simply that God is ruling, but it is in actual operation amongst the saints and they are all set around the tabernacle. It was important that the king or mediator in the kingdom should be understood, so that God came down Himself to the door of the tabernacle; His glory appeared so that Moses should be vindicated. The Holy Spirit tells us that he was the meekest man in all the earth (@Numbers 12: 3). Moses does not assert it but the Holy Spirit tells us God honours him. He said He would speak to a prophet in a dream, but Moses would behold the form of Jehovah, and He would speak to him as a friend mouth to mouth. Moses represented the character of God; he was a type of Christ in that, and became a king in Jeshurun in the midst of an upright people. It really is a matter of uprightness initially, to be in the kingdom of God.
J.J. In @Psalm 89 it speaks of persons who are round about God, who is dwelling in the midst of the people. It is a very serious thing in one way.
J.T. Because God is there. It is a very blessed thing for the upright people in Jeshurun but a very serious thing for us, too. "Our God is a consuming fire", @Hebrews 12: 29.
Ques. Does it help us in the beginning of our soul history to recognise that God has given place to
{455}
Christ in the kingdom, and to acknowledge the rights of God in coming out in that character here?
J.T. It is what God is in Christ. It is a mediatorial kingdom; so that "grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 5: 21. It is all through grace. The Spirit has taken up a mediatorial position, and He is here in a divine and permanent way. It was not true of Christ because He went away; but the Holy Spirit is here definitely and permanently, and He fills the sphere. So from the point of view of Numbers, it is God here in Spirit. God actually here; and the saints set by divine ordering in their respective positions, and therefore it is a kingdom, that is, God near us and in our very midst, and God known in our ways publicly and towards one another.
Ques. Would you say that is subjection to the king?
J.T. Quite, and to such a king! The love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, and that love is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given to us. That is the idea, and that is to be seen in all our relations.
J.J. I wish you would say a little more about the thought of the Spirit being here mediatorially.
J.T. Well, I think that is quite evident. He is here as being sent down from heaven, another Comforter. As Christ came down, so *He* is sent down. He is here so as to make effective, in a subjective way, all that has come out in Christ; and that is what is alluded to in the kingdom in this chapter. It is what it is in practical power; it is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. It is in the Holy Spirit, the Holy Spirit is the power of it all.
J.J. I would like to be clear about the mediatorial position of the Spirit. I think if you would unfold it a little more it would be a help. We can understand
{456}
it in connection with the Lord personally, but it is a little more difficult in the Spirit.
J.T. I do not think it can be very much more difficult to understand if we understand the meaning of the word 'mediatorial'. A mediator is one through whom others can act, it is a person coming between two parties, and that is how the Holy Spirit is presented in the New Testament. That is, He has come to act for the Father and the Son: He does not speak of Himself, He is here as sent, and it is what He hears that He speaks; He expresses what is in heaven in the fullest possible way here upon earth. He is not limited by time, or space, or territory; He is wherever the saints are, He is universal.
Ques. I suppose that comes out more in John?
J.T. It is formally stated there. He is "another Comforter", sent by the Father and the Son, sent by them expressly to act for them here.
Rem. In @Romans 8 He is an intercessor.
J.T. He makes intercession for the saints with groanings that cannot be uttered. So that we have God here by the Spirit, but the mediatorial position is clearly set out in that it is the love of God in Christ Jesus, and that same love is shed abroad in our hearts by the Spirit, so that the three Persons are brought together. As foreshadowed in Numbers, there is the tabernacle of witness, the abode of God, and all the tribes set around it, and the Levites having to do with God and carrying all that blessed influence throughout the tribes.
Ques. What has the kingdom in view? One thought really that the Lord came in in that way to establish rule in the hearts of men in order to lead them to what He had in His own heart.
J.T. I suppose the kingdom makes way for the church. The realisation of the kingdom in Romans so fortifies us that we are free for the church. I thought we might see in Colossians how we are
{457}
translated into the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love, but Romans gives us Jeshurun, that is to say, an upright people. The book of Numbers begins with God speaking in the wilderness out of the tabernacle: He takes it that we are in adverse circumstances and says, 'I know it'. He spoke in the wilderness out of the tabernacle, but the emphasis is on "in the wilderness". It is as if God had said to us: 'I know exactly where you are and what you are going through, and I am going to speak to you in that relation' -- the very circumstances in which we are. Thus He makes Moses and Aaron heads of the tribes, and the people are to show their genealogy and pedigree; every christian has to show by practical ways that he is really a christian. God says as it were: 'I know exactly where you are and what you are going through, but I want you to be genuine, a sincere and upright people'. So that they are taken account of from twenty years old and upwards, really all that have the Spirit of God and make a confession of Christ, believing on Him in their hearts; these are the ones to whom God is speaking; and then He numbers them all and everything is known; six hundred thousand odd, and He knows every one in their family and tribal relations. Then He assigns each man his place and says, 'I will be right in the midst of you'. What a position we have, what company we have!
J.J. I was going to ask if that is why the Lord has such a large place in chapter 14; He is mentioned so many times. He is the One that operates in that sphere, is He not?
J.T. Quite. It is very precious for young people to see that God takes account of them, but He says 'I want you to be real; I do not want it to be profession or pretence', and that is the idea of the pedigree -- they were to prove their pedigrees. The apostle says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus
{458}
Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", @1 Corinthians 16: 22.
Anyone that throws a stumbling block in the way of his brother would not be an upright walker. I get the Holy Spirit by believing in the heart; God gives me the Spirit because of what is in my heart.
Ques. Would the consciousness of the love of God shed abroad in our hearts produce the joy of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Yes. God is seeking hearts. He wants an upright people and a living people, and He puts His love in their hearts by the Holy Spirit. It is promised that gladness would be our portion. You have it here, "joy in the Holy Spirit", for the love of God is in Christ Jesus. It is not simply authority, it involves His priesthood, and the love of God is in Christ Jesus towards us.
Ques. Do we have the principle of peace in @Romans 8? The Lord is ever interceding for us.
J.T. Exactly. We were speaking of how practical it is, and how the epistle to the Romans is to bring about an upright people, a people amongst whom God could dwell, and amongst whom, therefore, His kingdom is realised. There is every encouragement to step out, and as we step out we get the Lord's support and grace, and become representative of the kingdom. The kingdom of God is here for the protection and support of the weak. It is not for destruction like the kingdoms of men; it is for the support of the weak.
Ques. How do you understand the verse where it speaks of destroying not the work of God?
J.T. I think it has a bearing on what one is doing, it is put in that way. I do not think it means that the work of God can really be destroyed. Do I regard God in such a way that I should destroy His work in another? The kingdom would help us to view one another as so much valuable material. What a thing it is to have an upright people amongst whom
{459}
God dwells! All their movements are marked by righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.
Ques. Do you think those things are found practically amongst brethren?
J.T. I think so. I think that is the way things stand. The mediatorial system implies that we are all useful in a greater or lesser degree. The Lord acts through us and by us, and it is most practical, so that whether I am in my workshop or at home, or among the brethren, I express the kingdom of God: I am among a people where God is.
Ques. You act for the glory of God. Is that the meaning of verse 18?
J.T. That is the mediatorial thought.
J.J. I suppose the last verse of chapter 13 prepares for chapter 14. "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ ..."
J.T. It is really like putting on the kingdom, the mediatorial kingdom: I am clothed with that, with the Lord Jesus Christ. It is put on like clothing. A man has a commission in the army, he represents the king, he is really the king in that way, he has authority. The Lord is the absolute representative of God mediatorially, and as I understand it I am in the mediatorial kingdom and have part in it. Each one should represent God in that way. The armour of light is in the same connection; I am not puzzled by anything that comes up, I know whether it is of God or whether it is not; the enemy has no advantage over me at all.
Ques. Would that be the result if we were found definitely in the path of the will of God?
J.T. Yes. You have light on anything that is presented to you; Satan has no advantage over you in that way.
Rem. You look at everything from the standpoint of the path of Christ.
J.T. So that a man having on the armour of light is invulnerable to any wilderness attack. I have got
{460}
power in having put on the Lord Jesus Christ; I am not only subject to Him, but have put Him on.
Rem. And there are the arms of righteousness, too, in that connection. I suppose while the armour would be protective, the arms would be more operative.
J.T. Yes. I thought that the Colossian view of the kingdom is to bring in the Son of the Father's love; not now the Lord Jesus "put on", but an object for the affections. You get in both Corinthians and Ephesians the idea of inheritance in connection with the kingdom of God, and that flesh and blood does not inherit it. We have in such expressions as that to take account of them, as contemplating the kingdom as going on further, even to a higher level, for the idea is carried into eternity, in the sense that the Son delivers it up to the Father. It is retained by the Father, it is the Father's kingdom. He never relinquishes it; so that "then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all", @1 Corinthians 15: 28. Now that is the thought, and to my mind most far-reaching and worthy of the closest attention, as presenting the kingdom and its eternal relations, and what we inherit in it. It is not inherited by flesh and blood. God will be all in all, even the Son subject to Him, showing what a wonderful thing the kingdom of God is; how immediately connected with God; and we would not have it otherwise, not in all eternity. We would not have it otherwise than that God, being what He is, should be supremely dominant; even the Son Himself, as it says, taking the place of subjection "that God may be all in all".
In Colossians it is the kingdom of the Son of the Father's love. Our hearts are filled by an object set before us, the Son of the Father's love; it is the Lord apprehended in that way. And Solomon says exactly that. "I was a son unto my father", @Proverbs 4: 3.
{461}
So that He has a peculiar place. Young believers should listen to Him and be instructed in those affections that belong to the family; the kingdom understood as leading into the family, in the Son of the Father's love.
J.J. So that it would be David in Romans, and Solomon in Colossians?
J.T. Just so; Moses or David in Romans, but Solomon in Colossians for we come under the influence of the Son of the Father's love. Solomon says, "I was a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of my mother", @Proverbs 4: 3. He teaches us how to be sons to God, how to belong to the family of God. So that in @1 Corinthians 15 the Son is subject and we are all subject. What a delightful kingdom that will be! God all in all. That is the great end from the standpoint of the kingdom, culminating in God being all in all, to those who have learned from the Son of His love how to be sons to their Father. If there is anything a young believer ought to know it is how to be a son to our Father. Jesus says, "I ascend to my Father and your Father". How am I to be a son like Him? I should like to learn how to be a son like that, and He teaches us. We are translated into the kingdom of the Son of His love, under His authority, and He will bring us into the understanding of sonship.
Ques. Would @Colossians 3 be the expression of the kingdom in the Son of the Father's love?
J.T. Quite. We are there addressed as the elect of God, so that would lead on to it. Here it is "giving thanks to the Father ... who has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love: in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins". Thus it gives us to see that He is "image of the invisible God, firstborn of all creation".
{462}
PRIESTHOOD
@Romans 12: 1 - 5; @Leviticus 24: 5 - 9
J.T. The great number of young brothers and young sisters with us occasions the concern as to whether the truth, as we have had it before us, is being understood and taken in. It might be well to keep this in mind in our remarks so that what is said may not be beyond the intelligence of anyone present.
The phase of our subject this afternoon is somewhat more advanced than those we have had, but it brings it down within the range of all to observe that, as believers are twenty years of age according to Numbers, every believer that confesses the Lord Jesus is viewed as of age; and as having the Holy Spirit, so he is a priest; as belonging to the military, he equally belongs to the priesthood. Therefore, when we speak of priests we are not speaking of a special class of christians, but of all christians.
Ques. Why do you turn to Romans for such a subject?
J.T. Just for this reason, that Romans gives us the initial features of the truth. Whatever side of it we may speak of, Romans gives us the initial idea of it. We have the idea of priestly service in presenting our bodies. We begin to act, or officiate, as priests in presenting our bodies a living sacrifice. That is distinctly a priestly matter. Romans, as I remarked, lays the basis for every truth, even of the church.
Ques. How do you regard the "yielding" in @Romans 6?
J.T. Yielding your members as instruments of righteousness, do you mean? That is God's service, but the yielding is not quite offering. It leads up to it.
Ques. Does a young believer, twenty years old and upward, understand the priestly function?
{463}
J.T. That is what we ought to get at in Romans. He obeys from the heart the form of teaching, and the teaching leads him to see that he is to yield himself to God, his "members as instruments of righteousness unto God", @Romans 6: 13. He sees that, and he thinks of the offering of Christ. He sees something in the offering of Christ that lays a foundation in his soul, that He offered Himself without spot to God, to cleanse us from dead works, to purge our conscience that we might serve the living God. That is an initial thought in Hebrews, corresponding with Romans. Serving the living God is really priestly service, as Aaron and his sons were charged with it.
So in Romans we have the idea of the law of God, "I myself serve the law of God", @Romans 7: 25. That is another priestly touch. The priest was the custodian of the law, but before he could be that, he had to value it himself, he serves with the mind the law of God. Moreover in that same chapter, he serves in newness of spirit: it says, "that we should serve in newness of spirit", @Romans 7: 6.
All these are priestly touches and should not be beyond the youngest confessor of Christ, because they are obligatory things that are facing us, if we believe and confess our Lord Jesus. There is another beautiful touch which, although it is a family touch, must be priestly. It is our speaking to God the Father. We speak directly to God by the Holy Spirit. We are actually speaking by the Spirit of God to God. We are speaking to God as revealed, and we are priests, because it is only the priest that had access to God, "through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father", @Ephesians 2: 18. In this chapter we have the offering of the body which is an intelligent thing. You are coming on to a higher level, you know what you are doing. It is an intelligent matter to offer your body a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable. It is the priest that understands what is holy.
{464}
Ques. Do you say that chapter 12 is the answer to the first eleven chapters? If I reach the good of the first eleven, I will be intelligent and I will offer my body in an intelligent way. What hinders our christian progress is that, as children of the saints, we have never learned how bad we have been, how low down we have got.
J.T. Romans is the great study for all young christians because the Lord, in His first announcement of the gospel in Mark, told His hearers not simply to believe the gospel, but to *believe in it*.
Ques. What is the difference?
J.T. There is quite a difference between believing what a person says and believing in the person; the latter is that you have absolute reliance. When it becomes a thing, if it is the gospel, then I want to explore it. I take it, as it were, on trust in its totality. I believe in the thing, that there is that thing -- the most wonderful thing that has come in through Christ, "the gospel of God ... concerning his Son", @Romans 1: 1, 3. It is presented to me as one whole, but involving much, and has to be gone into. It may take me a lifetime to do it, but I believe in it, I believe every part of it. The epistle to the Romans is what every believer should look into carefully because he has already committed himself to it in believing in it. Then he takes it up, and reads and explores it.
Ques. Is this the end of the old and the beginning of the new involved in one gospel?
J.T. That is right. When you discover what you are after the flesh, you are glad he is not more than seventy years of age; three-score and ten is the limit of the life of a man. After that it was labour and sorrow. If you see really what that life is, what it has proved itself to be, you can see why it should be cut down, cut down from nine hundred and sixty-nine in Methuselah to seventy in our time. You can see that that was imperative; man's life was so displeasing to
{465}
God that the shorter it was the better. But take the other life, which I believe our brother had not time to go into last evening, @Psalm 102. There you have the Lord Jesus contemplating that His life was just seventy years; He was accepting the ordinary limitations because He said to God, "Take me not away in the midst of my days" (@Psalm 102: 24), which would be about thirty-five. He accepted the handbreadth, the limitations of man's life. But the answer in @Psalm 102 is that His years should never fail. That is heaven's answer to Him. Those years, the years of the life of Jesus are so delightful to God, opening up freshly every morning, every one of those days and years. There would be no limitations to that life. "Thy years are throughout all generations". That is what heaven addressed to Him. That is to say, it is an eternal thing. Jesus, as Man, has come here and in positive moral worth He is eternal. He is that personally, but His moral worth is such that that life must go on. Essentially that life is to all generations; it shall not fail.
Rem. A scripture in Peter says, "For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: Let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it", @1 Peter 3: 10, 11.
J.T. Exactly. That would be a life pleasing to God. The lawyer said to the Lord, "What shall I do to inherit eternal life?" The Lord showed him, "This do, and thou shalt live", @Luke 10: 25, 28.
Rem. "Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing", @1 Peter 3: 8, 9.
J.T. That would point to priesthood.
Rem. That is, morally, life enjoyed.
{466}
Rem. It goes on as well, it is eternal, and in @Psalm 133 we have the same thought; that life is perpetuated in the saints.
J.T. It is a life that is pleasing to God, but as to the life of a man in the flesh, the shorter it is the better. The life of Jesus implies priesthood, an eternal priesthood.
Rem. In view of the cumulative evil in a life of seventy years, it is possible for us, through the death of Christ, to make life very short by offering it in the days of our youth.
J.T. You would reduce that life that God had already reduced governmentally, you reduce it by your own hand in the disallowance of the flesh; "The life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me", @Galatians 2: 20. You bring it down to less than seventy years, down to the time you were converted. God has terminated that life in the death of Jesus; you terminate it practically, and Romans tells you how. "If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live", @Romans 8: 13. That life never comes to an end.
Rem. Is there a thought somewhat akin to that in the twelve loaves?
J.T. That is what we want to come to in Leviticus, those twelve wheaten loaves set up on the table, six in a row with frankincense thereon. That is the life of Jesus, that is, that order of man. That is the kind of man, the order of man, before God for the whole seven days, and then the priests ate it at the end of the seven days. It becomes assimilated in the life of the saints. Exodus is the 'bread of presence', that is, what is before God. Here it is the 'bread of arrangement', the order of it, in Leviticus.
Ques. Is he leading up to "The compassions of God"?
{467}
J.T. The young christians here ought to see this "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service". That is the kind of thing which is to be before God.
Ques. Do I understand that a life that is pleasing to God is priestly?
J.T. It is that order of man -- pure, wheaten loaves, baked.
Rem. I thought that was very understandable. The young christians could get hold of that. They would turn to God through the mercies of God and present themselves in that way. They do not have to try to define the priesthood, nor a priest, but they are acting it.
J.T. That is right. Young people are growing up in a world which is perhaps the uncleanest world that has ever existed; they are brought into it, and it takes them time to discern how awful it is, how polluted it is. Hence our *bodies*, that is what the apostle stresses, our *bodies* a living sacrifice. A person's body is that in which he speaks, feels, sleeps, eats, and comes in contact with the world; that is something he can present to God.
Ques. Does not Romans help us to order our pathway so that it might be agreeable to God?
J.T. That is the thing. Our bodies come in contact with all the world offers, all its pollutions (the modern dress and all these things) and the young believer should learn how to hold his body for the Lord so as to present it a living sacrifice.
Rem. In coming to the truth of the kingdom in the Spirit, there would normally be spiritual growth in the heart of the young Christian which would lead him to turn his body over to God.
Rem. And we could raise the question as to just how much our eyes, lips and ears, which were heretofore
{468}
used otherwise, are now used in connection with the things of God. The enemy gains a great hold if our bodies are under his control. The world is not outside; the heart is really the citadel of the world.
J.T. Quite.
Rem. You open the book and you find the condition man has got into, not wanting to retain God in his thoughts. Now the Spirit brings him to it that he is able to offer that same body, and it is acceptable to God. When Moses put the blood on the ear, and the finger, and the toe, the whole body was affected.
J.T. That is the thing; separated in intelligence in his hands and his feet, his work and his walk, separated unto God. Therefore, the question is as to his body, how he dresses and how he uses his members. All this comes up at the very outset of a believer's history, and this is the thing I have to present to God.
Rem. What is the difference between the commandments and the compassions of God?
J.T. It is in keeping with the dispensation. God appeals to you by His compassions, what He has been to you in Christ, because His compassions refer to the early part of the book, how He has come in in Christ, and now what is His due from me? I have a body. What did Christ do with His body? That is the way it comes out. In @Exodus 21 the Hebrew servant devotes his body; he is taken to the door and his ear is pierced, his body is given up. That is the lead the Lord gives us, a body devoted, never to be recalled.
Rem. How many aspects of priesthood are there?
J.T. We are speaking of the initial thought. The primary thought in the taking up of Aaron and his sons was "that he may minister unto me in the priest's office", @Exodus 28: 1. The priest has access to God; he is the custodian of the law and his lips keep knowledge. The saints are to hear the words
{469}
of the law at his mouth, so that he has a very wide range of service. While that may require spiritual growth and development, the youngest believer begins by offering his body.
Rem. Not a vile body, but a body of humiliation. We have often been taught that this old body did not amount to much, anyway.
J.T. I think it does. It is a living sacrifice; it is a body of humiliation but it is, by the presence of the Holy Spirit, a living body, a living sacrifice.
Ques. Would the woman at the end of @Luke 7, and Mary from whom seven demons had gone out, in the beginning of @Luke 8, not be examples of what we are talking about? It is the same body.
J.T. Exactly. She was serving the Lord with her hair (that was part of her body), and with her tears. "Seest thou this woman?" the Lord says. It was a priestly service.
Ques. If this offering of the body does not go on, would you say the world would claim that body?
J.T. It is sure to.
Ques. Would you say the offering of the body in the case of Enoch continued for a space of three hundred years?
J.T. He walked with God in it. He had a true idea of the pollution around because he looked for the Lord with the holy myriads.
Ques. Would the eunuch be an example of that at his conversion, one who had never heard the gospel? It says, "Philip ... preached unto him Jesus", @Acts 8: 35. You were remarking about accepting death, and he seemed to accept it very early in his history.
J.T. Yes, he was baptised at once. Then he went on his way, on *his* way. It would appear as if he were on the way, as if he were already on the way, because it is "*join* thyself". The Holy Spirit says to a man who was indeed a priest, Philip, "join thyself to this chariot". It was such a chariot that he is to
{470}
join it. He ran and joined it, and when he got on it he found a man reading the Scriptures. It was in truth a priestly chariot. The Bible was read in it, it was honoured in it. He acknowledged his ignorance, but Philip was able to explain; the priest's lips kept knowledge for him, so that he unfolded to him the Scriptures, and as he saw water, he says, "What doth hinder me to be baptised?" Philip went down with him and after he is baptised he resumes his way. He went on his way, but how? Rejoicing! But it was *his* way, and Philip takes another way. Philip is taken by the Spirit and caught away, showing the great increase of spirituality in that a man is capable of being caught away by the Spirit. Like Enoch, he was caught away. That is to say, the Holy Spirit raptured him, caught him away; not up yet, but away for other service.
Ques. Is there not something peculiar in that the eunuch is not seen in relation to others?
J.T. I think it is to show how self-contained a christian may be when there are not others. If he needed others, the Holy Spirit would not take Philip away from him. He would not leave him alone if he needed help. You may be sure he got something to keep him in that way.
Rem. The eunuch says, "... of whom speaketh the prophet this?" And then it says that he went on his way rejoicing. Was he transformed by the renewing of his mind so that the scripture became light to him?
J.T. He indicates the way a christian is self-contained; he has all that is necessary for his maintenance and for his joy. This is to bring out that one point, because the Holy Spirit would not leave him alone if he needed a companion. It is to show that he did not need one, that the reception of the gospel renders one self-contained in that relation; not that he is to be independent, but he can get
{471}
along. He went back to his country a self-contained man; he had christianity in principle in his soul, "he went on his way rejoicing", @Acts 8: 39.
Rem. He did not need to go to Jerusalem to worship.
J.T. Someone might say, What would be better than to send this man to Jerusalem to get acquainted with Peter and the twelve. But no, there was a man by his side that he needed as much as any, and the Holy Spirit catches him away. It is not Philip's doing, it is the Holy Spirit's doing. So that there can be no question but that that man is self-contained. His state showed it. That is what a christian is; as set up here he is self-contained so that, if there is only himself in the world, he can get along. That is the power of christianity.
Rem. "Who shall declare his generation?" Would he declare another generation now?
J.T. Indeed he is another generation. The eunuch's life is taken from the earth, too.
Ques. Do you not think this magnifies the scripture, "Kept by the power of God", @1 Peter 1: 5? We get the power whereby we can be kept as if there is not anyone else.
J.T. That is the idea exactly, that is, the power to stand alone. It is not that the Lord intended him to be alone, but it is to set out that idea. No doubt others were converted, but that point is established, that one man can go on rejoicing.
Rem. That is very encouraging, especially in this country where in so many places just one or two are standing alone. The power of God is able to comfort and keep them.
J.T. I think so. You take Rahab. As far as we know, she never had the advantage of ministry. She never heard Moses, or Aaron, or the seventy who got the Spirit. She represents the work of God by itself. That is a thing that one would like everybody to get
{472}
hold of -- the idea of the work of God viewed by itself, apart altogether from ministry. For, after all, what goes into heaven is the work of God and nothing else, and what goes into the assembly is the work of God and nothing else. As Israel drew near to the Jordan, they sent over two spies and they found a remarkable work of God in Canaan, in Rahab, without a Moses and without an Aaron. Well, what does all this mean? Rahab has a cord and she lets down the men by a cord, something strong. But the men call it a "line". It is a line of scarlet thread. What does that word 'line' mean? What does the Holy Spirit mean by that word 'line'? What can He mean but that that is the line, because in @Hebrews 11 she is the first person said to have faith after the children of Israel left Egypt. There is not a word about faith in any person. "By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven days. By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace", @Hebrews 11: 30, 31. She had the line and it comes right down to the block of the genealogy of Christ. She is in the life-line.
Rem. That is very good. It says that she dwells in Israel to this day.
J.T. Each time they passed around the city, they would see that line. It was on the wall, it was there and yet, you might say, she never heard a gospel preaching. The point is the work of God.
Rem. While she stood there practically alone, yet she was in the truth of all that God had in the company.
J.T. She knew what God had done, she knew everything. There is not a word said as to her hearing it -- she *knew*. She never met Moses. Who was there to preach except those in Israel? I am not saying the work of God goes on without the preaching, but we are entitled to take account of it
{473}
by itself, because it is the only thing that will stand. The only thing that we can fall back upon in any place is the work of God.
Ques. Do you mean that, in the consciousness of my soul, I have to be brought to God if I am to stand?
J.T. And to measure myself. So it says, "to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith". I might have a lot of intelligence but, after all, my measure of faith is all that can be reckoned on.
Ques. Was the man in @John 9 an example of the work of God?
J.T. He corresponds with Rahab because there is nothing said about any ministry. The Lord opened his eyes and that is all. The point is that the works of God should be manifested in him, and they were manifested in him.
Rem. It is all means to an end, and the end is to dwell in Israel.
J.T. That is it. Do you not think it is important for each of us to see his measure, because it is in that measure he is in the body? No one is in it because he has more intelligence than others; it is the work of God only.
Ques. How are you linking this up with the twelve loaves?
J.T. It is to bring out what is in @Romans 12 first, how the believer comes to offer, and to offer what has been got by him, and how he comes to measure himself and sees that we are one body in Christ. That is to say, we are not one body by mutual agreement or by personal preference. We are one body because we are of that kind of humanity, the wheaten bread. One body in Christ means, as I apprehend it, that we are not one body as in the flesh. Romans does not go very far; we are not one body as so many persons in the flesh. The Jews
{474}
were in unity as of one family, but we are one body in Christ. That is the governing thing -- in Christ.
Rem. The standard of measure is the standard given by God. Paul says to the Corinthians, "These, measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves, are not intelligent", @2 Corinthians 10: 12.
J.T. Quite. "In Christ", here leads up to the idea of the wheaten loaves in Leviticus. "In Christ" means that I am not in the flesh. We are not one body in that sense. Some organisations are one body in that sense. They are all united on that principle as in the flesh, whereas we are one body in Christ which shuts the flesh out. In @1 Corinthians 10: 17 we have what underlies that: "we, being many, are one loaf, one body". That all leads up to what we have been speaking of, the wheaten loaves, the pure, even meal, the perfections of the humanity of the Lord Jesus.
Rem. The word of God contemplates that which should be reproduced in the saints.
J.T. That is what I thought. Chapter 12 is the expansion of what is in Christ.
Rem. And yet not at the expense of unity.
J.T. So that, as we said yesterday, the idea of unity is what is before us, but what makes unity valid? What makes any unity valid is these features that we are speaking of. What we are at today is the humanity of Christ. Christ as before God; in Exodus it is what He was before God. You do not get the number twelve referring to the loaves in Exodus, it is the pure table, the table is enlarged, and the bread of presence (which is the shew-bread) is before God. It is the idea of the thing without giving the number. In Leviticus, where it is a question of tribes, we have the number, the saints as a whole.
{475}
Rem. Any intrusion of the flesh weakens the thought of unity.
J.T. It comes in in many ways. Romans precludes all in bringing in the thought of the one body in Christ.
Ques. Is that the value of the last part of @Romans 3?
J.T. Yes. There you have the wheaten flour.
Ques. Would the military service be brought in here, to protect us from all attacks of the flesh?
J.T. I think so. Romans brings in that side "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus", @Romans 10: 9. That means I am of the military, and I am in keeping with that. It is the armour of light, not the armour of God yet. In the military I have to do more with darkness, not exactly the power of darkness, but the thing itself, and the armour of light makes the way for me. That is the military position, but collateral with that you have the priestly function in the offering of your body.
Ques. What does "in all these things we are more than conquerors" mean (@Romans 8: 37)?
J.T. That is victory, "through him that loved us".
Ques. When I present my body a living sacrifice, do I take account of it that it is a corruptible body?
J.T. It is another word altogether. If I look at my body as mortal, then it is a dying body. If I am presenting it a living sacrifice, I do not look at it as dying, I am thinking of it as in perpetual priesthood. I take account of myself as alive.
Ques. Do I present my body in the light that it is the temple of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. You mean that the Holy Spirit is in it? Quite. "If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live", @Romans 8: 13. The body is changed from a dying thing to a living thing.
Rem. There are different measures, but in Leviticus each loaf was of the same measure.
{476}
J.T. I think he is speaking now of the saints. When you come to different measures, it is more in view of the exercise of gift, but the priesthood in Leviticus is mutual, the same measure, two-tenths, which would bring everyone in on the same basis as establishing mutual feeling. Here, you see, the word is to Moses really. It might seem as if it were Aaron's responsibility, but the word is to Moses to see to this. It is not left to anybody, it is imperative that the thing should be done. You get in Sarah an illustration. Abraham tells her to take three seahs of wheat and bake cakes. The Holy Spirit does not say a word as to whether she did it or not. It does not say one word as to whether these cakes were ever presented to God; meaning that, if it is left to us we may never do it. We should, of course. But the word here is to Moses. The thing is imperative; God will have it, and He has had it in the life of Jesus, the Bread of Presence, that holy life of Jesus, the Bread of God come down. That was there, you see. The whole of @John 6, you might say, is to emphasise that the thing was actually *there*.
Ques. In connection with what has been said, would there be a suggestion as to an opening into wider service? It speaks of the different members of the body. Would it involve the desire to be fit for the Master's use?
J.T. You are on that line. God may take you up and use you in any way. You have presented your body. That would be a question of His sovereignty, differing a little from the thought of members of the body.
Rem. Whether gifted in serving in any specific way or not, there is a function which we, as members, would perform.
J.T. The two-tenths in each loaf brings in the mutual side. We are all on the same basis.
{477}
Rem. That brings in unity, too, in the twelve loaves in that way.
J.T. That is where unity is taught us. There are twelve, and they are divided into two rows with six in a row. That is the way they are arranged.
Ques. What would the two rows set forth?
J.T. I would connect the two rows with the shoulder pieces, the tribes divided equally. The Lord has a right to manipulate us at His pleasure. The number twelve is perhaps the most divisible of any number; it can be divided by twelve, by six, by four, by three and by two. So that it sets out a most remarkable means of manipulation, for the Lord has in us, as we are formed in this holy nature of His, the holy, wheaten flour, which renders us entirely subject to His will. I have no other thought than His will -- I am entirely at His disposal.
Rem. The bread of arrangement, it was arranged according to His mind and will.
J.T. I think that is the point in this book. In Exodus it is the bread of presence, which means, what is before God. Here it is the bread of arrangement.
Rem. That is interesting about the arrangement, it takes it out of our hands.
J.T. It is God's arrangement, and when I look up into the heavens I see God can arrange things much better than I can. "When I consider thy heavens", what an arrangement it is! (@Psalm 8: 3).
Rem. Scripture brings out the God of measure and the God of order.
J.T. The God of order is the idea. You have in Corinthians the directions that Paul gave when he was there first, and then the directions he gave in the letter, and then he says, "the rest will I set in order when I come", @1 Corinthians 11: 34. This shows how much the idea of arrangement, or order, is emphasised in the assembly. First it was what he did when he
{478}
was among them, then what he wrote, and then whatever remained he would put in order when he came. Nothing is left out.
Rem. I was going to call attention to the beautiful arrangement in the celestial sphere, and we see in the moral system that it is not left to human will at all. It is all His own perfect arrangement set forth, and that is to be the standard before us to which the gracious work of God would seek to bring us.
Rem. When I offer my body as a living sacrifice, then I place myself in the hands of God for His setting me wherever He may please.
J.T. That is the idea, and this chapter in Leviticus fits in, where we are set. Then they are to be there for a whole week, which is a period spiritually, the whole dispensation. But now there is the idea of what is before God in freshness because, according to @1 Samuel 21: 6, they were set in there when they were hot, fresh out of the oven, in freshness for seven days before God; then the priests ate them. When David asked for the loaves, they were there. I suppose, up to that time, there never was a greater priest than David when he took the five loaves. He was then, you see, fleeing from Saul's murderous attitude towards him, maintaining the testimony of God.
Rem. He was feeding upon what God had brought to light in his soul regarding Christ.
J.T. Quite. Who needed those loaves more than David at that time when he was standing alone for the testimony of God?
Rem. The second circle is the teaching we have this afternoon. You took up the tribes as being four, and then next as being three, and next as being one. Our initial teaching yesterday was possibly in the setting of them. Now today we come to the initial idea of the priestly circle and the initial teaching in connection with the body.
J.T. Quite. The priests, as we had it, were on
{479}
the east side, keeping the charge at the door. What we are at today takes us a little further than that. It takes us inside; we are occupied with the loaves. They are inside on the table in the holy place. We are inside now and every young christian ought to say, I should like to get inside. Why should I be outside? Why should I be an onlooker? Well, He would love to have you inside, and He would show you the beautiful bread that is inside; it is the bread of God. The wicked woman has her bread, too, in Proverbs. But this is what Wisdom would show you inside.
Rem. There is the beautiful fragrance from the loaves in that way.
J.T. How delightfully attractive it is! And why should any young believer not say to himself, I should like to get in there? What is in there? The bread of God, sustained on the pure table. Exodus tells about that table. It was two cubits by one by one and a half. It was an oblong, but it was only a cubit and a half high. It is within reach, it is not beyond our heads. Sometimes we say that what was said was quite beyond our heads. That table is not beyond your head. It is one and a half cubits high and it is a very small man or woman that is not taller than that, about twenty-seven inches high. That ought not to be beyond anyone. If anyone is smaller than that, I would question if he were a christian at all. You can see how graciously God brings the thing down. It is only one and one half cubits high, and there are all kinds of drinking vessels on it. It is a set table, cups and goblets and things to pour out with. The altar of incense was a square, but it was two cubits high. It went higher, which it should. This is more to be available to me.
Rem. Why should I not be inside when God has made all this provision? Why should I not be there?
J.T. Quite, it is there for you.
{480}
Rem. That thought of arrangement is very helpful. We sometimes are not there because it is not according to our own arrangement. However small things might look in the world, it is remarkable that they are in two rows. You would not think anything was arranged in the book of Acts.
J.T. And yet unity is stamped on the whole book. You are impressed with the delicacy of the food and the arrangement of it, the pure material with which it was made and the frankincense on it. The priests ate it, and as they ate it, it is called the most holy of God's offerings. Verse 9 is very striking, as you will observe.
Rem. Pure frankincense was put upon each row, not on each loaf.
J.T. The idea would be that each six would be a sort of unit, but the two together would be a testimony to the full thought of food.
Rem. So that, while there are individual loaves in each row of six, there is a corporate idea involved when the frankincense is put on. They all gave forth the same fragrance. This is the food of the priests, and every time they ate it they would be reminded of unity. The very constitution of the priest is built upon unity.
Ques. What would you say about sober judgment?
J.T. It is in keeping with these wheaten cakes. Sobriety is the leading element in a christian. The man out of whom the legion of demons was cast was said to be found sitting, clothed, and in his right mind at the feet of Jesus. He represents, from the intelligence side, the material that forms the assembly. A man like that would not plague his brethren with a long address without any substance. He was a man that was most trustworthy. The eunuch went on his way rejoicing; this man is left in Decapolis by himself. He is the only man in the place, as far as we can see, that got blessing. Think of the Lord
{481}
leaving a man like that alone! What does that mean? It means that the Lord knew what the man was capable of, he could stand it. Why could he? Because he was sitting and clothed at the feet of Jesus, and he wanted to be with Jesus. The man that wants to be with Jesus is the man to leave where Jesus is not.
Ques. Is the idea of the kingdom of God conveyed in him?
J.T. That man could be trusted. The Lord could trust him to stay there; He leaves him there. He has the power and love, and a sound mind.
Ques. Would you say that is the point, that God has a place in which to fit each one?
J.T. Even if you are isolated, if the Lord has set you in isolation, you can stand. There is no reason why you should give way. These men indicate how a christian is self-contained in independence of the world but not of other christians.
Ques. Is that why Naaman was told to go in peace when he was perturbed about going into the house of Rimmon?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. As to divine arrangement in connection with isolation is it your thought that the great thing to keep in mind is the divine idea, not what physically separates me? The twelve loaves are there still.
J.T. However far from the brethren, I am in that unity, if I am living on that food, the priest's food, then I am linked up in unity, because the loaves represented the whole nation.
Rem. In connection with the flour, you referred at the beginning to the evenness of it and I wondered if, in connection with feeding on it, it would produce the character that is set forth in @Romans 12: 3, "to think so as to be wise".
J.T. That is the thing.
{482}
Ques. The cups and things on the table were made out of gold. Gold means that which is divine. What would the cups be in that sense?
J.T. All is of God inside there, all is gold. It shows you that you are in the realm where all things are of God, all is of God. You would like to have a peep into where all is of God to see how things are served there. We entertain the saints, think how God entertains His people! The nearer you get to Him, the more at home you are. If you get a peep, you would be apt to stay.
Ques. In connection with the man who was left in Decapolis, do you think he was intelligent so as to be wise in the place where the Lord put him?
J.T. He was.
Rem. Referring to the thought of arrangement, the apostle in speaking to the Corinthians in the midst of the deplorable conditions that existed there, speaks of the Supper as that which "I have received of the Lord", the divine Arranger!
J.T. That is really what has been lost sight of in christendom, the divine arrangement. They have their own arrangements.
Ques. Is it not a fact that those who are in isolation among us are generally very weak?
J.T. It may be that they are not set there. Many of us go into it for selfish reasons, but we see here that the believer rightly in isolation is able to stand. The Lord would never place us there unless we can stand, and we may be sure we will not be left long alone.
Ques. Why is this an offering by fire? Where does the fire come in?
J.T. In the baking; it signifies going through death. @John 6 helps as to it, the Lord emphasising the idea of bread and how He goes into death. Sarah was directed to provide the loaves, but the Holy Spirit does not mention that she did it. You might be remiss in answering to the requirement. Sarah
{483}
rather misses it in that sense. She laughs, but Abraham shines in that chapter. Sarah shines later. When it is a question of casting out the bondwoman and her son. Sarah is ahead of Abraham.
Ques. Would you say I should be particular as to where I allow my body to go, and what I use it in connection with?
J.T. Quite. To be simple and frank, what you get at the beaches and all that sort of thing is something you cannot connect your body with. People go into these places and become defiled by them.
Rem. A lot of other things, too, newspapers, novels, radios, to make it very practical.
Rem. And coming back into the company of the brethren, you really offer diseased offerings, corrupt and polluted.
J.T. Speaking of our bodies and the idea of arrangement. Luke is the inspired writer that especially stresses the divine arrangement. It says, the Lord *placed* Himself at table. I have to consider how my body is to do that, as sitting with the brethren in that holy circle; my body is devoted, holy and acceptable, which is my intelligent service.
Rem. Luke is priestly, too.
J.T. When you come to the priest in Luke it is a question of order, and then garments. There is nothing exposed -- the priestly garments cover him right over, the body is covered. All that has its own voice, so that the Lord in Luke says, "but do ye remain in the city till ye be *clothed* with power from on high", @Luke 24: 49. And also the man from whom the demons went out is said to be "sitting, clothed", @Luke 8: 35.
Ques. Will you give us a word on @Leviticus 24: 9?
J.T. It shows the holiness of the thing; that is brought in in connection with the eating of it. It says, "And it shall be Aaron's and his sons; and they shall eat it in a holy place; for it is most holy
{484}
unto him of Jehovah's offerings by fire: it is an everlasting statute". That is, when we are eating it, so that the bread is taken off the table and eaten and new replaced, and yet it is most holy. It is to bring about a holy state in the saints.
Ques. You referred to @John 6 in connection with this. Is that the most holy offering ever on the earth?
J.T. Quite. As you are eating it and being reminded that it is most holy unto Him, you are judging yourself all the time and the partaking of it is making you holy, building up a holy constitution. There is the idea of image and likeness, you get the nature of Christ. There are two thoughts, 'image' is that you are representative of God but that must be being like God, like Him in nature. Adam was not really like Him in nature. Christ is the "image of the invisible God" (@Colossians 1: 15), but He was like God. The Lord Jesus really is the thing Himself.
{485}
OPPOSITION MET BY SPIRITUAL CONDITIONS
@1 Samuel 19: 1 - 24
The book of Samuel contemplates the testimony of God as in the vessels taken up for it and in peculiarly close contact with opposition. It contemplates opposition at a distance, such as artillery warfare, but it also contemplates immediate contact with the enemy; and this latter is the great feature in this book.
The book begins with Hannah who was in peculiarly close contact with her adversary. Peninnah is definitely called her adversary, one with whom she lived every day. And she made her opposition felt; she had an advantage. The Lord sometimes allows peculiar advantage to the opposition, to the enemy, so that Peninnah bitterly assailed Hannah -- Hannah being childless, and she the mother of children.
The book thus begins, and the principle is carried right through to the last chapter where you see the great enemy, Saul, overthrown. That is what I have in mind particularly, to connect it with spiritual conditions, to show how opposition is negatived in and by spiritual conditions. Christianity is intended to set out what is spiritual. Above all the dispensations of God, this dispensation is intended to portray what is spiritual, and emphasis is therefore laid on spirituality in the New Testament: "the spiritual discerns all things, and *he* is discerned of no one", @1 Corinthians 2: 15. He has a peculiar advantage: he is in a unique position. So that the final negation of opposition to truth is seen in the spiritual. They do not need to resort to violence; the power of spirituality effects the overthrow of opposition without violence. So that Romans gives this feature: "If
{486}
therefore thine enemy should hunger, feed him; if he should thirst, give him drink; for, so doing, thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head", @Romans 12: 20. Nothing would bring a man down like that.
I want to show from this scripture the kind of instrumentality God employs leading up to spirituality for the defeat of opposition. The chapter is marked by the most virulent opposition. Saul, being in supreme control of things, spoke to his son Jonathan, and his servants, that they should kill David. There was no concealment of his mind. I want to show how God meets that in certain instrumentalities leading up to spirituality, the final weapon, in His hand, for the nullification of opposition. There is the idea in Scripture of things being swallowed up, and I hope to show that opposition is entirely overwhelmed by spirituality.
In the Acts we have the antitype of all this. In chapter 5, the enemy assailed the position of christianity in Ananias and Sapphira, two covetous persons, two lying persons; that was met effectually. Then we find the high priests, supported by the infidel Sadducees who do not believe in the resurrection, laying their hands on the apostles and putting them in prison. The first instrumentality that God uses is angelic. The angel came and opened the doors of the prison that night, and led them forth saying, "Go ye and stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life", @Acts 5: 20. Sure enough in the morning they were at their work. After a night in the prison, possibly without a seat even, they come out and are early in the morning in the temple announcing and teaching all the words of Jesus. This is discovered by the officers and they send and take them again. Angelic ministry has done its part, the roar of Satan has been heard -- but presently we are told they did not bring them with violence this time for they feared the people; that
{487}
was God acting on the people. The officers were afraid of the people and so did not treat them with violence, but still they brought them to the court. The multitude cannot get in there to do their will. What will they do now? God's instrumentalities are always at hand and we never need fear that a way will be made. They are before the council and it looks as if things are going badly with them. But there was one man there in the council different from the rest; it does not say that he was a man of God, but he was a teacher, his name Gamaliel. God had His angel to take them out of the prison, the people to restrain the officers from violence, and Gamaliel to counsel that they should be released. He says, "Let them alone ... if it be from God, ye will not be able to put them down, lest ye be found also fighters against God". God can put a word into the heart of a wicked man, or even an ass. God can make the stones to praise him! And so you see in @Acts 5, the testimony goes on triumphantly. The apostles are released, though beaten first; they rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer, and went on and preached in the temple and the houses, that Jesus was the Christ. The enemy in his own domain was defeated. We have many other instances.
In the type here, the testimony in the very closest contact with the opposition goes through. How the very personnel of the opposition, all the organisation of the opposition, becomes the instrumentalities for the protection of the testimony so that it goes right through!
Jonathan is a lover of David, but a lover of David who remained till his death in the house of Saul. He is one who remains in the organisation of the enemy. Is anyone here like that? As remaining there as a lover of David, God used him. I am not commending Jonathan for a moment in regard to his association, but would show the agencies that God uses and that
{488}
we can rely on. There are lovers of Christ in the organisations around us. There are two things that should be noted: that God operates in spite of adverse conditions, and because of favourable or suitable conditions. He operates in spite of hostility, and also because of favourable conditions.
Here He operates in spite of adverse conditions the first, a lover of Christ in adverse conditions. Again I ask, is there one here like that -- Jonathan was in the house of Saul and he was a lover of David. He undertakes to speak to Saul about him -- no hardship to speak of one he loved. If you love Christ, it is no hardship to speak of Him even to an enemy. Jonathan was a true lover of David; Michal was a selfish lover. Jonathan loved David for his own sake. It says, after David had slain Goliath, and after he ceased speaking to Saul, Jonathan loved David as his own soul. A fine expression! That love remained all his life. A true lover of David in every association, and in these associations he is not ashamed to speak well of David.
So he says to David, "My father seeks to kill thee". One of the most painful things among the brethren is concealment. Jonathan was open. A true mark of spiritual formation is that one is open and transparent. He says to David, "My father seeks to kill thee". He knew what was in his father's mind. There is no concealment, young people, of the opposition to Christ in what is around us. It is blatant. They deny His divinity. There is murderous opposition.
So Jonathan under God's hand became the means of David's preservation. He spoke well of David to his father. Do you ever speak well of Christ in that way to His enemies? A beautiful speech Jonathan made: he commends him. God reckons on everything that may be conducive for the testimony to go through. Whether it be the enmity of Saul or
{489}
Jonathan's love, God uses both that the testimony should go through. God uses everyday experience. Can He use it? If He can, let Him use it. Jonathan prevails, and Saul says, "He shall not be slain".
The next feature is that there was war again. We need never expect to be free from war, nor be afraid. Samuel represents the testimony militant. Abigail speaks of David fighting the battles of the Lord. We want our names in the book of life. We want our names also in the book of the wars of the Lord. David had a very great place in that book. He fought the battles of the Lord.
So here one of the battles takes place and one can understand how this war would be recorded in the book of the wars of the Lord. David had a great victory. He smote the Philistines, and they fled from him. They mean men of big position here, men of culture, men of standing in a worldly way. Here was a stripling, but he had overthrown the leader of the Philistines, and now he fought them so that they fled. This again brings in the wrath of the enemy. Let us not be oblivious of the opposition to the true testimony of the Lord, to the true vessels that He employs, to His love, to His counsel. The opposition is unceasing.
But now Saul is sitting in his house, and David is playing. See the proximity of the vessel of the testimony to the arch-enemy of it. Saul had a javelin in his hand, sitting in his house. He did not need it there. There was Christ typically before him. The evil spirit was operating in his heart. "And David played with his hand". Saul had in mind to smite him to the wall. No doubt he wanted to fasten him with a spear to the wall so that his escape would be impossible. This is another thing we should take notice of -- the agility of the testimony, of what is of God. David is nimble, and God uses that agility. He fled: he got out of the way. It is a great thing,
{490}
as representing God, to discern that there is hostility and to get out of the way. God used David's nimbleness to get him out of the way, and he escapes. The Lord did not get out of the way, there was no escape in that sense for Him.
The next instrumentality is Michal. She was a lover of David, too, though it does not say so here. I do not think she represents a true christian, but a system as a woman often does. I have no doubt she represents a system favourable to Christ as opposed to Rome. There are systems favourable to the truth, who have genuine regard for the Lord Jesus. The Church of England, for instance, has a genuine regard for Him. Under that, God has fostered the truth; the truth of the gospel has been maintained. Michal is not to be despised at this particular juncture. She let him down by the window. She is in good company. Rahab let the spies down by the window, and the people at Damascus let Saul down that way. There is not a spiritual man who does not thank God for the Church of England. They have given us an open Bible, they have appointed it to be read in churches. But she has an image: she is an idolater. I only remark they are agencies God uses, but He does not let them off.
She places the image where David had been. Instead of Christ there is an image. Is that where you are? You may think you have Christ, but you have not. Like the mother of Jesus, they went a day's journey and thought He was with them, but He was not. Instead of David, there was an image covered with goat's hair. The real David was gone. If anybody here is in such a place, where there is nothing but an image of Christ, do not stay there. If you want Christ Himself, He has fled.
He flees to Samuel: a different man from Jonathan, and different, too, from Michal. He is the last great instrumentality God uses for the preservation of the
{491}
testimony. This leads David to spiritual conditions not found in the house of Michal or Saul; David is found where Samuel is. That was intelligence. He knew where Samuel was. After Samuel anointed David, he went to Ramah. He retired then from the judgeship of Israel, though in truth he judged it all the days of his life. He retired to Ramah, and what is he doing? He is presiding over a school of prophets. Is not he a beautiful type of Christ? We are enjoined in Corinthians to desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy. In that way we edify the assembly. If an unbeliever comes in, he falls down and worships God (@1 Corinthians 14: 25). The spirit of prophecy brings God in, and so the incomer falls down and says that God is among you. God is acting in prophetic speaking to bring in His mind to bear on the conscience of the brethren.
That is what was going on at Naioth in Ramah. It has a remarkable position in this chapter. The prophets were prophesying there.
David got into the company of prophets. He and Samuel went to Naioth. We are not told what went on until Saul sent messengers. He sent three times. What is to be seen, what is visible? What do the messengers of Saul see? They were sent with murderous intent, but what do they see? They see a company of prophets prophesying, and Samuel over them. A system that cannot be overthrown: the spiritual system that God has set up in Christ, set up in the assembly cannot be overthrown. Saul's emissaries could not overthrow it. "As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses ... they shall proceed no further", @2 Timothy 3: 8, 9. A system set up in Christ in heaven cannot be overthrown. It is prevailing. The messengers of Saul see this, and they are overcome. Another set of messengers come, and they begin to prophesy: the Spirit overcomes them. They are not like the messengers whom Ahaziah sent to take Elijah; they
{492}
were destroyed, but the spirit of christianity is not for violence. Spirituality will prevail, and it will overthrow the enemy at the closest contact.
The third company is sent, and they prophesy. What a great feature, if an enemy comes in and comes under the influence of heaven.
Then Saul himself comes. The very leader of the opposition comes himself. Let him come. This system of things that God has set up in Christ is not afraid of anyone. He came first to a great well. I do not suppose he ever understood much about the great well. Then he comes to the prophets, and he begins to prophesy, even before he came near Samuel.
What I want you to notice is that he is exposed in spite of the fact that he prophesied. He does not escape any more than Michal. The light exposes, it is that which makes manifest. Even though he joined among the prophets, he is exposed. He strips himself naked. Typically he never had suitable clothes and at the end, under the most favourable conditions, he is exposed. Let us be careful that if we come under the power of prophecy that we are not exposed.
The important point is that God used this final instrumentality for the overthrow of this opposition. Samuel presides over the prophets and brings down the opposition. If we cultivate this, and maintain it, we shall never be overcome. In this setting, David is protected. Samuel had Saul and the messengers under the influence of prophecy.
{493}
REALITY
@John 4: 10 - 19, 28, 30, 39, 40, 46 - 53
This gospel was evidently written long after the ministry of the twelve and of Paul had been effective, so that in a widespread area of the world, Jesus was believed on. Among those nominal believers there were some who were not really converted, they were not born again. John has in view that all nominal believers should be real believers, and that there should be no merely feigned believers. He tells us at the outset, that those that received the Lord Jesus, obtained from God the title to take the place of His children, "but as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God, to those that believe on his name"; and then he adds, "who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God", @John 1: 12, 13. God has in mind to disqualify all others; a very solemn matter for them, but necessary on God's account, for He hates unreality, and certainly will not have unreal believers. He knows they will drift away sooner or later. So John tells us in his wonderful sixth chapter, that when Jesus spoke words of "spirit and ... life" many of His disciples went away back and walked no more with Him. That is the inevitable result of unreality in our faith. The Lord challenges them, He says, "Will ye also go away?" And one of them answers, "To whom shall we go? Thou hast words of life eternal". They were real, and they were detained near the Lord, as followers of Him, because He had the words of eternal life.
The gospel today must, in the nature of things, take character from this wonderful book called 'The Gospel according to John'. Not that Luke's gospel does not stand; it does -- his is the loveliest of
{494}
all books. And those of Matthew and Mark stand, too, but they must all serve in relation to John because the gospel of today is to those who are nominal believers, many of them, alas, unreal! John would say to us, 'I should like to see all these people real believers, no longer merely nominal, otherwise they will turn aside in due course and end by being banished from the presence of God'. John is the same writer as the one who presents to us the solemn scene of the great white throne, and the One who sat on the well at Sychar in chapter 4 is the very same One that John presents, as sitting on that solemn seat called the great white throne, and from whose face the heaven and the earth flee away. Whilst John presents the love of God in the most wonderful way, for he knew it as perhaps no one else, yet he presents judgment. Not that judgment is opposed to love, it is not, it is the exigency of love, for how could God rest in His love, with rebellious men and women before Him? He could not. So John, taking account of us as nominal believers, presses the idea of coming to Jesus. John the baptist presents Him to us, at the outset, as standing. "In the midst of you stands, whom ye do not know, he who comes after me, the thong of whose sandal I am not worthy to unloose", @John 1: 26, 27. And then John presents Jesus walking, he says, "And, looking at Jesus as he walked, he says, Behold the Lamb of God", @John 1: 36. I should like to call your attention to that wondrous, glorious Person, with the same sort of feeling that filled the heart of John the baptist when he said, "Behold the Lamb of God". If I were to say, 'John, of whom are you speaking?' He would reply, 'I am speaking of this Person who is walking'; but really the whole universe should hear, "Behold the Lamb of God". That voice resounds in the power of the Spirit tonight, "Behold the Lamb of God". Have you seen Him? Have you seen any of His
{495}
movements? Have you heard Him? Have you moved on hearing of Him? There were two disciples of John the baptist who were within hearing of his voice, and they followed Jesus. They followed Him really, and feelingly, they were touched by the voice of the baptist, and they were moved to follow. Would that my voice could move you thus. They followed Jesus; attention is being called to Him by the voice of love, it moves hearers to follow. Let the word into your heart. As heaven looks down on you, it wonders that your heart can be so hard as to refuse such an appeal! If there is any movement, heaven notices it, and is pleased; "there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth".
One of the two disciples who followed Jesus was called Andrew, a notable man; he had been with Jesus for some hours of the day, and then he went off to get his brother. Someone may have invited you tonight -- your father, mother, brother, sister or friend -- it has cost them something, some thought or it may be prayer, and you have come. But that is not all. When Andrew had found the Messiah, he went after his brother, and brought him to Jesus. I am here tonight for that purpose, that in the grace of God some soul may be reached and led to Jesus. Luke would lead Jesus to *you*, so in no sense are we to set him aside. Luke tells us of the man on the road to Jericho, who fell among thieves who left him half dead, and of a Samaritan who passed that way and "came to him", that is what Luke would tell you, but John would say 'Come to Jesus'. You have been led to this room tonight, that you might hear the voice of Christ in the preaching. Some do not think much about the preaching, but it is of great importance to God, for it is His way of calling attention to Christ, in such wise that you might "come and see". John tells us that the Lord said, "No one
{496}
can come to me except the Father who has sent me draw him", @John 6: 44. It is a real work of God -- of the Father, Son and Spirit -- a mighty effective power to draw souls to Jesus. The Lord also says, "Him that comes to me I will not at all cast out", @John 6: 37. Whatever drawings there are, and there are drawings on this, the Lord's day; this whole day has occasioned a mighty wave of divine power, and all with a view that souls might be drawn to Jesus.
This chapter is one of the most touching in John's gospel. He deals with individuals; you get nothing in John as to numbers being converted or healed at one time, it is one after another. John's aim is quality, real conversions and real believers who saw the glory. It says, "Jesus ... manifested his glory; and his disciples believed on him", @John 2: 11. They looked on Him as His glory was manifested and they believed; that is what John has in view, he wants quality. At the end of his gospel, John tells us about the great catch of fishes; it is very striking how he brings in the number of the fishes -- "a hundred and fifty-three". Where do they come from? From "the right side of the ship", chapter 21: 6. Luke tells us that they come from the deep (@Luke 5: 4), but John says that they come from the right side of the ship, he has more discernment. Luke speaks of their weight, which causes the ships to sink, but John gives their number and quality, they are great ones. These are living saints, brought about by the ministry as peculiar to this gospel. Living persons whom Jesus on looking at, can name as He did Cephas. "Thou shalt be called Cephas". They were not like nominal converts who put up their hands and say, 'I believe', and who perhaps are never seen again! These are real believers, for the gospel is to secure men for God.
In this gospel we have a Nicodemus, in chapter 3, a man of distinction among the Jews; and a nobleman
{497}
in chapter 4; but between these two we have an outcast woman; her circumstances, and the circumstances of Jesus, brought them together. Jesus was at this well on account of His love; He was going to Galilee but He came to this spot; He was weary and He sat thus on the well, making no effort to conceal that He was weary. The woman came to Him on account of something that she needed; she needed water. Possibly she came then, because she could not come when others were there; she was a sinner, a woman of no repute. Let no one think that does not apply to me, for no one has reputation according to the flesh; she is just a picture of us all. God sees right through us all. When Nicodemus came to the Lord, He saw right through him and said, "Ye must be born again", chapter 3: 7. I do not know what classes are represented here, but the Lord knows; He said to Nicodemus, Your class, as a teacher of Israel, must be born again. That sweeps away all religious pride. People hide themselves, as they think, behind religious garb and custom, but the Lord says to that class of people, "Ye must be born again". The Lord does not say a word to this woman about new birth, she had no status whatever in that way, she had no reputation; but the Lord knew she was a poor, thirsty soul, who had drunk deeply into this world's pleasure and had come to the end of it. That was the class to which she belonged, and the Lord knew it. The Lord knows all about *you*; He knows what is going on in your soul, and what soul-experience you have had. He says to you, "If thou knewest" -- there is no question of what *He* knows, but of *your* knowledge. "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". The object of the preaching is to call attention to the wonderful gift of God, and to the Person through whom the gift
{498}
comes. The Person is equal to the gift, and the gift is equal to the Person.
Then the woman says, "Give me this water, that I may not thirst nor come here to draw". She was on natural lines, as most of us are at the outset; but there was a moral question to be settled with her, and the Lord says to her, "Go, call thy husband, and come here". Were the facts all known as to ourselves, there may be some domestic or other difficulty, which will have to be met and judged; the light of God has to search you, and to disclose to you the motives that are acting with you; before God does His work He will search you through and through. The woman says, "I have not a husband". It is not only what exists now, but what has existed, that matters, for God requires that which is past. If God is dealing with your soul, He will have everything out and settled; He will enter into and enquire into your past life. You can never be happy with God till things are all out and settled -- everything owned and confessed. It is a wonderful thing to learn how to confess to God. He reverts to your history since the beginning of it, not only what you are now, but what you have been. So the Lord here says to this woman, "Thou hast had five husbands", and the worst of it all is, that the one you have now is not your husband; so you said truly, "I have not a husband". The light entered into her and exposed her, and she said, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet". Perhaps you have never spoken respectfully to the Lord Jesus. Have you said anything to Him? He is ready to hear you. He listens to the blackest sinner that turns to Him. If God works with you, you will speak respectfully to the Lord.
Now having gone so far, I want to speak about this woman's body, as being typified in her water pot; because this chapter would secure you in your body and in your house. If we have in a town a
{499}
certain number of persons secured in their bodies (I mean as to themselves -- body, soul and spirit) and then in their houses, we have material for the assembly, in principle; and then there will be a place for Jesus in the town. That is exactly what happened here; this woman left her waterpot, that is to say, the material vessel which she brought, to get water from Sychar's well. There is no hint that she had a house, or a head of her own, but she had a body, as every one of us has. The epistle to the Romans, which is the great gospel epistle, gives the exhortation to present our bodies "a living sacrifice"; without that there is no evidence that the gospel has done its work. If my body is not yielded up, the Lord would claim it. The Lord has need of the believer's body; what a triumph that such a body should be in possession of living water! The woman drank the living water, in principle, and she lived. Her body was, so to speak, filled with that living water, though I admit that the Holy Spirit had not yet come. What happens today is that light comes in, then there is confession, and believing the gospel; then there is the reception of the Holy Spirit, and the body becomes "dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness" (@Romans 8: 10); the body is presented to God "a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service", @Romans 12: 1. This is what you get illustrated in this chapter. The woman leaves her waterpot, and goes to the men and says to them, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" (verse 29). How perfectly the light had penetrated her soul! "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done". One is challenged as to that, have *we* gone over the whole ground with God? The greatest cause of weakness among us, as believers, is the want of self-judgment -- the confessing of things. "Is not he the Christ?"
{500}
Speaking about Jesus in that way is sure to be noticed; it amounts to a very positive assertion, the strongest way of presenting Him. So "they went out of the city, and came to him" -- I would call your attention to that; they went out to *Him*, there is soul movement. The gospel according to John would produce soul movement to Christ. Then they believed, having heard Him, and they invited Him to stay with them. Is not that very beautiful?
I think the Lord greatly valued that. He stays with them for a fixed time, for two days, "and more a great deal believed on account of his word". Then they said to the woman, Now we believe, not because of what you said, though they did not make little of that, for she had brought the living water to them; her body was a holy vessel, which had carried the living water, as she spoke about Christ to the men of Sychar, but they said, "Now we believe ... for we have heard him ourselves". I would say to you, Go and hear Him yourself; that is what these men did, and then they say, He is "the Saviour of the world". They got more than she did, but she would not be in the least envious of that; on the contrary, she would rejoice. If you go to Him, you will get increase of light; think of these men talking about "the Saviour of the world". There was no reference to a house with the men of Sychar; they invited the Lord to stay with them two days, but they say nothing as to the accommodation they had; the Holy Spirit says not a word about the house, but at the close of this chapter we have the house of a nobleman. The narrative would not be closed until we had a house mentioned; I do not mean a material house, but a man's family circle. We get here a nobleman's household. The Holy Spirit would rebuke all radicalism in our souls, there is no radicalism with God, He saves a nobleman. He saves Nicodemus and He saves the poor outcast of Sychar -- He is no respecter of
{501}
persons. The door is open for all, whether a Nicodemus, a Joseph of Arimathaea, or this nobleman, to come to Jesus.
The nobleman came to Jesus in Cana of Galilee, the city where His glory once shone in turning the water into wine. The nobleman says, "Come down ere my child die" (verse 49). The Lord does not need to go down, He does not need to leave heaven tonight; He needs but to say the word. He did not go down to Capernaum, He remained where He was, and He said, "Go, thy son lives". Precious Saviour, what power He has! He wanted to introduce into that nobleman's mind the idea of a son; the man had said, "My child", but the Lord says, "Thy son". That son is to grace that house. Is there a young man or woman here tonight who belongs to a christian household? Are you unconverted, are you a blot on your house, and a grief to your parents? The Lord would speak to your soul that you might live. The man went down to his house and his servants met him and said, "Thy child lives"; he says, 'At what hour did he begin to get better?' and they say, "At the seventh hour". The Lord worked instantaneously, though the distance was considerable, the child was healed at the same hour as the Lord said, "Thy son lives". May this word tonight be the seventh hour for some of you! The seventh hour means the end of an exercise; a closing moment with the Lord; and it says this man "believed, himself and his whole house". How gladly he would receive the Lord when He went to Capernaum, and how glad would Jesus be to go to the nobleman's house. No one is truly noble, till he believes that "Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God", @John 20: 31.
{502}
THE CURRENT MIND OF GOD
@Revelation 1: 9 - 19; @Acts 10: 9 - 21, 44
I was thinking, dear brethren, of the current mind of God and our being in accord with it. One had better not be here on earth, if not in accord with the mind of God, not simply what it was or will be, but what *it is*. In this book of Revelation we have "I am ... he who is, and who was, and who is to come" (chapter 1: 8), "who is" comes first, so that in order to have a right apprehension of what has been, and what will be, it is essential to have an apprehension of what is. Of old, the people of God in the desert were to be certain of the divine way, and so the tabernacle with the cloud upon it was ever to be the guide. There is that at the present time which corresponds, and it is for all the people of God to see the way He takes; to be blind or indifferent is to court disaster, but to be in the apprehension of it and the recognition of its accompaniments, is to be in a current in which one is carried forward. So I selected these records of these two great servants of God, John and Peter, as illustrating the divine way of keeping us in the current of His mind. The selection is by no means accidental, for God had earlier set these two servants together, so that they moved together, as in @Acts 3 we are told, "Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer". They represented much, not simply the normal growth of believers, but the special workmanship of Christ. There is always that which is special in the ways of God, and we cannot deny Him that right. Peter and John in this way represented what was special, and they moved in beautiful harmony, John ever taking the second place. In these scriptures we find them in crises. The circumstances of these
{503}
chapters are far apart, for doubtless Peter was with the Lord when John was in Patmos; they are not now seen together, but separately, and I wish to treat of them in that way, because, whilst, as I hope to show, the same principle enters into both incidents. John is called back, he hears a voice behind him; whereas Peter hears a voice, not from behind, but from heaven. A voice from heaven indicates a forward movement, whereas the voice behind is to call attention to something that is behind. It may be that some of us are behind, and if so, the Lord will not fail to call attention to what is behind. We have to look back on what is behind, not in a mirror in front of us, but there has to be a turning, as we see here. John turned back to see the voice. Those who take the lead turn back at times; indeed, we find it with the Lord; in the moment of supreme suffering He turned round, we are told, and looked at one who was far behind -- one who had just denied Him; "The Lord, turning round, looked at Peter", @Luke 22: 61. That meant much for Him, but He did it, and it is ever right to do it when it is a question of one who is behind. Many of us, as I said, are apt to be behind, and those in front do not wish to go on without them. Those who are behind are greatly exposed. Amalek of old cut off those who were behind. Those in front cannot afford to ignore those who are behind, but I wish to point out that, for discernment of the present mind of God, spirituality is essential. Spirituality is a current word amongst us, but one is afraid that as to actual quantity it is not very apparent, and one includes oneself in this. Spirituality is not in much quantity, but it is essential to what I purpose to dwell upon. It is essential to be spiritual if there is to be any leadership, and let no one assume that there is not leadership. God always employs leaders; it may be in a small or a great way, but the principle of leadership is ever
{504}
present with God; and if there be any qualifications for leading, it is of all moment that there should be spirituality, otherwise, in due course, the right eye will become utterly darkened, and the arm clean dried up (@Zechariah 11: 17). One has to see clearly, to lead. Moses said to Hobab, "thou wilt be to us for eyes" (@Numbers 10: 31), poor eyes those would have been, the eyes of a native of the wilderness, for that was what Hobab was. The people of God should never be natives; they are passing through, and a child of the wilderness could not, therefore, properly be eyes for the people. So God in @Numbers 10 shows that *He* will be eyes to them. The ark, typifying the Lord Jesus, left its place of dignity in the camp, and took the lead (safe leading indeed!), three days journey in the wilderness. It was not only to take the lead, but "to search out a resting-place for them" -- that is true leadership. True leadership is not always militant or to do with strife, but it is for peace and rest. So in Deborah's days we read that the "leaders led in Israel", and they led aright, with the result that the land was at rest. Deborah says, "Let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years", @Judges 5: 31. Rest is the consequence of true leadership. The leaders led in Israel, and the ark itself led; it went three days journey in the wilderness to find a resting-place for the people. When it set forward, Moses said, "Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thy face", @Numbers 10: 35. Depend upon it, true leadership means the scattering of the enemy. When it rested, he said, "Return, Jehovah, unto the myriads of the thousands of Israel".
That is the divine way, and God is proceeding on those lines, so that in leadership it is of all importance to see the way, and to be able to turn back and see those who are behind; we must not go without them;
{505}
they are coming. I am not referring to apostasy -- to those who draw back to perdition, that is a different matter: ("if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him", @Hebrews 10: 38). That is a different matter from those who are walking slowly. The latter are coming on, anyway, and we see them coming. Peter looked back when he saw John following and it is of all moment for leaders to be able to see, to have a clear vision.
John here, was in a true position for leadership; he "was in the island called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus", and he was there as their brother and companion in tribulation, and he became "in the Spirit on the Lord's day". I believe the "Lord's day" in Revelation, suggests to us what the Lord has done for us in these last days. He has not publicly intervened in the regulation of the world yet. His object for the moment is to look after His people, the assembly, and He has intervened in the course of this world to make a way for us. It is the Lord's day; it refers to the day in which *He* is dominant. It may be said that He is not dominant in the world, but He certainly is acting dominantly in christendom, as this book shows, and He has made a way for us. "I have set before thee an opened door", @Revelation 3: 8. He has done that, and it has caused a mighty movement in christendom covering a long period of time; but He has done it, and John on this day is "in the Spirit", as if he is free to be abstracted. It is right to be free to be in the Spirit whenever possible. The realm of the Spirit is wonderful! It was not simply that he had the Spirit, or that he walked in the Spirit, but he was *in the Spirit* in the sense of being in the realm of the Spirit, and he was wholly absorbed in that realm on the Lord's day. The Lord's day and the Spirit go together. The Lord's day means that the Lord has intervened for us and has made a way
{506}
for us, and in doing so He has made a way for the Spirit, not only that the Spirit should convict, which He does, but that He should be available as a matter of privilege and enjoyment. But for that we need to be formed spiritually, not only to have the Spirit, but to accustom ourselves to the Spirit's domination, so that room is made for Him in the mind, affection and soul; He dominates so that there is complete envelopment and enrapturing. It is possible, and that is where John was. You will remember that Philip was caught away by the Spirit. A marvellous statement, involving not only his moral being, but the body, the whole man raptured by the Spirit, and he is found in normal conditions afterwards, at Azotus. Paul said if he thought of God he was beside himself; God was so much to him.
John was in this state, and he heard a voice behind him like a trumpet. Why should John be disturbed? I do not suppose he ever complained about the disturbance: the voice of Jesus could never be a disturbance to be complained about by John. It may be a disturbance to some of us, who are in worldly associations, but the voice of Jesus, even when like a trumpet, would never be regarded by John as a disturbance. And there were words in the voice, which was behind: "What thou seest write in a book, and send to the seven assemblies". And then he turns to see the voice -- a remarkable expression -- and he saw the Lord, not in habiliments that belong properly to heaven or heavenly associations, but in habiliments that refer to a state of things here that needed to be dealt with judicially; it is that to which I would call attention. If we are to go forward spiritually, it is important not to ignore conditions that exist, for the Lord will call us back if we do. People who pretend to go forward spiritually, and ignore conditions locally or generally, will soon hear a trumpet voice *behind*, as if the Lord
{507}
would say, 'Take notice of local conditions'. I am speaking very practically and simply. It is well to be practical and not ignore actual current conditions among the people of God. I am not saying that there was any reproof for John in this trumpet voice, there was not; nevertheless John needed to have his attention called to what existed in the seven assemblies in Asia. I do not doubt but that he was conversant with these assemblies in his service. I believe he ministered in these very places in his later years; but we may minister in localities and yet need to have our attention called to certain current conditions, and that is what you get here. The voice is from *behind*, like a trumpet, and John is not only to be made acquainted with the conditions, but he is to write about them, he is to let the brethren know about them, he is to let the seven assemblies in Asia know, in writing, about these conditions. And so he sees the Lord in this judicial garb, and he falls at His feet as dead. It was a different Jesus for the moment, so far as John could judge, from what he had been accustomed to; but it is well to get a good view of the Lord in His judicial garb, because *we* have got to put on this garb if we are to be kept from the occasion of judgment. If there be a good doorkeeper in a judicial garb, evil is not admitted, it is judged. I doubt whether any one is of value in the assembly, save as he is able to form a judgment about evil. We get in this very book an angel talking to John saying, "I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore" (@Revelation 17: 1); then he carried him away in spirit to a desert, so that he might see the evil in all its hideous magnitude, and the judgment of God upon it.
So here John falls at His feet as dead, but the Lord assures him that He is the same Jesus whom he had known from the outset: "Fear not; *I* am the first, and the last, and the living one; and I became dead,
{508}
and behold, I am living to the ages of ages, and have the keys of death and of hades"; as if to say, I want you to see the evil -- the drift of evil in the sphere of profession (in the midst of the candlesticks), but I wish you to understand that I am in control, and nothing can get beyond Me. He would assure us that He has "the keys of death and of hades"; He has power to limit the evil. Then He has also, the "key of David", that is to say, the power to open up the door (chapter 3: 7). That is what John had to come to. He was assured of the Lord's love, that it was the same Jesus, but here in judicial garb. Nothing in the whole sphere in which His name is owned, misses His eye. Nothing will escape His judgment, and He would bring us into accord with that now, so that as going forward in spiritual and assembly privilege, we are with Him in regard of the evil that exists abroad. 2 Timothy teaches us, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity" -- you judge it, and leave it, and then you "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart".
In Peter's case we have another crisis. It is not now a question of evil coming into the church. Thank God, it had been kept out. We see in @Acts 5 and 6, that there was an attempt to bring in evil but it had been kept out by holy vigilance; so that in chapter 10 it is not a question of evil rushing in, but that something new and delightful to the heart of God, is about to be introduced. Now this is an important matter, because we can never tell when God will bring in something that we have not looked for, that we have not perhaps wished for. Something, indeed, that may interfere with our reckonings a little, and our personal position, but if we are in the Spirit, if we are spiritual, we shall be in full sympathy with it, and if there be anything lacking with us, as there is apt to be, God will reveal
{509}
it unto us, "If in any thing ye be otherwise minded. God shall reveal even this unto you", @Philippians 3: 15. God has great consideration for a spiritual person. Most tenderly did He reveal things to Peter, so that he might act concurrently with what He was doing, as we see in this chapter. Saul of Tarsus had already been converted and was in active service; like His Master, the Lord Jesus who, before John Baptist was cast into prison, began to do something, according to John's gospel. According to the synoptic gospels, He waited until John was in prison, that is to say, He was governed by levitical instincts and principles; but being a divine Person, according to John's gospel, He Himself moves; He stood, and then He walked, and then He ministered. So Paul was already in service according to chapter 9, when the great current was moving out towards the gentiles. Is Peter going to be in this movement? If there be a current today, something distinctive from God (He loves to bring in distinctive things), if I am spiritual I shall not miss it. I may need correction, or even rebuke, but I shall not miss it; hence the great importance of spirituality.
Peter, we are told, was in the house of Simon a tanner, and Cornelius receives a vision from heaven. God is moving -- a mighty current is moving towards the gentiles. Peter is not far away; he is at the seaside, and it is about the sixth hour (probably noon), and he is hungry. While the food is being prepared, Peter goes *up*; he did not go down. Had he been governed by natural feelings, he would have gone down to where the food was being prepared, for he was hungry; but he went up -- moral ascent, a true evidence of spirituality, and he went up to *pray*; that is a sure sign of a dependant man. I am sure, dear brethren, we need to be on the watch, because God moves, as we sometimes sing, "in a mysterious way"; not that it is mysterious to the spiritual. God moves, and we do not want to be out
{510}
of step with what He is doing; a spiritual man will not miss it.
Peter went up to pray, and an ecstasy came upon him: that is the evidence of spirituality in a crisis. Then the sheet comes down, "and it came even to me". Peter says in chapter 10 it came from heaven with the creatures in it, and a voice says, "Rise, Peter, slay and eat". Peter needed adjustment, and it soon came. This took place three times, and while Peter was in doubt as to the vision, the men who came from Cornelius stood before the gate, and the Spirit says to Peter, "Behold, three men seek thee ... go with them". That is to say, he is spiritual, and the Spirit can speak to him. It is not a question of a call in discipline or providential intervention, but a direct voice from the Spirit to a person who knows how to listen to the Spirit. Peter is spiritual. I do not go into the details. Peter comes down to the three men, and they travel to Caesarea where Cornelius meets them. In the house of Cornelius, Peter, when beginning to speak, says, "Of a truth". It is a fine thing if God is doing something that cuts across my feelings or prejudices, to recognise the truth. The truth should be the great adjusting principle. If I am subject, I bow to the truth, and let it have its way. The Lord Himself used the same words when at Nazareth, "I tell you of a truth", @Luke 4: 25. Peter says here, "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons". It is a very fine trait of spirituality, to bow to the truth of what God is doing.
And so Peter went on to preach to Cornelius and his company about the Lord Jesus. "While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word" (verse 44). That is to say, Peter is brought into accord with the current, and now the Holy Spirit has a free hand. That is one of the finest results of any exercise in service, that the Spirit has a free hand. The Spirit
{511}
falls on Cornelius and his company while Peter is yet speaking. He did not ask Peter to stop, but He fell on them while Peter was speaking. What a scene! Peter was preaching in the power of the Spirit, undoubtedly, and the Spirit falls on his hearers, as if He were to say, I have a free hand now. And so we reach @Luke 15 -- the acme of the gospel -- the prodigal brought back, and the best things of heaven brought out; that is where the Spirit of God has a free hand.
The Spirit of God "fell upon all those who were hearing the word"; that would denote an affectionate, energetic action, showing the divine feelings in connection with the reception of the gentiles. A marvellous scene! It all flows out in connection with Peter having been brought into accord with the current; he was fully in it, and he says later in justification of it, "who indeed was *I* to be able to forbid God?" It was *God's* doing. What can be greater in our service, than that room is made for the Spirit of God -- so that what is done is done by God, and not simply by us? Peter was brought into accord because he was spiritual, like the servant of Abraham of old, who said, "I being in the way. Jehovah has led me", @Genesis 24: 27.
May God help us not only to recognise the Spirit, but to be spiritual, as it says, "the spiritual discerns all things, and *he* is discerned of no one", @1 Corinthians 2: 15.
{512}
"WILT THOU BE MADE WHOLE?"
@John 5: 1 - 18
We have in the Scriptures, not only incidents that illustrate the gospel, but also the settings of those incidents; and the setting as well as the incident is intended to have a voice. Even the time in which we find an occurrence has a significance. The setting of this remarkable incident is a religious setting. Religion, of course, is in a sense right, but you may find it among the heathen, in fact it is innate in man to be religious, therefore in itself religion is not of any moral value. In the epistle of James it speaks of "pure religion and undefiled" which is, "to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world". That is a religion which has a moral value to it, but it is not the prevailing religion, but is indeed rare. The prevalent religion is almost legion in regard of its varieties. One has only to look up an encyclopaedia or dictionary to find out how many there are. But I doubt if you will get the kind that James speaks of -- the kind that is pure. So that the religion I speak of as connected with this man in @John 5 is the kind that was common. Jerusalem, as a city of the world in those days, had its own religion. The centre of it was the temple, an imposing structure built by a wicked man, Herod. It was not the one which Solomon built. The religious customs went on, even whilst the Lord Jesus was arraigned before the high priests. The Lord Jesus was arrested in Jerusalem and tried by the religious dignitaries of that day. Theirs was not a religion that was "pure and undefiled", but a religion of the world. This incident is in that setting. A feast of the Jews was going on, a customary religious feast. We are in similar
{513}
circumstances today with a religion that is accepted in the world. In spite of this, the Lord Jesus is operating in the midst of it. It is not helping Him, but He is operating Himself. We find in this setting, a pool with a name suggesting something that is very good. It was called in Hebrew, Bethesda; that was its name according to the religious setting. It signifies 'house of mercy'. That is a very good name. But names do not always convey what is literally intended. We have 'Sisters of Mercy', so-called, today, who might be expected to convey mercy, or to show mercy. If I were to illustrate a sister of mercy, I should suggest Anna, the prophetess, a woman of great age. She spoke to everybody in Jerusalem about Jesus. She departed not from the temple day or night. There are not many like that. This pool then was called Bethesda! House of mercy! House of pity! There was something in it. But a man was there who had been ill for thirty-eight years, but he did not come in for the mercy. Some of you may have been reading the Bible for years and hearing sermons, but how about that disease of sin from which you are suffering?
It began in the garden of Eden. It is a disease that is working and it bears its fruit. The world is an evidence of it. "All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God", @Romans 3: 23. Not only have we sinned, but sin is working in us. Peter had a boat, and the Lord Jesus asked him to lend Him his boat that He might preach out of it. And then the Lord says, "Launch out into the deep", and he did, and a great haul of fishes was the result. Peter fell at the Lord's knees and says, "I am a sinful man, O Lord", @Luke 5: 8. Not only had he sinned, for he cursed and swore, he was a sinful man. Every one of us is just as sinful as Peter. We must have this matter settled. We may put it off for a time, but a settlement has to be made. The Lord Jesus has
{514}
settled the question of their sins for believers. It is on the principle of faith. If a settlement is not made now in time, it will have to be made in eternity. "It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment". The graveyards are the witness to death, but if we die without Christ we shall appear before the great white throne, and everyone will then have to own that God is righteous. The lake of fire is a terrible reality, but the scripture is true: "Whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire". @Revelation 20: 15.
Well, this man was in the midst of this religious setting, but he had suffered an infirmity for thirty-eight years. The place did not deserve its name so far as he was concerned. It is for us to enquire whether *we* have got any relief in regard to this sin question. The Lord Jesus is ready to help you if you are convicted of sin. The angel came down but once a year to trouble the waters of Bethesda, but this is not how matters stand in the true house of mercy: God is "rich in mercy". Luke records the history by a man who smote upon his breast and said, "God, have compassion on me, the sinner", and the Lord Jesus says he went down to his house justified. It is in the acknowledgment of it that the relief comes. God is merciful to him. He has not to wait thirty-eight years.
How can we be justified? The Lord Jesus has borne our sins in His own body on the tree (@1 Peter 2: 24). The Lord says to this man, "Wilt thou be made whole?" There was not a man there for all the thirty-eight years able to help the poor invalid. Only One can give it to you, that is Jesus. It is the gospel period. The power of the Lord is present to heal. Not simply can it heal, but it is present to heal. It is not simply a matter of light. The Lord asked this man the question, "Wilt thou be made whole?" for the man had no one to help him. Then
{515}
the Lord said, "Take up thy bed, and walk". He is ready to do it for anyone. The bed is a simple figure of what people rest in. The Lord says, take it up and walk. This is going on all the time. It is only a question of the Lord saying it. We are not half believing enough as to the Lord's power. He can speak from heaven and a man can be raised up in America, or in China, or in Africa. It is a question of His power. If you believe that He is a divine Person, that He is God, it is simple. The Lord said it and the man believed it. Many a one has come into a gospel meeting and has gone out able to walk spiritually.
Impotent folk! No power to resist evil nor to do anything good. This man was among them. The Lord Jesus is working in the midst of such circumstances. He is here to help *you*. It is one at a time. John presents this. John's gospel is to bring in quality. Andrew goes and finds Peter and brings him to Jesus. It is one at a time. Even though a multitude were converted, it is yet one at a time, an individual transaction with Christ. Peter says, "Repent, and be baptised every one of you". Take Nicodemus, the Lord told him, "It is needful that *ye* should be born anew", @John 3: 7. In @John 4 a poor woman came out by herself. She was converted, and she went and spoke to others and they were converted. Here is one man selected out of all those impotent folk. He gets converted. It may be He has in His mind to pick out someone here for blessing tonight. Though the Creator of all, He deals with one at a time. "Wilt *thou* be made whole?" Are you ready to get the blessing? Have you any sin question to answer? Would you like to be relieved? Do not wait thirty-eight years! "Now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation". The man took up his bed and walked. He did not miss the blessing. The Lord said, "Take up thy
{516}
bed, and walk". Will you in simple faith believe? His word is, "He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life", @John 5: 24. Do you believe that? This man heard His word and acted on it. It is a question of obedience. He did it, and in doing so, was cured.
The Lord has a right to command obedience. It is in love. "God ... commandeth all men every where to repent", @Acts 17: 30. It is in love. *Your* wisdom is to do it. Why? "Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness". Will you do what this man did? He obeyed the Lord Jesus; suppose he had lain on his couch and said, 'I am not sure about it!' He would not have been healed. Suppose you go out and forget the word! So far as you are concerned there is no gain from this meeting. It is imperative to do what the Lord says. The religious people were not pleased that the man was healed on the sabbath day. It was a matter of religious form. They actually complained that a man ill for thirty-eight years had been healed on a day that stood for current religion. He said, "He that made me whole ... said unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk", a good answer. The word of the Lord Jesus is more important than that of any other. Do not disregard it, for in obeying it the power to rise up comes to you. You remember what the jailor said, "What must I do to be saved?" Have you ever asked that? "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house". Nothing could be plainer. If He says something, do it. Salvation lies in obedience. The man says, He told me to walk on this day. It was the word of authority. The Lord Jesus takes all the suffering on Himself. He took the whole sin question upon His own shoulders, and died, that He might say to you, 'Take up *your* bed and walk'. Power comes
{517}
by obedience. God gives the Holy Spirit to all those who obey Christ. The man came in for opposition, but the Lord says, 'Do not sin again'. There is no licence for sin. The Lord says, "Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee". As forgiven I get the Spirit. I give up sin and walk in newness of life.
May God help you to do what the man did, and as you obey, strength will come to you.
{518}
"JERUSALEM ABOVE ... OUR MOTHER"
@Galatians 4: 26 - 31
I wish to speak, dear brethren, of Jerusalem above, viewed as "our mother". She is spoken of thus in the passage read. She is alluded to elsewhere as the heavenly Jerusalem, and as the new Jerusalem, and as the holy Jerusalem, but I think of her now as "above", the title under which she is spoken of as "our mother". The idea of the mother runs through Scripture; sometimes it is representative of a system. We should not hesitate in the use of the word 'system' as applied to Jerusalem, for God always operates systematically; and the want of system in the right sense is necessarily weakness, and tends to individualism and independency. One has not to go beyond one's physical constitution to understand that God works on that principle; and so in the wide universe all is on that principle, as apprehended by faith; for "by faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed", alluding to what we call the universe. The very word signifies organisation and organism. It is very evident that the idea of the mother, as applied to Babylon, or the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, is systematic; outside of the divine system there has not been anything like it in the history of the world: "Mystery, great Babylon, the mother of the harlots, and of the abominations of the earth", @Revelation 17: 5.
It behoves us, dear brethren, to understand and have in evidence what is of God from the 'mother' standpoint. It is a matter of interest and instruction, that Samson took his father and his mother with him; they went with him, but it is said after allusion is made to them, that his father went down to the Philistine woman whom he was to marry. The
{519}
mother was omitted. It is in that omission that the history of breakdown in the church, I believe, is illustrated. We may go a long way with the father, and find ourselves in association with what is evil. Then we have a feast instituted, and the disclosure of the secret. The Philistines became possessed of the secret, and the enemy has made much of that secret. We find that what belongs to the mystery, is now degraded abroad in what is called religion but which is really heathen idolatry. That is a very solemn and striking fact.
God "maketh the barren woman to keep house" (@Psalm 113: 9); to attend to the house she is one in whom the heart of her husband doth safely confide -- that is the thing, dear brethren, and that is moral love. The mother, according to what I have been saying, lives above the level of this world, and maintains what is due to the Lord. She maintains secrets. It will be remembered that in the case of the woman I have mentioned -- Samson's mother -- the angel came to her, so that obviously there was some neglect in the father going alone with him; this was seen in the consequent disaster.
I want to show from the scripture in Galatians, the traits of the mother, our mother, which is Jerusalem above. The reference here is to Sarah. I was speaking of the idea of the mother running through Scripture, and I think I may safely say that whilst we find it in Eve, it is particularly developed in Sarah. In the midst of disaster we have this brilliant gem set Adam called his wife's name "Eve" -- a very fine word of Adam. What brilliancy is in that gem! He called his wife's name "Eve" when God told him he was going to die. What a fine thing it is to be able to speak of life when we are going to die -- death is the judgment but life is the blessing. Life is no afterthought; eternal life is no afterthought. It was no improvised thing. "In hope of eternal life, which
{520}
God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began", @Titus 1: 2. One loves to go back to the beginning of things. How restful! The hope of eternal life stretches back to past eternity. Eve was to be the mother of all living. How different from that system of which I have spoken, of which it is said, "I will kill her children with death", @Revelation 2: 23. It is a solemn thing to be the child of religious organisations. In Eve the features of the mother were not evident. She named her children, which, in itself, was out of keeping with the mother, for Adam was to name the creatures. Then if we come down to Enoch there is nothing said about his wife. When we come to Noah's wife there is nothing said about her as possessing motherly or spiritual traits. Had the wife the features of the mother you may depend upon it that the Spirit of God would not overlook it. But when we come to Sarah we have remarkable distinction. Peter refers to her as a model for all wives. But I am speaking of 'mother'; unless there be the wifely quality there shall be no motherly qualities. Sarah stands out as the wife. She is called a holy woman and she is distinguished. God would train us in making us wait, and wait in faith. She was a true mother. She cast out the man after the flesh. That is the true mark of the mother in the saints. Ishmael was the son of Abraham equally with Isaac. He was some fourteen years older. Abraham had spoken well of him, and God promised to bless him, to make a nation of him, but the Holy Spirit says "he ... was born after the flesh". How many there are that can be spoken of as distinguished, and yet born of the flesh -- the flesh cultured, and mocking and despising Christ. The true mother will not have that. There would be a refusal of that. The casual judgment of brethren is very unreliable. We should never be casual in regard to divine things; every moment is a crisis in regard to the man of
{521}
God the war is always on. We have to be on our guard about being casual, but, in order to check our casual discernment, God blows a trumpet. You will remember the silver trumpets in Israel. In the Revelation, John was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and there was a great voice as of a trumpet behind him. The Lord was calling attention to the terrible things that were coming in among the saints. If the trumpet is sounded we must pay attention and look into matters. Apparently Abraham did not notice the mocking of Ishmael. Even prominent brethren do not see it, but if it is to be seen, why do I not see it? It is from want of eyesight. We brethren ought to take notice of it. Then Abraham was reluctant, he would retain Ishmael. But what did Sarah say -- but the Holy Spirit quotes Sarah as Scripture? What says the scripture, "Cast out the bondwoman and her son". How important to see that the very words of the mother in her care for her son are quoted as Scripture. So the word to Abraham is, "Hearken to her voice". The son of the bondwoman is not to hinder the son of the free woman.
We have the mother also in Rebecca. I touch on a few mothers to show you how the idea of the mother is worked out in Scripture, so that we might see how practical it is, and that our mother is above. She is necessarily above. She is morally above now, as she will be by and by. Rebecca is remarkable. She had a word from God before her children were born. The elder should serve the younger. The 'mother' spirit must pay attention to the voice of God, the prophetic word, otherwise how is she to know what to do? Rebecca was a woman that had faith and prayed, and God answered her, and of the twins she loved Jacob, Isaac loved Esau. Some say the church teaches, but it does not. The church is taught. But the church is a voice, and viewed in that light we do well to pay attention to the teaching,
{522}
that we may know what to do. Isaac loved Esau; he loved his venison. Natural taste may be seen even with old brothers. Isaac loved Esau. That kind of love in the assembly is disastrous. Rebecca loved Jacob; he was a plain man, but God had spoken to her about him before he was born, and she cherished it. The prophetic word coming before his birth governed her heart. However much the flesh marked him, Jacob valued the inheritance. The christian loves the meetings, he loves the brethren. So Rebecca takes upon herself to secure the blessing for the object of her affections. Her ways were truly crooked. But she loved Jacob and she would secure the will of God for him. She would have him blessed and she says to him, "On me be thy curse, my son!" O, for such a spirit! The bride is the bride of the Lamb, the suffering One, and if need be she will suffer.
Rebecca secured the blessing for Isaac, but Moses mother would secure him from the world. That is another feature of the mother, to keep her children from the world. She saw that he was a proper child; she saw that the child was beautiful. She had discernment of what is of God. This is not a question of the leading brothers amongst us, but of the saints generally. Is not every young believer beautiful? There is something there, some ray of beauty that the eye of the true mother can discern, and she would put him in the ark, and in the water. The only way to carry that through is in the death of Christ. Moses went into the world but he did not stay in it. As soon as he became great he made a decision. Where were the roots of that? In the mother. When he became great he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter. His mother had preserved him. As the Lord says, "Ye are the salt of the earth". The element of preservation marked the mother of Moses.
{523}
Then Deborah arose "a mother in Israel". She is a typical mother. Our natural judgment is not to be trusted, but where attention is called to a thing and the brethren come together before God, there judgment is to be trusted. Here is a woman that has judgment. She says, "Hath not Jehovah ... commanded?" "He that has my commandments", said the Lord, "he it is that loves me". Is there not a word for every emergency? Judgment is a very prominent word in Scripture.
Then take Hannah. What a mother she was! It is a question now of the house of God. Eli sat around; he is old and fat. Hannah was concerned; she wanted a son. She did not want him for herself, she wanted him for the Lord. That waiting process spiritually is a very fine process; relying in faith on the Spirit of God. The mother can only go so far. But she did not neglect him afterwards; she made a coat for him every year. She saw that he was properly clothed. A good many of our young are not properly clothed. Samuel was clothed according to his growth.
These women, I believe, constructively present to us the thought of the 'mother'. And as we consider all these traits we can understand that that is our mother "which is above", and that she is a free woman. As Christ is free, she is free. She is in sonship, and her place is in heaven.
What I am speaking of is spiritual. These things are to appear presently, and we shall see how as the complete work of God, the assembly will come down invested with divine glory. She fills the whole scene with grace and liberty. Her light is most precious. It is for us to have our eyes open to see these features and how they are worked out as I have indicated in these women in the Old Testament, that we may see how they take form, particularly under Paul's
{524}
ministry, so that the assembly cares for the interests of Christ in His absence, and presently she will come down fully robed in suitability to Him, as the holy Jerusalem.
May God bless these thoughts.
{525}
A PLACE FOR CHRIST
@John 4: 39 - 42; @John 12: 1 - 3, 9 - 11; @John 20: 19 - 23
John makes much of a place here for Christ. Indeed it would be in his mind that the Son of God had come to obtain and hold a footing here. So he enlarges on the love of Christ that would provide for this footing. It is a footing which involves His liberty to come at His pleasure; not in an arbitrary way, or by force. He will do that presently; He will come out in power. John says in the Revelation that He will come out in a military way, the armies of heaven following. It will be no question then of persons who love Him making room for Him, but of taking up His rights in power. But now, as I said, in this gospel it is a question of room being made for Him by those who love Him, and this was to give character to christianity. It was not something set up here and left to work its way automatically, but it afforded the means of Christ coming in at His pleasure, each incoming involving fresh interests and fresh impressions. This should not be regarded as anything unexpected. It is a principle with God in what He creates or inaugurates that He never leaves it to itself. Although furnishing it amply, He never leaves any creation or thing to itself, not even a person. There is not a person in the world that is left to his own organisation, wonderful as his organisation is, and wonderful the environment in which he is set, as it is said, "For in him we live, and move, and have our being", @Acts 17: 28. As the apostle says to the Athenians, "Though he be not far from every one of us" -- good or bad -- "for in him we live, and move, and have our being". And so in regard to the wide universe itself, for whatever we may be told by those who look into these scientific matters,
{526}
the fact remains that the universe is not left to work itself, although wonderfully furnished. God has kept His hand on it, and does keep His hand on it. The earth receives the grain of wheat or any other cereal falling into it, but the seed is not left to itself. It has in itself life, and it dies, but "God gives to it a body as he has pleased", @1 Corinthians 15: 38. It is God not only in infinite power in a general way, but in infinite detail, as a faithful Creator.
All this enters into christianity. John would show how the Lord comes in, not to force Himself on us, but as knocking at the door. John quotes this in the last address to the assemblies in the Revelation, "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking", @Revelation 3: 20. That is divine activity -- one of the most touching things conceivable, because it involves reproach. One standing at the door and knocking becomes, it may be, the object of the derision of those that pass by. He stands at the door and is knocking. He does not force the door. He knocks; He knocks loud and hard, it may be, but He knocks, and it is for you to open. He does not force the door, but His attitude shows this principle, that in the darkest days, at the end, when indifference and worldliness have set in. He knocks; that is His attitude. "If any one ... open the door", He says, "I will come in unto him", not come into his house merely, but to "him", a person, "and sup with him, and he with me". That is His attitude, and the end of the dispensation indicates how this began. How active the Lord was in the inauguration of it, appearing first to Cephas, then to the twelve, then to above five hundred brethren at once, then to James, and then to all the apostles, and then to Paul. Such is His activity! These were only instances; how many others there were, who can say? And so it goes on. I do not say He does not come where He is not invited. He also comes judicially, and that is
{527}
involved in what I have been saying about Laodicea. He comes judicially, but I am concerned now in these scriptures to show that the Lord apprehended as with us gives fulness and effectiveness to any light or truth He may have ministered to us. I want you to note this. It is one thing to listen to ministry or teaching, to be taught, but in order to have the full bearing of anything administered we must see it in relation to Christ, and not only place it in relation to Christ, but, when He comes in see that room is made for Him, and then He will place Himself in relation to it.
Now that is one of the greatest services, and the Lord is doing it.
Those who listen to ministry and know nothing about the Lord coming in, never see the full bearing of what is ministered. They may enjoy it for a time, and it may please, but to see it in its fulness, room has to be made for the Lord, and that is how christianity has been maintained. It is that the Lord ministers through the gifts, as it says, "for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ" (@Ephesians 4: 12), but He comes in following upon the ministry Himself as room is made for Him, and gives effect to it, and indicates its full bearing. If one is free from oneself, one wishes to see the full bearing of the truth, and so I began with this passage in chapter 4 as illustrative in a peculiar and striking way of the initial feature that I have in my mind.
The woman had listened to Christ and she left her waterpot, meaning that she was affected by what He said. She understood by His remarks to her that she herself was to be a vessel of living water. She understood that, and that is what is meant by her leaving her waterpot; she might have taken it back full of water otherwise. She went to the city and said to the men, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" @John 4: 29.
{528}
She did not convey anything beyond what had happened in herself, but while it is one thing to see the working of the truth in oneself, it is another thing, a much better thing, to see the bearing of it universally, and one would urge all this so that we should become universal in our outlook and affections. As soon as we see the bearing of the truth as the Lord identifies Himself with it, we shall become universal in outlook, we shall become enlarged; so as the woman goes off and tells the men, the Lord begins to speak to His disciples about food, and of lifting up their eyes to see the fields "already white to harvest"; far and wide as their eyes could scan, there they were, the fields white to harvest. This comes in between the woman's mission to the men of the city and their full acceptance of it; that is to say, as we read down the chapter we are to pay attention to the fact that it is not simply this woman that is in mind. She has already got the light of herself being a vessel, but she is only one person. The Lord is thinking of the fields "white to harvest", and so those to whom she spoke believed, showing how effective her ministry was. They believed on account of her testimony, which would show how effective one may be in speaking to others when one is converted and in the full enjoyment of the light; they believed on account of her testimony. But that was not the end of it. We might count the number who believe and think we have accomplished something -- an evangelist might have done that. But in spite of the fact that her body was a vessel she could not give full effect to the truth, nor can any vessel, even a Paul, and so the men went to Jesus themselves, for such is the effect of good evangelisation, that the converts go to the Lord themselves, and they say "we have heard him ourselves, and we know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world". That is a much greater thought than she conveyed to them. How did they get that
{529}
thought? Not from the woman; they got it as they went to Him. They invited Him to stay, it says, as you will observe, "When therefore the Samaritans came to him they asked him to abide with them, and he abode there two days. And more a great deal believed on account of his word; and they said to the woman, It is no longer on account of thy saying that we believe, for we have heard him ourselves, and we know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world" (verses 40 - 42). Now, dear brethren, you see that they had invited the Lord to stay with them. I wonder how much this is understood. I am afraid not much, for in moving about I observe a great preponderance of local feeling in the prayers of the brethren, narrowness of outlook. Good and blessed are local prayers; the Lord hears them, but how He loves to expand our hearts and to get us to see things as He sees them. How has this to come about? as we make room for Him -- they invited Him to stay with them. The woman did not invite Him, apparently she had no place to invite Him to -- not like Martha or Lydia -- her domestic relations were sorrowful, but she was secured herself. We have to run down the chapter to find the house secured, the picture is not complete without the house being secured, and that is the nobleman's at Capernaum. No house is mentioned in Samaria, but the Lord nevertheless remained there two days. Two days would mean adequate testimony for the purpose on hand, and that purpose was that these dear people should come to see the full truth as the Lord identified Himself with it, and they became universal as far as their confession went -- He was the Saviour of the world. Not simply the Saviour of any locality, or country, or continent, but of the world. What an immense thing it is to see the truth, not simply the truth in relation to Him, but to see Him in relation to the truth. It is thus we apprehend the bearing of it, and it makes us
{530}
evangelical. It is not simply ministry, it is Christ apprehended as He abides with us. It may be only for a moment -- the two days here afforded adequate opportunity for the Samaritans to apprehend Him in relation to truth that had come to them through the woman, and now they hear Him themselves. And when the Lord preached the gospel what a touch He would give it, what a bearing He would give it, He would make everybody present feel that they should come into it. Like the ark of old, He was great enough to take in all creation.
Now in chapter 12 we have the Lord coming in not by invitation. He remained in Samaria by invitation, not merely, as I have been showing, to gratify those who invited Him, but to indicate the bearing of the truth they had received. But He comes into Bethany of His own volition. I am speaking now of chapter 12, not chapter 11 -- the visit had in view the result of chapter 11, that He might show the full bearing of chapter 11. I am speaking of this because one knows in oneself, and one sees it among the brethren, how we fail to come to the end of things, the end of a movement of God, to see the full bearing of it, and if we see the full bearing of anything we must see Christ in relation to it, not only to see it in relation to Him, but to see Him in relation to it. I think we shall see in the millennial day the full bearing of all the testimony of God. It will be a wonderful time. The light will be seen in all the testimony of God, and then we will understand. The assembly is to be the temple in that day; it now "groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord", @Ephesians 2: 21. The bearing of that remark is millennial, so that all that is seen is intelligible in the temple. That is what we are, dear brethren. Hence the importance of being instructed now for that wonderful structure.
And so He comes to Bethany six days before the passover, meaning that there is ample time for the
{531}
object He had in view, not two days, but six days, and it is said. He "came ... where Lazarus was", @John 12: 1. We have often remarked on this, I do not dwell on it, what I am concerned about is that He is going to identify Himself with Lazarus. He is going to sit down at table, and Lazarus is to be one of those sitting down with Him. We shall never see Lazarus aright until we see Him there. Now you will observe there is nothing said about the people coming to see Lazarus in chapter 11. There were those who believed, who had seen the wonderful things that had been done, but nothing about coming to see Lazarus until the Lord identifies Himself with him, and then you see Lazarus as he should be seen. He is not an isolated risen man, he is a man risen and sitting at the table with Jesus. That is how we begin to see the bearing of resurrection. "Lazarus was one of those"; there were others, but he was one that sat at table with Jesus. Jesus had come to Bethany in relation to him -- it was "where Lazarus was". It might be said that Lazarus may perhaps have gone away somewhere, but the Lord knew, and He knows where we all are. If He comes to Birkenhead He comes in relation to the saints and those who know Him "where Lazarus was", not where he had been, but where he was. It was the dead man Lazarus whom He had raised from the dead. "There therefore they made him a supper", but the point is to give full bearing to what happened, and so Lazarus sits at the table. Now you never see Lazarus as he should be seen according to the mind of God until you see him there, and if you see him there you see him properly. Then you see Martha properly, too; she has never been seen as she is seen here. All this means that the Lord has had to say to Martha, and His service to her has taken effect. Now, He says, 'I want you to see Martha as I intend her to be seen'. How is she to be seen? As serving; that was her
{532}
particular ministry, but she never shone as she shone here. His presence there gave full effect to what He had effected in her. Then Mary, did she ever shine like this? No, she had sat at His feet and listened to His word, but we never hear anything about a box of ointment until now. Did the Lord not know that she had that box? He did, but it means that He had effected His own work in her, and He would show the full bearing of that, and so He came to Bethany where He could see Mary as He intended her to be seen. You see the importance of apprehending the Lord in the midst, letting Him have His place. If the light, as God intends it, shines, it is as He stands in relation to it, because it is a question of the testimony now; by and by, it will be a question of my standing in relation to Him before God, but if I am to be here in testimony He must stand in relation to me, that is how each of us is seen rightly, and so Mary is seen here as she was never seen before. The Lord knew she had this box. It was not an impromptu thing, it was something she had kept to use six days later. She intended to use it when He died, but she says, 'I may never get another opportunity' and so the principle is that she seizes her opportunity -- a fine thing to get hold of -- to seize the opportunity, and not miss it. It was six days too early, but the Lord knew that, and she never shone as she shone here. The Lord set Himself in relation to her. He went there, they did not go to Him. When we go to Him, then it is our being in relation to Him. He shines, but in the testimony He must stand in relation to us if we are rightly to represent Him and what He indicates in us. Then you see how Lazarus value comes out; people came to see Lazarus. People might go to see a noted preacher, and as in the history of the church there have been men who have been outstanding, people have sought to see them because of this, but that is not the principle; the principle is
{533}
that Lazarus is understood because Jesus has placed Himself in relation to Him. Lazarus is not said to have said anything in Scripture; it is not a question of what he was saying, it is a question of what the man was. He was a risen man in connection with whom Jesus has placed Himself, that is the idea. That is the force of resurrection, it is not something in itself, we speak of the resurrection as something, it is not something in itself. Jesus says, "I am the resurrection"; that is the idea. He stands in relation to it; that is how the resurrection is seen in its fulness. So that Lazarus is sought out, and it says the chief priests sought to kill him because many came and believed on Jesus on account of him; you do not get this until after Jesus places Himself in relation to Him.
What you observe in chapter 20 is that it was the first day of the week, and that the Lord came where the disciples were. It does not say in the original they were assembled. It is a question of the persons; that is to say, persons who had received the most wonderful message that ever was sent to men, and that was that the Lord Jesus said to Mary, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". She came, we are told, and told the disciples these things, and then the Lord comes in and He stands in the midst. As some of us were saying the other day, it is not in this gospel that He stood in their midst, it is not a question of signalising those particular persons only. In Luke it says "in their midst", that is to say, in the midst of people whose features were expressed in what they were saying, but the disciples here are not saying anything. They had received a message from Him, and He came and stood in the midst, the doors being shut; that is to say, in a spiritual way "in the midst". It is not limited, it is not a local thing. John has got that in view in this
{534}
chapter. It is the idea of the Lord as ascended up "in the midst". "I ascend" -- that message was already in their hands, and in their hearts, I believe. The Lord came in that the message should have its full effect. I am speaking of things being made effective in their full bearing, and this is conditional on the Lord being apprehended "in the midst". The bearing of that is universal; I may say, eternal.
And so He speaks peace unto them; that peace that He spoke is like the ripple from something thrown into a sea of water, it extends to the utmost limit. It is eternity from His point of view; peace is to prevail there. His attitude "in the midst" has that in view. So He shows them His hands and His side, which has, too, an eternal bearing, not as in Luke, but it is more the ark at rest, and the love that is there, the testimony to it in that riven side. His hands and His side. What are the hands for? hands are not always for work. As in Canticles, they are for love, too. "His left hand would be under my head", says the loved one, "and his right hand embrace me", @Song of Songs 8: 3. It is eternity, it is the fulness of divine thoughts, it is giving effect to the message that He had sent them, and they were glad, the ripple of gladness inspired by His presence that is to extend until it reaches the utmost bounds of the eternal scene. We are lifted out of time really. And after they rejoice, He confirms them in it. It is not a passing joy, a passing ripple, as that caused by the angel that disturbed the water at the pool at the sheepgate at a certain season, not like that, the ripple of joy is to be permanent. So that you have peace again; He said, "Peace be to you" that is confirmatory peace. The first "peace" is productive of joy, the second "peace" is confirmatory, to make the enjoyment permanent. The joy begins here, and what begins here is to be permanent, but then, as I was saying, it is not simply in view of eternity, it is
{535}
that John always has the full bearing of all on the testimony here, so that the Lord says, "As the Father sent me forth". I want you to follow what I am saying. The attitude in which they were set up is not as in Matthew to go to Galilee, or as in Luke to stay in the city, but "As the Father sent me forth", to be brought on to His own level, not only in family relationship, but in physical service, that is the principle. So that all that had preceded in the gospel is gathered up here in this company in the upper room with the doors shut, and the Lord comes in to make all that effective, to show the full bearing of it, and how He regarded their ministry, for they were to go out. This is the highest level on which levitical service can be carried on. It is as we are sent out, as the Father sent out Jesus, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you" on that level. He sends us out as the Father sent Him forth, and then so as to ensure that that should be maintained in them and that it should not be simply a question of light. He breathes into them -- no transaction like this in Luke. It is on this great levitical level "He breathed into them" and He says, "Receive the Holy Spirit". O! how urgent that is. It would be on His level, "Receive the Holy Spirit". Not a question of the Person of the Holy Spirit, although it is really that, but the article is left out here, it is the character of the thing, "Receive the Holy Spirit". Not simply that I am sealed, but I receive Holy Spirit; it is breathed into me. The most intimate transaction conceivable, but it is necessary so that we may see the exalted position whence we are sent out, and then they have confidence that the Lord works with them, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". He has full confidence in whatever they do. It gives the remission first here, it is the reverse in Matthew, there it is the binding first and then the remission,
{536}
but here it is remission first and then retention. Grace works in John, and so unto the present time. In dealing with the brethren in the systems around, we think of them in grace, the spirit of forgiveness and remission, but if they refuse and reject the truth and turn away back, then their sins will have to be retained, and that is a solemn thing.
{537}
ENERGY
@2 Samuel 23: 13 - 17; @Romans 15: 15 - 33
I have been thinking, dear brethren, of 'energy'. The fact that these mighty men of David come in at the end of David's reign in this second book of Samuel is to remind us obviously that there was no one throughout that reign whose service was omitted. The energy that marked David's helpers as seen in these mighty men has all been taken account of in divine record. For God writes up His people and no one is omitted, so there is every incentive to devotedness from that viewpoint. God is always particular to assure us that there is no forgetfulness in Him. Think of that register in heaven where all our names are written! In Revelation we have no one omitted we read of all who took part in the tribulation, and then all these have part in the first resurrection. So whilst the list of the 'mightier' in Chronicles is at the beginning of David's reign, the list here is at the end; so that the whole devotedness throughout is taken account of. We get certain mention of mighties in Philippians who might have not been remembered, but their names are written down. So again there is no omission with God.
When I speak of devotedness I mean that all the resources, whatever we may have, are to be dedicated and made effective by energy. The resources are devoted to us for use; so these mighties represent strength and the right use of it. We see that their strength was not misspent, and for that they had to understand what David valued.
In @1 Corinthians 12: 31, we get things of greater values, the things more excellent. The Scriptures dwell upon that which is more excellent, and so therefore it is a question of ability to discern what is the more excellent, but the standard is always to be taken from Christ. So these three mighties are
{538}
needed to convey what should characterise the people of God throughout the whole dispensation. That is to say we have to learn to value things.
For instance, we have in @Matthew 13: 44, the idea of the treasure. It was found in a field and hidden in a field. We are not told the extent of the treasure -- it may have been gold, but there was one who could value it and so the whole field was bought to secure it. Then we have the merchant seeking beautiful pearls and then he finds one pearl of great value and sells all that he might purchase it.
In the early part of the Acts the numbers converted are given. It is right to number converts but if we go too far on that line we shall do as David did, but the Lord numbers them. There is no need to think that in heaven there will not be enough room for everyone -- there will! There are great numbers in heaven already; we read of great numbers of angels round about the throne. So that there is no danger of inflation with regard to numbers -- the more the better, but there is great danger in occupation with numbers. So in the Acts, although there the feature was numbers, there is no evidence of inflation. I think it was a question of the treasure coming to light. The Lord was beginning to get the benefit of His treasure.
With the apostle Paul there is little enough said about numbers, but Paul was a true evangelist. His one idea was the 'church'. This was because he was near enough to Christ to know the value of things -- that is to apprehend the value of the pearl. The man who understands what is nearest to the heart of Christ is the man with the greatest power. The man who preaches in order to get converts may get them, but he may leave them without getting them near to Christ. The espousal must take place. Paul could say, "I have espoused you to one husband", @2 Corinthians 11: 2. Until the marriage in that sense has taken
{539}
place we have not reached what is dearest to the heart of Christ, and that brings into view the Supper.
So to return to these three mighties of whom we have read, they have in view this feature which is to run through the dispensation. According to this passage they came to David at the harvest time. This is very significant, and the thought is carried on in John's gospel in the fourth chapter when the Samaritan woman has met with the Lord; the Lord says to His disciples, "Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; for they are white already to harvest", @John 4: 35. So it is still harvest time.
Next we are told that David was in the cave of Adullam. That is to say the place of rejection, but it was also a stronghold -- that would suggest fellowship. Then we have the camp of the Philistines who were in possession of the well; then next, the longing of the heart of David.
Thus all things are plainly set out, the time of year, the position of David, the position of the Philistines and the position of the well. All this is very important. Then one thought that the three chiefs were symbolical of something that was intended to run through the dispensation, devotedness and the power to break through. It is not a question here of being great in exploits and killing Philistines. The killing is not of the same value as breaking through them and obtaining what is dear to the heart of David; that is for us, what is dear to the heart of Christ! The point was to reach the thing David's heart longed for and to bring it back. It is said, "these things did these three mighty men", @2 Samuel 23: 17. The point is, they were such men; it is something positive and so pleasing to their master that he pours it out upon the ground to Jehovah.
Now I think the position is clear (and in any devoted service it is well to understand the position). Whilst the Lord has the whole field, He knows where
{540}
the treasure is, or as has been said, where the fish are and where the sheep are. He knows where the gold is too, and where the excellent things are! So you find in the beginning of the Bible that a river flowed out of Eden having four heads. It is a universal thing and the effect of the flowing out of these streams is to search out what is in the land.
Whilst the whole field, as I said, is required by the Lord, He knows where the things are that He seeks. It says of Havilah that "the gold of that land is good", @Genesis 2: 12. Also bdellium and the onyx stone are there! This is a reference to the field where the gold is, and bdellium is and the onyx stone. We find in the course of Scripture how these things were used. For instance, the woods that were used in the temple, the precious stones, and also the gold. All was overlaid with gold -- this was a question of dignity.
So we can see we have the suggestion of the position of things in Genesis. The Lord knows where the members for His church are.
If I am subject to the Lord, I shall serve under His direction and I shall go where *He* sends me. Hence with Paul's service. I was speaking just now of having devotedness and energy. The next thing is that it should be rightly used as coming under the Lord's direction. Then we shall find what is dearest to the Lord's heart, and that means breaking through the host. It is no easy path; it entails rejection and suffering.
In turning to @Romans 15 we find Paul had never been to Rome but he had it in his mind to go, and meanwhile he wanted them to have a right example. So he begins to say, as you will observe in verse 15: "But I have written to you the more boldly, brethren, in part, as putting you in mind, because of the grace given to me by God, for me to be minister of Christ Jesus". He was about to speak of himself so that they might see in him the grace that was given to
{541}
him by God, that is to see the example thus set forth in himself.
After he had left Corinth, you will remember the rule of rivals arose, a terrible thing! So he sent Timotheus to them that they might have in him the positive evidence of his ways as they were of Christ. So it is in every local meeting, these rivals will have to face this young brother -- Timotheus. But in the second epistle Paul was able to bring before them real christianity, for they were now able to accept it.
Paul goes on to say in @Romans 15: "For I will not dare to speak anything of the things which Christ has not wrought by me, for the obedience of the nations, by word or deed, in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of the Spirit of God; so that I, from Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum, have fully preached the glad tidings of the Christ" (verses 18, 19). He had fully preached the glad tidings of the Christ! Now we are in the presence of a real mighty man and it is well that we should look on this picture divinely given here. It is not a question of what Paul might have been as a natural man. It was what he had acquired as being near to Christ and as coming under His direction. But what had it cost him? He refers to the power that had marked his ministry "in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of the Spirit of God; so that I, from Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum, have fully preached the glad tidings of the Christ". Now look at that! Think of the extent of his service! Think of the number of visitations he would have to have, and the prayers, and sufferings and stripes! What was all this for? He was breaking through the host of the Philistines to get the bride of Christ. The gospel had been served for that, because he had the church in his mind.
Now he says in verse 23, "But now, having no longer place in these regions, and having great desire
{542}
to come to you these many years, whenever I should go to Spain ... I hope to see you". Spain at that time was the limit of the known world. Paul would go to the limit for the gold was there. This is very practical. It is a question of energy rightly directed.
We know the apostle *did* go to Rome -- a prisoner, but a prisoner of Christ, and he was left there as a servant of Christ, preaching and teaching -- and this apostle could always speak about what is nearest to the heart of Christ. He could say of Christ and the church that "Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it", @Ephesians 5: 25.
Need I say how Christ broke through the host to secure this? And this is the spirit that is to mark the saints through the whole dispensation.
Some of us were speaking a little today of Samson. We read of Samson that his head was shaved -- his seven locks were cut off. That was a complete removal of what Samson was in his natural strength and then his eyes were put out. What a spectacle! How completely helpless he was! But he does not stop there; we read further that Samson's hair began to grow. That means there was life, but what is needed in service is not only life but intelligence.
Then the social system comes into evidence. They would have him for sport. How is Samson going to move now? There is no evidence of the locks now, but his hair had begun to grow, so Samson knew what to do. He asks to feel the pillars whereupon the house stood that he might lean upon them, and so he leans upon them and the whole structure comes down, but Samson fell with it. That is, there is no thought of public distinction. We must all share in the breakdown of the church but inwardly we have the support, and the promise to the overcomer is ever the same.
So Paul speaks in verse 30 of the passage we have read in Romans of "the love of the Spirit". The love of the Spirit is to be amongst us!
{543}
THE LORD AS SEEN AT THE CLOSE OF THE GOSPELS
@Matthew 28: 16 - 20; @Mark 16: 14 - 20; @Luke 24: 36 - 53; @John 20: 19 - 23
J.T. I have been thinking of late that when the Lord is pleased to furnish light and instruction to His people, He makes it effective, and that is only as He is seen in relation to it. I thought we might look at the ends of the gospels with this in view. These scriptures are familiar to us, and much used to set out the bearings of the gospels, but the one point that is before us now, is that the bearing of any instruction and light the Lord furnishes to His people is only rightly apprehended as we see Him in relation to it. So these scriptures are serviceable to us for this purpose. Matthew furnishes instruction as to discipleship. We see the bearing of it and the object in it; as the Lord appears in Galilee we get the idea of appointment, and an appointment the keeping of which involved a long journey; and as the journey was taken the Lord appeared, and went forward to show the whole bearing of the instruction of the gospel, as seen carried out in the disciples. They are not called apostles here; it says the eleven disciples, and they are to go and make disciples. The full bearing of discipleship is seen as the Lord identifies Himself with His disciples, for it is not simply that one is a follower, taught by the Lord, but that as such he is influential. He can only be so rightly as he apprehends the Lord in relation to him. That would indicate what I am thinking of in regard of Matthew, that we should see how the bearing of the instruction is as the Lord identifies Himself with it. If it is to be effective in the world in testimony it must be as He is connected with it.
{544}
Ques. Is that why He says, "Lo, I am with you always"? Is that the thought of Emmanuel being at the beginning and the end?
J.T. Yes, that passage fully bears out what I have in mind. "Lo, I am with you alway". The bearing of discipleship is seen in its full effect as He is identified with it.
Ques. Is it the thought of fellow-labourers with God?
J.T. Just so, but the thought is seen in its full bearing and effect as God is with them. So it especially comes out in Matthew, "Emmanuel, ... God with us". God's mind in testimony is effective as He is with us. In the creation itself, although working on its own impetus as a clock, it is not so kept going and made effective, except as God is in it.
Ques. Would God being with us involve conditions?
J.T. That is good, and shows that whilst we may be very active, that does not ensure that God is with us.
Ques. Have you in mind that power exists in God being with us?
J.T. Well, the One who is with us has all power in heaven and upon earth. It is not simply that the power is with us, but He is with us. That makes service effectual, and raises the whole question of the Lord coming in amongst His people. Immediately a thing comes in we apprehend it, but He comes in to identify Himself with the teaching and instruction, so that the saints move on and apprehend the Lord in relation to what He presents. The full bearing of the coming world will be when Christ takes things up. So now, on the principle of faith, as He is apprehended in relation to what is presented, it is effective. Hence in the assembly He is seen in identification with what is presented as ministered by Him.
Ques. Is that why He is risen here, and not ascended?
{545}
J.T. Yes. He is with you always, so the discipleship is influential; it is "go ... and make disciples". That is, they have power and influence with them. It makes christianity a living thing, it takes character from Christ in a living way. He makes everything effective as He appears amongst His people.
Ques. Would you say we belong to a company who are attracted to the Lord, and where He delights to come?
J.T. Yes, and as we apprehend this, we apprehend all His communications. In His ministry He was not like a recluse or a monk; what we get with Christ is constant movement; He was constantly teaching, and His movements exemplified what He taught. In that way results are produced according to the pattern presented. Christianity is intended to be characterised throughout by divine incoming. Christ is livingly in the testimony.
Ques. Would you say we need to learn to apprehend the sphere of the Lord's operation?
J.T. It is His sphere of operation, and I believe all His appearings before He went up, after He arose, were to establish spirituality amongst His own. He does not come in an earthly capacity. He comes in a spiritual capacity. They were to become accustomed to spiritual manifestations; according to @John 14 these were to continue, and the continuity would keep Christ in view in a living way, according to pattern. Moses continued according to the pattern shown him; we cannot say what that pattern was, there were specifications, but they would not suffice. It is the apprehension of Christ which enables us to work according to pattern. In Matthew, the idea of appointment involves a long journey; a disciple would undertake that. A disciple is a trained person, a follower; he is a person who has been taught, and takes character from the teacher. The disciples were accustomed to long journeys; the Lord Himself
{546}
took journeys, so they were able to keep the appointment. The Lord kept the appointment, He never fails.
Ques. The journey was not attractive naturally?
J.T. No, we do not care much for exercise of that kind, the kind that means a long journey. The disciples were willing to take the journey; that is the idea of true discipleship.
Ques. Is your thought that the journey is inward exercise, or outward activity?
J.T. An inward journey now; there are two positions in that respect, Matthew and Luke. In Matthew you take the journey, you agonise before the Lord, and He gives you to understand that if you are to get your message you must get it there. He says, "There they shall see me". If you seek to get your service from the Lord you have to see Him. Well, you go, and you wonder what it is going to be. You could say many things, give old sermons over again, that is simple; but that is not this. This is how you have to get it from the Lord. You may have your own thoughts, but if you see Him He conveys to you that He approves, and as you begin to minister it enlarges, because he is standing in relation to it.
In Luke there is no journey; He says, "Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem". While we tarry we might say to ourselves, 'Why in the city of Jerusalem?' Because your soul becomes imbued with the sense of the grace of God which would lead you into such a wicked place, before saying anything about the remission of sins. "Repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem". They were to tarry there until the Spirit came down; it is not our exercise or activity but we wait on the Spirit. As regards service, in Luke while you tarry, you would be imbued with a sense of grace, and the Holy Spirit
{547}
would come to give effect to that, whereas in Matthew you have to take the journey.
Ques. Where does the journey end?
J.T. In the mountain; @Matthew 7 gives us the mountain, and the mountain is in this last chapter. Going to the mountain always involves exercise, it would test our strength, and then we need to be sure we find the right spot, so we should be on the alert. Matthew stresses responsibility.
Rem. It is difficult to rise to an elevated spot.
J.T. Ascending requires spiritual energy. Luke comes to the level of men, it is not a question of energy but of divine activity; a person is impressed and imbued with grace. I think Luke is first as to service to men. I should begin with Luke or John today, in dealing with a young soul. It is a great thing to have an outline of what to present, and get the Lord's approval of it, and then wait to be imbued with a sense of grace. Then you find in the process of delivering your message the Holy Spirit Himself will help you. As you wait before the Lord your soul becomes imbued with a sense of grace.
I think going to the mount as in Matthew means withdrawal from man and his ways; the whole chapter leads up to this, so that the Lord comes up to them, and they worship Him; but some doubted. There were only eleven of them, it was a broken state of things, but they go to the place appointed by Him. Success is certain if He makes the appointment and we keep it. He will not fail. Even the doubting ones do not interfere, they went right on, and He says, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth". Even if some doubt -- you go right on. You would give the doubters plenty of opportunity to right themselves, but if they do not do so you go right on. In taking the long journey they were not sure what the end was going to be; that is a great test. Even if they had feelings of unbelief in their hearts, when
{548}
they get to the end the Lord does not say anything about their unbelief. The thing is to go on and disregard your feelings. Unbelief is sorrowful, but that is not the point in Matthew; the thing is to go on. Galilee is the place of reproach, but Matthew emphasises Galilee as over against Jerusalem. Jerusalem is slighted in Matthew always, it fits in with old times, when certain things were held in religious repute, and others in disrepute. Galilee is in disrepute. So in Acts it is "men of Galilee" (chapter 1: 11); there is nothing for the flesh in going to Galilee, the flesh would resent it.
Ques. Were the disciples to be marked by what marked the Lord?
J.T. They were to be going on; even if sorrowful things like divisions happened, as seeking for truth we are to go on. There had been a break in the twelve disciples, there were only eleven, and some of them doubted. It was a weak state of things, but the Lord says, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth".
Ques. Is Galilee the place where we get our commission?
J.T. That is the idea. We are set here to make disciples of all nations; that involves great power in the way of influence, and the power comes from the Lord. He says, "I am with you alway". In the bearing of our commission He is with us; it is all in Christ.
Now in Mark the Lord stresses their unbelief. "Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen". That is, He is teaching them how to believe an accredited testimony. We must learn that; even although we may not see things, we must learn to believe them. They had accredited witnesses here, and did not
{549}
believe them. They must learn how to believe an accredited testimony. That is, the ground of testimony that is presented in Mark, is by an accredited witness. We have the testimony of the apostles carried down in Scripture, but there is the spiritual presentation of the Holy Spirit here.
Ques. Have you in mind that the Lord, in our day, uses accredited witnesses?
J.T. Yes. He takes men up and makes them competent witnesses. There must be the exercise of faith in themselves, something is presented to them, and they believe the testimony, and they expect others to believe their testimony. One who does not believe the witness of God makes God a liar. God knows how to qualify witnesses.
Ques. Is Matthew the power, and Mark the kind of vessel?
J.T. Yes. The person who speaks to you expresses what he speaks and you believe on his testimony. Christianity must be on the ground of testimony. "*Ye* are witnesses of these things", @Luke 24: 48. There are two ideas in witness; one is we are His witnesses, the other is, we can be witnesses because we have seen the thing. These two features come out in Mark; and if I expect others to believe me, I must believe the testimony. It is for me to find out who these witnesses are. The Lord had appeared but they could not believe the persons who had seen the Lord. Then He goes on to show that "he that believes and is baptised shall be saved, and he that disbelieves shall be condemned", @Mark 16: 16. The Lord speaking here would show the full bearing of faith.
Ques. Is there anything suggested by he that "believes", not 'has believed'?
J.T. It is characteristic. Not 'he has', but "he that believes, and is baptised". It is faith that believes
{550}
divinely-given testimony. God never leaves Himself without witness, and it is always the witness of men; here it is a question of believing and being baptised. "He that believes and is baptised"; that is, faith detaches me from the world. Baptism is the public recognition that that believer is detached from the world, and so is able to go into the world with the power of the gospel. That may mean suffering in the world, but the gospel is to every creature.
Ques. If the witness is to be effective must it be the preaching of what we know?
J.T. Yes, if we preach the gospel it must be preached as something we know. If you get your commission from the Lord it is quite evident you are there on His account. Every time we stand up to preach it ought to be in some sense of being a representative of Christ. In Mark it is to be preached to "all the creation", that is to say, it goes back to @Genesis 1. Matthew goes back to @Genesis 2, and so does Luke, but in John it is "whose soever". The commission in John is on the highest level. "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you". They are sent with authority to remit sins; the full bearing of that is seen in the Lord. I think it is a question of disciples in @John 20. They are not called apostles. They were affected by what had been presented to them, and the Lord comes in to make it more effective, and to make them more effective in it.
They say in Luke, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon". That shows they had taken notice of what was involved in the grace of what He had done. The Lord had not done that in any haphazard way; if He appeared to Simon it was with an express purpose in view, it was in grace, the grace that overcomes sin. Peter's sin was grievous, but the Lord appears to Him in grace. Something has taken place in the way of ministry, and the saints speak of it; the Lord likes that, but He would make
{551}
it effective. The Lord comes in and shows the full bearing of that. They were saying, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon". And the Lord appeared to two on the way to Emmaus; that is restoring grace, and He is made known to them in the breaking of bread. The question is, What are the saints speaking about after the meetings? What they have heard. The Lord likes that, and He would let us see the full bearing of the things ministered to us. They are not ordinary things; "As they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst, and says to them, Peace be unto you". It does not say 'in the midst', it is "in their midst", @Luke 24: 36. That means He appeared to those people; it is a local position, whereas in @John 20 He comes on the first day of the week, where the disciples were, and stood in the midst. That has a much wider bearing than their midst. If we get anything in the way of ministry, and the brethren talk of it and appreciate it, the Lord likes that, and He comes in and gives it its full bearing in our souls.
Ques. Would you say the Lord comes in and gives us to see the grace and wisdom in which we should move towards others?
J.T. Yes. They were to tarry in the city. Then He says to them, "Have ye anything here to eat? And they gave Him part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb" (@Luke 24: 42). Now if you saw the Lord taking the fish in His hand and eating it, you would see things in a fuller bearing than ever before. No doubt the fish and honeycomb mean something spiritually, but as taken into the Lord's hands they have a wider bearing.
Ques. Would it be the setting for His appearing, that there is something amongst us?
J.T. Yes, and He would show the full bearing of what we have. When the Lord attaches Himself to the things of God they are not common things -- they
{552}
are very great in their bearing. The middle bar of the tabernacle went right through; we see how things go through from end to end.
Ques. Is fish the produce of taking account of ministry?
J.T. Well, I should say so, and honey would be their part; fish would be divine resource, it indicates abundant resource, and the Lord would indicate its full meaning.
Ques. Would it illustrate "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth"?
J.T. It would. Then He opens their understanding to understand the Scriptures. You see what fulness the Scriptures have as He is connected with them. "Thus it is written, and thus it behoved the Christ to suffer, and to rise from among the dead the third day; and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name". He identifies Himself with what is there, hence @Luke 24 is christianity from the standpoint of grace. We see its full bearing as He is there.
In John it is in the midst, and the disciples were not doing anything, but the doors were shut; that would indicate a setting when a message has been sent; and as He comes in, the message acquires a fulness it never acquired as given them by Mary. They would see Him in relation to it: "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you". We continue in that relationship; there is only one Father. I think you see things in their full bearing as the Lord identifies Himself with them. "In the midst" means a great spiritual universe, having in its midst everything that is of God, all belonging to Him.
Ques. Does it involve the church universally?
J.T. That is what I thought. I think the gospels all lead to the great spiritual realm involved in the midst, where the message to Mary would be apprehended in its fulness, "I ascend to my Father and
{553}
your Father, and to my God and your God". They would be lifted up in that, to a heavenly position and relationship to Him, and they were glad when they saw Him. He says the second time, "Peace be to you". It is a real established peace; Christ brings in that. Then "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you. And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them. Receive the Holy Spirit: whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them". That is the ground we are on in John, "whose soever". He is in the midst now of what He inaugurated and brought into being, and nothing is said as to whether they repent or not. It is forgiveness, and it is left for them to decide whose sins shall be remitted. I suppose it fits in in our times, when we have to do with brethren who by their associations are involved in sin. It is for us to determine whose sins we shall remit, how can we have them in fellowship with us, unless we have power to remit their sins? These are great things; it is "whose soever". The Lord has such confidence in His disciples in John, that He gives them full liberty in regard to forgiveness; so we do not approach a brother and charge him with evil associations, but we begin rather on the line of forgiveness. It is "whose soever", whether in the church of Rome, or anywhere else. The Lord has such confidence in His disciples that He says, as it were, 'whose soever sins ye remit, I remit'.
John's gospel makes way for our seeking out our relations in the public profession. All christians are our relations. When Jacob went to seek a wife he sought his relatives first. It is a question of relationship, family relationships, so if we approach today on the line of John, it is a question of family relations. We can go a long way with them on that line, before we need to introduce the church. As soon as family relationships are established and our brethren see we
{554}
can serve them, then they begin to acknowledge obligation to us. I believe many in the professing church today acknowledge obligation. It is a question of establishing family relationship first, so Jacob's enquiry is for Laban. That is a good start; he might have said it was Rachel he was seeking, but he does not say that. When Rachel comes with the sheep it is as the daughter of his mother's brother, it is a question of relationship to his mother. He served Rachel, but not as his prospective wife, but as his cousin. She tells Laban, and Laban employs Jacob as his nephew. Things lead on one step after another, until we have our brethren on family lines, we go along with them and speak of the gospel. Jacob serves for a month, until Laban says, "Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou serve me for nothing? tell me, what shall be thy wages?" That is where the church comes in, and as soon as your relations say they are obligated to you in regard of the way you serve, well then you say, it is a question of the church. That is when Jacob asks for Rachel. If Jacob had asked for Rachel at the start, he might have been refused. It is a great lesson to us.
{555}
DIVINE SETTINGS
@Exodus 35: 27, 33; @1 Corinthians 12: 18, 28
What I have in mind is divine settings. Divine settings, to my mind, form a subject of wide bearing and, as I hope to show, are inclusive of all blessing.
It will be recalled that it is said of the king of Tyre, who is a type of Satan in the book of Ezekiel, that he was the anointed cherub that covered and that God had set him so. "Thou wast the anointed covering cherub, and I had set thee so", @Ezekiel 28: 14. That, I think, is the first mention we have of the earliest incident of divine setting. It was a position that belonged to one alone -- "the anointed covering cherub". Apparently there was only one. He evidently had a function of great importance in the angelic realm, but it was forfeited. He proved treacherous and fell. That is a solemn consideration, beloved brethren, for if the idea applies, as it does, and as I hope to show, to each believer, there is a clearly implied responsibility, and a disregard of this may lead to a similar fate to that which befell the king of Tyre, or the great being he represents.
We have, later, the idea of setting in the sun and in the moon. They have not left their function. They remain to this very moment fulfilling with remarkable accuracy, the service intended. Indeed, it is part of the celestial glory that these wonderful bodies retain their orbits and, in retaining their orbits, fulfil the benign purpose for which they were formed; so that we have alternating, day and night, months and years and seasons, aside from which it is difficult for us to understand how creatures such as ourselves can subsist. The service rendered by these bodies is so common, so familiar, that we forget their benign influence, the divine consideration of the
{556}
Creator in setting them there. And then there are also the stars, some of which are said to be fixed; but we do not even know they are there. "He made the stars also" (@Genesis 1: 16); "He giveth names to them all" (@Psalm 147: 4), involving, as we read in the book of Job, sweet influence. "Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?" @Job 38: 31. That is a precious suggestion. There is not much in the way of sweet influence on earth. It is all spoiled, but the heavens still declare the glory of God, and sweet influence is involved in that. Influence is a great feature of the heavens. It were well if we respected the influence of heaven. We were speaking of it this afternoon; food given from thence, lying as hoar-frost, fine, granular, on the face of the wilderness, and the dew coming down before it. Like the dew of Hermon, as we are told elsewhere, which descended on the mountains of Zion. It is where the Lord commanded the blessing. "As the dew of Hermon that descendeth on the mountains of Zion; for there hath Jehovah commanded the blessing, life for evermore", @Psalm 133: 3. I refer to these things as of heaven and what God has set in the heavens.
We are about to be set there presently; a fact so stupendous that we can scarcely take it into our minds, far more stupendous than the sun's position there. The heavenly city is set there, in a way replacing him of whom I have spoken, referred to in Ezekiel. It was said of him that every precious stone was his covering, and nine are mentioned; whereas, there are twelve mentioned in the heavenly city, not as coverings, but as foundations. A foundation is a greater thing than a covering, and that is our setting. There is no possibility, beloved, of breakdown in that. The heavenly city remains eternally the light of the universe, as God and the Lamb are in it. "Every precious stone" is a
{557}
wonderful thought; the twelve showing how divine love entered into the heavenly city. It permeates it. Everyone there is amenable, not only to divine command but to spiritual suggestions. It is "a city that is compact together"; a city formed of persons, like ourselves, who are the subject of the unerring work of God. Think of being the formation of God. We are His workmanship, as it says, "For we are his workmanship, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works" (@Ephesians 2: 10) -- of indestructible workmanship. Of such is the heavenly city.
Well, now I want to show how Exodus opens up this thought, and it is notable that the princes, typically persons of spiritual wealth and power, furnish the stones, the onyx and other stones, to be set. Precious stones are of enhanced value as they are set where they can be seen, where they can reflect, indeed, in their own peculiar way, the action of light. Now I mention the princes because God would urge the thought of our having spiritual means. The material poverty that is growing out of the present world-wide conditions should work spiritual wealth in the people of God, so that we read that "their deep poverty has abounded to the riches of their free-hearted liberality", @2 Corinthians 8: 2. We are apt to rest in our poverty, and speak of it, and act in it; whereas, material poverty or stress is intended to promote spiritual wealth and liberality. That is what it is for. So the present widespread pressure in the world will act as discipline from God, which the saints of God -- and only the saints of God -- can understand, and as they understand and accept the discipline, it is sure to work out in spiritual wealth. Therefore, whatever prognostications may be made as to change in these conditions externally, there can be no doubt, beloved, of a good year ahead of us spiritually. I have no doubt of that, and that is the whole matter. Everything portends a good spiritual
{558}
year under God; that is to say, if discipline effects anything. God has inaugurated a very widespread discipline, and it is sure to effect its end, for God is very patient and persistent with us so that there may be some increase of spiritual wealth; that if there be poverty, as it says, there may be free-hearted liberality, "for God loves a cheerful giver", @2 Corinthians 9: 7.
And so I refer to these princes, and in referring to them in Exodus, I am not overlooking what has often been noted, that Exodus takes into account all the saints in the giving. Chronicles emphasises the giving of the king but Exodus includes all, so that everyone may contribute to the tabernacle, but yet there is the reference to the princes. However the saints are viewed as the work of God, there is always the idea of the prince. A prince is one who has more. If there is to be envy, let it be a holy envy. The apostle Paul wrote to the Corinthians to provoke them to jealousy, and he spoke to the Romans of the same thing, but of a *holy* jealousy; that is to say, if my brother has spiritual means, why not I? God would call my attention to him; not that I should seek that he should be diminished in his wealth, but that I should be increased in my wealth. It is holy envy, if you will allow me to express it. Why should I not increase my wealth if the means be available? I am but a sluggard if I do not. If the Macedonians gave more liberally than the Corinthians, why should it be? God would stir us up. I am not speaking of material things, for the moment, beloved, but of spiritual; that there might be princes among us, princely men -- not those who take the position at all, but those who are it -- whose princely holdings prove that they are princes.
And so here, they gave the onyx and other stones to be set; that is to say, they came forward with something that could be presented in a fixed position, something *to be set* -- not something to be hidden. If
{559}
we have a precious stone it is not to be hidden. Of what value is it as hidden? It is in its setting that the value shines, and so it says that they gave these stones to be set. Now think of that. Think of having something amongst the people of God in your soul -- yours -- that is set. There it is. Now take the onyx, for instance. That is the stone that was to be used for the shoulder-piece of the ephod of the high priest. Think of providing an onyx for such a service as that. Mark you, that whilst the habiliments of the high priest all picture Christ as He is now in heaven, we must remember that there is no workmanship in Him. It would be derogatory to Christ to talk about workmanship in Him. He is all these things personally, but then we must not exclude the idea of workmanship in the saints. In other words, the types represent a setting of thoughts, spiritual thoughts, aside from which we cannot grow or become adjusted in relation to God's system of things. All these thoughts refer to us. It is how we come into the thing, how we come into an apprehension of Christ as He is as High Priest in heaven. But the Holy Spirit has to tell us that there was a precious stone on each shoulder, and that the names were there. If that were all, then I should lose the idea of the priests giving. I should lose the idea of the cutting of the stones in verse 33. I should lose sight entirely of Bezaleel, and we cannot afford that. Bezaleel does not refer to someone in heaven. There is no such thing as Bezaleel being all these things in Christ. It is what is brought about in our souls. That is Bezaleel's work, and I cannot afford to lose sight of Bezaleel, the man of divine skill and wisdom. They had all the things amongst them for the cutting and setting of stones, so that they should be set; but I must keep my eye on Bezaleel, and I must keep my eye on those princes who give the onyx and other stones to be set, for they are the product of the work of God.
{560}
Christ is not that. Christ is what He is. He is not a creature. He is divine. What we arrive at and what we see is God graciously coming down to us and filling our hearts with holy thoughts so that we might arrive at what Christ is in heaven as bearing every one of us on His shoulders, supporting us. So we have the two onyx stones, one on each shoulder of the high priest with six names graven on each. These names were the children of Israel, sons of Israel according to their birth; that is to say, we are supported as a family by Christ in heaven. That is a precious thought. It is according to our birth, whether old or young; whether it were Reuben the eldest, or Benjamin the youngest, each had his place according to his birth; each belonged to the family, and each is supported family-wise, in these onyx stones provided by the men of wealth in Israel.
And then we have the breastplate, set, we are told, with twelve precious stones -- twelve of them. How those princes would shine indirectly in those stones given for setting, and the workmanship of Bezaleel in the cutting, so that your name and my name are engraved, all the names of the saints engraved. It is the work of an Engraver. We cannot afford, beloved, to omit these things, if we are to arrive at the greatness of the position of Christ in heaven, as representing us before God. We want to have the thing in detail, and if we are to have it in detail, we must understand the types. Now the breastplate is a most interesting thing. It is the most interesting part of the high priest's dress. It contains, as I said, twelve precious stones; four rows of three each, with the names of the tribes of Israel according to their tribe -- not according to birth. We are supported on the shoulders according to birth; that is, in the family, but on the breastplate, according to our tribes. That brings in the counsel of God; that each one has his own place, not determined by birth, but determined by the
{561}
counsel of God. I prefer that. Hence, Judah was first. When I look on the breastplate, I am submissive to the sovereign purpose of love, but then there are those precious stones, and every name set. Think of that, beloved. Think of being set before God; not shining down upon the earth in the high priest's breastplate, but shining Godward. Think what it means that every name is perfectly readable to the eye of God in that breastplate, and think of it being set there, and set there according to eternal counsel: "For the gifts and the calling of God are not subject to repentance", @Romans 11: 29. There is no possibility of any name being blotted out there.
You see the tribes as complete there. Therefore, you find them all in the heavenly city, as I said, the whole twelve tribes of Israel.
Well, now, in the verses read in the epistle to the Corinthians, we have these two thoughts: first, that God has set us in the body; and, secondly, that God has set certain in the assembly. Before dwelling on these two thoughts, I do wish to emphasise what I have said. You get the thought of the setting in the breastplate and also in the onyx stones on the shoulders, but particularly in the breastplate. The most precious thoughts that creation can suggest to us enter into the breastplate. Creation, in this respect, furnishes a language of God which we can understand. I cannot think for a moment that divine Persons conversing together use such a language. They do not need to, but language taken from creation is for creatures. Divine Persons have a language: what it is, we know not. The Lord Jesus speaks about the glory which He had with His Father before the world was. "And now glorify *me*, *thou* Father, along with thyself, with the glory which I had along with thee before the world was" (@John 17: 5), and we have also words about counsels taken. We may be sure, beloved, that divine Persons have
{562}
their own way, far beyond *our* ken, of communicating with one another. Before any human language was formed -- and God is the author of language -- divine Persons had a means of communicating together. That we have to leave, but communications that we are conversant with are taken from the creation. Every word used by the Spirit of God is taken from creation; I mean, taken from it to form man's thoughts and conceptions of God's thoughts; God, in His grace, comes down to our level, so that we might understand from creation what He intends to convey by it. Therefore, the precious stones convey the very highest thoughts, the most precious thoughts of God, and there are twelve of them with our names engraved on them. I speak especially to the young ones here. Take into your souls that your names are there emblazoned before the eye of God, day and night. The high priest was never to go into the presence of God without the breastplate, so as to assure us that there is perfect and perpetual representation of us in the presence of God. He ever appears to make intercession for us. Think of that. He ever appears to make intercession for us, and what I mean by that is what one has spoken of before, that the position of the saints here corresponds with their position in the breastplate. The tribes, as depicted around the tabernacle in Numbers, corresponds with the breastplate; in other words, our position here in this world is to be in accord with the position we occupy in the breastplate before God, perfect correspondence between the breastplate and the position of the saints in the path of the will of God down here, and that is how we get support, for you cannot look for support in the path of disobedience. God may discipline you in it and watch over you in it, but support is in the path of His will.
Now, to come back to Corinthians, the first setting is in the body, and that includes every person who
{563}
has Spirit of God. Every person who has the Spirit of God is in the body. He has not selected his place in it. That is quite obvious. "I will praise thee, for I am fearfully, wonderfully made. Marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well. My bones were not hidden from thee when I was made in secret, curiously wrought in the lower parts of the earth", @Psalm 139: 14, 15. We have nothing to do with that. It is a question of what God has done. He has set the members in the body as it has pleased Him. We should not wish it otherwise. The eye, the hand, the foot, and all the members mentioned by way of illustration, are there according to divine appointment. As in the physical body of man, so in the spiritual body of Christ, every member is there according to divine appointment as it pleased God. This is a very serious matter because the body is an organism. The assembly is an organisation. The assembly involves intelligence and subjection, but the body, that is to say, the assembly viewed as a body, is an organism. It is a question of our being linked up vitally by the Spirit, linked up in life, and when one speaks thus, one has to admit that the thing is scarcely known at all among the saints of God. The idea of the body is known theoretically but if I am challenged, what do I know of this organism? What do I know about it typically? What do I know about being linked up vitally with every saint on earth and being in a position according to divine appointment? Being set there is a matter to challenge our hearts so that as we come into it, as we see the wisdom of the setting, we function in it.
I might suggest at this point that many dear saints of God are in a false setting. A precious stone should be in its proper setting. The book of Proverbs contemplates a precious stone or jewel in a false setting. It says, "A fair woman who is without discretion, is as a gold ring in a swine's snout",
{564}
@Proverbs 11: 22. Her fairness, without discretion, is a jewel in a false setting. The jewel may be there but the setting is wrong. I may be in a setting of human arrangement, in a worldly setting, but if I have never come into the fellowship of God's people, I am in a false setting. There are many like that, set in the midst of a worldly organisation. If there is anyone here in such a position, I would urge you to consider it. As I have said, 'A fair woman without discretion'. You are fair with God because of His work in you, but without discretion. Your circumstances are without discretion; your ways are without discretion; so much so, that your allegiance to Christ is questionable. Think of your christianity being questionable. It is questionable if you are without discretion. And so you have here the thought of being set in the body according to divine pattern. How I should like to answer to that in my own soul and to see all the brothers and sisters taking their place in this setting, no longer without discretion, but each in his own setting, like jewels of silver and gold, as we see in the book of Proverbs.
Now, in speaking of the body, I have especially in mind to speak about the assembly as such. The body, of course, is the assembly. It is one phase of it, but when we come down to the last verse read, the word is "assembly", not 'body'. The word 'assembly' properly means those that are called out -- called-out ones. Is there anyone here tonight who is professedly a believer in Christ and not called out of the world? The basis of Corinthians is "called out" persons, persons called "saints", God having called us as He called out of the tabernacle. He is calling every day, constantly calling every day: "Come out of her, my people". That is the call, and so in @2 Corinthians 6: 17: "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not what is unclean, and *I* will receive you". That is
{565}
the call. You cannot afford to be in the world. God calls you out, and that is the idea of the assembly. You are called into something, and that something is the assembly. It is formed of persons called out, but as formed. It is marked by intelligence and order. That is what it signifies, and so it says that God has set certain in the assembly. Every one of us is set in the body. Every true christian is set in the body, but only *certain* are set in the assembly: "And God has set certain in the assembly: first, apostles; secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers; then miraculous powers; then gifts of healings; helps; governments; kinds of tongues", @1 Corinthians 12: 28. These are set in the assembly, and so they are not independent. There is no such thought as a gift being free to do as he pleases and to go where he pleases. He is set in the assembly. You may say, 'I am responsible to the Lord', but that is not set in the assembly. I might be responsible to the Lord as a unit, as an individual, and I am, but that is not set in the assembly. If I am set in the assembly, I am responsible to it. I come under surveillance, and it may be the criticism of the assembly; and no true servant will have it otherwise, for his brethren are his safeguard. So, God has set certain in the assembly. Hence every brother should aspire to gift. "But desire earnestly the greater gifts", @1 Corinthians 12: 31. The need is very great for them and the need is great for persons who are ready to be sent. To have gift is one thing; to be sent, is another. I may have gift, and may not be ready to be sent, not trustworthy, and so Isaiah says, "And I heard the voice of the Lord saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" @Isaiah 6: 8. "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" "I" and "us". "Whom shall I send?" is definite inquiry, as He is very particular as to whom He sends. God is particular, but then the next thing is, "Who will go for us?": not for
{566}
*me*, but for "*us*". The "us" is a very wide thought. It brings in more -- authority. "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" -- that is a call. Was the need ever greater? Never. The need among the people of God, the need to preach the gospel, the need to serve is paramount, but "Whom shall I send?" and you say, 'Someone with a gift'. No, not someone with gift only. The gift needs to have formation. The gift is to be in its setting; what is that setting? the assembly. That is the setting. I cannot go without the fellowship of my brethren, and so, as you will all remember, at Antioch, the Holy Spirit describes to us the beautiful material in the assembly that was there. So the question arises in one's mind about the assembly that is here in New York, for instance. What is it like? The assembly that was there at Antioch was a very beautiful assembly. The princes of that assembly shone in lustre. They ministered to the Lord, and they fasted. Antioch does not suggest the Ethiopian woman whom Moses married. I am afraid that she depicts the assembly in this city, not very lovely, but one cannot speak much of the loveliness of any assembly today. Nevertheless, Moses married her, although both Miriam and Aaron spoke against her; that is to say, the Lord Jesus takes us up, and enters into the bond with us, in spite of our unloveliness, but He intends to make us lovely. When she comes up out of the wilderness in the Canticles, she is very lovely with all the powders of the merchant. "Who is this, she that cometh up from the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?" @Song of Songs 3: 6. She is beautified for Solomon and merges into the daughters of Jerusalem. "King Solomon made himself a palanquin of the wood of Lebanon. Its pillars he made of silver, its support of gold, its seat of purple; The midst thereof was paved with love by
{567}
the daughters of Jerusalem", @Song of Songs 3: 9, 10. "Paved with love by the daughters of Jerusalem". How beautiful they were! The Lord takes us up, you see, in spite of our unloveliness, and He makes us lovely if we will allow Him. He will beautify us, and so, as I was saying, Antioch was very beautiful. It was a perfect gem, as it is depicted by the Spirit.
And then there were those gifts, Barnabas and Paul. Barnabas was mentioned first and Paul was mentioned last. "Now there were in Antioch, in the assembly which was there, prophets and teachers: Barnabas, and Simeon who was called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaen, foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul", @Acts 13: 1. They were gifts, and they were set in the assembly. They had taught in that assembly. They had to do with it, but now they are set in it, and the Holy Spirit speaking to the assembly, to those present, said, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them. Then, having fasted and prayed, and having laid their hands on them, they let them go", @Acts 13: 2, 3. The assembly, or those representing it, laid their hands upon them, and let them go. "They *let* them go". Do you think they wanted to get rid of them? No, the idea of the body was there. They were members one of another. They were linked up vitally in that assembly, but then the idea of the assembly was there. As it says, "The assembly which was there", and God had set these persons in it -- these gifts -- and now they go out, sent by the Holy Spirit. They go out with the full fellowship of the assembly.
Well, dear brethren, that was all. I had the idea of setting in the assembly in mind, because there are many, thank God, who are able to serve amongst us, but I fear too much individuality, too much aspiration to serve and shine in service, and too little understanding of being set in the assembly. Let the
{568}
setting in the assembly have full weight with us, so that we have the confidence of our brethren, and go out in the service with their hands upon us. They will let us go, not wishing to get rid of us but sparing us rather, and supporting us in the service. Their places were cherished there, and they came back after their service. They did not go away in a hurry, because we are told that they remained no little time with the disciples in Antioch.
