{#Gospel Stories}
{1}
<h1>Gospel Stories</h1>
THE PRICELESS PEARL
David Morse, a missionary resident on the west coast of India, was talking with an old pearl-fisher, in whom he had been interested for a long time. The latter had just surfaced from a dive with a large pearl oyster between his teeth. The missionary opened it with a pen-knife and drew out of it a magnificent pearl.
'Look, Rambhau. It's worth a fortune.'
The fisherman shrugged his shoulders. 'Yes, it is beautiful, but...'
'What? Have you seen more beautiful ones?'
'Oh yes! There are more beautiful ones. I have one...' He stopped, as if words failed him.
'Look, there are blemishes, this spot here, that slight chip there, and it is a little too elongated. It is beautiful, no doubt, but there are better ones.' 
'You are too demanding,' exclaimed Mr Morse. 'I think it is perfect.'
'Well,' said Rambhau, 'It's what you say in your preachings. People look upon themselves as perfect, but God sees them as they really are.'
The conversation continued while the two men walked back towards the town along a dusty road.
'What you say is right, Rambhau. Do you not see that God, who declares all men unfit for His presence, offers complete justification to all those who simply believe His word and accept His free salvation?'
'No, I cannot believe it, Sahib. I have often told you, it would be too easy! Your religion has many good things about it, but it is mistaken on this point. I cannot accept it. Perhaps I am too proud, but I must work for my place in heaven. You see, I should feel ill at ease there.'
'Oh! Rambhau!' murmured the missionary. He had been praying for this man for years, without any result up to now.
'Rambhau,' Mr Morse continued gravely, 'Don't expect to get to heaven in this way! There is only one way and it is not that of works, but Christ alone. Rambhau, you are old now and perhaps this will be your last pearl-fishing season. To have the pearly gates of heaven opened for you, you must accept the new life God offers you in His Son Jesus Christ.'
'Yes, it is my last season. I have fished for the last time today. This is the end of the year and I have preparations to make for the coming one.'
'You ought to prepare for the life to come.'
'Just so. Do you see that man over there? He is a pilgrim walking barefoot on the sharpest stones and stopping every two or three steps to kneel down and kiss the ground. I want to begin my pilgrimage on the first day of the new year and go to Delhi on my knees. I have intended to do this all my life. I wish to be sure of heaven.'
'To Delhi! But that is nine hundred miles, you will wear your knees out and you will get blood poisoning or leprosy, before you get as far as Bombay!'
'Never mind, I must go. I shall suffer but my suffering will be sweet: it will gain heaven for me.'
'Rambhau, my friend, don't do that, I beg of you. Jesus Christ has died to obtain heaven for you.'
The old fisherman shook his head. 'There is no one on earth more dear to me than you, Sahib Morse. You have been taking an interest in me for many years, you cared for me when I was ill, you have helped me in my need. But no one, not even you, can turn me aside from my great desire to gain eternal life. I must go to Delhi ...'
Some days later Rambhau knocked at the missionary's door. 'You must come home with me for a moment. I have something to show you.'
Mr Morse had the presentiment that his prayers were going to be heard.
'I shall come with you with pleasure,' he answered. But his heart failed him when he heard the old fisherman say, as they came near his dwelling, 'I am leaving for Delhi in a week.'
He made his friend sit down on the chair, where the latter had so often explained salvation in vain, then left the room and came back with a little casket.
'For many years I have been keeping here a thing I want to speak to you about, Sahib. You did not know, but I had a son. He was also a pearl-fisher, the best on the Indian coasts. He was an excellent diver, had the most piercing eyesight, the steadiest arm, the most powerful lungs. He was my joy and pride. He dreamed of finding a pearl more beautiful than all those that had ever been found before, and one day he found it. But, in order to have it, he remained too long under the water. He died a short time after...'
The old man bowed his head and for a moment his whole body trembled in silence.
'I have kept this pearl ever since,' he continued, 'but now I am going away and who knows whether I shall return? So I wish to give you my pearl, you, my best friend...'
He opened the casket. From the cotton-wool surrounding it, he slowly drew out a giant pearl of incomparable brilliancy and fabulous worth. The missionary remained silent with admiration.
'What a marvellous thing, Rambhau!' he said at last.
'It is perfect, Sahib.'
A new thought seized the missionary. He quickly raised his eyes.
'Rambhau,' he said, 'It is a remarkable pearl. Let me buy it. I will offer you ten thousand dollars.'
'Oh, Sahib? What do you mean?'
'Fifteen thousand or more, if necessary. I will work to obtain it.'
'Sahib,' said Rambhau, drawing himself up, 'This pearl is beyond price. No one in all the world is rich enough to pay for its value to me. I would not give it up for millions of dollars. I do not wish to sell it to you. You can have it only as a gift from me, your friend.'
'No, Rambhau. I cannot accept it thus. However ardently I desire it, I could not accept it in this way. Perhaps I am too proud, but it would be too easy. I must pay or work to obtain it.'
'You do not understand me, Sahib. Don't you see? My only son gave his life to obtain this pearl and I will not sell it at any price. What gives it its value is my son's life. I cannot sell it to you but I can and will give it to you. Accept it as a token of the affection I have towards you.'
Much moved, the missionary could not reply for a moment. Then he grasped the old man's hand.
'Rambhau,' he said gently, 'Do you not see? What I have said to you is exactly what you have said to God, and what you are saying to me is what God keeps on saying to you.'
The pearl-fisher gazed long and questioningly at the missionary. Slowly he began to understand. The missionary continued: 'God offers you salvation as a free gift. It is so great and so costly that no one on earth could purchase it. Hundreds of millions of dollars would not be sufficient. No one is good enough to merit it. Your entrance to heaven has cost God the life of His only Son. You would not be able to gain salvation, even if you spent a million years on it or made hundreds of pilgrimages. All you can do is to accept it as a token of the love God has for you, a sinner. Rambhau, you may be sure I will accept your pearl humbly, asking God to make me worthy of your affection. But will you not humbly accept God's great gift, knowing that it was necessary for His Son to die, so that He could offer it to you?'
Great tears now furrowed the old man's cheeks. The veil was being lifted. He understood at last. 'Sahib, I see it now! For two years I have acknowledged the teaching of Jesus and have believed on Him, but I could not believe that His salvation was free. I understand it today: there are things which can neither be bought nor worked for: they are without price. Sahib, I am willing to accept God's salvation!'
"For ye are saved by grace, through faith; and this not of yourselves; it is God's gift," Ephesians 2: 8.
"For God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal," John 3: 16.
{2}
THE TOUCH OF THE MASTER'S HAND
Myra Brooks Welch
<blockquote>It was battered and scarred, <br>And the auctioneer thought it <br>Hardly worth his while <br>To waste his time on the old violin, <br>But he held it up with a smile. <br>"What am I bid, good people", he cried, <br>"Who starts the bidding for me?" <br>"One dollar, one dollar, Do I hear two?" <br>"Two dollars, who makes it three?" <br>"Three dollars once, three dollars twice, going for three", </blockquote>
<blockquote>But, No, <br>From the room far back a grey haired man <br>Came forward and picked up the bow, <br>Then wiping the dust from the old violin <br>And tightening up the strings, <br>He played a melody, pure and sweet, <br>As sweet as the angel sings. </blockquote>
<blockquote>The music ceased and the auctioneer <br>With a voice that was quiet and low, <br>Said "What now am I bid for this old violin?" <br>As he held it aloft with its' bow. <br>"One thousand, one thousand, Do I hear two?" <br>"Two thousand, Who makes it three?" <br>"Three thousand once, three thousand twice, <br>Going and gone", said he. </blockquote>
<blockquote>The audience cheered, <br>But some of them cried, <br>"We just don't understand." <br>"What changed its' worth?" <br>Swift came the reply. <br>"The Touch of the Masters Hand." </blockquote>
<blockquote>And many a man with life out of tune, <br>All battered with bourbon and gin, <br>Is auctioned cheap to a thoughtless crowd <br>Much like that old violin. <br>A mess of pottage, a glass of wine, <br>A game and he travels on. <br>He is going once, he is going twice, <br>He is going and almost gone. <br>But the Master comes, <br>And the foolish crowd never can quite understand, <br>The worth of a soul and the change that is wrought <br>By the Touch of the Master's Hand. </blockquote>
{3}
THE SUFFICIENCY OF CHRIST
After a preaching in Chicago, a man came up to the preacher and said to him, before all the audience: 'You can talk like that about how Christ is dear to you and helps you; but if your wife was dead, as my wife is, and you had some babies crying for their mother, who will never come back, you would not say what you are saying.'
Just a few days later this preacher lost his beautiful and nobly gifted wife in a railway crash, and the body was brought to Chicago and carried to the Salvation Army barracks for the funeral service. After the funeral service the preacher stood by the casket, and looked down into the face of the silent wife and mother. He said: `The other day when I was here, a man said I could not say Christ was sufficient if my wife were dead and my children were crying for their mother. If that man is here, I tell him that Christ is sufficient. My heart is all crushed. My heart is all bleeding. My heart is all broken, but there is a song in my heart, and Christ put it there. If that man is here, I tell him that, though my wife is gone and my children are motherless, Christ speaks comfort to me today.' That man was there, and down the aisle he came, and fell down beside the casket, and said `Verily, if Christ can help us like that, I will surrender to Him.' He was saved there and then.
{4}
THE WRONG MEDICINE
A chemist, who professed himself to be an atheist, looked at the clock in his shop, and decided it was time to close for the night. He had scarcely done so when there came a timid ring at the bell. `What do you want?' was the not very polite question, as he opened the door and looked down on the little girl who stood there. `Please, sir, mother's bad, and will you give her this medicine?' 'Too late; can't give people medicine at this time of night. Come in the morning.' `Oh, but do, please, sir; she's so sick; I don't know what I'll do; please give me it!'
With a grumble and a grunt, the door was opened wider, the child admitted, and he made up the prescription, and away went the girl joyful at her success. As he replaced the bottles, his eye caught the label on the last bottle he had used, and to his horror he saw that he had made a serious mistake and had put in some deadly poison.
`What can I do' he said? `The girl is gone and I know nothing of her, don't even know where she lives. Perhaps her mother has taken it by now!' As he thought thus a cold perspiration seemed to come out of every pore, and he stood in blank terror. `If the woman takes the medicine, there is no hope. I shall be a murderer. What shall I do?'
What hope, what comfort could there be for him - a man who did not believe in God? The man fell on his knees, just where he was behind the counter, and cried aloud: `O God, don't let that poor woman take the medicine!' Scarcely able to move from fright, in utter helplessness, the chemist knelt, repeating his prayer. Tinkle, tinkle, went the bell again. Hardly knowing what to do, and trembling from head to foot, he went to the door. There stood the child again, sobbing as if her heart would break. `Oh, please, sir, I'm so very sorry. I was hurrying home, and I tumbled down - I broke the bottle - I couldn't help it. Oh, do please forgive me, sir, and give me some more medicine.'
Almost overcome with sudden joy, he could scarcely refrain from embracing the young culprit whose fall had, through God's mercy, averted the terrible thing he had feared. God - yes, there was a God - had indeed heard his prayer. `Come in, my dear, come in; I'll give you some more - don't cry.' With trembling hand and beating heart, and mind all aglow with wonder and relief, the chemist carefully made up the prescription again, and the child gleefully ran off once more, full of thanks for his kindness.
The door was locked, the light put out at last, and he turned into his little room alone with God - God whom he had treated so terribly in the past, and who had so mercifully heard and answered him in his distress. I need not tell you how, on his knees, the repentant man sought and found pardon and peace, and how it became his delight, and still is, to make known the love of Christ, and to tell to sinners around, what a dear Saviour he had found.
"The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God" (Psalm 14: 1). "For God so loved the world, that He gave His only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal" (John 3: 16). "Behold, now is the well-accepted time; behold, now the day of salvation" (2 Corinthians 6: 2).
{5}
BILLY AND THE FISH'S HEAD
Billy's teacher had told him a good story, and, like all the Bible stories, it was true. A tax had to be paid, and the Lord Jesus told Peter to go fishing, and sure enough as he had been told, the first fish he caught had the very coin in its mouth required to pay the tax (you can read about this in Matthew 17: 24-27).
Now Billy's mother was a widow and very poor, and the more Billy thought about it, the more certain it seemed that if the Lord Jesus could do this for Peter, he could do it for Billy's mother! So Billy prayed, and he saved his pennies until he had a whole shilling. `And what can I do for you, sonny?' asked the fishmonger, when Billy turned up at his shop, clutching his precious shilling. `Please, I want a fish - a big one,' said Billy. The fishmonger looked doubtful. A big fish costs more than a shilling. 'Well, it's a fish's head I really want,' Billy exclaimed hopefully. `It doesn't need to have a body.' That was different, of course, and the fishmonger promptly produced a big one. He wrapped it in newspaper and Billy proudly carried it home.
`Mummy!' he called excitedly, as soon as he got inside the door. `Look what I've bought.' `But what - ?' she began. `It's to pay our bills!' he said, hopping up and down with excitement. 'Like Peter!' And he told her the story of the coin in the fish's mouth. Together mother and son opened their fish's mouth - but there was no coin there! With his faith almost shattered, Billy flung himself on his bed and cried himself to sleep. Meanwhile his mother was glancing idly at the piece of paper in which the fish head had been wrapped. Suddenly, to her astonishment, she caught sight of her own name in a solicitor's advertisement! Reading on, she saw that it was requested she should get in touch with this firm of solicitors, and she would hear something to her advantage. Well, she did and found that a relative with whom she had lost touch had died, leaving her a sum of money. Billy's face was one big beam when he heard the news. `So Jesus did hear my prayer after all!' he exclaimed. `If it hadn't been for the fish's head, you would never have known about the money!'
This story is perfectly true, and it tells us that simple prayer, with faith, is always heard - even though the answer is not necessarily given to us in the way we had expected!
{6}
WHAT WAS IN JEREMY'S EGG?
Jeremy was born with a twisted body, a slow mind and a chronic illness that had been slowly killing him all his young life. Still, his parents had tried to give him as normal a life as possible and had sent him to St Theresa's Elementary School. At the age of 12, Jeremy was only in second grade, unable to learn much. His teacher, Doris Miller, was often impatient with him. He would squirm in his seat, drool and make grunting noises. At other times, he spoke clearly and distinctly, as if a spot of light had penetrated the darkness of his brain. Most of the time, however, Jeremy irritated his teacher.
One day, she asked his parents to come to school for a consultation. As they sat quietly in the empty classroom, Doris said to them, `Jeremy really belongs in a special school. It isn't fair to him to be with younger children who don't have learning problems. Why, there is a five-year gap between his age and that of the other children!' His father said, `Miss Miller, there is no school of that kind nearby. It would be a terrible shock for Jeremy if we had to take him out of this school. We know he really likes it here.' Doris sat for a long time after they left, staring at the snow outside the window.	Its coldness seemed to seep into her soul. She wanted to sympathise with the parents. After all, their only child had a terminal illness. But it wasn't fair to keep him in her class. She had 18 other youngsters to teach and Jeremy was a distraction. Furthermore, he would never learn to read or write. Why waste any more time trying? As she pondered the situation, guilt washed over her. `Oh God,' she said aloud in prayer, `here I am complaining, when my problems are nothing compared with that poor family! Please help me to be more patient with Jeremy.'
From that day on, she tried hard to ignore Jeremy's noises and his blank stares. Then one day he limped to her desk, dragging his bad leg behind him. `I love you, Miss Miller.' he exclaimed, loudly enough for the whole class to hear. The other children snickered, and Doris's face turned red. She stammered, `Wh-Why, that is very nice, Jeremy. Now please take your seat.'
Spring came, and the children talked excitedly about the coming of Easter. Doris told them the story of Jesus and the resurrection, and then to emphasise the idea of new life springing forth, she gave each of the children a large plastic egg.	`Now,' she said to them, `I want you to take this home and bring it back tomorrow with something inside that shows new life. Do you understand?' 'Yes, Miss Miller!' the children responded enthusiastically - all except for Jeremy. He just listened intently; his eyes never left her face. He did not even make his usual noises. Had he understood what she had said about Jesus' death and resurrection? Did he understand the assignment? Perhaps she should call his parents and explain the project to them.
That evening, Doris was busy and forgot about speaking to Jeremy's parents. The next morning, 19 children came to school, laughing and talking as they placed their eggs in the large wicker basket on Miss Miller's desk. After they completed their Maths lesson, it was time to open the eggs. In the first egg, Doris found a flower. `Oh yes, a flower is certainly a sign of new life,' she said. A small girl in the first row waved her arms. `That's my egg, Miss Miller,' she called out. The next egg contained a plastic butterfly, which looked very real. Doris held it up.	`We all know that a caterpillar changes and grows into a beautiful butterfly. Yes that is new life, too.' Little Judy smiled proudly and said, `Miss Miller, that one is mine.' Next Doris found a rock with moss on it. She explained that the moss, too, showed life.	Billy spoke up from the back of the classroom.	`My Daddy helped me!' Then Doris opened the fourth egg, which was empty! Surely it must be Jeremy's, she thought and, of course, he did not understand her instructions. If only she had not forgotten to phone his parents. Because she did not want to embarrass him, she quietly set the egg aside and reached for another. Suddenly Jeremy spoke up. `Miss Miller, aren't you going to talk about my egg?' Flustered, Doris replied, `But Jeremy, your egg is empty!' He looked into her eyes and said softly, `Yes, but Jesus' tomb was empty too!' Time stopped. When she could speak again, Doris asked him, `Do you know why the tomb was empty?' 'Oh yes!' Jeremy exclaimed. `Jesus was killed and put in the tomb. Then His Father raised him up!' The recess bell rang. While the children excitedly ran out to the school yard, Doris wept. All the cold inside her melted completely away.
Three months later Jeremy died. Those who paid their respects at the mortuary were surprised to see 19 eggs on top of his coffin, all of them empty.
"But they that wait upon Jehovah shall renew their strength: they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not tire; they shall walk, and not faint" (Isaiah 40: 31). God "has begotten us again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from among the dead" (1 Peter 1: 3).
S Police
{7}
THE DOCTOR'S BIBLE
W P MacKay left home to attend college and medical school at the age of seventeen. His mother was a very godly Christian, and upon his departure she gave him a Bible, writing her name and his, and a verse of Scripture upon the flyleaf But alas the son had no use for his mother's God, or the Bible she had given him. He did not consult its pages; and soon after, while drunk he pawned it in order to purchase more drink.
His studies at school engrossed him, and the Bible was forgotten. Eventually he graduated with high honours and became the head of a large hospital. He also took the lead in an infidel club where they practised everything that was licentious and vile. He was boldly acclaimed by others in his ridicule of God and the Bible.
The only thing that seemed to give him any thrill at all was when an ambulance would unload a dying victim of an accident; or a patient came under his care whose condition was so critical that the chances of survival were slim. This moved him to pit his skill against what his colleagues would term the impossible. If the patient pulled through, it only gave Dr MacKay an opportunity to indulge in vain and inglorious boasting. But God was about to deal with him and bring the doctor to his senses in a remarkable way.
One day an accident victim was brought to the hospital, terribly injured. In spite of his condition, on his face was a serene look of peaceful calm, so unusual that it amazed Dr MacKay, who was accustomed to seeing people suffer. `What's the diagnosis, Doctor?' asked the patient with a smile.	`Oh. I guess we'll pull you through,' replied the doctor. `No, doctor, I don't want any guess,' the man said, 'just lay me down easy anywhere, Doctor. I am ready, I am not afraid to die because my trust is in the precious, shed blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, who paid the penalty for my sins at Calvary.' His face radiant with Christian love, he continued: 'I know I am going to be with the Lord Jesus if I have to die.	But I would like to know the truth, just what is my condition?' 'You have at the most three hours to live!'
Hardened as he was Dr MacKay could not but feel sympathy for the dying man. `Is there anything special you would like us to do for you?' he asked. `Thank you,' said the man. 'In one of my pockets is a two week's pay cheque. I wish you would send it at once to my landlady, and ask her to send me the book.' `What book is that? asked the doctor.	`Oh, just the book.' the man answered.	`She will know.'
Dr MacKay arranged for the dying man's request to be carried out, and then started on his rounds through the hospital. But those words kept ringing in his ears - `I am ready Doctor, just lay me down easy, anywhere, I am ready.' Dr MacKay had never been known to enquire about a patient for any personal motive, but for the first time in his life, he wanted to know how this one was getting along. He returned to the ward where the injured man had been placed, and seeing the nurse whom he had assigned to the case, he asked her how the man was. `He died a few minutes ago,' the nurse told him. `Did he get the book?' asked the doctor. `Yes, it arrived shortly before he died.' `What was it, a bank book?'	`No, it wasn't his bank book,' said the nurse, it is still here though if you want to look at it.	He died with it under his pillow.'
Dr MacKay went to the bedside, reached under the pillow and pulled out the man's book. It was a Bible. As he picked it up, the Bible opened, and the pages turned over to the flyleaf. There in his mother's handwriting was his own name, his mother's name, and a verse of Scripture. It was the Bible given to him by his mother when he had left home to attend college; the one he remembered pawning, while drunk in order to buy more liquor. He slipped the Bible under his coat, blushing with shame to think that he had despised it so, and rushed upstairs to his private office. There he fell upon his knees, and asked God to have mercy upon his soul. All his life he had known, through the teaching at his mother's knee, that Christ alone could save and keep. In repentance now he accepted Christ as his personal Saviour, and came to realise that God was his Father, the Lord Jesus Christ his Saviour, and heaven his home. Have you heeded love's warnings?
{8}
DON'T WAKE DADDY
A man who was preaching in the open air was a saved drunkard, who had formerly been a terror to himself, his family, and his neighbours. He was telling in all humility of spirit what great things the Lord had done for him. In the crowd was an unbeliever who was mocking, scoffing and jeering. `It's all fancy - just a dream - just a dream,' he sneered.
A little girl of ten years of age timidly touched him and whispered: `Please sir, if it is only a dream, please don't wake him - that is my daddy!'
The unbeliever was touched in his heart and conscience, and was converted. He found out that it was not a dream, but a reality.
{9}
GOD'S GRACE
This is a true story. Every Sunday afternoon the Pastor and his eleven-year-old son went out into their town to hand out gospel tracts. This particular Sunday was very cold outside as well as pouring down rain. The boy bundled up in his warmest and driest clothes and said, `OK dad, I'm ready.' His dad asked, `Ready for what?' `Dad, it is time we gather our tracts together and go out.' Dad responds, `Son, it is very cold outside and pouring down rain.' The boy gives his dad a surprised look, asking, `But Dad, aren't people still going to hell, even though it is raining?' Dad answers, `Son, I am not going out in this weather.' Despondently, the boy asks, `Dad, can I go? Please?' His father hesitated for a moment then said, `Son, you can go. Here are the tracts; be careful son.' `Thanks Dad!' And with that, he was off and out into the rain.
This eleven-year-old boy walked the streets of the town going door to door, and handing everybody he met in the street a gospel tract. After two hours he was soaking, bone-chilled wet and down to his very last tract. He stopped on a corner and looked for someone to hand a tract to, but the streets were totally deserted. Then he turned toward the first home he saw and went up to the front door and rang the bell. Nobody answered. He rang it again and again, but still no one answered. He waited but still no answer. Finally, he turned to leave, but something stopped him. Again, he turned to the door and rang the bell and knocked loudly on the door with his fist. He waited, something holding him there on the front porch. He rang again, and this time the door slowly opened.
Standing in the doorway was a very sad-looking elderly lady. She asked softly, `What can I do for you, son?' With radiant eyes and a smile that lit up her world, this little boy said, `Ma'am, I'm sorry if I disturbed you, but I just want to tell you that Jesus really does love you, and I came to give you my very last gospel tract which will tell you all about Jesus and His great love.' With that, he handed her his last tract, and turned to leave. She called to him as he departed. `Thank you, son! And God bless you!'
Well, the following Sunday morning in church, Pastor Dad was in the pulpit. As the service began, he asked, `Does anybody have a testimony or want to say anything?'	Slowly, in the back row of the church, an elderly lady stood up.	As she began to speak, a look of glorious radiance came from her face as she said, `No one in this church knows me. I've never been here before. You see, before last Sunday I was not a Christian. My husband passed on some time ago, leaving me totally alone in this world. Last Sunday, being a particularly cold and rainy day, it was even more so in my heart, and I came to the end of the line where I no longer had any hope, or will to live.	So I took a rope and a chair and ascended the stairway into the attic. I fastened the rope securely to a rafter in the roof, then stood on the chair and fastened the other end of the rope around my neck. Standing on that chair, so lonely and broken-hearted, I was about to leap off when suddenly the loud ringing of my doorbell downstairs startled me. I thought, I'll wait a minute, and whoever it is will go away. I waited and waited, but the ringing doorbell seemed to get louder and more insistent, and then the person ringing also started knocking loudly. I thought to myself again, Who on earth could this be?! Nobody ever rings my bell or comes to see me. I loosened the rope from my neck and started for the front door, all the while the bell rang louder and louder. When I opened the door and looked, I could hardly believe my eyes, for there was the most radiant and angelic little boy I had ever seen in my life. His smile, oh, I could never describe it to you! And the words that came from his mouth caused my heart, that had long been dead, to leap to life, as he exclaimed with a cherub-like voice, `Ma'am, I just came to tell you that Jesus really does love you.'	Then he gave me this gospel tract that I now hold in my hand. As the little angel disappeared back out into the cold and rain, I closed the door and read slowly every word of this tract. Then I went up to my attic to get my rope and chair. I wouldn't be needing them any more. You see, I am now a happy child of the King, and since the address of your church was on the back of this tract, I have come here to personally say thank you to God's little angel, who came just in the nick of time and by so doing, spared my soul from eternity in hell.'
There were now no dry eyes in the church. And as shouts of praise and honour to the King resounded off the very rafters of the building, Pastor Dad descended from the pulpit to the front pew where the little angel was seated. He took his son in his arms and sobbed uncontrollably. Probably this universe has never seen a father that was more filled with love and honour for his son except for One. This Father also allowed His Son to go out into a cold and dark world. He received His Son back with joy unspeakable, and as all of heaven shouted praises and honour to the King, the Father seated His beloved Son on His throne far above all principality and power and every name that is named.
There may be someone reading this who is also going through a dark, cold, lonely time in his or her soul. You may even be a Christian, for we are not without problems, or you may not yet know the King. Whatever the case and whatever the problem or situation you find yourself in, and no matter how dark it may seem, I want you to know that I just came to tell you that Jesus really does love you. He really does .... May the love and grace and mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ be yours this day!
{10}
WITH HIS STRIPES WE ARE HEALED
In a school in the north of England someone had done a serious wrong, and the headmaster had in vain tried to find out the culprit. He felt that, for the honour of the school, he must discover the wrong-doer ; and so he assembled all the classes and, having made known to them the gravity of the offence, he asked the boys for their judgment :s to what should be done. The boys all agreed that the offender deserved punishment.
Then the headmaster made an appeal to them, beseeching that the one who had done wrong should come forward and bear his punishment, but the appeal was without success.
The next morning the boys were gathered together again, and once more they listened to their headmaster as he pleaded that someone should own to the offence, confessing his failure, and be prepared to bear the penalty, but his entreaties found no answer.
On the third morning when the school once more assembled, the boys listened for the third time to the supplications of their head. He spoke to them of how the matter affected the name of the school, and of all that it meant to him as head, and again he asked for their decision as to the rightness of meting out punishment for such an offence. All agreed without faltering that the wrong was too serious to go uncorrected.
Then the old headmaster called upon his chief assistant and gave him a cane. The old man stretched out his own hand and waited. Seeing what was in the mind of his chief the teacher raised the cane above his head and brought it down on' the outstretched hand.
The pain of the stroke caused the master to pull his hand to his side, but with tightened lips he raised it once more. The cane cut through the air a second time, but again was the trembling hand raised. The third stroke fell and then, as the arm was uplifted, a big boy, a boy from the top of the school, rushed forward sobbing and begging, as he confessed to being the wrong-doer, to be allowed to bear the rest of the penalty of his misdeeds.
Have you yet done what that boy in the North Country School did ? When all men, women, and boys and girls lay under the displeasure of God for wrongdoing, the Lord Jesus came Himself to bear all the punishment, and He went to the Cross, to death itself, that you might never have to bear the penalty of your sins. "He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities :	the chastisement of our peace was upon Him; and with His stripes we are healed," Isa. 53: 5.
{11}
A DAUGHTER'S DEVOTEDNESS
Many years ago, when the city of Nancy in France had been captured in battle, the victorious Charles the Bold ordered that every tenth person in the town should be slain.
The inhabitants -- young and old -- were assembled in a line along the principal street of the city. Then, at a word from the Conqueror, a herald went forth and began to count. Each person on whom fell the fatal number ten was to be sent to be executed by the sword.
Near the head of the line the Governor of the city and his only daughter were placed. He had long resisted the siege, supported by the heroic girl by his side, but it had been in vain.
Watching the movements of the herald and hearing him count aloud, the daughter of the Governor saw by a rapid glance that the dreaded number was about to fall on her father. Instantly she slipped behind him and placed herself on the other side. Before the old man was aware of her object, the number which should have been his had fallen upon his daughter.
He stood for a moment stupefied with astonishment and grief, and then called out to the herald : "Justice ! Justice ! "
"What is the matter, old man ? " demanded the herald, before passing on.
"The count is wrong! There is	a mistake. Not her!" exclaimed the father, as the executioners were laying their hands upon the girl, "take me, for I was the tenth ! "
"Not so," said his daughter calmly, "you all saw that the number came to me."
"She put herself in my way - -she took my place -- let the blow fall on me! " pleaded the old man ; while she as earnestly insisted that she was the chosen victim.
Amazed to see two persons striving for the privilege of death at their hands, the executioners dragged them both before Charles.
Here we will pause to consider the act of self-sacrificing devoted love which far surpasses even the noble action of that loving girl. Jesus, God's beloved Son came down from heaven to take the sinner's place. At the cross of Calvary the stroke of divine justice fell on His head that sinners might be saved.
He knew that the judgment must fall not on every tenth person -- but on every one, for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, and so He took the sinner's place and bore the punishment instead. What boundless grace was His to cause Him to endure the judgment which must have fallen upon us as guilty sinners. It was love that brought Him down.
But to return to our story. Charles had some pity, notwithstanding his violent temper, and he was greatly moved by the sight that met his eyes. "I pray you hear me! " cried the girl, throwing herself at his feet. "My life is of no account -- then let me die. But spare -- oh! spare him, the best and noblest of men."
"Do not listen to her! " exclaimed the old man. "You beheld her courage, her self-sacrifice, and I see that you art touched! You will not, you cannot, destroy so precious a life ! "
Strange to say, tears came into the eyes of the cruel Conqueror, and with his voice shaking with emotion he cried, "Neither shall die ! Old man ! fair maiden! I spare your lives and for your sakes the lives of all these people, for I
have gained the knowledge that love is greater than kingly power, and mercy is sweeter than vengeance."
Thus unexpectedly deliverance came to the one who was ready to die for her father, but there was no deliverance for Jesus, if He were to accomplish the great work of redemption and set us free. Some who saw Jesus on the cross cried in derision: "He saved others; Himself He cannot save! " but they little knew how true their words were, for
<blockquote>"Himself He could not save, He on the cross must die, Or mercy could not come To ruined sinners nigh. <br>Yes, Jesus' precious blood must flow, That sinners might forgiveness know." </blockquote>
What joy and thanksgiving filled the city of Nancy that day, while the devoted girl, whose heroic conduct had saved not only her father, but one-tenth of the people from massacre, was the centre of their affectionate admiration.
Thus in heaven the Lord Jesus will be the centre of the redeemed, who will say "Unto Him that loved us and washed us from our sins in His own blood -- to Him be glory."
Jesus loved even unto death. Do you love Him ? Have you trusted your soul to Him, the only Saviour, and thanked Him for the greatest sacrifice of all ?
"GREATER LOVE HATH NO MAN THAN THIS, THAT A MAN LAY DOWN HIS LIFE FOR HIS FRIENDS," John 15: 13.
{12}
THE BEST TIME A lady went to Dr. Chalmers one day
and said, "Doctor, I cannot bring my child to Christ ; I have talked and talked, but it is no use."
The Doctor thought she lacked skill and said to the girl, "Now, they have been bothering you a good deal on this question of your soul's salvation. Suppose I just tell your mother that you do not want to be talked to any more on this subject for a whole year. Will that do ? "
The Scotch lassie hesitated a little ; then she said she did not think it would be safe to wait a whole year. Something might happen, or she might die before then. "That is so," said the Doctor, "and suppose we say now six months ? "
She did not think even that would be safe. "Well, let me say three months," said the Doctor.
After some hesitation, the girlie said, "I do not really think it would be safe to put it off for three months. I don't feel safe in putting it off at all." So they knelt down together and told God, and all was settled.
{13}

