{#Selected Ministry - Volume 3}
{1}
<h1>Selected Ministry - Volume 3</h1>
LOVERS OF GOD
W J House
@2 Timothy 3: 1 - 5; @Romans 8: 26 - 29; @1 Corinthians 8: 1 - 3; @1 Corinthians 2: 7 - 12
It is the desire of God to have lovers. The apostle Paul speaks of those who love God. God's desire to have such is so great that He commands it, saying, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God" (@Matthew 22: 37). It is imperative according to the divine standard, and He wants thousands to love Him. Scripture speaks of "ten thousands of ten thousands and thousands of thousands" (@Revelation 5: 11). Daniel tells us that "thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him" (@Daniel 7: 10). It is a wonderful suggestion when God speaks of the "thousands of them that love me" (@Deuteronomy 5: 10).
God wants lovers who will love Him with all their heart, all their soul, all their strength, and all their mind. He is not content with fragments, with the tail end of our lives, with a few odd moments on our knees at bedtime. He wants no movement in the heart except what is of Himself, no desire apart from Him, no strength wasted, no thought of which He is not the Object. God is so blessed, so worthy, He is to have it all and He wants thousands of thousands like that. Behind all this lies the heart of God, and He has made Himself known in such a way that He will absorb the whole being of so many. It was the desires of love on the part of God that led to this command for
{2}
lovers, and what He is, has been so declared that He must be loved.
In contrast, think of those who hate God; those of whom the Lord said, "now they have both seen and hated both me and my Father" (@John 15: 24). Awful contemplation! that the human heart should be so alienated from God, that it should forget and hate Him. What a range of things fills the hearts of men in the last days, as @2 Timothy 3 tells us -- anything except God. Men love even themselves. We live in the most selfish day in history. In every sphere, self is enthroned. What man loves rules him. What controls the heart controls the being. Thus everything gives place to what ministers to self. There are also lovers of money; it has taken God's place. How we see it all around with its accompanying sorrows, which pierce men and drown them in perdition. Then, lovers of pleasure -- how many devotees at that altar! We see everything sacrificed to it. There are those also who love and make a lie. If men did not love a lie, the bookshops would soon be closed. The same is found in the religious world. At bottom, men know it is all a lie, but they love it because it is a lie; indeed, the whole world is a lie, a sham, but men love it. Again we see how pre-eminence is loved by men, and the love of it will lead them to anything.
The divine thought is "lovers of *God*". How this is exemplified in Christ! Not one affection stirred His heart but God was its centre. From Bethlehem to Calvary, God was the object of His every desire. "I have spent my strength" (@Isaiah 49: 4), He could say. It was used to serve God. Though weary He would continue His journey to find one worshipper. His strength was weakened in the
{3}
way, the way to Calvary. Not a thought, but God was its object; as it is written of Him, "Oh how I love thy law! it is my meditation all the day" (@Psalm 119: 97). Every morning, His ear was opened to hear, as the instructed. We see in Him the perfect model of a lover of God.
Now we may see what God is prepared to do for His lovers. What gain there is in this, what blessedness! "If any one love God, *he* is known of him". God knows such a one altogether. He knew Christ, that great Lover. He was unknown among men, but well-known in heaven. Only heaven, and a few in touch with heaven, knew of His birth. Then those thirty years -- who knows of that secret life in Egypt, at Nazareth, hidden from the world! None of us knows much about it; God knew it all. At the end of it He could say, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 3: 17). That was a review of those thirty years. Every prayer, every action, every step, every thought had been watched. It came out at His baptism, He was known of God.
So it is with all God's lovers. Of course in one sense He knows everybody. He knows every fowl on the mountains; not one sparrow falls to the ground without His knowledge. He knows the wicked afar off. But this passage means that He knows him intimately. We see this in Abraham, the friend of God. A friend loves at all times, be they dark or bright; whether in plenty or in little. Abraham is called the friend of God. And God says, "I know him" (@Genesis 18: 19), and further, "walk before my face" (@Genesis 17: 1); so that God could look at him as he walked. The preposition is "*before*", not '*with*'. God would have it thus with every lover of His. He would give each
{4}
one the sense that He knows them favourably and intimately. Better to be known of God than of the world. It is a poor thing to be known by the king, compared to what it is to be known of God. Again, the scripture says, "Jehovah spoke with Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his friend" (@Exodus 33: 11). The basis of that is that Moses was a lover of God.
What will God not do for those who love Him? Jesus loved Lazarus and He would go to the place where they were prepared to stone Him for Lazarus¬ sake. @Romans 8 helps here. We *do not* know what to pray for as is fitting, but we *do* know that all things work together for good to those that love God. He has such an interest in His lovers that He uses all His power, His wisdom and His riches to make all things work together for good to those who love Him; not for everybody, but for His lovers. Note the word *together*, that is, these things are made to co-ordinate, so that everything that may come upon His lovers will work for good. This is seen in the pathway of Jesus. God was behind all His movements, as we may see in @Luke 7. If He goes to the house of a proud Pharisee, God caused that one should come in there who did not cease to kiss His feet. Calvary is the great expression of the love of God, and that He is behind everything to bring good out of it. Through it there will be brought to light the myriads of the redeemed who all love God.
So it will be with us in the measure we love God. Whatever may come upon us -- sickness, difficulties in circumstances, unjust accusations or trials, God is so great that if we love Him He will cause any or all of these things to work together for our good. Lovers of God do not think
{5}
these things are against them. Our great concern is not merely to recover our health, not to overcome the difficulties, not to prove we have been unjustly accused; but to see to it that we love God, and then we can confidently leave all these matters in His hand. "We *do* know that all things work together" etc. We may and do have many solemn exercises about many things, but the greater exercise is to love God, and that means that no room is left in the heart for any idol.
The apostle Paul in writing to the Corinthians says, "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him". They have such a place in His heart, He values them so much, that He has prepared them. There has been deliberate activity, there is a plan and a process to prepare for God's lovers what the human heart could never dream of. There is a place prepared for such in the Father's house. Wonderful thought! in a sphere where only love prevails; where there is conscious relationship. The city too is prepared for them, the city that Abraham looked for, whose Builder and Maker is God. "He has prepared for them a city" (@Hebrews 11: 16). What a city! God's city has only one street, a golden street. There is no false step; every movement is transparent, no dark underhand movements. It has a wonderful temple. God and the Lamb are that temple. There is no need of the sun, for the glory of God is the light, and the Lamb is the lamp thereof, and a river of water of life, clear as crystal, flows out of the throne. We belong to that city, for our citizenship is in heaven. This is but one of the things that God has prepared, and He would give us to enjoy it now.
{6}
Indeed according to @Hebrews 12: 22 we have come to it now, the "city of the living God".
The new heaven and new earth are prepared for a people who love God. What a scene -- where there is no distance between God and His lovers! He is their God (@Revelation 21: 3). How attractive all this is! It would help us to judge idolatry. John closes his first epistle thus "Children, keep yourselves from idols" (@1 John 5: 21); the idols of self, money, pleasure, pre-eminence, etc. When we know what God would do, that we are known of Him, and the things He has prepared, our hearts are surely attracted to come into this position of loving Him.
What is this love for God? How is it expressed? There are people who say they will not believe unless they see. But nobody has ever seen love, it is a spiritual thing, yet nobody can deny that love exists. And where love is, it is expressed. Now love for God is expressed in a twofold way, by obedience and by sacrifice. These two great expressions of love are seen pre-eminently in Christ; in Him they shine. He was obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Then His love found expression in sacrifice; how great the sacrifice of Himself! Now what good is there for us to say we love God if we do not obey Him? "Hereby know we that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his commandments" (@1 John 5: 2). Love enjoins and love obeys. "Children, let us not love with word, nor with tongue, but in deed and in truth" (@1 John 3: 18). So that the great expression of love in a believer is that he is subject.
Love is also seen in sacrifice. This is how love came to us. "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid
{7}
down his life for us" (@1 John 3: 16). When we see a believer holding his body, not for pleasure but for God's service, we see the mark of love. Or he may spend his time in considering for the Lord's interests. This costs something, it is a proof of love. Or money or a home may be similarly used -- it is love appearing. God's love came this way. "God so loved ... that he gave" (@John 3: 16). "Herein is love ... that he ... sent his Son" (@1 John 4: 10).
This measures us all. The measure of our love is the measure of our obedience and our sacrifice. But it is precious to God. He takes special interest in one like that; He will cause everything in his history to work out for good.
Let us see to it then that we are not lovers of self, of pleasure, of money, but lovers of God, so that we may taste the sweetness of these things, and let us all join in saying, "*We* love because *he* has first loved us" (@1 John 4: 19).
*From Our Closing Days, pages 24 - 31, Edinburgh, 1936*.
{8}
{9}
THE LORD'S WORK
W J House
@Revelation 1: 4 - 6; @Revelation 5: 6 - 10; @1 Chronicles 23: 1 - 6
I desire to say a few words that might help us to understand a little more what the Lord is doing at the present time. Scripture speaks of the work of God and the part of it that is finished. It says, "And the heavens and the earth and all their host were finished" (@Genesis 2: 1), wonderful work! These wonderful works were done by Christ, that blessed Person whom we know as our Lord Jesus Christ. John says, "All things received being through him" (@John 1: 3). Paul says that He is the "firstborn of all creation; because by him were created all things, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth ... all things have been created by him and for him" (@Colossians 1: 15, 16). Moses tells us that they were "finished" (@Genesis 2: 1), implying that there was nothing whatever to be added to them. None could suggest any improvement on the work of God. In the expanse in which He set the sun, the moon, the stars; He has established the ordinances of the heavens, Pleiades and the bands of Orion, and we realise there is nothing unfinished about them.
Then, too, what a wonderful sphere the earth is, on which many millions of people are provided for every day. It says, "the king himself is dependent upon the field" (@Ecclesiastes 5: 9). All are sustained by the infinite resources that the Creator has put in the earth. God's workmanship is seen in the flowers, the insects, the birds -- God says to Job,
{10}
"Doth the hawk fly by thine intelligence?" (@Job 39: 26). Our bodies, too, reveal the wonderful work of God, but He is not inactive because this phase of His work is finished. It does indeed say that God rested from His work on the seventh day and was refreshed (@Exodus 31: 17), but that does not mean that He has ceased to work since that time. The Lord said, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work" (@John 5: 17), and I desire, with the Lord's help, to say a few words on what the Lord is doing now. We could never compass all His work, but I would like to speak of four features of the work of the Lord at this present time.
Scripture does not disclose how long God took to create the heavens and the earth in @Genesis 1: 1, but we are told that He prepared the earth from a state of chaos and emptiness for man in six days. If God brought forth conditions suited to man in six days, what must be the magnitude and glory of what the Father has done "hitherto" and of what the Lord is now doing during six thousand years! I read these passages to bring before us the great thought of what the Lord is doing now.
In the first passage the apostle John tells us of the One who loves us. In worship he comes to it, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom". The One who made the worlds, "All things received being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being" (@John 1: 3). This One is said to have made us a kingdom. This is a very great and glorious matter, and John is in the light of it, that God is making a great and eternal kingdom -- the everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. The thought of making involves a process, it is not quite the same as
{11}
creation, which was by command, and it stood fast. Making implies deliberation and a certain process to bring about a result. "Let us make man" (@Genesis 1: 26). It does not only say that God created him. God is our Creator; but God formed man and he is fearfully and wonderfully made. God breathed into man's nostrils the breath of life, showing there was a process in the making.
Now the Lord is making a kingdom and He has great pleasure in this kingdom, which He is making in our hearts. When we receive the glad tidings we are attached to His kingdom; He is making us. One loves the gospel because it tells of the God who translates us from the authority of darkness into the kingdom of the Son of His love. Our blessed Saviour Himself comes before us, and in the power of what is seen in Him, the soul moves out as delivered from the authority of darkness into the kingdom of the Son of God's love. We become part of His kingdom; He is our Lord and we become subject to Him; an extension of His kingdom is thus secured in hearts in which He rules.
Now that is what the Lord is doing, He is bringing us under control in a practical way. It does not operate in its fulness all at once, for many things claim the hearts of young christians, and indeed all of us. We all have to say, "other lords than thee have had dominion over us" (@Isaiah 26: 13); but I am sure the desire is that He only should be Lord to us, and that loyalty to Him should be maintained. We are receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken; God has established it and the work of God cannot be shaken, it will stand for ever. It is the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ, it is the work of God and
{12}
of Christ that has been going on for six thousand years, and is still going on now. It is a much greater thing than the establishing of the heavens to rule over the earth, which God did in a day. This kingdom is a process going on little by little, as the blessed influence of the love of Christ becomes more deeply rooted in our hearts. The power is love and it is a constraining power. The apostle says, "the love of the Christ constrains us, having judged this: that one died for all, then all have died; and he died for all, that they who live should no longer live to themselves, but to him who died for them and has been raised" (@2 Corinthians 5: 14, 15). The Lord is establishing His kingdom through the activity of the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven. Little by little the process goes on in the heart of every believer, and thus His kingdom is established. It is true, and will be true to eternity, that unto us there is one Lord, Jesus Christ.
Then in @Revelation 5 He is making other things, or persons. The elders say, "Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open its seals; because thou hast been slain, and hast redeemed to God, by thy blood, out of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation, and made them to our God kings and priests; and they shall reign over the earth". The Lord is seen there as the One who makes kings, not crowning them, but making them. On that line, our life here is not too long for the process. It is so great a matter that we need every moment that God leaves us here. What marks the kings is that they are like Him. Of Gideon's brethren it was said, "As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the sons of a king" (@Judges 8: 18). Gideon said, "They were my brethren", they had kingly features. How
{13}
we need to make room for the Lord's work to appear in kingly features, in contrast to the contemptible and worthless character that marks us all naturally -- to make room for the formation of what is kingly, for in Scripture a true king is one who is beautiful. "Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty" (@Isaiah 33: 17). A king is one who is dignified, who is glorious, who is able to rule. It is the idea of a person who is supreme.
We have to be made, but not so the Lord -- He was born a King. As to His own Person, He is the King of kings; kingly features were always there, but as coming into manhood it was said, "Where is the king of the Jews that has been born?" (@Matthew 2: 2). So this great Maker of kings takes us in hand to instruct us and to form us that we may bear kingly features, and that we may be able to rule. The first portion of territory over which I rule is my own spirit. A person who rules his own spirit is greater than he that takes a city, (@Proverbs 16: 32). No one can be trusted with extensive territory until he has learned to control his own spirit, so that it does not get out of hand. I am quite sure the older brethren will agree that it takes a long time. That kind of a king cannot be made in a day; it is a lifelong exercise to learn to control one's own spirit. This applies also to our bodies; the apostle said he buffeted his body, indicating that he would not allow it to dominate him. How often we lose ground by our natural desires assuming control, or our spirits, and by our not allowing the Lord to control all. With many a christian the love of money becomes the dominating power, and like the brethren of Joseph, the place that Christ should have in their hearts is sacrificed for money.
{14}
A king does not act like that. He rules his spirit and has control over his body and over his money. It is most important for all of us that we should have our businesses under control, and that we should hold them rightly in relation to the Lord. This applies also to the home. Many of the sisters are dominated by their homes, but the house is not to rule them, they are to rule the house. That is the sphere where they are being made kings by the skill and wisdom of the Lord.
I come now to what the elders say, which is that "Thou ... hast ... made them ... priests" -- a most magnificent thought! These twenty-four elders represent what has been gathered up by the Lord. He has gathered up kings and a kingdom; they are round His throne and are His kingdom, and His throne dominates them. They are His kings, each has a crown and all are sitting on thrones. There are millions of them, not merely twenty-four, but these are representative of all. Also they all have golden howls full of incense.
The process of making us priests is a most intensive one. What marks a true priest is holiness, a preparedness to consider for God on all occasions and to be able to bless. The priests stand and bless. The priest's lips keep knowledge and one learns the law at his mouth. Think of the precious grace of Christ that takes up you and me and transforms us by His own work so that we qualify to be priests! The apostle speaks to the Corinthians of the various kinds of evil-doers, who shall not inherit the kingdom of God, and then he says, "these things were some of you". If we read the list we all have to admit how humbling it is. He adds, "ye have been washed, but ye
{15}
have been sanctified, but ye have been justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God" (@1 Corinthians 6: 11). Think of the precious grace that would win your heart, and add you to His kingdom, making you a king and a priest. It is a time when He considers for God, He is able to bring the odour of the holy incense before God. These elders say, "thou ... hast ... made them ... priests", they are His workmanship. It is something infinitely greater than the creatorial power of God in the physical creation, but it is a kingdom over which Christ is exalted as King, the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. There are myriads of kings who are crowned and able to rule for God in the world to come. "And *thou*, be over five cities" (@Luke 19: 19), said the Lord to one who had been faithful.
Priests are marked by holiness. Perhaps some of us may know a little about righteousness, but what do we know of holiness? That shrinking from evil in our spirits, and the abhorrence of it. Peter speaks of a holy priesthood, and it is seen in these elders. They are able to stand before God and to present incense, everyone of them having bowls. It is a magnificent spectacle, myriads and myriads of holy priests having golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of saints.
In Chronicles we have another feature of what is made. There we have what David is said to have made, "the instruments which I made, said David, to praise therewith". David is the chief musician, the sweet psalmist of Israel, and he is king David in majesty, glory, victory, and power. Then he is a priest, for he wore the linen ephod and danced before the ark. We also have the prayers of
{16}
David the son of Jesse. This company of four thousand singers were to use the instruments "which I made, said David, to praise therewith".
I want to touch upon this making instruments to praise therewith, as part of the work of Christ. One loves to think of the Lord making instruments of music. Music is a great matter with God. I love to look at the saints as the instruments which Christ has made. In the Psalms David speaks of a great variety of instruments, the greatest perhaps is the harp, and these are the instruments in the hands of the elders in @Revelation 5. The harp is an instrument which expresses the most beautiful music as the strings are tightened and tuned under the hand of Christ. Then there is the pipe, which is breathed into -- showing that it comes from the spirit, so to speak, the trumpets to sound aloud, and the cymbals that the hands use to make a sound. Thus the Lord is operating over this long period to make His instruments; He intends to have an orchestra. If you read the last few Psalms, particularly the last one, you will see how the different notes come in, and all are blended to have one sound. That is the divine idea, to have no discord.
The Lord is producing this harmony in the hearts of the saints now. It is all gathered up in the twenty-four elders. They are a kingdom, and they are kings, they have crowns; they are priests with their white raiment, their bowls full of incense and they have harps. The Lord is still making, and these are just a few suggestions of His present work. He would make us submissive to Himself, that we should see something of the greatness of it, and to be in His hand that He should make us kings and priests.
{17}
Satan has not ceased in his work in making a kingdom of darkness. He always imitates, and in that way deceives men. His kings are the "universal lords of this darkness" (@Ephesians 6: 12), and he himself is a king. It says, "They have a king over them, the angel of the abyss: his name in Hebrew, Abaddon, and in Greek he has for name Apollyon [that is Destroyer]" (@Revelation 9: 11). He also is an anti-priest, the accuser of the brethren, and he has a system of anti-priests. Thus he is in contrast to our great High Priest who intercedes for us. He also has his instruments of music to carry out his purposes, as Nebuchadnezzar commanded, "at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, pipe, lute, sambuca, psaltery, bagpipe, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the golden image" (@Daniel 3: 5). Satan is forming vessels, instruments of satanic music to woo the hearts of men and women to the system of worship he has set up to the destruction of mankind.
I appeal to the young people to remember that there are these two systems. In the one there is what the Lord Jesus is doing from on high by His Spirit, making His kingdom, His priests, His instruments of music; and in the other there is Satan with his kingdom, subverting the hearts of men who are willing to obey him. It is a very solemn matter for us all to consider to which kingdom we are lending ourselves, for everyone is being formed in one kingdom or the other. Soon the dividing line will come. All that the Lord has made will be removed and brought into display in another world, when He comes "to be glorified in his saints, and wondered at in all that have believed" (@2 Thessalonians 1: 10). The time will come when He will be wondered at, and that which has been formed on
{18}
the opposite side will go out into the blackness of darkness for ever. One desires that we might take account of the present moment, for it is of great importance, when little by little we are being formed by the Lord. May He help us to take account of these things, and to be in His hands as clay in the hands of the potter, that our own wills may be judged, and that He may form us as He will for His praise.
*From Our Closing Days, pages 32 - 42, Dundee, 1936*.
{19}
BEAUTY
W J House
@Song of Songs 5: 9 - 16; @Genesis 37: 1 - 3; @Isaiah 52: 1
I want to say a few words as to beauty. A person would have to be blind to be ignorant of the fact that beauty marks all the works of God. The scripture says that He has made everything beautiful in its time, (@Ecclesiastes 3: 11). He knows how long a thing is to last, and if its time is an hour, a day, a week, a few years, or eternity -- He has made everything beautiful in its time. Apart from the power and the height and the ordinances, how beautiful are the heavens! We read, "By his Spirit the heavens are adorned" (@Job 26: 13). David says, "When I see thy heavens", and what a spectacle the heavens present on a clear night! God intends us to look at them and to consider them. David says, "When I see thy heavens, the work of thy fingers" (@Psalm 8: 3). Some of the stars are blue, some red, and some golden, when seen more clearly than with the naked eye. They are gems set in the heavens in evidence of God's regard for beauty. Then what beauty there is on earth! -- Whose hand has ordered it all? Think of the majesty of the mountains, the beauty of the valleys, the charm of the ever-flowing streams, and the verdant foliage that God has made. Can we question His delight in the beauty of His handiwork? The Lord said, "Consider the lilies how they grow" (@Luke 12: 27). Why should God put into a flower such amazing beauty? Take the insects; especially in tropical countries, there is beauty in the butterflies that
{20}
baffles mankind, and no one can imitate it. Think of the tropical seas, where the sun's power is mighty. There are fish there radiant with such blendings of colour that it is almost unbelievable, but it is the work of God. If God has done thus with that which is but for time, what must be the beauty of that which will last for ever? God is forming beauty now that will last for eternity. He has finished the material worlds, "And the heavens and the earth and all their host were finished" (@Genesis 2: 1). They have never been added to or altered, for they are God's handiwork, and He is still working, as the Lord said, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work" (@John 5: 17). This great work has been going on for nearly six thousand years.
All the beauty that will be seen in the new heaven and the new earth is concentrated in the Person of Jesus. The beauty with which God will garnish the spiritual heavens, that which will yet be seen in every heavenly family, as well as that which will be seen only on the earth, was all concentrated in the Person of Jesus in manhood. God is wonderful in His ability to concentrate, it is part of His divine glory to do so. He says, "Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways and be wise" (@Proverbs 6: 6). Think of what God has concentrated in the ant, so tiny an insect, yet possessing profound wisdom, so that she knows she must gather her food in summer, and store it up in places she provides for herself, and keep it there for the winter. So in His wisdom God has concentrated in the Person of Jesus in manhood all the beauties of the new heaven and the new earth.
What is so amazing, and what should challenge every heart is, that when all this beauty came down to earth in
{21}
the Person of Jesus, the language of the world, and of the religious part too, was "there is no beauty that we should desire him" (@Isaiah 53: 2). Is this what you would say, dear friend? The truth is that all the beauty of heaven and of earth is in Jesus. "Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty" (@Isaiah 33: 17). The King in His beauty is Jesus -- "another king, Jesus" (@Acts 17: 7). This King opens the eyes of men to see His beauty, blessed be His name. That is what the blind beggar wanted when he said, "Son of David, Jesus, have mercy on me ... Rabboni, that I may see" (@Mark 10: 47 - 51), and he followed Jesus in the way, glorifying God. He glorified God because he saw the King, and everyone does so who sees Him, because they have seen the beauty with which God will fill eternity.
I do not know that I can touch much on this scripture in the Song of Songs, but it came before me as a description, from the heart of the bride, of features of beauty that she knows to be in the bridegroom. This is what she is able to say about Christ when she is challenged: "What is thy beloved more than another beloved, Thou fairest among women?" The previous part is full of the greatest instruction: they say, "What is thy beloved more than another beloved, That thou dost so charge us?" She had said, "If ye find my beloved" -- she has lost touch with Him. Has anyone here lost touch with Him? She says, If ye find my beloved ... and she cannot finish the sentence because of the depth of her feeling. Is He more than another beloved to us? With whom can you compare Him? Think of the various objects that engage the human heart, but what are they compared with Christ? He is more than another beloved, He is more than any other
{22}
object could be. In this connection He is not prepared to be merely first, any more than He will be second -- He must be *all*, One alone. When the heart says, "my beloved", there is no idea of anyone else. With many christians He is One of many, alas, all dividing the heart with Him, but this bride says of Him that "he is altogether lovely", "the chiefest among ten thousand". He is the only One to her heart now, whatever has been her experience before.
We will look at her description of Him as bringing before us what beauty is and where it is. In verse 10 it says "My beloved is white". That could not be said of any other man, that he is inherently white. If we are white individually it is because we have been washed, by "him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins" (@Revelation 1: 5). We were not white naturally, but covered with stains. "My beloved is white". He was "the holy thing" from the outset. "My beloved is white and ruddy". If we are now ruddy it is as having been healed, "Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases" (@Psalm 103: 3). Each of us has needed a physician, but the Lord had no need of one, for no trace of the moral diseases and sicknesses that assail mankind ever touched Him. He was ruddy, without any trace of disease, He is inherently vigorous.
"His head is as the finest gold". The head is the seat of intelligence, and the bride is distinguishing His head from His eyes and cheeks and mouth. There are in His holy and blessed mind thoughts that are in keeping with the finest gold, thoughts that are more precious than tongue can tell, the very thoughts of God. The psalmist says, "How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum of them!" (@Psalm 139: 17). All these thoughts were in
{23}
the mind of Jesus, every one of them expressing the perfection of divine love. So she says, "His head is as the finest gold".
"His locks are flowing, black as the raven". She looks at His hair, and she says there is no evidence of age, nor of decline, and to all eternity there never will be. "His eyes are like doves by the water-brooks, Washed with milk, fitly set". Think of a blessed Man like that! The dove can never rest where there is uncleanness, and the eyes of Jesus are as doves¬ eyes by the water-brooks, always watching the movements of the Spirit of God, and His eyes in accord with them. In His compassion, of course, He may look upon a poor sinner, but He cannot look upon sin or upon what is unholy, for He is God. How often sorrow comes, especially with young believers, because their eyes have been allowed to rest upon unholy sights. What we need is to follow Him, and as passing through this corrupt scene, we need to be blind to evil and not to look in certain directions. The window of the ark was above; from that the dove went out and came back; there was no window in the side of the ark. It was not contemplated that Noah and his family should be watching the corruption outside, so the window was above, and our eyes should be "Looking unto Jesus".
"His cheeks are as a bed of spices, raised beds of sweet plants: His lips lilies, dropping liquid myrrh". I cannot say much about His cheeks, I suppose they are connected more with the countenance, and the countenance of Jesus was lovely; indeed it is like a bed of sweet-smelling plants, giving out a fragrance that would draw every heart to kiss Him. "Thou gavest me not a kiss"
{24}
(@Luke 7: 45), He said to the Pharisee, but the woman kissed His feet and the Lord valued that.
"His lips ... dropping liquid myrrh". Every word from the lips of Jesus was fragrant with sweet-smelling myrrh. When He spoke, He conveyed to His hearers the intensity of His suffering love. When He said to the leper "I will", in that word was the sweet-smelling myrrh that would take upon Himself what was upon the leper, the suffering love that would identify Himself with him. And so with all His words, as they dropped from His blessed lips.
"His hands gold rings, set with the chrysolite". His hands remind us of what He does, and they captivate us, they are as rings that hold us firmly; set with chrysolite, a golden stone that brings before us what is of God. The Lord won many a heart here with His hands, for what He did held them in the grip of His love.
"His belly is bright ivory, overlaid with sapphires". How different Jesus is from everyone else! How little there is in this world that will stand examination as to what is inward and hidden, and that any dare to examine closely! There would be found a sink of corruption. All may be fair outwardly, but inwardly the Lord says, they are "full of dead men's bones". When you come to Jesus, you see what is incorruptible, both inwardly and outwardly. Time can never effect deterioration in that blessed Man. You can look at Jesus and see nothing but beauty. Being overlaid with sapphires signifies that He is adorned inwardly. Inward beauty is what is of value, but there is much veneer in the world today.
In @2 Timothy 3 there is a description of what characterises the world today. It says, in the last days men
{25}
shall be lovers of themselves; deeply rooted selfishness in their hearts. Lovers of money and of pleasure; having no love for what is good; unthankful, unholy, traitors; having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof. This is a perfect description of christendom. We need to take heed that it does not describe some of us, and that our christianity is not merely an outward form that covers an awful inward state. As you look at Jesus inwardly you say, "His belly is bright ivory, overlaid with sapphires".
"His legs, pillars of marble, set upon bases of fine gold". This implies the superiority and grandeur of the movements of Jesus as He walked. John the baptist was entranced with the beauty of the movements of Jesus. His heart was lifted outside his surroundings when ceasing for the moment from his own service, he looked upon Jesus as He walked, watching the legs of marble set in bases of finest gold. That is why the woman in Simon's house never ceased kissing His feet. She had been following Him and watching His movements, and the Lord said, Since the time I came in she has not ceased to kiss My feet.
"His bearing as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars". Lebanon is marked by being the highest point in God's land, and thus very near heaven. It is where the cedar trees grew that were used in the building of the temple. Solomon said, "Send me also cedar-trees, cypress-trees, and sandal-wood trees, out of Lebanon" (@2 Chronicles 2: 8). Such trees can only be obtained from Lebanon, and they represent men who live near heaven in communion with God.
"His mouth is most sweet: Yea, he is altogether lovely". The bride distinguishes between His lips and His
{26}
mouth. His lips refer to what He says, but in relation to His mouth she says, "Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth" (@Song of Songs 1: 2). He is holding her heart and bringing her in touch with Himself in that intimate way. She does not proceed with other members of His body, but she sums all up in that word "he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, yea, this is my friend". This is the Object of my heart, for whom I live, whose presence I love, the One to whom I tell my secrets, my Friend. The Lord said "I have called you friends" (@John 15: 15), because He told them His secrets. So the bride says, "this is my friend". It is not here, I am His friend, but that He is my friend. I have not one secret that I withhold from Him. Is that so with us? Do we tell Him our secrets? All beauty is in Him, He is the King in His beauty.
In @Genesis 37 beauty is not immediately connected with Joseph personally, but with his coat, which is a very important matter. The Song of Songs describes the Beloved as white, "My beloved is white". That is important, but Jacob made for Joseph a coat of many colours. The Spirit of God leaves us to find out how many there were, it just says "many". There are only a certain number of primary colours, but God loves to blend colours. Joseph's coat was a witness to the love that Jacob had for him, and Joseph went into the field wearing his coat and seeking his brethren. This speaks of the Lord Jesus here seeking men, and beauty is seen in the garment of Jesus. He had only one "coat" and He exhorts His followers to have only one. Joseph wore his coat out in the field, as he moved about amongst those who hated him. The Lord appeared in His beautiful garment, the basis of
{27}
which was white linen, so white that "fuller on earth" could not whiten it. Set in the fabric there was also blue, the colour of heaven -- "Thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth" (@Matthew 6: 10). God's will pervades heaven, and it also pervaded every movement of Jesus. Then the purple -- He was King when He was here, and the kingly colour was always to be seen. It is to be seen now in suffering; those who wear purple are sufferers at the present time.
The apostle says, "if we endure, we shall also reign together" (@2 Timothy 2: 12). At Nazareth He suffered contempt and scorn, but He is the King there, and how the purple adorns the suffering One on the cross! Even the robber sees it, and would fain come into the kingdom of this blessed One who is King. Then, wherever Jesus went, the scarlet was seen. He did not seek publicity, as we all love to do naturally, but He could not be hid. The centurion said, "only speak a word, and my servant shall be healed" (@Matthew 8: 8), and Jesus marvelled that he had detected the scarlet. Amber, the colour of glowing brass, is typical of holiness, and every action of Jesus was in accord with the brass, as perfectly holy in word and deed. Green denotes that every action was marked by freshness and living power, even when on the cross. "If these things are done in the green tree, what shall take place in the dry?" (@Luke 23: 31). The idea of a garment is that in which we are seen by men, and thus the Lord went through this world seeking His brethren, and wearing the coat of many colours, representing that which is beautiful in a garment.
As to @Isaiah 52, the prophet says it is time to wake up. Of course, literally, it refers to Israel, but I would apply it
{28}
to us. "Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, Jerusalem". The time has come for God's people to be beautifully clothed, many have been dilatory as to this long enough. In the passage in the @Song of Songs 5: 3, the bride says, "I have put off my tunic, how should I put it on?" Who told her to put it off? The Lord Jesus had only the one, but He did not put it off. It was taken away by wicked hands and they cast lots for it. The church should not put off her beautiful garments. The bride was not ready when the bridegroom called because she had put off her tunic, but the word now is to put it on. This is what the Lord has been doing these hundred years, He has been waking up the church to put on her beautiful garments, so that she will be suitably clothed when He comes. The way they are put on is by making room for the word of the Spirit of God, for He is the One who clothes us in beautiful garments. The Holy Spirit will always bring into evidence the features of Christ in the saints, if we make room for Him, for He is the *Holy* Spirit, and holiness is one feature of the beautiful garments. He is the Spirit of God, and He will bring into evidence what is in keeping with God. He is the Spirit of Jesus, and He will bring the features of that lowly blessed Man into evidence. He is the Spirit of Christ and will bring the features of the anointing into evidence. He is the Spirit of the Lord and will give us to be in power. He is the Spirit of God's Son in our hearts, and thus He brings us into the liberty of sonship. Then also He would grant us to have the Spirit of grace, of supplication, of judgment and of wisdom, all features which enter into the beautiful garments for the daughter of Zion.
{29}
Thus as we make room for the Spirit of God, the beautiful garments are seen upon His people and the word to us is to awake and to come into this. The Lord desires that His people should be suitably clothed to greet Him when He comes, in accordance with the coat of many colours. The word is to put them on, and we do so by making room for the movements of the Spirit, and for Christ in our hearts, and we shall thus be delivered from the false beauty of Babylon, which is soon to terminate.
Satan has built up a vast system of external beauty to gratify himself. He was perfect in beauty when he was made, but he corrupted his beauty, and he has built up a great city marked by corrupted beauty. In it also there is gold, silver, precious stones, blue, purple, and scarlet, but it is all coming under the judgment of God. It is only as we have part in true beauty that we shall be delivered from what is false. May the Lord help us to make room for these features of beauty, for it is evident that nothing can be suitable to God which is not truly beautiful.
*From Our Closing Days, pages 55 - 67, Manchester, 1936*.
{30}
{31}
THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (1)
W J House
@1 Kings 2: 1 - 46
W.J.H. I have suggested this scripture in the transition period between the close of David's reign and the magnifying of Solomon. It affords instruction as to what the Lord would help us to judge; so that Solomon's work might proceed, both in our own hearts individually and amongst the gatherings of God's people. I believe the true Solomon is proceeding with His work, with all its blessedness. We all want to make room for it to take effect, so that features of the house of God might be more definitely in evidence in our localities. And with that the blessed presence of God, which is what we can look for if we have the features of His house.
One feels that many of us are delighted to be in David's kingdom with all its benefits and protection, but the Lord is moving on and it is a question now of what the Son of David is doing as building assembly features in His people. This transition period comes in between the two reigns, as affording us opportunity to make room for what Solomon would do.
R.H.V.A. Does it represent for us that it necessitates the recognition of the need of displacement in my soul in order to make room for the coming in of Solomon?
W.J.H. Exactly. I think that we should see, that these persons that are judged in this chapter represent what is working in our own hearts naturally, which hinders the
{32}
true Solomon operating according to His purpose. These matters are in the way in many localities, and they are in the way naturally in all our hearts.
W.G. The throne of Solomon must be established without any difficulty being in the way amongst us.
W.J.H. Solomon means peace, and you cannot have peace in any company of God's people, and you cannot have it in your own soul, if what Joab, Adonijah and Shimei represent is not judged.
M.H. Would you suggest to us what these represent?
W.J.H. They set forth various features of the flesh, which perhaps we can refer to later, but one would like us to seize a little more the supreme blessedness of what Solomon has in mind. He has before him the thought of God dwelling among His people. In our localities we know a little today of a visit, and individually we occasionally know something of a visitation. But God's great end is to dwell permanently, to have a residence suitable for Himself. Solomon has that in mind, and nothing less -- *a settled place*, like what is in heaven. A house that Solomon would build to be His settled place where He would be permanently. If we can make a little more room for something of that in the various gatherings we come from, no one can tell what the result would be for God. So that it is worth our facing what hinders.
J.D.U. He sends to Hiram and says, "There is neither adversary nor evil event", and he says, "And behold, I purpose to build" (@1 Kings 5: 4, 5). Does the
{33}
thought of dwelling suggest that not only we are at rest, but that God is at rest amongst us?
W.J.H. That is the point, and the thought of God abiding comes right down even to one heart. The Lord says, "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him" (@John 14: 23). Think of such blessedness being available to one heart -- "We will come to him and make our abode with him" -- that the touches that we get for a moment should be extended to be continuous, if conditions permit.
J.N.G. Does the thought of *dwelling* suggest that God is at rest amongst His people?
W.J.H. Quite so. Rest is the greatest thought probably in a dwelling. "This is my rest for ever;" God says, "here will I dwell" (@Psalm 132: 14). Conditions permit God to rest.
J.W.H. Could you help us as to why these things are left over from David? Two, at any rate.
W.J.H. Because, I suppose, they were not ready for the thought of a dwelling place for God, because of conflict. David being a man of war there is much conflict, and also his rule is a gracious rule, so that on the side of the kingdom the Lord often leaves much till there is the desire to have a house for God. Then He does not leave anything. The reason why many matters are left, perhaps for years, in localities, is because the features of the house of God are not in evidence. There is not the exercise to have them, while enjoying the beneficial rule of David and His protection.
{34}
C.D. The kingdom is established under his hand before the house is built?
W.J.H. David sees to that side, so that what is secured by David's rule is that all Israel loves David. The Lord gets the love of our hearts by His gracious rule, and on that line He often leaves many matters until the truth of the house of God is raised.
J.D.U. So you would bring before us the supreme blessedness of God dwelling in our hearts, so that we would be ready to have everything else eradicated?
W.J.H. I think the touches we get of the presence of God are to woo us from things that hinder this being permanent. The Lord graciously gives touches of His presence to the saints together, and to our own spirits individually, but He has more than that in His mind. If we are prepared to provide the conditions, He would extend the enjoyment of His presence beyond a visitation to "our abode" (@John 14: 23).
E.B.McC. The maintenance of the truth is very necessary in every locality. If not maintained the Lord may cease to work there.
W.J.H. I suppose the truth would secure the rights of God recognised according to His command.
J.D.U. Is it that gracious rule of David in our hearts? "If ye love me" (@John 14 15) -- it is His gracious rule that makes us love Him, is it?
W.J.H. Do you think some of us rather shrink from facing the next step? There is a sense in which even Saul could love David. Saul loved him, and it says "Jonathan loved him as his own soul" (@1 Samuel 18: 1). His soul was knit to the soul of David; and it even says
{35}
Michael loved him, (@1 Samuel 18: 20), and Hiram always loved him. On that line things go on very well, the gracious rule of the Lord bearing with us and not raising any questions. Perhaps we would like the local meetings to go on like that, but that is not the house of God, that is the kingdom, and the kingdom is to prepare the way for the house of God being established. As soon as that comes into view, matters must be taken up.
G.A.v.S. I wish to ask if the exercise you are suggesting to us is that we are prepared for the removal of everything that would interfere with the outgoing of the affections of God for His house?
W.J.H. Quite so. Touches of the divine Presence were known under David, most blessed moments, David himself longing for it, his heart panting after it, "As the hart panteth after the water-brooks" (@Psalm 42: 1). But he had before him in his reign that there would be more than that, -- a permanent residence for God amongst His people. He knew there were certain matters that would have to be faced, but in grace he left them until the exercise of the house of God should arise.
A.B.J. Seeing the house of God is in view in Solomon's reign, is not the question of holiness in view in the clearing up of these matters?
W.J.H. There cannot be peace without it. David means 'beloved', and that is how all christians know Christ; every true christian loves Him because of what He has done, how He gave up His life for us. But Solomon means peace, and that indicates that conditions are according to God.
{36}
C.D. Is it not more a matter of righteousness in the establishment of the kingdom, and holiness coming in in relation to the house?
W.J.H. This chapter closes with the kingdom being established under the hand of Solomon -- all that offends must be removed for peace to prevail.
J.D.U. So that settling of difficulties in local companies is not everything. We get these matters settled in view of God having His place amongst us.
W.G. There is something beyond the exercises of care and so on -- we have to move on.
W.J.H. What is beyond is unity in the service of God, so that all make one sound in praise, and then "the glory of Jehovah had filled the house of God" (@2 Chronicles 5: 14). The true Solomon is seeking to secure this in the hearts of His people where saints are governed by the truth of the assembly. And if we get a touch of that in its blessedness and glory, we shall be emboldened and encouraged to face questions which arise in our own hearts primarily, and deal with them.
W.G. In speaking of holiness, do you think that there is a state allowed in these men that had gone on for years unjudged -- they had not faced the matter before David, or before the Lord?
W.J.H. That is where we all come in. Mr. Stoney said we must face private suicide or public hanging. There is no doubt that these three persons represent what is in every single heart in this room, and if allowed will definitely hinder features of the house of God where we are. If we do not deal with them privately -- and there was
{37}
ample time given by David to deal with them, then they must be faced publicly.
W.G. In spite of Shimei's apparent repentance, the matter remained unjudged before the Lord.
W.J.H. It always comes to light if the time allotted to each of us to judge ourselves is not embraced.
J.D.U. It would look then as if the Lord is intent upon producing these heavenly conditions; the unity of praise, etc., preparatory to taking us to heaven.
W.J.H. The thought of something on earth that corresponds with heaven is the divine idea. It was Solomon's thought that the settled abode of heaven and the settled abode on earth should be characteristically the same.
L.G.L. Were the sons of Barzillai in line as those that would eat at Solomon's table?
W.J.H. Quite so. They are men that are prepared for Solomon's reign.
R.H.V.A. What would be the moral effect of a state that holds itself available for the Lord in self-judgment -- what would be the moral effect amongst the brethren?
W.J.H. Such would be a contribution towards the divine presence amongst the saints, "I will love him and will manifest myself to him" (@John 14: 21). When together, such would promote conditions for the divine presence. We only get as together what we bring; no miracle happens.
The Lord definitely commits divine Persons not only to visit, like God did to Abraham, but to abide with the one who loves Him and keeps His commandments. One speaks humbly for we know so little of even a visit.
{38}
W.G. Do we need to have our affections carried by what the Lord is doing now in relation to the assembly?
W.J.H. Quite so. I believe the position in a certain sense today is that we are passing through the transition period between David and Solomon. Moral questions and questions of holiness are arising in many places that had been left for years. The Lord has in mind that the features of the house of God should be in evidence.
E.B.McC. If I sit to adjudicate on a matter, should not my own state be taken into account, and if I judge wrongly it will come back on me?
W.J.H. Indeed, it is an abomination to judge another if we have not judged ourselves, it is sinners judging sinners.
E.B.McC. You would need the sense of the support of heaven in any matter you take up in connection with the saints?
Ques. Would the word of the Lord come in? Benaiah gets the word from Solomon, as being one whose allegiance to Solomon is as true as it had been to David?
W.J.H. Evidently he was one fit to judge; a man who had already judged in himself what Joab and Adonijah and Shimei represent.
Rem. It is interesting to take account of the name 'Benaiah' which means 'built up of the Lord'.
G.A.v.S. I was wondering how far affection for the Lord, and for the Lord's interests in His beloved people, would have the effect of opening our eyes to the real character of different forms of evil which must be dealt with before the holiness of God's house can be adequately borne witness to.
{39}
W.J.H. There is a tendency with us to go back to David's day when things were not raised, and say, 'What a pity these matters are raised. Why not let us go back to David's time when he left matters?' We have come to that time in the testimony when the Lord is acting definitely now as Solomon, that in a special way Solomon's work is to go on.
J.D.U. What a delight to the heart to be able to wipe away the tears caused by the sorrow that these things bring about as the evil is dealt with, the sorrows removed, and God can come in.
W.J.H. Solomon is magnified. Further back, in Samuel, David is magnified, and we love to magnify David; but they desire that Solomon's throne should be greater than David's throne.
G.A.v.S. I would like to ask how it is that David is the one who lays injunctions upon Solomon. Although he was more definitely acquainted with what was working in the hearts and minds of these men, looking at them representatively, while Solomon was really the one who was to deal with the matter officially. Solomon moves in regard to each one, but each one betrays his own situation.
W.J.H. David leaving it did not mean that David did not feel it. He had a very definite judgment about these matters until this subject of the house of God is definitely brought forward, that is the matter in view. I think it denotes that the Lord is going to establish the features of a dwelling place for God amongst us, and we want to give ourselves to it whatever it means in the way of self-judgment.
{40}
J.D.U. In Matthew's gospel we have those who "hunger and thirst after righteousness" (@Matthew 5: 6) -- that everything that is wrong should be put right, all righteousness fulfilled.
W.J.H. Quite so. The Lord has in mind that the glory should be amongst His people as united as one.
E.B.McC. The saints are enlarged by the handling of these difficulties, if matters are taken up in a right way. Solomon, like Joseph, is binding princes and teaching his elders wisdom.
W.J.H. That is a very interesting scripture as it says of Joseph, "To bind his princes at his pleasure, and teach his elders wisdom" (@Psalm 105: 22). That is what Solomon is doing here, he is binding his princes according to his pleasure, and he is teaching his elders wisdom; it covers an immense range.
E.B.McC. That would bring before us the importance of the present moment.
W.J.H. How great Solomon became, the largeness of his heart was as the sand upon the seashore.
H.C. Many of these cases are past. Would the scripture "God bringeth back again that which is past" (@Ecclesiastes 3: 15), have a bearing in relation to present holiness?
W.J.H. The Lord has given many a lengthy opportunity to put matters right. If we put things right in the period He gives us to judge them, we are free to serve in the house of God, but if we go beyond the allotted period of grace that David gives, then they must be dealt with publicly. The matters that need to be dealt with in self-judgment lie at our door for many a day.
{41}
G.A.V.S. Are you indicating that these men had time allowed, that repentance might characterise them?
W.J.H. David waited as to Joab and he bore with Shimei, and he knew what Adonijah had done, and did not deal with them. But Solomon does not tarry. When the time comes for the house of God to proceed, these matters are then dealt with. And we can be encouraged to feel that the features of the house of God are coming into view. That is what the Lord has in His mind.
A.B.J. We may go back in our minds to a day when peace was more amongst us, but these matters being raised are a sure token that the Lord is indeed with His people.
W.J.H. I think we should take courage that these matters are being raised now. It denotes the Lord is moving on another line; that He has brought in a measure of subjection, thank God. We can say there is, to some extent, the element of subjection through the grace of the kingdom. Now the Lord is definitely moving to secure a dwelling place for Himself and for God. It may be in one heart in Kyneton, or in any local company, or in His people generally. The same principle governs each situation.
C.D. The throne of Solomon is to be greater than the throne of David. It is a greater thing to secure something for the heart of God, in which He can rest, than for the grace of the kingdom to protect us.
E.B.McC. Would you say a murderous heart, a spirit like Joab's, would not do for the house of God?
W.J.H. There are two principles of evil operating in Joab, which are as natural as anything to all of us. One
{42}
is envy, and the other is hardness. "The sons of Zeruiah, are too hard" (@2 Samuel 3: 39). He saw in Abner and in Amasa potential rivals to himself, they were great men; the Lord had recovered them to David; but Joab saw possible rivals to himself and nothing would do for that man until they were removed. We shall never have part in the house of God if we make room for these activities, even secretly.
W.G. What would operate to bring about the exercise, and review of the past, that this might be brought up?
W.J.H. The very grace of David, that accepted the self-judgment of Abner, and the transferring of his allegiance to David, after being such an inveterate enemy at that time.
C.D. Apparently there was no change in Joab.
W.J.H. It is too late when Solomon is on the throne. He has had his opportunities, David says do "not let his hoar head go down to Sheol in peace" -- the movements of envy and hardness till the head is hoary -- alas there is little hope then.
W.G. David allowed him to go on that he may be judged in the end.
W.J.H. Well, he had a long period to judge himself. I think we hardly know how much the secret workings of envy are in our hearts. The Lord is prospering someone else. He is helping another brother in Kyneton as well as the one He usually helps -- what are we going to do?
G.A.v.S. Are these moral elements absolutely incurable in each one of us, and for that reason it is
{43}
necessary for us to act definitely in putting them to death as it were?
W.J.H. If we do not secretly put them to death, it will have to be done publicly. If we do not secretly judge hardness, we shall have to be judged ourselves. The house is going to be filled by God, not by Joab. Joab is not going to have any glory there. When that house, which Solomon builds, is finished, the glory is coming down to take possession of it, so that even the priests cannot minister. What would you do bringing in a Joab then?
J.D.U. What did you mean by dealing with it secretly?
W.J.H. How many a time Joab must have thought of Abner and Amasa, and he might have gone to David and put it all right in self-judgment, but he did not. So the time comes when David says to Solomon, 'You are a wise man and you are not to let him go down to the grave in peace', the thing is to be settled here.
J.D.U. Do you think it helps as the glory of Christ and the perfection that shines in Him shine in our hearts?
W.J.H. My impression is that every appearing in any little measure to the hearts of the saints will raise another challenge, because the Lord wants conditions to permit of His presence being permanent.
"As the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God" (@Psalm 42: 1). There was nothing that compared to a day in God's courts with David. You could bring a thousand of anything, and nothing could be compared to it.
{44}
C.H.W. Is not the end of the second book of Psalms on that line, "The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended" (@Psalm 72: 20)?
W.J.H. The end of all longings is to have God dwelling with His people.
@Revelation 21: 3 is the goal of all divine activities, "The tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall tabernacle with them" -- eternally.
J.D.U. Evil is confined in its own place and the effect of it on the hearts of His people is removed. We can well understand the Joab spirit is utterly foreign to that.
W.J.H. Joab's spirit began in Satan when he was jealous of God; he says, "I will be like the Most High" (@Isaiah 14: 14). Joab's line will end in the lake of fire.
G.H.McK. The sons of Barzillai are in contrast to that -- true sons of the kingdom, eating at the table.
W.J.H. Quite so. Ready for any move that David may make, and Solomon may make.
A.H.S. Then when matters are raised in the two instances, there is a further period of probation under Solomon.
W.J.H. Further opportunity for Shimei -- Joab does not seem to get much; Adonijah does not get much, but Shimei gets a good deal -- how gracious the Lord is in these matters.
J.D.U. Solomon's action is very summary, it is drastic.
W.J.H. With Joab and with Adonijah it is final; with Abiathar there is a door to recovery; with Shimei he is put under restriction in view of salvation. The Lord has His own way of dealing with each situation, the principle
{45}
of envy and hardness the Lord will not tolerate. Adonijah usurped the kingdom -- the place of Christ.
G.A.v.S. Adonijah says the hearts of the people are towards me. The hearts of the people were no indication of divine choice, for God chose Solomon.
W.J.H. Indeed he knew the throne was Solomon's from God, nevertheless he tried to steal the hearts of the people.
J.D.U. The word is addressed to the hearts of all and we are given ample time, "He that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and without remedy" (@Proverbs 29: l).
W.J.H. Indeed Adonijah was given a further period, open rival as he was with Solomon, yet Solomon sent him to his house; but when he attempts to break through he is dealt with forthwith. These principles are in us, so to say, and if we want the features of the house of God where we are, we must face them.
J.D.U. The Holy Spirit raises matters with us individually, and if we do not face them, it is to our loss.
H.C. "For if any man reputes himself to be something, being nothing, he deceives himself" (@Galatians 6: 3).
W.J.H. How far from Adonijah's spirit Paul's was as he went to Corinth; he went there as a wise architect; and he did not go down there seeking to control and capture their affections; he says "Ourselves your bondmen for Jesus¬ sake" (@2 Corinthians 4: 5). It was for Jesus¬ sake he was working as an architect.
Evidently Solomon detected the same thing back again in Adonijah seeking Abishag -- He says, "Ask for him the kingdom also". If you ask for her, you might as
{46}
well ask the kingdom; that is what he was seeking. The period allotted had not produced self-judgment with Adonijah.
R.H.V.A. Does it not represent the moral distance between the judgment of the Lord and what is purely judicial?
W.J.H. Quite so. 'Thou art a wise man', David says, and the next chapter develops that greatly, reference being made to the proverbs of Solomon, three thousand of them (@1 Kings 4: 32). That is the wisdom of Solomon and it unfolds itself in connection with the house of God. You do not know what proverb he would use, he has three thousand of them to meet every situation, and how do we know what proverb to use, unless we hear from the true Solomon? If you are judging judicially you will just quote what has been done before.
J.S.B. You spoke of the great need to judge hardness and envy, can it be only judged at the cross?
W.J.H. Where else would you go! One should seek by all means to judge this jealous spirit in our hearts.
W.G. It is a very real exercise, because it involves our accepting death; you spoke of suicide.
W.J.H. Joab had the opportunity of judging this and burying it morally, and he would have had his part in the house of God had he done it. Adonijah might have had an opportunity also. There is a tendency when a leader dies for someone to desire to be king. When Gideon dies Abimelech virtually says, "I will be king". When a leader dies, or is removed, there is something in every heart that says, "I will be king". But Solomon will not have it,
{47}
because he has the building of the house of God before him.
G.F. I suppose Adonijah's method was to make a party of it?
W.J.H. The hearts of certain were towards him. Like Abimelech, who went to his mother's brethren, to his special friends, to those who saw things as he saw them. Jotham says, as it were -- and that is the word for us all 'My intention is to go on in the place in which the Lord has put me'. The fig-tree says, "Should I leave my sweetness;" the vine says, "Should I leave my new wine;" but the thorn-bush says, "Come, put confidence in my shadow" (@Judges 9: 11 - 15).
Adonijah is the bramble here who says, "I will be king". The assembly is the body of Christ, and in the body all we have to do is to fill our part as under the Head. The ear just fills its function, the hand and the foot the same. What the Lord is helping His people to come to is the truth of the body, the assembly.
J.D.U. So that the fig and vine properly function under the head, the sweetness, etc., coming from the Head?
W.J.H. Quite so. Could you have anything better in Melbourne may be, than to honour God and men if you were an olive-tree? The spiritual person has nothing else before him than to honour God and man. The fig has nothing more before him than to bring in sweetness in a bitter world. The vine's service is to make glad the heart of God and man, but the moment we say, 'I will be king, I will wave over the trees;' then that moment we are lost to
{48}
the house of God. If this is not judged then Solomon must deal with it.
J.D.U. Is it an anti-Christ spirit?
W.J.H. Yes, apostasy is the final development of such a spirit.
W.G. Would you say there should be quietness and dignity in our service -- no ambition?
W.J.H. Well, as we are under the influence of Christ, the true Solomon, we are happy to be one of His men. When the queen of Sheba comes to this wonderful scene she says, "Happy are thy men! happy are these thy servants" (@1 Kings 10: 8).
H.C. Paul was morally superior so as to be able to deal with the conditions at Corinth, because he had been in the third heaven and had moral superiority to deal with the root of things in Corinth.
W.J.H. What is in the third heaven, in paradise, is the tree of life. Christ is there as the great Centre of the pleasure of God. Paul came down to Corinth to seek to maintain that there.
L.L. We do not want to confine this exercise to leaders.
W.J.H. These principles operate naturally in every human heart. We deceive ourselves if we do not think that.
G.A.v.S. Would you say that as we follow the way in which each one of them was dealt with, we are enabled to judge these things as they come to light in our hearts?
W.J.H. He would help us to deal with them, first in ourselves, and if we do not He will, as Solomon, deal with them, and there is no escape then.
Ques. What came to light in Shimei?
{49}
W.J.H. Shimei retained the longing for the 'good old days' when Saul was reigning; he looked back to the days when things were outwardly correct enough in a certain way, but when the first man had definite recognition and the best of Amalek was spared. He looked back to those days and he thought they would come back again and he cursed David. He had ample opportunity to judge this, and Solomon gave him more time to judge it, to accept restrictions, to allow what was spiritual to prevail; but he refused the restrictions.
G.A.v.S. Is it not important that Shimei was actually directed to live in Jerusalem, so that every opportunity was given him to see that these days were better than Saul's?
W.J.H. Fancy going to Gath after living in Jerusalem! Going to the Philistines¬ land! I believe if we could interpret what is in some heart still, we would see a longing to go back to the former things. There have been periods in every meeting like that and some call it 'the good old days', but the Lord is giving ample opportunity for us to judge that, and to give place to Solomon. You are not wise in that, Saul's days are not better than David's days, nor than Solomon's days.
Ques. Are we apt to seek every trivial excuse for going back to those days?
W.J.H. It was rebellion at heart against the conditions Solomon had brought in.
*From The Wisdom of Solomon, pages 7 - 31, Kyneton, Victoria, November 1937*.
{50}
{51}
THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (2)
W J House
@1 Kings 3: 23 - 28; @1 Kings 4: 29 - 34
W.J.H. It is instructive to take account of these two chapters following what we had this morning, as also preparatory to the construction of the house of God. In chapter 5 Solomon definitely begins the great work of his life, but the Spirit of God has brought forward these other matters prior to the erection of God's house, and I think they afford us help to approach the realisation of the thought of the house of God. Not only that what is in the way morally in all our hearts should be judged, but we should be prepared to face the question of the word of God, the discerner of what is within. The idea in christendom of the house of God is what is external, and is of very little value. What is merely external, formal and dead yields nothing; but the word of God brings to light what is living and we need to allow its scrutiny to come into our souls as we approach the subject of the house of God locally and generally.
J.D.U. The enemy would destroy everything that is living, would he not?
W.J.H. There is never any conflict in a cemetery. If things are dead the enemy can leave us, but the true Solomon by His judgment, by His word, brings forward what is within in a living way outside externals.
{52}
A.H.S. Are you referring to the sword in connection with the word?
W.J.H. Yes. Solomon says, "Bring me a sword". The apostle makes clear what that is. The word of God is sharper than any two-edged sword, and it pierces what is inside. As we approach the thought of having a part in the house of God, we must be prepared for His word to search us and bring out what is within.
R.H.V.A. Is there a moral connection in what you are now bringing before us with what we had this morning? Does the judgment of Joab, Shimei and the others, prepare the way for the operations of the work of God?
W.J.H. Quite so. For the house of the living God is in view. What is merely formal and external, but dead, is worthless in the house of God. So we need to face the word of God to bring out what there is within, that is, where there is life and living affections. However much under reproach, because of our past history, what Solomon is looking for is what is living. "For a living dog is better than a dead lion" (@Ecclesiastes 9: 4). These women might be regarded as dogs, but one of them is a living dog with living affections and she is better than a dead lion. Solomon discloses by his word that she has living affections in her soul and as such she is serviceable to the house of God.
J.D.U. So it goes back to the scripture quoted this morning "If any one love me" (@John 14: 23).
W.J.H. And love would always seek to preserve life. The other woman does not care because she does not love. She is quite willing for the other child to be cut in
{53}
two; but where there are living affections they find expression in suffering.
J.D.U. Prepared for any sacrifice?
W.J.H. Yes, even to giving up her own child to another if life could be saved.
R.H.V.A. Does the child represent Christ as held in the incorruptible affections of the soul?
W.J.H. Well, I would rather say that, in the setting it is in, it represents living material for the living house. What Solomon really has in view typically is the house of the living God, and one of these women will sacrifice anything to have living material preserved.
G.A.v.S. Does the matter then represent the exercises in a locality for the preservation of life, even though it might involve the sacrifice of ease and comfort, and perhaps the object of its affections might be lost to it?
W.J.H. Quite so. The position is remarkable coming in at this juncture. The past of the woman is not ignored, and brings before us what marked us in the past, like the Lord being in the house of Simon the leper. The Spirit of God does not hide it, yet becoming serviceable by the activity of living affections sacrificing to preserve life.
C.D. And it is the word of the king that brings it to light.
W.J.H. There is power in the word of the king; like the word of God which pierces to dividing between soul and spirit, and joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. So that as we approach the subject of the house of God, we have to face the word of God, for in His house is the oracle where God speaks.
{54}
W.G. Would what we speak of as care enter into this in relation to God, the way in which care is carried out, readiness to sacrifice? She cared for the living child.
W.J.H. I think so. We often have to have our affections stirred for the preservation of what is living.
E.B.McC. In adjudicating, would you say the spirit of a little child enters into it, that would be the proper attitude?
W.J.H. Yes. The potentialities in a little child who can tell? For a little child is going to lead the various features of the work of God in a coming day -- "A little child shall lead them" (@Isaiah 11: 6), referring to the various animals that Solomon speaks of.
E.B.McC. So that having the spirit of a little child you would naturally care for life.
W.J.H. The Lord took a little child and said, "And whosoever shall receive one such little child in my name, receives me" (@Matthew 18: 5). There is a correspondence between Christ and a little child.
A.B.J. Is it not essential to see that in no other way and in no other place could this matter have been settled? Is not every matter to be solved in the presence of the king? In verse 16 they came to the king and stood before him.
W.J.H. You cannot judge by externals. There are no means to judge by externals, one person's word against another's, but bring the matter into the presence of Christ and His word looks beyond externals.
C.D. It brings to light the inwards.
W.J.H. So if we are going to reach this great thought we must be prepared to have the Lord look inside.
{55}
God's house and God's presence, is a very searching matter. Not a question now of our acts as in Joab's and Shimei's cases, but the searching eye of Christ taking account as to how far we have living affections for His interests.
J.S.B. In contrast to what we were speaking about this morning as to what was hard and envious, the motive for the preservation of what is living is seen here to be love. The inward affections of this woman were moved to preserve life, "Love never fails" (@1 Corinthians 13: 8).
W.J.H. "Bears all things" (@1 Corinthians 13: 7). This woman was prepared to bear a most terrible situation that her own child should pass into the care of another, rather than the child should die; indicating that what is living will bear sacrifice to preserve life.
W.G. Solomon's wisdom is excellent in the way he brings out the affections in the mother and discloses the true relationship.
W.J.H. The word of the king -- it brought out where life is. In a case of judgment when the Lord speaks He will bring out where life is, where there is anything to be preserved.
G.A.v.S. Do we cultivate interest and affection in every manifestation of spiritual life in the christian circle?
W.J.H. That is it exactly. Take the children and young people growing up amongst us. We should be prepared to make great sacrifices that they should not be engulfed or destroyed by the callousness of the present day. The next chapter we read develops that further in what Solomon opens up. He speaks of trees from the cedar to the hyssop, and he speaks of cattle and of birds and
{56}
creeping things and fishes, disclosing his valuation of the work of God in its various forms. All that precedes the building of the house.
Ques. The maternal element amongst us is of great importance in that respect, is it not? I was thinking of the maternal affection being brought to light; there is the maternal side of care.
W.J.H. A very great side and we want the Lord to search us as to whether we have it, or whether we are going on formally as to our care meetings and assembly meetings, or whether there is the mother heart behind it all.
C.D. Prepared to sacrifice would be the test of that as with Moses¬ mother.
W.J.H. Quite so. It must have broken her heart to take Moses and put him in the ark in the river by the bank, but her object was to preserve him for God.
C.D. That is the test of reality instead of formality.
W.J.H. I feel we want to take that to heart in facing difficult matters. Whether there are these feelings of living affections, or whether it is just a matter of bringing the sword and cutting the child in two, and there is an end to the matter.
Ques. Or even conforming to what is outwardly right.
W.J.H. Quite so. That is the point for us to see -- the word of God -- a sword such as that is. I believe if we would face the fact that God is speaking and let Him search us; it would promote the living condition, whether in prayer or praise or thanksgiving, for He is the living God.
{57}
J.S.B. You spoke of what is potential in a child. Moses as a child was beautiful, we need spiritual sight to see beauty in the children of God.
W.J.H. I am sure that is right, but by the action of some parents you would wonder whether they value the child at all for God. Moses¬ parents hid him as long as they could, but when they could not hide him they prepared an ark and put it in the sedge by the bank of the river. They did not put their child right out in the stream, as some parents do, but they put him into the minimum of it, not the maximum, for they wanted him for God.
J.D.U. Is that not where the passover comes in, a lamb for a house? We shelter our households.
W.J.H. Quite so. The firstborn child in that house would have particular attachment for that lamb.
J.D.U. The protection in that way of what is for God as seen in the firstborn.
W.J.H. We have had some heart-breaking experiences of parents pushing their children into the stream, as if they did not value them potentially for God. So that they have been swept away in the great current of Egypt's river. Moses¬ parents put him among the sedge in the border of the stream.
E.B.McC. Timothy was brought up in a right way; as a child he knew the scriptures, able to make him wise unto salvation.
W.J.H. Very good. What is instilled into Moses from his birth is the acceptance of being hidden. For three months while he was entirely under his parents¬ care they hid him. He is hidden from his birth and all the way through. If we could instil into our children that they are
{58}
not for this world, they are hidden here, in the first three months of their spiritual history, they would never depart from this.
Ques. Would you attach some importance to taking account of spiritual life and interest in any person who comes under the power of the word of God?
W.J.H. That is the point here, that this mother would save the life -- that is her objective at all costs.
G.A.v.S. Is that the care and solicitude of those in whose care the child is?
W.J.H. The apostle speaks of Jerusalem above being "our mother" (@Galatians 4: 26).
Ques. You spoke of being hidden for three months by the parents. Does what you refer to come out in relation to the preaching of the gospel also, God saving souls to hide them?
W.J.H. The hidden position is the position for all of us, but if it is not brought into our souls when we are young it seldom gets in at all. When the Lord found what He valued He hid it.
G.A.v.S. We see that in active exercises in the government of a country. Most of the laws of that country are directed towards making provision for the preservation of those who are young, and unable yet to guard themselves against the great dangers which surround them. I suppose that is just as true in the commonwealth of God as in the commonwealth of a nation.
W.J.H. This mother would look at her child like that -- the possibilities in view of Solomon's kingdom and Solomon's work -- Solomon is on the throne, and he is
{59}
going to build a house that is exceeding great in fame and beauty.
Ques. To be an element in it?
W.J.H. That is what she rightly would look for.
A.B.J. This child would take a right account of himself later on, he would owe his life and existence to this word that came from Solomon.
W.J.H. Indeed, we are born again by the word of God says Peter, and we live by every word of God. As this child grew up, and understood that he owed his life to the word of Solomon, every word of Solomon would have weight with him. This brings us to the next chapter.
G.A.v.S. Is Paul's solicitude for Timothy of a similar character?
W.J.H. And found more clearly still in Onesimus. How anxious Paul was; so much so that he wrote a special epistle to Philemon that the child begotten in his bonds should not be injured.
E.B.McC. The maternal side comes to light, and the Lord places the child where it gets proper care.
J.D.U. I suppose here we would be encouraged to sacrifice the natural, whatever that may cost us?
W.J.H. That is how life is preserved. She is prepared to sacrifice what she would naturally claim, for the preservation of life.
E.B.McC. The Lord sees she gets the living child. The young man in Luke is given to his mother.
W.J.H. Yes. What I had in mind -- more than the child itself -- was that we should have to do with the Lord who searches our innermost hearts, and thoughts and feelings, and thus we are on the way to the house of God.
{60}
G.A.v.S. In regard to wisdom in the passage at the end of chapter 4, is this wisdom of such a character that it covers everything in earth, air and water?
W.J.H. "In wisdom hast thou made them all" (@Psalm 104: 24) it says. Wisdom is in every sphere of God's activities. God gave Solomon wisdom and largeness of heart -- that is a great matter. Largeness of heart -- immense affection -- complete with the wisdom. So that he has a heart that can think of every feature of the work of God. Having that, he speaks three thousand proverbs, which I think means that there is a word of wisdom from Solomon for every matter that ever arises. The three thousand will cover every matter. There is far more than the actual book of Proverbs, there is the living word as well as the literal scripture.
J.D.U. The application by the Spirit of the written word perhaps?
W.J.H. Never outside the boundary of scripture; yet you have to get to Solomon to find these three thousand proverbs and with such a range of them you do not know what He will use.
G.A.v.S. With Christ there is power to deal with every possible situation that could arise.
W.J.H. Judgment is to begin at the house of God, that is what Solomon has in view, the house of God being there, judgment is there, these three thousand proverbs are for judgment, to know what ought to be done in every circumstance.
Ques. So that He may apply a scripture which has never been used before?
W.J.H. Which is very testing.
{61}
J.W.H. Do you suggest that the three thousand proverbs are for the working out of judgment in detail?
W.J.H. Quite. The general position is that the Lord will recognise living affections. But then in the question of judgment He has a word of wisdom for every matter. The range of wisdom under His hand is expressed in the three thousand proverbs, and He has a word of wisdom for every situation.
A.B.J. In the verses 30 and 31 all human wisdom disappears before the true Solomon's wisdom?
W.J.H. That is interesting. Various characters of wisdom are referred to. The sons of the east, but Solomon is wiser than they are! There are persons that go back to the religious traditions of men. There is the wisdom of Egypt, of this world. There are brethren who have helped us in the past, grandsons of Jacob may be. We might look up their writings to get a proverb for the situation, but that is not the way at all.
W.G. The scripture says he "spoke" of them, not 'wrote' of them, would that bring in the presence of Christ?
W.J.H. That is so. We are approaching the house of the living God, there are living expressions and living wisdom from the mouth of Solomon.
H.S. Ethan and Heman wrote psalms.
W.J.H. Ethan the Ezrahite thought very highly of David. Solomon is wiser than he, however much we may value Ethan. The other three may be grandsons of Jacob and belong to the past. The proverb that Solomon will say now, is in view in an assembly meeting. It is very testing as to whether we are with Solomon. What we did in an
{62}
apparently similar case weeks before, or years before, is not to guide now.
Ques. These men would speak from their experience. Solomon has the word from God to meet every situation, it is not a matter of past experience.
W.J.H. The apostle says to the Corinthians, "Thus there is not a wise person among you" (@1 Corinthians 6: 5). We do not despise these serviceable brethren, whether living or gone, but what we want in a difficult situation is a proverb that Solomon speaks.
C.B. Is there any wisdom apart from Solomon?
W.J.H. Well there is the wisdom of the world which comes to nought; and there is the wisdom from beneath too.
C.B. With all this available wisdom, how is it that we so often miss the point?
W.J.H. It is a question as to whether things are living with us, we never miss the proverb if we are livingly in touch with Solomon, in living affection.
G.A.v.S. Would the wisdom come out in the application of the proverb? In any given situation the wisdom that brings the word of Christ to bear upon it would be the proverb for the occasion.
W.J.H. I suppose that three thousand would cover all the moral questions that would ever arise, there is a proverb for each one.
C.D. It is a matter of what he spoke, not a question of what others say, but rather the true Solomon, it is what He says that counts and what we wait for and listen for.
{63}
W.J.H. That is what you get in the house of God. The time has come for judgment to begin from the house of God.
H.C. We often quote what valued brethren say, believing Christ is speaking through such.
W.J.H. The Spirit of God conveys what Christ says through vessels. Christ is not actually here physically, but He is Son over God's house, and He does speak, and we are to discern His voice.
E.B.McC. He credits the assembly with having those proverbs.
W.J.H. How testing as to whether we are near enough to Him to get the proverb for the occasion, or whether we look up to see what Mahol said.
Ques. Then there is the testing as to whether we have discernment to accept it.
W.J.H. That is what is so searching.
H.S. In connection with the morning meeting, there is nothing mystical about getting the song from the mouth of Solomon.
W.J.H. If indeed we should be near enough to get it and dependent enough. Solomon has the house of God in view in all this, first his proverbs to order and adjust things according to divine wisdom, and then these thousand and five songs.
C.D. The proverbs would put us in tune for the songs.
A.B.J. The right use of these proverbs in solving matters would mean unity?
W.J.H. Quite so. It would adjust us in every moral question so that things are right according to divine
{64}
wisdom; but what is next in view is the praise of God. There is a great range in that, a thousand and five.
E.B.McC. Why a thousand and five?
W.J.H. I do not know. The only thing I would say is that there is a vast range of living praise to be maintained by the true Solomon, not one note or one song, but a thousand and five songs.
E.B.McC. Do you think it begins at the weakest and increases one hundredfold?
W.J.H. Quite so. But we come together under the Son over God's house. What song will He sing? He has a thousand and five to select from.
C.B. Only one song is recorded.
W.J.H. Quite so. Who knows when the saints come together what song the true Solomon will take up? We used to see brothers come with their hymnbooks turned down.
J.D.U. I was thinking of young brothers that we long to see taking part in these songs. What is necessary with them is life, if they were living they would be available.
W.J.H. The Lord might choose any of them to introduce one of these songs -- the songs of Zion they may be called.
G.A.v.S. Are the songs only in the hymnbook?
W.J.H. "Singing and chanting with your heart to the Lord" (@Ephesians 5: 19) -- not with your hymnbook. The Lord might use the hymnbook, but it is a question of what is in the heart.
{65}
J.D.U. The thing with us is to see that we are living and then we are ready for any one of the thousand and five.
W.J.H. The Lord would help us and is helping us to recognise that, if these living affections are with us. If there is matter of discernment and judgment, there is a word -- a proverb from the mouth of Solomon. He would select one for the occasion. If it is a question of the service of God in praise, there is a living song which He will lead the saints to sing.
W.G. Would the proverb be limited to judgment?
W.J.H. A proverb is a word of wisdom when it is needed for any matter.
W.G. Would you help us as to the giving out of hymns?
W.J.H. It is only in wisdom they can be used. Take such a proverb as "God is in the heavens, and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few" (@Ecclesiastes 5: 2). That is a word that needs to be listened to, from the mouth of Solomon, specially in the prayer meetings. We cannot help one another except as things are living. You cannot draw up anything for the service of God, there is no schedule, there are a thousand and five songs, and you never know which one Solomon will select. It is really how far we are in touch with Christ.
W.H. Do you think if we apprehended the Lord in connection with the three thousand proverbs, we would be drawing from the Head in such a way as to be intelligent as to what is given expression to?
W.J.H. Yes, I do.
{66}
C.B. Tell us why that one song is recorded.
W.J.H. It is called the Song of Songs. I suppose it is the greatest of all of them, whether applied to Israel or to the assembly. There are many other notes that Solomon may strike at times, and we are dependent upon Him for that.
G.A.v.S. Are they included in what Paul says "Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs" (@Ephesians 5: 19)?
W.J.H. Quite so. The songs of Zion are referred to in Scripture -- they are all in that book.
J.N.G. Why songs with Solomon, and psalms largely with David?
W.J.H. David is the sweet psalmist of Israel, and a psalm has to do with experience with God. But a song has to do with joy in the heart Godward, and God delights in such songs. I do not know that I can say much about the difference.
J.S.B. In the preservation of that which is living you have touched upon the meetings for prayer, and reference to our words being few. If we are given to prayer at very great length, can that make for preservation of what is living if there is that which is wearying to the saints? We speak practically.
W.J.H. If we turn to the Lord about that, we will find He has a proverb to put us right. There is a proverb that tells us what is suitable if we will only listen. Solomon's prayer that follows is the longest prayer in scripture. It can be read deliberately and reverently in seven minutes. It covers the greatest range that our minds can take in.
{67}
W.G. The prayer that is livingly in connection with the house of God usually holds the saints.
W.J.H. Well, if we have as much real exercise as Solomon's we might sustain public prayer for seven minutes. There is no prayer, other than the Lord's equal to it!
We might pass on to this next point in the same connection. Solomon spoke of trees "from the cedar-tree that is on Lebanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the wall". Then he spoke of cattle, and he spoke of fowls and he spoke of creeping things, and of fishes. I believe all this would help us to value the work of God in view of the house of God, for in God's house there is a place for every feature of divine workmanship.
E.A.K. Would you connect this scripture with the sheet that comes down from heaven in the Acts, where similar things were spoken of?
W.J.H. Yes, only this is much wider. Solomon spoke of trees. There were no trees in that sheet, there were no fishes. I think the meaning of it is that in approaching the subject of the house of God, Solomon would teach us to value any feature of the work of God in one another.
R.H.V.A. Every whit utters His praise.
W.J.H. Every whit -- quite so.
J.D.U. Is that the thought of the hyssop -- no matter how small?
W.J.H. Yes. What it must have been to hear Solomon speak about the feature of God's work in a cedar, and in an oak, and in a palm, and in an olive tree, and in a vine. He comes right down to the hyssop that springs out
{68}
of the wall. So that everyone would value these plants as never before.
E.M. Does that apply to one seeking fellowship?
W.J.H. Indeed it applies in our attitude towards the work of God in every way. That you do not despise God's work -- you value it. It may be small like the hyssop, or great like the cedar, but whatever feature it bears, it is the work of God and Solomon has something to say about it, for he values it.
C.D. He has taken account of everything in God's work, so that he speaks of them all. Every creature came under his notice and he has something to say about it.
W.J.H. He *spoke* of these things. All these things are living. They are trees that he spoke about, not timber simply.
G.A.v.S. Would the spiritual key be, "For thy will they were, and they have been created" (@Revelation 4: 11)?
W.J.H. That is what the elders know. They know that everything was made for the pleasure of God, to express something of Christ.
C.B. Was Paul valuing the hyssop? He says the weakest is necessary.
W.J.H. Yes, the weak brother for whom Christ died. Christ values such, though he may be like hyssop that springs out from the wall.
R.H.V.A. Is not there a blessed sign that it was used to sprinkle the blood on the lintel?
W.J.H. Yes, though small it was serviceable.
J.D.U. "Less than the least of all saints" (@Ephesians 3: 8).
{69}
W.J.H. It means, I think, to get the gain of hyssop we must be small. Indeed hyssop is the means of cleansing. The psalmist says "Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean" (@Psalm 51: 7). Coming down to the thought of hyssop is the divine way of cleansing. The fig-tree, or the cedar, or the palm, all have features of God's work, but if we want to be cleansed it is by way of the hyssop.
W.G. "The trees of Jehovah are satisfied" (@Psalm 104: 16).
W.J.H. Every tree of the Lord is satisfied to grow in his own place, and fill his own part. You have never heard of a cedar wanting to be a vine. His service is prescribed for him and he is satisfied. Solomon has something to say about every feature of the work of God, and the necessity for it amongst His people.
G.A.v.S. The spiritual value of the work of God, so that they are spread abroad and appreciated.
W.J.H. I have no doubt every item listed here is descriptive in some way of the work of Christ. If you want to see the true cedar, go to Him. If you want to see the true hyssop, you go to Bethlehem or Calvary. If you want to see any feature of the beasts that are clean you see it in Christ; the ox, the lamb, the goat and the lion. All these features of the work of God are seen in Christ; but Solomon would help us to value them as seen in one another.
C.D. All the way through it is an important matter to hear what the King has to say, whether in regard to the living child, or the mother; or the proverbs; or the songs; or as to the vast range of the work of God.
{70}
W.J.H. That is important. That touches our readings and meetings for ministry. What will Solomon say; he has all this range before him and he has something to say, what will he say today?
J.D.U. Does that apply when seeking to distinguish where the work of God is in one who comes to the meeting for the first time?
W.J.H. Exactly. If you could see things as the Lord sees them you might speak to him about the lamb, or about the lion. It depends upon what is suitable for the moment. What he may need is preparedness to suffer, what he may need is courage to face an issue that God has brought to his door.
J.D.U. There are the unclean elements -- the creeping things?
W.J.H. Well, Solomon no doubt had something to say about these which would be very extensive. How he would bring home what man is in himself, his own nothingness -- "Thou worm Jacob" (@Isaiah 41: 14). What Solomon could open up as to this line!
G.A.v.S. How do we speak of fishes?
W.J.H. I think the fishes speak of the reserves that God has under His control. The sea contains living things innumerable. The reserves of divine resources are unlimited.
J.D.U. Do you link these with what we have in Leviticus?
W.J.H. Quite so. Solomon would help us to understand what is clean and what is not.
{71}
J.D.U. One has been feeling the importance of that book very greatly, in connection with things in the house of God.
W.J.H. I have no doubt in the wisdom that God gave Solomon he would open out the chapters in Leviticus in connection with the creeping things so that we might understand what God meant by these things.
The house of God is to be a house of prayer for all nations, and so you find a little later on the queen of Sheba comes up to hear this wisdom. There is a place where matters come up to be solved and where the light can be reached.
A.B.J. So that if we are in the good of that it will radiate and others will come into blessing?
W.J.H. That is what is in view.
C.B. Is that testimony?
W.J.H. Yes, "God, who desires that all men should be saved" (@1 Timothy 2: 4), as the apostle says as to the house of God.
R.H.V.A. Is there any connection between this and @Colossians 2: 2, 3, "the mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge"?
W.J.H. I think that is very good in connection with what we have had. Behind all these features in the physical creation there lie typically the treasures of the house. Solomon opens that out in all that he has to say. Ministry is largely to help us to locate features of Christ and value them and make use of them.
W.H. Are you suggesting that ministry allows for the true Solomon to speak today?
{72}
W.J.H. That is it, to tell us about oaks and cedars and doves¬ and eagles¬ wings, indeed all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
*From The Wisdom of Solomon, pages 32 - 59, Kyneton, Victoria, November 1937*.
{73}
THE ARK IN ITS PLACE
W J House
@2 Chronicles 5: 1 - 14
One would desire to enlarge our interest in the present work of God. Nothing can be more important and greater than what God is doing, for, dear brethren, there is nothing like the work of God. In the world of nations, each nation is anxious to know what the other is doing. In business, rivals are always anxious to know what their competitors are doing. But I would like to enlist your living interest in what God is doing. If we look at the work of God, as it is visible in the creation, how trifling it makes men's doings appear! Who would compare the sun in the heavens with all its wonderful light, with the tiny globes that men make -- but that is the relative difference between God's work and man's work. What can you compare with the work of God, what is there like it? If we look into the heavens the work of His fingers, it is calculated to bring every man down to the dust in the sense of his own nothingness. If you take the lily, for the Lord bids us to consider it, what is there that men could do compared with the lily?
So it is with *all* the work of God. Perhaps some of you think that God is not working. Many live today as if God is doing nothing -- what an outrage on God that any should think He is not doing anything! Nations are busy, cities are busy, men and women and children are busy doing something -- can we conceive that God is not working? What is God doing? It truly says, "And the heavens and
{74}
the earth and all their host were finished" (@Genesis 2: 1). Finished so perfectly that no revision for thousands of years has been necessary. No modification -- made as God does everything -- perfectly, but finished. Has He done nothing since? The Lord says, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work" (@John 5: 17) -- has the Lord Jesus been doing nothing for thousands of years of men's history? What is He doing? The greatest interest for your soul and mine is to be profoundly concerned as to what God is doing and what Christ is doing. What the Lord did in the three and a half years of His public life was so great that John supposes that the world could not contain the books that should be written, if everything that Jesus did was listed.
So I want to dwell a little on what God is doing now and what Christ is doing. "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing" (@Proverbs 25: 2). He does not advertise His works. They need no advertising, and in any case where sin is active He hides His hand, but every kingly feature in man would find out what God does. It is the only thing that matters.
So I wanted, with the Lord's help, to suggest a little as to the great end that God is working to. When it is unveiled, what will there be? Well, first of all there will be a suitable place for the ark. It says, when Solomon had finished all the work of the house of God, when there remained nothing whatever to be done in this connection, then they brought up the ark of the Lord into *its* place. It had never been in *its* place before, it had been in many other places, but not until now was it in its own place, the place that was suitable for it. Where had it been? It had
{75}
been in the wilderness, it had gone three days¬ journey into the wilderness. It says it was a "great and terrible wilderness, a wilderness of fiery serpents, and scorpions" (@Deuteronomy 8: 15). The ark had moved three days¬ journey to search out a resting place for Israel, to find in those dreadful conditions a spot where Israel could rest. It had gone forward before them all to face the enemies, and as the ark went out Moses said, "Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered;" and when it rested he said, "Return, Jehovah, unto the myriads of the thousands of Israel" (@Numbers 10: 35, 36). The ark had been down into the waters of Jordan, at a time when Jordan overflowed all its banks, the flood tide of that river in evidence. It had been into those waters and driven them back. The psalmist said, "What ailed thee ... thou Jordan, that thou turnedst back?" (@Psalm 114: 5). The ark had been round the walls of Jericho, that entrenched city of spiritual wickedness, and brought down its wall to the dust. It had been in a tent at Shiloh, a tent which God placed amongst men, largely forgotten by Israel. It had been into the land of the Philistines, taken into the house of their god. The Philistine god had fallen upon its face, and they put it up again and then Dagon's head and hands are cut off in the presence of the ark. It had been in the house of Abinadab on the hill, cared for as best may be until finally David says as to that position, "We found it in the fields of the wood" (@Psalm 132: 6) -- apparently unwanted and unappreciated by anyone. As David sees that holy vessel in that position there arises a mighty vow in his soul; that, "I will not give sleep to mine eyes, slumber to mine eyelids, Until I find out a place for Jehovah" (@Psalm 132: 4, 5). What we have been looking at
{76}
earlier today began with that vow. The ark is found again in the house of Obed-edom, one solitary family that loved it. If everyone else is afraid, even David, Obed-edom opens his house to care for that holy vessel. It is found later in a tent within, guarded in the city of David. But, dear brethren, these positions do not denote *its* place.
This holy vessel has been in all these places, but none of them was *its* place, the great end of Solomon's work is to provide *its* place. And all the people, the priests leading, join to bring up the ark into its place within the oracle. That is one feature of its place. The oracle is the place where God speaks, it is where the divine voice may be heard, that is its place. Anyone that wants to hear the oracle must find the ark, for the ark's place is in the oracle, where the voice of God is heard. It is the most holy place -- the very holiest spot in the universe, the most holy, that is the place of the ark. Under the wings of the cherubim, guarded perfectly, guarded by every attribute of God, where none could ever touch that vessel again with unholy hands -- passed under the wings of the cherubim, that is its place.
We know, dear brethren, what all this means, it is the place which the Lord Jesus Christ has for ever. He has been into the manger at Bethlehem, but that is not His place. The grace that took Him into such a situation fills our hearts with wonder, but none would say that is His place. Grace took Him down into Nazareth of Galilee. Where is the heart that would say that is His place? Grace took Him into the house of Simon the Pharisee, unwanted and unappreciated and yet He went, but Simon's house is not His place. Mighty love took Him into the waters of
{77}
death, even the death of the cross, that is not His place. Though He has been there indeed at the time of its flood, when all the power of death had to be met, Jordan is not His place. His conflict with the spiritual powers of darkness, which Jericho represents, has been entered on, and He made a show of them openly, but Jericho is not His place. The betrayal and unfaithfulness of His people have found Him in the modern Philistine's land, only to bring out the wretchedness of their gods, that they have neither head nor hands but just the stump.
Some hearts have opened to find a place for Him, such as Martha did, for she received Him, conscious surely of how unworthy her place was for such a Visitor. So it has been during the dark ages and onward, there have been the Obed-edoms who cherished in their affections that blessed Person so unwanted in a Philistine world and so neglected by His unfaithful people.
I am sure we are all deeply conscious that at best we are but providing Him a tent. In grace He accepts the tent. It is but a tent. But when Solomon's work is over, our blessed Lord Jesus Christ will have a place that is His, enclosed in the holy affections of His people. Their willing ears and hearts will be attentive to the voice of God that comes from Him, never again to be touched by unholy hands, but guarded for ever under the wings of the cherubim. This is part of the great work of Solomon, which David had in his heart when he determined to build a house for God. "Arise, Jehovah, into thy rest, thou and the ark of thy strength" (@Psalm 132: 8).
And so this great work is proceeding and we are all glad to be part of it, to provide something for His place. To
{78}
provide some living material which will give Christ His suitable place, where He will be for ever. The staves being drawn out, signify that He will never move again, He has reached His place in the holy affections of those who love Him in His assembly.
But then, dear brethren, what is God doing? What is there for God coming into view? That is the next feature; for when the ark was enshrined in its place, then we have brought before us what is for God Himself. What begins as Christ has His place, is the service of God. No one can have part in the service of God until Christ has some place. Let no one deceive themselves, the true measure in which we can serve God is the place Christ has in our hearts. When the ark has its place, then there begin the movements of living praise, every part of the being brought into it, the hands and the lips and the breath. One might say spirit, soul and body, are brought into the service of God, and all united as having one common object. For as sure as Christ is in His place, there will be one sound of living praise. The jargon of the religious world is because of Christ being displaced, but unity in praise Godward springs from the supremacy of Christ in the affections of His people.
The priests were suitably clothed in white linen, in holy purity. The singers used trumpets, lutes, harps, cymbals -- instruments which bring into activity every part of man -- and all the singers and trumpeters making one sound. Supposing you brought in Joab, what would happen? He will never come in thank God! Supposing you brought in Adonijah, who would usurp the place Christ has, everything would be marred. Supposing that Shimei
{79}
could come into that scene, who would make room for the flesh which gratifies itself -- but it never can be, dear brethren. They were one "to make one voice to be heard in praising and thanking Jehovah". Everything that would bring in discord is judged in what we have been looking at this morning, and these priests have been attentive to Solomon's instructions, to his proverbs, to his songs, to his unfolding of the great work of God in the universe in all its living character. So that it says they make one voice. And when that point is reached which God loves -- *one voice* -- then it says the cloud filled the house, and all activity ceased, while the blessed holy presence of God filled the scene -- God all in all. That is the end, "Then the end". The end that God is working to is that His presence should fill the universe, not that of course service Godward ceases in another sense, but this is the blessedness of the presence of God, so wonderful dear brethren, that no heart can fathom it. The few moments we have known in power in our souls stand out in our histories, never to be forgotten. But the great end of this present period of divine workmanship is this -- that God has a dwelling place that He takes possession of as His own.
Let us not think that all this must await the future and nothing be known of it now. The Lord promises to give one heart a touch of it, if only that heart will yield Him the conditions He requires, "If any one love me, he will keep my word" (@John 14: 23). His word is His known mind kept in holy affection, and the Lord promises that "We will come to him and make our abode with him". If, dear brethren, in our localities where the Lord has set us, where the Lord is working in our souls to form us into living
{80}
stones to have part in this spiritual house, we will face having conditions suitable to Him, He will give us even now a taste of what is eternal. Christ having His place -- the responses being united as one, the cloud of glory coming over our spirits. If one could quicken the longing for this to be realised, how thankful we would be. We would have it far, far more if we would face the adjustment of the various moral questions that He brings to our door. If in holy living affections we would devote ourselves to His precious interests. If we would be attentive to His wisdom, and His songs, and His words. The consequence would be that He would be supreme in our hearts. There would he unity in the service of God and we should know something of the cloud of glory, the greatest moment ever known here, when God is present and the cloud of the divine Presence is known to our spirits. These moments stand out as the foretaste of eternity. Let us not rest, and let us not evade the constant questions the more than Solomon raises. For He is but preparing the way for the great end to be known in our souls, our gatherings, our individual hearts may be, pending the great day of the unveiling when it shall be said from a wondering universe, "What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23: 23).
May the Lord help us to face what the true Solomon is raising with us individually and collectively; in view of this wonderful end, that the ark is in its place; that the service of God is united, making one voice; and then the conscious sense of the divine Presence filling all, for His name's sake.
*From The Wisdom of Solomon, pages 60 - 70, Kyneton, Victoria, November 1937*.
{81}
THE LORD'S SUPPER LEADING TO THE SERVICE OF GOD
G R Cowell
@Leviticus 8: 1 - 3, 6, 14, 15, 18, 22 - 27, 30; @2 Chronicles 5: 11 - 14; @John 13: 10, 16; @Hebrews 2: 10, 11.
My desire tonight, dear brethren, is to speak of liberty in the service of God, and I think this liberty is largely bound up with three things. The first is an understanding of @Leviticus 8, that is, an understanding of sanctification -- "He that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one". I believe that lies at the basis of any liberty as serving God in His own presence. That is connected with the service of the Mediator. It was carried out by Moses in @Leviticus 8 -- "Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying ...". The Sanctifier is the Lord Jesus as Mediator. But then the Lord brings in what is additionally necessary in @John 13; there is that which His own service has effected, which He speaks of as "He that is washed all over". There is also the service of love that is left for us to do for each other in washing one another's feet. We have been washed all over -- Moses took Aaron and his sons and washed them with water, they were washed all over. He that is washed all over still needs to wash his feet and that is a service of love left to us to perform for each other. Then finally, what is needed also is the attitude that is referred to in @2 Chronicles 5: 12, where it says that the priests and the Levites were standing at the east end of the altar. They were standing as holding
{82}
themselves in readiness to serve -- not coming to the meeting, as it were, with the idea of being spectators in what is going on. They come as standing -- they do not sit down -- at the east end of the altar, the side of expectancy, expecting the glory to come in as thus all ready.
To return for a moment to @Leviticus 8; I believe that is a matter all the people of God need grounding in -- sanctification. Before I speak of it in detail, it will be well to say a few words on the service of God generally, and you will understand that what I mean now is the service of God as in Leviticus, that is priestly service. In Numbers it is levitical service; in Leviticus it is serving God in His presence. The service of God has two parts to it; there is the service of God at the altar and the service inside the tabernacle.
Priestly service at the altar was a public matter; that is anyone could have come along and could have seen the priests serving at the altar; but inside the tabernacle no one saw what went on, only the priests themselves knew. Typically, they entered into a scene where all was of God. And you will find in @Exodus 29 and 30 that those two sides of the service went on every morning and every evening; every morning the priests went to the brazen altar and offered the morning lamb, and every evening the evening lamb, with its meat-offering and drink-offering. But then the priest also went inside the tabernacle every morning and evening, and he trimmed the lamp and put incense on the golden altar. You can understand that when a priest went inside and looked around, as entering in spirit a scene where everything was of God, what kind of prayers and praise would go up from him at the golden
{83}
altar! Our prayers and praise must be affected by our environment. The prayers and outgoings of the hearts of the saints at the golden altar -- that is in spirit in a scene where everything is of Himself -- are sweet incense to God. That is the kind of prayer the Lord prayed in @John 17. He is there as Priest at the golden altar, serving in spirit in a scene where everything is of God. He views the saints from that angle -- "the glory which thou hast given me I have given them, that they may be one, as we are one" (@John 17: 22). That is like the priest looking round and seeing the boards in the tabernacle, covered with gold, set in bases of silver -- the saints as they are before God. And that was going on every morning and evening. What a blessed thing it would be to take that up!
To take up priestly service at all we need to know something of sanctification, but what I have in mind to occupy us with tonight is the service of God in connection with the morning meeting, the Lord's supper. I believe that this matter of sanctification according to @Leviticus 8 has an important bearing in connection with the cup. We have been occupied this afternoon with the truth of reconciliation. Now reconciliation refers to the way Christ has laid the basis in divine righteousness for this scene where everything is of God. Reconciliation does not only bear on the church, but on all things in heaven and in earth. "You ... now has it reconciled" (@Colossians 1: 21, 22). But reconciliation touches the whole scene of glory. We should be in liberty at all times in our spirits to enter into the immediate presence of God, without embarrassment, as a matter of enjoyment and contemplation. @Luke 15 is a matter of enjoyment, @Hebrews 9 and 10 a matter of
{84}
contemplation. If we understand the work of Christ we shall be free at all times to go into the holiest as a matter of enjoyment and contemplation. Think of going into a scene where everything is of God, and *that comes into the morning meeting*. It is a question of going into the scene as a matter of enjoyment in the first instance, but then there is also the question of serving God actively, in a priestly way. It is one thing to be in the enjoyment of God's presence, and it is *another thing* to be free actively to serve Him in it. If we are to serve Him actively, we must have something acceptable to offer. When it comes to a question of actively serving God in His own immediate presence, we need something more than reconciliation, which is the bearing of the work of Christ in its wide and extensive character.
*Sanctification* refers especially to the bearing of the work of Christ *on the church*. It is not so much what the work of Christ has done for God in its vast and extensive character, but what the work of Christ has done for us *in making us all of one with Him*. If we are actively to serve God in His own immediate presence, we need to have a sense that we *have part* with Christ, as entirely suitable, as all of one with Him. Many companies will come into the meaning of reconciliation, heavenly and earthly companies, but no company will come into sanctification like the church. They will have part in the universe of bliss, but no company will have part with Christ in the holy service of God like the assembly. What the Lord had before Him in a special way in going into death was that He should sanctify us by the offering of His body once for all, to bring us in as a priestly company with Himself in
{85}
the service of God. That is what is set out in @Leviticus 8. I should connect *reconciliation with the cup*, and I should connect *this also* with the cup *at the Supper*, because it is the Mediator who does it. I suppose there was really no greater service that the Mediator did than this; it was probably the greatest act of Moses¬ service -- to sanctify a priestly company to draw near to God, to serve Him. That was the great end in view in the covenant. God had come out to man and made known the terms on which He would be with man. God is with us on the line of supply, and it is all in view of our being with God in His realm of things, and in such liberty that we are free to serve Him as consciously having part with Christ, and as all of one with Him. What a wonderful thought it is. What could be a greater act on the part of the Mediator than to secure for God this great return from the covenant, this great response, that there is a company brought to God, all of one with Christ in God's holy service?
You will notice that the whole assembly is brought into it. What this means in christianity is that all the saints take it up. We are all priests; we do not set apart a certain priestly class, but it is the saints moving together, all intent on God having an answer to His great thought, just as in Numbers the whole assembly moves together to offer up the Levites. We are all in it on a priestly line. I would encourage even the youngest here tonight that what we are speaking of is your portion. There was no age limit to the priests. We have been sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. The Levite had to be 30 years of age before he was entrusted to carry these holy things. It needs maturity. But how are we to get maturity
{86}
except by taking up priestly service? When we grow to maturity how delighted we shall be to be entrusted with the carrying of holy things!
Let us look for a moment at this chapter to see some of the important things in it. It says in @Hebrews 2: 11 that "he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one". That is, the saints are entirely identified with Christ as a Man in the immediate presence of God. How has that been brought about? By Christ's wonderful service to us as the Mediator by the offering of His body once for all, typified in *the sin-offering, the burnt-offering and the ram of consecration*. So what has happened is that, through the work of God to begin with, every one of us has a link with Christ through His service towards us as Mediator. We have all been washed all over. You say, why did Aaron need washing all over? -- Aaron is a type of Christ. The Lord said "I sanctify myself for them" (@John 17: 19). The Lord Himself has left flesh and blood conditions *for our sakes*. He need not have done, but He Himself has gone through the waters of death. His position as Man before God is based on the fact that He died and has risen again; He did it for our *sakes*. *Aaron and his sons* were washed all over -- we are brought before God on the ground of death. That is the very same ground on which Jesus is before Him, for our sakes, that we might be brought with Him before God. The precious ministry of the Mediator as to His death has this practical effect of washing us all over. The Lord says in @John 13: 10, "He that is washed all over ...". The word of God, through the Mediator, through Christ, has come home in power to the soul, giving me a sense of a link with Him beyond death.
{87}
And then to go forward -- *Aaron and his sons were* all clothed; Aaron in his special garments -- Christ is unique in that -- but the sons also were clothed. The part I want to dwell on most is that *Aaron and his sons* put their hands on the head of the sin-offering; they put their hands on the head of the burnt-offering, and on the head of the ram of consecration. Following on that, Aaron and his sons had the blood put on the right thumb, the right ear and the right toe, and Aaron and his sons had their hands filled with what was delightful to God. Aaron and his sons were anointed and were sprinkled with blood. Thus the sanctifier and those that were sanctified were all of one, brought before God on sacrificial ground as all of one. I believe that to have that in our souls is going to set us free in the presence of God. It is involved in the cup and the covenant because it is the work of the Mediator. We come into the presence of God conscious that the Sanctifier has made us all of one with Himself. It is man going in to God -- not God coming out to man -- on the same ground before God as Christ is as Man. How marvellous the grace of Christ, that He is now before God on the ground of a sin-offering having been offered! Aaron and his sons put their hands on it -- we are identified with Christ before God on the basis of that offering. He is there on the basis of that offering, not because He needed it, but in grace, that we might be one with Him on that ground; the burnt-offering similarly, and the ram of consecration. It is especially calculated to set us free. The sin-offering has dealt with all that is offensive and put it away; the burnt-offering is the sweet odour of Christ to God in which we are accepted. But the ram of consecration is a touching reference to the
{88}
death of Christ -- consecration means the filling of the hands. He went into death to fill the hands of a priestly company with that which is pleasing to God. We have part with Christ, as all of one with Him, in the presence of God, and we come before God with our hands filled with that which is pleasing to *Him*. Moses put these things in the hands of *Aaron and his sons* -- Christ and the assembly presenting to God all that Christ was in His death and in His perfect manhood.
The details of what was put into their hands speak wonderfully of the perfection of Christ in that precious sacrifice and of His precious manhood. He would fill our hands with these things. How could brethren be silent if their hands were filled with these things? And they were all anointed; so that in every way "he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren". I believe that has a very important bearing on what we may speak of as *the transition* at the Supper from what God and Christ are to us, to what we are to God as having part with Christ in the service of God.
When it comes to the practical working out of it, @John 13 helps. Once the priests were sanctified, when they were washed all over, they were never washed all over again, but every time they approached to serve God they had to wash their hands and feet at the laver. We cannot wash one another's hands -- that is a matter which we have to see to ourselves: "Let a man prove himself, and thus eat of the bread" (@1 Corinthians 11: 28). We have to see that we have holy hands. But when it comes to a question of feet washing, in @John 13, the Lord leaves that as a service of love which we
{89}
can perform for one another. The truth of the body enters into that, it is a mutual service. John does not name things as Paul does, but *the truth of the body is very prominent in the Supper*. The loaf reminds us that we being many, are one loaf, one body, and we drink into one cup. We come together and *sit down body-wise*, in love for one another and recognising the fact that we are dependent upon one another. I have often *come* to the Supper feeling as though everything depended upon me. The Lord does not expect us to bear that burden. You may come to the Supper tomorrow morning feeling under some pressure in your spirit, and you may not feel equal to the occasion, but what meets that is that we sit together bodywise. Instead of being disturbed because I am not feeling up to it, I come and sit down with the brethren. What I need is to have my feet washed. We cannot help getting our feet soiled, as it were, as we go through this world -- "Jesus ... having loved his own *who were in the world*", it says; that is why feet washing is necessary. The Lord Himself sets the thing moving even now. We come together and some brother somehow is free -- some sister; no doubt they have proved the personal service of Christ. The thing is for that brother to give expression to what has set him free. So we sit down together and wait upon one another, and someone who is free gives expression, either in a hymn or thanksgiving, to what has set him free, and that sets another brother or two free, and sisters as well. If you have come feeling unequal to things in your spirit and you sit down quietly, you thank God for the brethren; you are *sitting bodywise*; things do not depend upon you but on the body. Soon someone is free; it doesn't touch you much. Well, wait a bit longer; it
{90}
has set someone else free and he expresses it, and now you have the touch for your own soul, your feet have been washed. What are you going to do? You look around the room and think there are a lot of others better qualified than you are. You think, should I take part now? Five minutes ago I could not have thought of it. You are just the one to do it; your feet have been washed. Take that hymn, or phrase, or thanksgiving that washed your feet, and go forward with your bit. And so the service goes on, until the whole company is free, brothers and sisters all free in spirit.
You thus reach the service of the sanctuary in its true character; all enjoying part with Christ, all ready to take up this great truth of sanctification as consciously with Christ, one with Him. We thus come into the presence of God with our hands filled with what is delightful to Him. No question then of waiting upon one another, but of wisdom as to when to bring your part in, what will be best for the occasion. That is the great end in view in the service of @John 13. "If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them" (verse 17). We have to remember that is said *at the Supper table*. Feet washing in another setting takes place in our homes, but I am speaking of the Supper. How often meetings have been spoilt because we have not done it. The part others have taken has washed my feet and yet I have held back and the service has broken down at that point with me, because I have had my feet washed and have not gone on to wash someone else's. We should all take up the obligation of being sent into this world by Christ, as the Father sent Him; and the first specific thing He says about being sent is that we should wash one
{91}
another's feet. "The bondman is not greater than his lord, nor the sent greater than he who has sent him. If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them" (verse 16, 17). The first obligation of being sent is to learn to act bodywise with the brethren. I can only fill a little niche in any morning meeting. If I try to do anything else than that it would only mar the service of God, but the thing is to do my little bit.
That brings us to Chronicles, which I think illustrates the normal service of the Supper. This is the service of the sanctuary. When it is acting normally, feet washing has taken place; everyone set free and everything going forward in liberty in the holy service of God. What it says in verse 11 is that all the priests present were hallowed without observing the courses. I have heard brothers say the priests should serve by course. So they should in certain aspects, *but not at the Supper*. All the priests present were hallowed; that is the normal thing, every priest is free. That is how we should hold ourselves at the Supper, all sanctified, all holding in faith the ground of @Leviticus 8 and ready for the service. All the priests were hallowed without observing the courses -- they were all ready to take up the service of God. "The Levites the singers ... clad in byssus, with cymbals and lutes and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them a hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets".
As I said earlier, the service of God is divided into two parts -- the service of the altar, *and* the service in the tent. The beginning of the morning meeting, and right through the Supper corresponds with the altar, as @1 Corinthians 10 shows us. As the meeting goes on we experience the other side of the service. The altar is the
{92}
public side -- anyone 'sitting behind', as we speak, can see a company of saints serving God by the Spirit, boasting in Christ Jesus and having no confidence in the flesh. What a sight for anyone who comes in with eyes to see what is going on! During the early part of the meeting the public side is *the only part* there is, but as the meeting goes on the priestly company in their spirits pass into the immediate presence of God. The public side still goes on, the person sitting behind still hears the thanksgiving and praise, but does not realise that that company he has been looking at have passed into a scene where everything is of God. That is *the secret side*. But on the public side it says here that the priests and the Levites were standing at the east end of the altar, clad in byssus. This is the third thing that I have spoken of as necessary for liberty in the service of God. It means that *we accept the obligation* of being prepared to take our part in priestly service. We are not only concerned as to washing one another's feet, but both brothers and sisters should be present as taking an active part -- not only what is audible -- we should all be present as actively engaged in priestly service. We should not come and sit down, but we should be standing, as it were. How God values those who come on this line in the way of response, standing at the east end of the altar and clad in byssus, -- that is, there is no fleshly emotion or sentiment; byssus suggests purity and sobriety.
One has heard of brothers who take the ground, as to audible part, that they will only act on impulse. That is not byssus. It may be right to act on impulse, but not to limit one's actions to impulse. The idea of a priest is intelligence and sobriety; he knows what is suitable at the
{93}
moment, he takes his part as wisdom dictates. That is what I understand by standing, clad in byssus, at the east end of the altar. That is, as you function in that way and go forward in sobriety and intelligence, you believe that the glory will come in. "When the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one voice to be heard in praising and thanking Jehovah" -- that is when everyone is free, when the note of praise has become *unified*. The priests were the trumpeters; -- the trumpet suggests a clear intelligent note -- indicating the way the Lord is moving as singing praise in the assembly. There is the clear note of the trumpeters going on -- whereas the Levites, the singers, with their instruments, are the subjective side -- what is going on in the hearts of the saints -- hearts vibrating in unison with that clear priestly note. "Then the house, the house of Jehovah, was filled with a cloud, and the priests could not stand to do their service because of the cloud; for the glory of Jehovah had filled the house of God". What a moment that is, beloved brethren! If we are prepared to take up the service of God in happy liberty, holding in faith the ground of sanctification -- what Christ the Mediator has done -- also holding ourselves in love one towards another as prepared to take our part in washing one another's feet, and finally as standing at the east end of the altar -- all having definitely before us that God should have His portion; then, once the thing is in unison and every heart is vibrating, and this moment reached when the trumpeters and singers are as one, to make one voice to be heard in praising and thanking Jehovah, then the house is filled with the glory of God. What a climax! Formal priestly service comes to an end. You have reached the goal, the
{94}
sense of the Divine Presence is filling the hearts of the saints. You can be free in every way, the glory filling the house, and the saints consciously part of that new creation scene where everything is of God. The saints who have been serving in a priestly way are now conscious of being *part of the scene* where everything is of God, in the immediate presence of the glory. What a blessed thing it is!
That is what is in view in Hebrews -- "For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory ...". I think that links up with what we have in Chronicles "bringing many sons to glory". I do not regard that as the coming display, the glory of the kingdom, but as being brought into the immediate presence of all that God is, and being there perfectly at home where the glory fills -- consciously part of a scene where everything is entirely according to God for His pleasure. God is bringing us to that wonderful eternal scene where all things are of Himself; and that is the climax to have in view, beloved brethren, every time we come together at the Supper. If we reached that scene, how different our expressions would be, -- not now so much occupied with the sacrificial side -- what Christ was here and what He did here. That is what filled the hands of the priests earlier. But to be consciously part of a scene where everything is of God, where Christ as *the* Beloved, the Centre of all affection, has a peculiar glory, loved before the foundation of the world, and now in the place given Him in divine purpose before the world was.
May God help us on these lines, that we may really know complete liberty in His holy service and thus touch
{95}
increasingly what it is to be brought to glory *now*, for His name's sake!
*Harrow, February 1938*.
{96}
{97}
THE TRUTH OF THE ASSEMBLY - LIGHT, EXPERIENCE, TEACHING
H F Nunnerley
@Exodus: 15: 1 - 3, 13, 17; @Psalm 107: 1 - 8; @Acts 11: 19 - 26
H.F.N. What is before me in reading these scriptures, is the thought of how we come into the assembly in a practical way; that each one of us might come into the truth of it thus in a real and practical way. Apart from this, we may lose what is distinctive in our day in regard to the position the Lord has given us in His sovereign goodness. *Firstly*, we come into it in the way of *light*, as @Exodus 15: 13 - 17 suggests: "Thou hast guided them by thy strength unto the abode of thy holiness ... Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance". *Secondly*, in the book of Psalms we may see how we come into it as the fruit of *experience*; reaching the truth of the assembly in an experimental way. So that we are brought to a "city of habitation", where we may "exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the session of the elders" (@Psalm 107: 7, 32). *Thirdly*, in the Acts of the Apostles, we come into it as the fruit of divine teaching. The ministry of Barnabas having established the saints in relation to the truth of the kingdom and the circle of christian fellowship, Paul is brought in, and the result of his teaching is that the saints were formed into an assembly. It is open to everyone of us,
{98}
even the youngest, to bear assembly features as thus taught.
W.J.H. Perhaps you would say what you mean by having part in the assembly in a practical way?
H.F.N. It is easy enough to view ourselves as a congregation, and come together and expect certain persons to sustain the ministry, and so on. But the Lord would touch the heart of the very youngest, so that each might feel that he or she is a component part of the assembly, and be prepared to shoulder responsibility, and take an intelligent part in the service and privilege of the assembly. It is an immense gain to any city, or to any local gathering of saints, when every brother and sister is fully committed to the Lord. So that their interests are wholly bound up with the service and life of the assembly -- that which is the chief interest of the Lord upon earth today. It is the Lord's mind that every other interest should be subservient to the assembly, and that that should be paramount.
J.S.D. What God has done in the overthrow of the enemy, as typified at the Red Sea, should touch our hearts and impress us with the great end He has before Him.
H.F.N. That is, that we should make Him a dwelling, "This is my God, and I will glorify him [or, 'make him a dwelling', see note *e*]; My father's God, and I will extol him" (@Exodus 15: 2). This refers to the tabernacle, which was built as the fruit of the devotedness of God's people. They had been liberated from Egypt, brought into covenant relationship with God, and the outcome of that is that they prepare Him a habitation. Then the second
{99}
reference in verse 13, "Thou by thy mercy hast led forth the people that thou hast redeemed; Thou hast guided them by thy strength unto the abode of thy holiness". This has reference to the assembly as in @1 Corinthians 1: 2, "the assembly of God which is in Corinth" -- the assembly viewed as the abode of divine holiness. Then in verse 17, we are brought, in this song, to the very choicest thought of the assembly as the "mountain of thine inheritance, The place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling, The Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared". So we get light as to the assembly at this early stage, leading on to the full light of our Ephesian position, that is, the light of all the counsels of God, typically coming out in this wonderful song.
G.A.v.S. It is important that each individual should make every personal interest subservient to this great thought, that he may be contributory to the assembly, the true dwelling place or habitation of God.
E.E.S.L. The last place to which you referred says, "The place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling", showing that the tabernacle was not merely something contributed to in material and work, but that God's people were themselves the dwelling place and have part in it.
H.F.N. Not only are we contributors to enrich and build up the tabernacle, the assembly, but when we come to Ephesians it is really what is for God. The result of the ministry should not merely be that the saints are edified, but that in every locality there might be something more for God, so that the divine service might be enriched as the result of our coming together.
{100}
G.A. That would make a great appeal to our hearts, for there is what is for God in the saints being together, apart from anything that may transpire or that may have been said.
R.S. The song of Moses and the children of Israel, brings out that there is that in which God delights to dwell, that is, the praises of His people.
H.F.N. Exactly; so every brother and sister is to be a contributor in relation to the assembly, as pictured in the tabernacle system. There were not only the contributions of the men -- every man whose heart prompted him was to bring gold, silver, etc., but the women, the sisters, and the principal men, the princes, were also to contribute. Then there is what the Lord gives sovereignly in the way of gift. One would desire that we might all accept the principle of responsibility to contribute, so as to enrich the assembly.
S.E.E. Does the reception of divine light produce these promptings of love that would desire that God should have a habitation?
H.F.N. Yes; so that each might take an affectionate and intelligent part in relation to the service of the assembly.
E.E.S.L. Your reference to the sisters indicates that the contributions are not merely in what is audible?
H.F.N. Quite so. It is very beautiful in that connection that the first thing the women contributed was the blue (@Exodus 35: 25). I suppose Mary of Magdala served in this way when she carried the Lord's message in @John 20 to the disciples.
{101}
W.J.H. There is a tendency with many to look upon redemption and some sense of deliverance from the world as the end, rather than the Lord in grace taking us up in view of His pleasure.
H.F.N. That is so indeed. What follows here is that they are in accord with the thought of being brought to the abode of God's holiness. One would like to give an impression to all of what it is to come there. Many will stand for purity of walk and even purity of doctrine as far as they know, but unless we get an impression of the abode of God's holiness we shall never be rightly exercised about the purity of our associations.
S.E.E. Verse 13 speaks of their being "led forth", and verse 17, of their being brought in. What is suggested in this?
H.F.N. Corinthians answers to verse 13, that is, we have a company of people brought *out* of a corrupt and idolatrous world, to form the assembly of God which is in Corinth. Being brought *in* to the mountain of God's inheritance, verse 17, views the assembly from the divine side. God has taken up His inheritance at the present moment in the saints. So that we begin to look at the assembly as presented in Ephesians entirely from the side of divine pleasure, where we can respond to God in His holy nature. We are brought to enjoy the very choicest thoughts of the divine inheritance, to the place where He would plant them, in the mountain of His inheritance.
S.E.E. It appears a long journey to some of us from what we are brought out of, to what God would bring us into.
{102}
H.F.N. Indeed! but do we not get impressions from the Lord in the way of light, even from our conversion? Perhaps it has taken some of us a lifetime to work it out, but once a soul has had divine light from God in regard to the assembly in true spiritual power, he will never fit into any earthly system.
J.S.D. You spoke of the progress and expansion there is in these three references to the assembly in @Exodus 15, does that correspond to our growing in the knowledge of the truth?
H.F.N. Well, I am sure it does. It is a question of light here, and it took them many years to reach it. The defect in Miriam's song, as has been often observed, was that she dwelt only on present grace, with no reference to future glory. So there was only one theme to her song; but when we reach the divine thought of the assembly in spiritual power, we learn to embrace all the divine thoughts.
G.A.v.S. The response of the chorus was not at the full height of the song. If we come short of God's thoughts of the inheritance, there is poverty in our response.
H.F.N. I am sure there is.
A.H. The great difficulty with many is that they are not truly disentangled from the world, so as to be able to sing such a song.
Ques. What position does Moses take here?
H.F.N. He is the Leader; the one who had led them out of Egypt; he would express the authority of God.
G.A.v.S. Would this song be the expression of how the assembly is actually brought out, so that it takes
{103}
account of itself as completely brought out before it knows what it is to be brought in?
H.F.N. Yes; we leave the world -- Egypt -- publicly, under the leadership of Christ as represented by Moses. We have been, so to speak, baptised to Moses in the cloud, and in the sea; we have publicly left the world, and having done that, we have only one interest. The Lord has one chief interest now upon the earth, the assembly. There never has been a time when He had not a supreme interest upon earth, and the man of faith is always in keeping with it. If we think of Daniel, God's chief interest in that day was the city of Jerusalem, and so Daniel had his window open towards Jerusalem, and prayed three times a day. So the assembly, which is the chief interest of Christ upon earth today, should be our paramount interest. It is to be understood in the ways of God, in the purpose of God, and in the working out of God's testimony.
G.A.v.S. We should take up things more definitely from the point of view of the assembly as a whole, rather than individually as members of a congregation.
H.F.N. Exactly. I do not think any brother or sister will be of true spiritual value in a locality, unless he or she is prepared to accept obligations as being of the assembly.
E.E.S.L. In all our prayers the windows of our soul should be, so to speak, open towards Jerusalem.
J.S.D. To what do you refer in speaking of our publicly leaving the world?
H.F.N. It is connected with our baptism. No doubt most here understand the scriptural truth of household baptism, but nevertheless there comes a moment in our
{104}
histories when we publicly leave the world under the leadership of Christ. We cannot be material for the assembly, nor support divine interests in the locality in which the Lord has set us, unless we openly cut our links with the world. It is then we would begin to enrich the great tabernacle system and would get an ever-increasing sense that the assembly is the abode of God's holiness. Everything must be in accord with His holy nature, which we know is love. Then there would begin to dawn upon our souls the glory of the assembly as the great vessel of which it is said, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages" (@Ephesians 3: 21). One's desire is that all might get a lasting impression of what the assembly is to the heart of God and of Christ, and the unique privilege of belonging to it.
W.J.H. The apostle used profound language in Ephesians as to that, saying, "the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints" (@Ephesians 1: 18). If that shines on us as light, even though we may not have reached it in its fulness, it will be a wonderful day!
H.F.N. It would indeed, and what you say raises a very practical question. As we look back, the kind of ministry that helped us was that which was just beyond us, and this is what would help the young today. If things are presented in the power of attraction, it really causes us to move.
B.O.L. In order to reach this we have to know something of the definite committal of @Romans 12, presenting our bodies a living sacrifice to God. In this way we reach practically what God has for us in the abode of His holiness.
{105}
A.H. Is it suggestive that Miriam used only one instrument?
H.F.N. There is a certain music in only one note, but you feel in regard of Miriam that her subsequent history proves that her soul had not embraced the great thought of God's purpose.
A.H. In @1 Chronicles 13: 8, the cymbal, the tambour, the lute, and the harp are instruments connected with God's abode; but if we are content only to have the tambour, we shall fall short of what is in God's mind, shall we not?
H.F.N. Referring to @Psalm 107, a psalm well known to us, we see how we come into the truth of the assembly in an experimental way. We may have things in the way of light -- and there is a certain power in light to sustain the soul -- but then, as we all know, the song of Israel died away and murmuring took its place. This psalm is a celebration of God's ways; it opens by saying, "Give ye thanks unto Jehovah; for he is good; for his loving-kindness endureth for ever". In verse 2 we are redeemed; in verse 3, we are gathered out from the east, and the west, and the north, and the south; and then in verse 7 it says, "he led them forth by a right way, that they might go to a city of habitation". We have these three things. We are redeemed, we become the absolute property of another. Then we are gathered from every quarter; and then, it is said, "he led them forth by a right way, that they might go to a city of habitation". Along with that, the psalmist gives a record of the experiences through which we pass in order that we may reach this city of habitation. There are wanderings in a solitary way; they found no city to dwell
{106}
in; they were hungry and thirsty, and cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and "he delivered them out of their distresses". If we are really to occupy our place in the assembly, and function there according to divine thoughts, and fill our appointed niche, we must take up these things in an experimental way.
W.J.H. The matter becomes one of intense desire, and the experiences of the wilderness are necessary in order to reach it.
H.F.N. Exactly. You feel that we have to take it up in soul history with God; that our place in the assembly now is not only measured by light, but by the experience we have gained with God in relation to the wilderness. The great end in view is that we should come to a city of habitation. We get a well-known illustration of that in @Acts 9. Saul of Tarsus was conscious not only of being redeemed and gathered, but when Ananias put his hands upon him he must have felt he was in the city of habitation. There is a great deal of difference between a brother who speaks merely as having a good deal of light, and one who speaks as having been through experience with God, which gives authority and weight to what he has to say.
G.A.v.S. Experience is not only the result of the length of time I have been acquainted with things, but the way in which they are worked out in the practical knowledge and enjoyment of my soul with God.
L.P.M. The experience is liberating; to go "to a city of habitation", is that not liberation?
H.F.N. It is exactly, so that at the end of the psalm you see the outcome of this experience is that you praise
{107}
Him; you exalt Him "in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the session of the elders" (verse 32). A brother who has experience is of great value in the care meeting. Not only is the Lord to be praised in the congregation, but all the wealth and experience that is gained in the knowledge of God, results in His being praised "in the session of the elders". How valuable to have in any city a brother who has been through experience with God, so that as a result God is exalted in the congregation, and praised among the elders.
W.J.H. One thing greatly to be desired as a result of meetings for care, is that God should be praised. Instead of our having our own way and asserting our own wills, that God should be praised.
H.M. I suppose we never can reach that unless we go down to the sea in ships, and face the wind and the waves, which would speak of assembly difficulties.
H.F.N. I am sure of that. What precedes is the divine education for it. I think this psalm is invaluable to us as showing the way in which we can come into the assembly on experimental lines.
R.S. The Lord says in @John 8: 12, "he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life". It is that which prompts our souls to respond in praise, is it not?
W.J.H. You suggest that in spite of the days we are in, the Lord graciously gives us to experience what it is to be part of His assembly, and to share in the service of praise, even though in weakness.
H.F.N. I think what our brother referred to is well for us to weigh over; that those who go down to the sea in
{108}
ships, see the wonders of God in the deep. What a wealth of experience that kind of brother would bring into a care meeting, and how it would tend to secure that God should be exalted in the congregation of the people, and praised in the session of the elders. There is little real gain from a care meeting, unless it results in the Lord being exalted. You feel what lasting good would issue from our care meetings, if everyone came with a wealth of intelligent experience gained from his knowledge of God as able to meet every situation.
S.E.E. What is suggested in "he led them forth by a right way"?
H.F.N. I suppose the only right way is that which really leads to the land of God's purpose. There is only one right way through the wilderness, and it leads to the city of habitation. Saul of Tarsus is an illustration of one who was led by the right way. He came into the street that is called "Straight". Then he discovered that the assembly was a city of habitation. There are those who come in and out amongst us who never seem to find the city of habitation.
W.J.H. That is to say, they are living a lonely life in their outlook and spirit and thus are isolated, whereas in the city of habitation the saints are set together in affection.
A.H. The Lord in calling Paul had that in mind. Paul says, speaking to Agrippa, that he was sent, not only to "open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light", but that "they may receive ... inheritance among them that are sanctified" (@Acts 26: 18).
{109}
L.P.M. The sisters and children are needed in a city of habitation; it is not a matter of men only. All are necessary.
H.F.N. In @Acts 11: 20, after the persecution of Stephen, it says, they came to "Antioch ... announcing the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus". The title the "Lord Jesus" is one that we hold in peculiar affection as being the property of the assembly. It is presented in this special setting in the New Testament, and seems to suggest the intimacy of reverent affection in the assembly. It is her right to speak thus to Christ. The Ecclesiastical Commissioners are very careful about the preservation of their church property, and one feels that if we are to be true to Christ, we must get an impression of the value of our distinctive property.
The first reference here states, they went everywhere preaching the word; and later, at Antioch, announcing the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus. That would result in the development of assembly features and affections. The title is a holy combination, indicating an intense reverence for the Person of Christ, and holy affections. We need to be maintained in balance as to our reverence for Christ, and our affections for Him; this would bring out true assembly features. The first reference to "the Lord Jesus" is in @Luke 24: 3, where they "found not the body of the Lord Jesus". It is not the body of Christ, or the body of Jesus, but "the body of the Lord Jesus". The next reference is in @Acts 1: 21, "the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us". The third reference is by Stephen, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit" (@Acts 7: 59). Here, in this preaching, we have it at
{110}
the very foundation of the assembly about to be developed under Paul's ministry.
G.A.v.S. So that the assembly stands in a fixed relation to the Lord Jesus. It is only as it is held in this relation actively, that it functions adequately.
H.F.N. As our hearts are divinely moved with reverence and affection, we rightly say, "Lord Jesus", and prove ourselves true assembly material.
H.M. The bride in the @Song of Songs 8: 6 says, "Set me as a seal upon thy heart, As a seal upon thine arm" -- she would suggest one who reverently loved Christ.
L.P.M. Would you distinguish a little more between the thought of light, and what you mean by divine teaching?
H.F.N. In divine teaching things are put in order in our renewed minds. We may have a great deal of light, but so mixed up that it is of very little use to us. The Lord makes use of divine teaching by the Spirit, so that things are put into an orderly form in the minds of the saints.
L.P.M. The result at Antioch was that a great crowd were taught, and brought into the understanding of the assembly; they were not merely individual brothers and sisters, but merged together and able to function.
H.F.N. Exactly; so that in @Acts 13 we read of those who were ministering to the Lord there; they had their part in the great anointed system and, as you say, they were functioning.
What follows the preaching by those who were scattered leads on step by step, because as a result of that "a great number believed and turned to the Lord". Then the next thing is that tidings of these things were sent out
{111}
and reached the ears of the assembly, and they sent out Barnabas to go to Antioch. It has been said that Barnabas was like the golden bar that united the boards of the tabernacle; his ministry had a binding and unifying influence among the brethren, so we can see the wisdom of their choice. He was a large-hearted, sympathetic brother, one without jealousy, and it says that he, having arrived, and seeing the grace of God, rejoiced and exhorted all "with purpose of heart to abide with the Lord". As first turning to the Lord, we would become true subjects of the kingdom, and as abiding with the Lord, we come into the gain of the holy circle of christian fellowship. Then the third thing is, "a large crowd of people were added to the Lord", involving that something divinely constructive had taken place in the minds of the saints, so that they were really "added to the Lord". Firstly, we read that they "turned to the Lord", @Acts 11: 21; secondly, they are exhorted to "abide with the Lord", verse 23; and thirdly, much people were "added to the Lord", verse 24.
W.J.H. Is being "added" like being made a kingdom, as in @Revelation 1: 5? "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom". Being added, shows that the kingdom is increased, by those added to it.
C.M. What is the difference between being "added to the Lord" and "added to the assembly" or together (see note *g*) in chapter 3: 1?
H.F.N. I suppose that being added together is that you become an intelligent part of that which God will use in His service and testimony.
{112}
W.J.H. Unless there is subjection with us to the Lord, divine teaching cannot operate.
H.F.N. Being "added to the Lord", and abiding "with the Lord", means that we have come under the holy, subduing effect of the lordship of Christ. We cannot bring an unsubdued will into the assembly, or we should mar its functioning, and hinder the enjoyment of its privileges.
S.E.E. Although we cannot point to the assembly in a concrete way today, nevertheless there are those who are being "added". In chapter 2: 41 they were "added;" then in verse 47, added together. They had been proved as persevering in the apostle's teaching and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers, together with those already there.
H.F.N. Yes. Now at this juncture in chapter 11, Barnabas recognises Paul as a better brother than himself, and he brings him forward. We never prosper in our localities until we are prepared to take a second place to a better brother than ourselves. He went away to Tarsus to seek out Saul, and having found him he brought him to Antioch, and they were together there for a whole year, and they taught a large crowd. It has been remarked that we get the four seasons in a whole year; perhaps they are not so marked in some countries as in others, but we all know the difference between winter and summer, and spring and autumn. It is a great gain to spend a year spiritually, with the brethren. To be with them affectionately in every season; as much when the cold winds are blowing, as when the sun is shining.
{113}
G.H.W. Earlier, Barnabas was prepared to sacrifice. He sold his lands, and laid the money at the apostles¬ feet. It would make him effective in his service.
H.F.N. It would indeed. He was subject to the Lord's authority in the apostles.
A.H. The whole year would represent the whole period, too, I suppose. We are committed to the whole year, to go through things with the saints.
H.F.N. There is great advantage in spending a whole year with the brethren, watching the results of the teaching the Lord gives, so that the city of habitation is reached through experience, and God is praised in the session of the elders. As the fruits of the service of Paul and Barnabas, the converts became an assembly, that is an intelligent vessel capable of entering into the thoughts of God's counsel; able to function in His service, and to support the whole range of divine interests. Those merely forming a congregation are viewed apart from the acceptance of responsibility; they may be interested or not, but as an assembly, we are exercised responsibly as to the part we have in relation to it, hence the great value of coming under spiritual teaching. There is a generation rising up amongst us that stands in need of teaching.
W.J.H. Especially Paul's teaching. Lydia, in chapter 16, recognised the importance of the things spoken by Paul. The element of patience would enter into this, both on the part of those who teach, and those who are to be taught. Job said, "Who teacheth as he?" (@Job 36: 22). We could all bear eloquent testimony to the patience of God.
{114}
J.S.D. Does that statement, "they were gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd", indicate the general need to be taught?
H.F.N. The rising generation stands in need of Paul's teaching. We are in danger of taking things for granted, forgetting we were once young ourselves.
G.A.v.S. It is sorrowfully possible for me to be amongst the people of God, and yet be in isolation as to my understanding. I may be outwardly there, yet not moving spiritually in assembly exercises and feelings. In such a wonderful environment as the Lord has placed us, we ought to be exercised to be intelligently in the assembly.
S.S. As the result of the full year's tuition, the work of God comes to light: they were first called "Christians" after the year's tuition.
H.F.N. I think we should all recognise the great spiritual value of coming into the gain of teaching. You find those who, in the midst of the most spiritual teaching in the house of God, alas, do not move in response.
R.S. Is this teaching all in view of our finding our place in the heavenly city?
H.F.N. That is what it would finally result in. As thinking of our place there, we should be concerned about finding our place here in the local assembly.
S.E.E. The first scripture brings before us what God does sovereignly; the second, what we reach experimentally; the third, what we enter upon intelligently.
*From The Truth of the Assembly, pages 1 - 18, Sydney, April 1938*.
{115}
COMPLETENESS
H F Nunnerley
@2 Kings 5: 9 - 19; @Jude 14, 15; @Colossians 4: 12 - 17; @2 Samuel 6: 11 - 17
What I desire to speak to you about, dear brethren, is the thought of *completeness*. To the assembly at Sardis, the Lord said, "I have not found thy works complete before my God" (@Revelation 3: 2). Our desire is that the Lord may search all our hearts in relation to whether there has been *completion* in regard to our assembly exercises.
In the epistle to the Colossians the Spirit of God brings out this thought of completeness; first, in relation to the word of God, we are told that the truth of the mystery was the completion of the whole circle of divine revelation (chapter 1: 25). Then, after the Lord Jesus is presented as the glorious Head of His assembly, it is said of the saints, "ye are complete in him, who is the head of all principality and authority" (chapter 2: 10). What a thought that is! We have not to travel outside the Lord Jesus for anything that the assembly needs. All that ever was needed since the day of Pentecost, no matter what the difficulty, has been found in "him, who is the head of all principality and authority". Then in chapter 4: 12, we read of Epaphras, whose priestly intercession, labouring day and night in prayers for the saints at Colosse, was to the end that they might stand "perfect and complete in all the will of God". What a valuable service anyone would render to the saints today, as labouring fervently in prayers to bring them into the
{116}
gain of Paul's ministry, involving the great truth of the mystery, that they might stand perfect and complete in all God's will. The very youngest christian need not have before him anything less than this!
If we look abroad in christendom today, and think of all that has come in in the public history of the assembly, we see how far short we have fallen from the complete will of God. The first necessity for recovery is that we take up things in personal exercise before God, so that they might be completed. In Enoch, the seventh from Adam, we have the complete course of spiritual education. David was never morally or spiritually greater than when he brought up the ark. This had been the great desire of his heart as a shepherd lad, and he was allowed by God to complete it, as bringing the ark into the tent which he had provided. In that day he delivered a psalm into the hands of Asaph and his brethren.
Then the final thought in Colossians is seen in Archippus (chapter 4: 17). The beloved apostle sent him this word, which comes home to every one that has taken up the work of the ministry: "And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, to the end that thou fulfil it". We feel the immense importance of this, lest we should stop short of the complete will of God. How much there is of going half way -- how many have never been fully committed to the Lord and the circle of His interests! What a perilous position they are in!
In @2 Samuel 6: 16 we read that "Michal the daughter of Saul looked through a window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before Jehovah; and she despised him
{117}
in her heart". Earlier, it is recorded that she loved David. Indeed, all Israel and Judah loved him. The Spirit of God loves to record the brightest moment in our history, when Christ was supreme in our hearts and had the only place in our affections. I would like to appeal to the young, as to whether the Lord Jesus is enshrined in your affections, as the hidden Man of your heart. Jonathan was prepared to strip himself of everything, and hand it over to David, because he loved him as his own soul. The women of Israel celebrated him in their song. Doubtless there was admixture, just as there is with many today, but it is said that "all Israel and Judah loved David, for he went out and came in before them" (@1 Samuel 18: 16). Are we like Michal, looking out of a window -- regarding Christ at a distance instead of being near to Him? Eutychus, in @Acts 20, was seated at a window, as though to keep one eye on the brethren, and the other on the world outside. Is there any young brother or sister in that position, not wholly committed to the holy circle of christian fellowship, where the Lord Jesus is cherished, loved, and adored, but keeping an outlook on the world with its powerful attractions? We read also of Jezebel, represented as a painted harlot, thrown down out of a window for dogs to eat. The danger of looking out at a window is an ever-present snare, and raises the question as to whether we are merely spectators, or participators in the spiritual activities going on at the present moment among the brethren. The Lord would speak to our hearts, that we might feel the powerful attraction of the Lord Jesus, and that He might secure the supreme place in our affections. If He does so, we shall be secured as material for Christ's assembly, and shall adorn
{118}
the house of God with the spirit of Christ, and so promote His precious interests down here.
I refer to Naaman. He came to the prophet, but in the wrong way; he showed the wrong spirit and went to the wrong person, and then wanted to go to the wrong place; mistakes which each of us is liable to make. Have we come to the right person, in the right spirit, and in the right way? Naaman draws up to the door of the prophet, with his retinue of servants and his chariot, and Elisha sends a messenger to him, saying, "Go and wash in the Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be clean". But Naaman was offended, and said, "I thought, He will certainly come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of Jehovah his God ... And his servants drew near, and spoke to him and said, My father, if the prophet had bidden thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he says to thee, Wash and be clean? Then he went down" (@2 Kings 5: 10 - 14).
If we take Naaman merely as a picture of a sinner, we may miss the teaching of the Spirit of God. It is said at the beginning of the chapter that he was a great man, through whom God had given deliverance to Syria, but that he was a leper. That was his state; and we read that Naaman was angry, and turned away in a rage. I wonder if any of us have been angry thus? Cain was angry at the righteousness of God; and the elder brother in @Luke 15 was angry at the grace of God, and would not go in. Uzziah the king was angry at the holiness of God, and became a leper. Naaman had to learn the great lesson of the ways of God in death; he had to face death; and no one is of value in the service
{119}
of God unless he faces this great question of death. Naaman went down into Jordan and plunged seven times, and "his flesh became again like the flesh of a little child, and he was clean". If every one had the flesh of a little child, there would never be a cause of sorrow to our brethren, or a dishonour to God.
In verse 15 it says that he "returned to the man of God, he and all his company". That is a fine tribute to Naaman. In @Acts 13: 13 we read of "Paul and his company" -- I trust everyone of us belongs to it. It is a great thing to form part of Paul's company, but I will never be that unless I have first formed part of Naaman's company, the man who went down into Jordan. He "plunged himself" -- an energetic word -- "seven times in the Jordan ... And his flesh became again like the flesh of a little child", and *then* he returned to the man of God. One loves to think of that return journey. The outward journey had been marked by pride, resulting in failure to take in the situation; but when he returned to the man of God with all his company, and stood before him, it was with "the flesh of a little child". What assemblings together we should have, if every one of the brethren had the flesh of a little child! -- the characteristics of the old man judged in the light of Christ's death. So Naaman goes on to say, "Behold, I know that there is no God in all the earth but in Israel; and now, I pray thee, take a present of thy servant".
Three simple thoughts come out in this incident: as the fruit of his plunging into the Jordan seven times. He gets an enlightened mind. This is essential, if we are to take up assembly exercises and the service of God. So Naaman says, "Behold, I know". You will remember that
{120}
with Rahab you have the same features: she says, "I know that Jehovah has given you the land" (@Joshua 2: 9). So, too, with the beloved apostle, he says, "I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep for that day the deposit I have entrusted to him" (@2 Timothy 1: 12). In the uncertainty of christendom today, when men have surrendered everything, and there is no certainty in the public profession, it is an immense thing to secure an individual who can truly say, "Behold, I know".
The next thing is, Naaman got his heart enlarged. The moment we come in touch with God, and in contact with the Lord Jesus, we get, not only an enlightened mind, but an enlarged heart. Naaman wanted to become a giver. It is true Elisha refused. And then we come to the third and most important thing. Naaman had an exercised conscience. One would pray that our consciences might keep pace with the light the Lord has given. If we fail in this, we shall make spiritual shipwreck. Our consciences must keep pace with the light the Lord gives. Naaman becomes exercised as to the house of God. He asks for two mules¬ burden of this earth to be given him, for he had in mind to take up the service of God in the country to which he was going. Then he raises his exercise with the man of God in regard to his going into the house of Rimmon, when his master leaned upon his hand. How beautifully Elisha meets this! -- he did not tell him not to go. Had he told him that, he would have been a legalist all his days, and had he given him permission to do so, he would have been loose in his associations; but in divinely given wisdom, he says, "Go in peace". We need to be exercised as to our associations; to face the great question of
{121}
christian fellowship, and to commit ourselves to it. We see the wisdom of Elisha here. He does not forbid him, nor does he give him permission to go, but he says, "Go in peace". We have thus the record of Naaman's history with God, and see how these things were brought to spiritual completion with him.
In @Genesis 5: 24, the Spirit records of Enoch that he walked with God. One would like to challenge all here, as to whether we know what it is to walk with God. The Spirit of God records the fact that "Enoch walked with God; and he was not, for God took him". @Hebrews 11: 5 too, presents him in a most remarkable way, "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he has the testimony that he had pleased God".
One would like to appeal to all, even the simplest christian, to cultivate a walk with God. There are four men in the book of Genesis who are said to have walked with God. It is said of Enoch, and equally of Noah, amid all the increasing corruption of his day. It is also said to Abraham, "walk before my face, and be perfect" (@Genesis 17: 1). Finally, Jacob says, "The God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked" (@Genesis 48: 15).
One feels how fitful one's communion has been, and how little one has cultivated this holy intimacy with God, which is necessary for a man to walk with God. The Spirit of God would not put a heavy burden upon us, but He is looking that we might please God, and cultivate a walk with Him, so that it might be said of us, that we too have this testimony, that we please Him.
{122}
I have referred to this testimony because it is said in @Jude 14 that Enoch prophesied, "Behold, the Lord has come amidst his holy myriads". As we think of the coming of the Lord, one would desire that there may be the completion of our spiritual education, so that we might be taken, as having pleased God, even as Enoch, who "was not, for God took him".
Referring to David in @2 Samuel 6, I suppose we should not hesitate to say that this was the most spiritual moment in David's history; and it is recorded that David danced before Jehovah. In David's very earliest days, when he was but a shepherd lad, the thought came into his heart to find a resting place for the ark. I wonder if there ever has sprung up in your heart the desire to find a dwelling place for God? We see here that David made a mistake; that he had not sought God after the due order, so the ark was carried into the house of Obed-Edom; and God blessed that household. If there is a house where the ark is valued, God will bless that household, but however blessed we may be, our households are never great enough to contain the ark. In @Luke 24, the Lord went into the house at Emmaus, and when He broke the bread they discovered who He was. They had besought the Lord to abide with them, but He disappeared out of their sight. We all have to learn that, however supremely blessed a christian household might be, it is not great enough to contain the ark. Later, David seeks God after the due order, and the ark is brought into the tent David had provided for it -- not into the tabernacle, nor the temple -- it pre-figures the present moment. The bringing of the ark into the tabernacle may refer to the day of Pentecost, when
{123}
Christ was publicly enshrined as the ark in the house of God; and then the day is coming when the ark will be carried to its final resting place -- the temple. But here we get the provisional moment -- what may answer to the assembly at Philadelphia. The ark is carried into the tent, nothing outwardly great, but where it is cherished in the hearts of His saints. David's exercises were completed, and it is said that "when they that bore the ark of Jehovah had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a fatted beast". This was the action of a spiritual man. He had in view the completion of what had been the great desire of his life. The great controlling thought of David's life was to find a place for the ark, and as it was about to be realised, he developed in patience, so to speak, as every spiritual person would. After he had taken six paces, he offered sacrifices of an ox and a fatted beast.
One has thought of this in regard to the great apostle of the gentiles. I suppose we get the completion of Paul's ministry in @Ephesians 3, when he bowed his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ -- that was the great completion of his service. The burden of his prayer was that "the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts". What a resting-place for the ark! The day will come when Christ will be publicly installed in His supreme place in a reconciled universe. Christ will be the centre of it, but the wonder of the present moment is, that the divine end may now be reached. The great end of all ministry in the house of God is, "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to
{124}
know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge" (@Ephesians 3: 17 - 19).
What a beautiful picture of this we get as David "danced before Jehovah!" Then there was the service of song in the book of Chronicles, on that supreme day when David first delivered a psalm into the hands of Asaph and his brethren. That was the outcome of the completion of his spiritual exercises. One prays that every brother and sister who takes up the holy interests of Christ may never be satisfied until their secret prayers, their wrestling with God that Christ may secure the supreme place in the affections of the assembly, reach completeness. And that they may see Christ dwelling in the hearts of the saints by faith. David danced before Jehovah with all his might, and he was girded with a linen ephod.
I refer for a moment to the passage in @Colossians 4: 12. "Epaphras, who is one of you, the bondman of Christ Jesus, salutes you, always combating earnestly for you in prayers, to the end that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God". I think we would all admit of what value it would be to the saints in any place, to have an Epaphras amongst us. One who prayed for the saints, day and night, that they might stand "perfect and complete in all the will of God". One feels that the prosperity of the local companies, the growth and advance of the saints, and their great support in relation to the assembly, really hangs on this priestly service of intercession. So the beloved apostle could speak of Epaphras and say, "who is one of you, the bondman of Christ Jesus". Think of his ceaseless service in prayer, his intercession that the saints might stand "perfect and complete in all the will of God". We
{125}
may see features of the work of God, many precious and holy evidences that the Spirit of God is working in our midst. But if we have the true spiritual outlook, we shall never be satisfied short of this, that the saints stand "perfect and complete in all the will of God".
In closing, one would like to say to the beloved brethren who have taken up service in the house of God, to those who have taken up the great levitical burden of the testimony, that the word that is addressed to you is, "Take heed to the ministry". What the Lord looks for is fidelity. He looks that you might complete the ministry that He has committed into your hands. Remember that the only effective service in the house of God, the only true work of lasting importance, is that of one who is wholly committed to the Lord and to the assembly at the present time. Let us see that we complete our exercises with God, for we can never adorn the courts of God with our presence or service, unless we have a secret soul history with God. Our spiritual stature in the house of God is the measure in which we can say, *I know God*.
To those who minister and serve, taking up the great burden of the levitical service of God, the word comes, that they should take heed to *complete* that which the Lord has committed into their hands.
*From The Truth of the Assembly, pages 19 - 30, Sydney, April 1938*.
{126}
{127}
ASCENT TO THE HOUSE OF THE LORD
H F Nunnerley
@Genesis 35: 1 - 15; @Psalm 122: 1 - 9; @Isaiah 2: 1 - 5
H.F.N. We might look at these three scriptures following on what we were speaking of yesterday, in regard to our coming into the truth of the assembly in a practical way. Each of these scriptures indicates a moral journey to the house of God. God said to Jacob, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there". That is an imperative word from God to Jacob. Then in @Psalm 122, which is one of the songs of degrees, it says, "I rejoiced when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of Jehovah". The spirit of Christ pervades this Psalm. The Lord, even as a holy Child at the age of twelve years, found His delight in God's house, it was His Father's house. We read that "when he was twelve years old, and they went up to Jerusalem" (@Luke 2: 42). It was His parents¬ custom. What must have been His holy feelings at that tender age, when they said, "Let us go into the house of Jehovah"? Looking at the Psalm in relation to ourselves, we see what a response is looked for from us. Do we say, "I rejoiced when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of Jehovah"?
In @Isaiah 2 we have the mountain of Jehovah's house, and a kind of universal movement in relation to it. The Lord would graciously promote movements in us individually, with a view to the universal movement amongst the people of God in relation to God's house.
{128}
S.E.E. Does this passage suggest that it is an upward movement? "Let us go up".
H.F.N. Yes, morally, it is an upward journey to the house of God; each of the scriptures read suggests that God's house is a place of moral and spiritual elevation above everything in this scene.
W.J.H. It is the point of contact between heaven and earth.
H.F.N. The house of God affords the great delivering element amongst His people, so that they might be lifted above the current religious order of things in christendom, and reach this place of moral and spiritual elevation in their souls.
W.J.H. Do you think the line suggested yesterday is also seen in these three scriptures -- the first, light; the second, experience; and the third, teaching? The light of the house of God was given to Jacob; it was a dream that came from God, to tell him what was in His mind; but it was not, at that moment, enjoyed by Jacob.
H.F.N. Exactly. What comes out in the previous part of chapter 35, shows that Jacob had been brought into moral consistency with God's house. We shall never get a divine appearing, unless we are in moral consistency with the God whose house it is. We should all look for this favour of a divine appearing.
J.S.D. Did the question raised with Jacob as to his moral state make way for the appearing?
H.F.N. Yes; it was a question of light, but Jacob answered to it, and was brought into consistency with God's house. So God says, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there; and make there an altar unto the God that
{129}
appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother". He must go to Bethel to build that altar. While there are no specifications in Genesis in regard to the building of altars, each altar indicated the spiritual measure of its builder. The moment God speaks to Jacob, he said to his household and all that were with him, "Put away the strange gods that are among you, and cleanse yourselves, and change your garments". If there is movement in regard to God's house, it first begins in the households of God's people. Everything in the nature of idolatry is to be broken down in our houses. Then we need to understand cleansing, such as results from the application of the death of Christ; the water that flowed from His side indicates the power of moral cleansing. The third thing, the changing of our garments, refers to the associations of God's people.
W.J.H. Do you think that with some of us, the idea of reaching the house intelligently, is still a dream? It is a great day for us when we realise that it is an actual, living experience to be known, that we have part in the house of God.
H.F.N. A sister, who had wandered into the world and had married there, was graciously recovered by the Lord. But she then realised that many things in her household that had been gathered while she was away from the Lord were not suitable now. She was greatly moved by the Lord's recovering grace, and called her children together, and told them she had wandered from the Lord. Then she said, There are many things in this house which, if the Lord were to come into it, would displease Him. Then she took her children with her, and
{130}
went right through the house: to the bookshelf, to the music, and so on, and they burned the whole lot in the back garden. If we really have to do with God, it would affect our whole households. He would call attention to our bookshelves, our music, and many other things. There may be a necessity for a bonfire before some of us come to enjoy the house of God.
A.C. What is the difference between Shechem and Bethel, and the altars at those places?
H,F.N. We have often spoken of Shechem as the half-way house. Jacob set up an altar there, and called it "El-Elohe-Israel", meaning 'God, the God of Israel'. It was at Shechem that his daughter became entangled with the daughters of the land, and brought the greatest dishonour upon his household. But here, at Bethel, we see a distinct move. Jacob tells his household to put away "the strange gods that are among you, ... and the rings that were in their ears, and Jacob hid them under the terebinth that is by Shechem". Shechem is referred to in @Joshua 24, as a place that is marked by uncompromising decision to adjust all our ways in the light of the house of God. We need this in regard to ourselves and our households or we shall never take this upward move.
G.A. It is very searching, because this entails a constant review of the whole course of our lives. We are not at liberty to disregard any feature. Jacob, no doubt, in his experience, would go over the ground again and again, that he might go forward with God.
H.F.N. It has been truly said, that as coming together to break bread, the meeting really starts when the saints leave their households. We shall never touch the
{131}
truth of the house of God, and appear in the courts of our God, unless this work of searching has begun in the households of the saints. In @Leviticus 23: 17 they were to bring the two wave loaves out of their houses.
B.O.L. It is of the greatest importance that we should see what God had in mind in speaking to Jacob, that He desired to have him in close intimacy with Himself, that His own heart might be gratified. If that laid hold of us, there would be no difficulty with us about idols.
H.F.N. No, I am sure there would not. So with Jacob, it says, "they journeyed". Is not that the key to the chapter? There is definite spiritual movement now. In verse 16 we are told "they journeyed from Bethel", and in verse 21, "Israel journeyed, and spread his tent". Chapter 35 is one of spiritual movement.
A.H. Would that be in contrast to fleeing from his brother Esau? The question of brotherly relations had been faced with Jacob, before this moving upward.
H.F.N. I am sure that is so. Jacob becomes an object of intense interest to God. In the first verse, God spoke to him. Then in verse 5, "the terror of God was upon the cities". The moment we make a spiritual move, we can count upon divine protection. Then in verse 9, God appeared to him, and next, He changed his name and gave promises; and finally, God "talked with him", which would bring in the thought of intimacy referred to by our brother. It is most encouraging that the moment saints begin to make a spiritual move in the direction of the house of God, they become objects of intense interest to divine Persons.
{132}
E.E.S.L. Jacob had retained the impression of the house of God he had received twenty-one years before, when he said, "How dreadful is this place!" (@Genesis 28: 17). *He* had changed and could go up there; but he realised the character of the place had not changed, therefore idols could not go up.
Ques. It speaks of what they have in their hands, and in their ears: is it not important that what affects those two members should be given up?
H.F.N. I am sure it is.
L.P.M. God would have His people respond to what He discloses Himself to be. The response is in accord with the revelation of Himself.
H.F.N. And when Jacob got to Bethel, "he built there an altar, and called the place El-beth-el; because there God had appeared to him when he fled from the face of his brother". Instead of building an altar at Shechem and making himself a centre, linking God with his own things, the true dignity of the house of God comes before Jacob, and he builds an altar to the God of the house of God. One would love to see each one of the brethren moving up to Bethel, and building such an altar.
G.A.v.S. The privilege of this maintained Jacob in movement.
G.A. In the scriptures you have called our attention to, there is a communication in each case. Do you suggest the saints receive communications from God in relation to His house through ministry, or otherwise?
H.F.N. Through ministry mainly; but when we begin to move in relation to the house of God, we receive personal communications from the Lord. What follows is
{133}
that discipline comes into one's house. Many of us, perhaps, in the past have regarded discipline in the way of punishment, but there is no element of punishment in christianity; it comes to us in love. We see here, that Rebecca's nurse dies, and was buried under the oak. That is another feature which comes into this chapter of spiritual movement -- we get a series of burials. The discipline of God comes in to help us the moment we begin to make a spiritual move.
W.J.H. We can expect the Lord to bring in some kind of sorrow alongside the desire to go up, to help us to break our links with earth.
H.F.N. Yes; and so we read, "And God appeared to Jacob again after he had come from Padan-Aram, and blessed him". There is every element of encouragement for each one of us to make this movement in relation to the house of God. He will come in and help us in the way of discipline. One would like to challenge our hearts as to whether we have ever been conscious of having a divine appearing. "God appeared to Jacob ... and blessed him". I suppose a divine appearing always has in view the house of God.
S.E.E. The pouring of the drink offering upon the pillar that Jacob erected would suggest that through his experience, Jacob had acquired spiritual substance, which would gratify the heart of God.
H.F.N. Yes, indeed. Following on what we are speaking of, we get Jacob's name changed: "thy name shall not henceforth be called Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. And he called his name Israel". His name was changed on the eventful night when he wrestled with the
{134}
angel, but now he is in entire keeping with the change. It is another great moment in the history of a saint when the Lord changes his name. Jacob is the first in Scripture to be called a prince, and he appears here in princely dignity in the house of God, with his name changed.
G.A.v.S. What is the relation of the change of name here, and what we get in the previous chapter, when God met him at Peniel?
H.F.N. In the previous chapter, he was not in keeping with it. At that moment Jacob had not princely features. One loves to think of the saints moving in princely features in relation to God's house. The idea of a prince in Scripture is one who acquires moral greatness with God and with His people. It is not exactly an official position given to him, but a position acquired through secret exercise with God, which befits him to move in moral greatness in the house of God.
W.J.H. We are told of princes of the sanctuary in @1 Chronicles 24: 5 -- that is nothing official, is it?
H.F.N. No; we would delight to see every brother and sister adorning the house of God as spiritual princes.
J.S.D. Does the change of name involve the consciousness that while I have to do with the same God as before, I am going to have to do with Him under a new set of circumstances in the future?
H.F.N. Exactly.
G.A.v.S. Why is there not only a change of name of the person, but a change of name of the place? It says, "Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, that is, Bethel".
{135}
H.F.N. I suppose it is a great test of our spirituality in the house of God, as to whether we have acquired spiritual ability to name things. I think the Lord has been exercising us of late years, so that we might learn to name things rightly.
S.E.E. As you move towards the house of God, you get confirmation of what has been presented in the way of light, and has attracted you to that spot.
H.F.N. Quite so. God speaks of Himself as "Almighty God", and then gives confirmation: "the land that I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land". And then God went up from him in the place where He had talked with him. Are we conscious of what it is to be in the house of God as spiritual princes, adorning the house with holy features of Christ, and knowing this privilege of intimacy -- "God ... talked with him"? Later in the book Joseph talked with his brethren, but here we have it indicated that God talked with Jacob.
G.A. Would you tell us why God chooses at this juncture to make Himself known as Almighty God? Would it comfort and strengthen us to recognise afresh that the exercises which confront us are brought to us by the Almighty God, whose resources will be all-sufficient for the exercises of the house of God?
H.F.N. I am sure that is right. In every fresh move the saints make, there is some divine disclosure to our hearts. God confirms the movement by the revelation to us of His name.
G.A. Does the house suggest the place where the accumulation of spiritual exercises and blessings, as
{136}
indicated with Abraham and Isaac, work out practically in Jacob?
H.F.N. These exercises are brought to fruition in Jacob, and the result is that he sets up a pillar, another great moment in spiritual history. Abraham shines as an altar-builder; the great characterising feature of Abraham's faith was that he built altars. In connection with Isaac, the great spiritual feature was his digging of wells: opening up divine resources in the Spirit. When you come to Jacob, he sets up pillars, which, I take it, is the great witness in relation to God's house of divine grace and faithfulness. So that the assembly is spoken of as "the pillar and base of the truth" (@1 Timothy 3: 15).
Jacob sets up a pillar on Rachel's grave, marking not only the greatness of his affection for Rachel, but the effect of the discipline, and as a witness to God's faithfulness.
A.H. This is a pillar of stone, (@Genesis 35: 14). God had just gone up from Jacob, renamed Israel, and a pillar of stone in relation to that appearing would indicate a permanent result.
C.F. Is there anything for us in the spiritual movement taking place after the birth of Joseph?
H.F.N. Indeed there is, because it speaks of the beginning of all spiritual movement, when the glory of Christ shines into our souls. We have to do with people who are linked up with certain wrong things, and they mourn and even shed tears in connection with them, but yet they do not move out of the conditions. The final call of God is to come out of Babylon -- "Come out of her, my people" (@Revelation 18: 4), but people, though groaning and
{137}
even weeping over things, often do not move. It raises the question, What is it that will produce movement in the people of God? Well, the moment some ray of the glory of Christ shines into our hearts -- the birth of Joseph was like a ray of light shining into Jacob's soul -- then, there is definite movement brought about.
J.S.D. Do I set up a pillar when I come into moral accord with the light that has reached me?
H.F.N. That is it. Jacob sets one up in the place where God talked with him. Here is a man in holy intimacy with God. Think of the favour of God talking with him! -- and in that very spot Jacob sets up a pillar, and "poured on it a drink-offering, and poured oil on it". Jacob was really entering into the sense of the favour of God, and the oil on the pillar denoted that he had come to value what is spiritual.
L.P.M. What would correspond to this in our present setting together as saints? How would it find expression?
H.F.N. I suppose it would be in the way we take part in the service of the house of God, we should pour out our drink-offering. A drink-offering was of wine, and was poured out in the sanctuary, and would suggest the joy which marks the saints as ministering in the house of God. You would love to see all the saints there in the sense of divine favour.
S.E.E. In connection with the pillar of stone, would these be landmarks permanently connected with our spiritual history, and an abiding testimony to the way God has become known to us?
H.F.N. Exactly.
{138}
W.J.H. How wonderful that there should be a drink-offering for God! Something that would make glad the heart of God in having His people in His house, where He can talk with them. What moments they are when God talks with us!
E.E.S.L. Why do we not read of burnt-offerings here, nor at El-Elohe-Israel?
H.F.N. I suppose the burnt-offering sets forth the ground of our acceptance, and that is hardly the question here. The great point is that Israel, on the one hand, is conscious that God is blessing him, and, on the other hand, that he is entirely suitable for God's house. So it is really a question of what God secures for His pleasure in relation to His house.
G.A.v.S. I was wondering if the altar is stressed here rather than the offering on it, in order to bring out Jacob's knowledge of God, rather than any thought of service. The altar in these two instances indicating what he had reached in his own soul.
H.F.N. Yes; the altar here indicates the measure in which I am at liberty in the house of God. We would like to see everyone living in liberty in God's house, conscious that God's face is towards him and on the other side, that he is entirely suitable to God.
A.C. Three times in this chapter we are told Jacob journeyed. Although there is discipline, Jacob makes great spiritual progress, and thus the discipline is really to help him.
H.F.N. Exactly; so it links on with the next scripture we read in @Psalm 122: "I rejoiced when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of Jehovah". This is a
{139}
movement amongst the people of God. We were suggesting that this would correspond to the thought of the holy Child Jesus.
W.J.H. So glad was He that He remained there when the others went back.
H.F.N. Yes. One thinks of what depth of feeling underlies what the psalmist says here of the gates of Jerusalem; how the Lord Jesus would look upon the company of the godly ones, and say with them, "Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem".
L.P.M. The thought of Jerusalem being added here is a development on what is related to the house of God?
H.F.N. Yes, indeed. Would not Jerusalem, in the songs of degrees, represent the assembly in relation to the Lord's universal interests upon earth today; the assembly looked at in the full light of the Ephesian position? Whether you are in Europe, or South Africa, or Australia, you discover Jerusalem, wherever the universal interests of Christ are cherished upon earth today.
S.E.E. Wherever you are, it is possible to be in the centre of things.
H.F.N. Quite so. We see here that it is an upward movement, "Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of Jah", and it was 'Israel's custom' (see note *c*). God would give us impressions in regard to His house, which would result in upward, spiritual movement. If we follow the movements suited to the house of God, we shall see that, 
<blockquote>'That way is upward still' (`12:6).</blockquote>
{140}
W.J.H. These experiences pursue a kind of educational course, and each touch of the divine Presence in the house of God raises a challenge with us.
A.H. It is a great thing to see the tribes in movement, is it not?
H.F.N. I suppose that is seen in our local settings. It is a great joy to visit a place, and perhaps a few years later, to return and find that the saints have moved together in a spiritual way.
G.H.W. Being "compact together" would indicate the way in which we are set together in mutual relationships and affections.
W.J.H. That is seen in the extension and increase of the meetings for fellowship of a general character. The Lord has been working in households, then He works in localities, and then the saints desire to enjoy fellowship in a wider way.
H.F.N. Yes, and one loves to think of what God gets from all this. The tribes go up according to their custom; there was an upward movement on the part of the people of God.
L.P.M. It is the "tribes of Jah", not the tribes of Israel.
H.F.N. Then follows, "there are set thrones for judgment, the thrones of the house of David". It is a great principle in the assembly, that we should recognise the thrones for judgment. It would correspond to what is set out in 1 Corinthians. There are thrones of judgment, but it adds, "the thrones of the house of David". Would it not greatly help us to remember this connection of the thrones for judgment, with the one who had the heart of a
{141}
shepherd? The prophet Zechariah speaks of the One who sits and rules as a priest upon his throne (@Zechariah 6: 13); and Isaiah speaks of the one who shall rule as being a Father (@Isaiah 9: 6). Does it not greatly help us in considering the throne, to consider the One who sits upon it? He has the heart of a Shepherd and of a Priest. Priestly sensibilities are to govern the administration of God's house, combined with the affections of a father. Those who exercise the administration of the house of God should be desirous that these features should be present.
W.J.H. That is very helpful. How the apostle Paul illustrates this. We can see what a shepherd's heart he had, even when dealing with the situation at Corinth. What a father's heart and affections he had; what a priest's outlook, and yet he was one of the brethren.
Ques. Why is it "thrones" -- in the plural?
H.F.N. It is not limited to one; rule in the assembly is not by one man. In the exercise of rule as from the throne in the house of God, the saints are to be brought in. Then following on that, we should pray for the "peace of Jerusalem". One loves to drop into the prayer meeting, and find the saints there in touch with the whole range of the Lord's interests upon earth, praying for the peace of Jerusalem. Not merely praying for what is going on in their own localities, but for all the interests of God. Much as we would desire, through the mercy of God, the peace of Europe, the paramount thought in the house of God, is that we should pray for the saints and the testimony. The recognition of the throne would break down the spirit that marks the world today. The spirit of socialism is not to be allowed in the house of God. The brother who has the
{142}
universal interests of God as the great burden on his heart, is the one who really prospers. And so what follows here is, "Peace be within thy bulwarks". We need to maintain the bulwarks of the assembly. The moment they are broken down, there can no longer be any practical protection of divine interests. Then it says, "prosperity within thy palaces". There is sometimes an effort to have prosperity within the palaces without the maintenance intact of the bulwarks. The saints have been recovered to Paul's ministry, the bulwarks, but then they have to come into the full flow of John's ministry -- to reach the palaces of love.
A.H. It says in @Revelation 4: 10 that the twenty-four elders were before the throne. Our capacity to take any part in administration is acquired by our being before the One who sits upon the throne. Is that right?
H.F.N. I am sure it is.
E.E.S.L. We sometimes think prosperity depends upon gospel activity, but it would seem that it depends on our making the assembly our chief interest.
H.F.N. You feel there must be the palaces of love, as we sing. They really lie behind all, and it is there we secure the brethren and companions and say, "I will say, Peace be within thee!" This is a moral and spiritual progression, and you have secured the brethren and companions. It is like the Lord's word in @John 20, where we get a double reference to peace. "I will say, Peace be within thee! Because of the house of Jehovah our God I will seek thy good". The challenge to each one is, whether the house of God is our supreme interest, or whether we have some interest outside. It would greatly affect the
{143}
saints and the local meetings, if every brother and sister were definitely committed to the interests of the house of God.
W.J.H. We pray for that.
H.F.N. It is a great thing for our feet to stand within the gates, the place of public administration, but we do not want to stop short of the palaces of love.
One has thought of the passage in Isaiah as denoting a universal movement, "And it shall come to pass in the end of days, that the mountain of Jehovah's house shall be established on the top of the mountains, and shall be lifted up above the hills; and all the nations shall flow unto it. And many peoples shall go and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob". That is the first feature; it is the house of the God of Jacob, and what follows is that He will teach us His ways, and we will walk in His paths. So that in relation to God's house here, we have the thought of coming under divine teaching, corresponding with the third scripture we spoke of yesterday -- @Acts 11: 26 -- where we saw the advantage of the divine teaching. Then we are told, "For out of Zion shall go forth the law", that is, the divine principles, the law that governs the house of God, have come down out of Zion. It has its great basis in the thought of sovereign mercy. "Jehovah's word from Jerusalem" is an extensive thought, denoting the opening up of God's mind, which we get at the present time as we come together governed by the principles of the assembly, and in the recognition of the Holy Spirit. Unless we have Jerusalem, that is, the assembly, deeply set in our affections, we shall never get the word of the Lord. The
{144}
practical effect here is that their swords are turned into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning knives. It is a very fine moment in the history of the saints, when their swords are turned into ploughshares. We need ploughshares in the house of God as well as pruning knives. If we bring in a sword, we may cut off a brother's ear. But when the swords are turned into ploughshares, and the spears into pruning knives, we get a double result -- which I think might be illustrated in Paul's ministry to the Corinthians -- striking deep furrows into the soil for sowing, and then the pruning knives, securing fruit for God.
There is much more in the passage, and one would desire that the brethren would think over the great spiritual advantage of making these universal movements towards the house of God.
*From The Truth of the Assembly, pages 31 - 48, Sydney, April 1938*.
{145}
ASSEMBLY VISITATIONS (1)
H F Nunnerley
@Luke 24: 27 - 36; @Mark 11: 11, 15 - 19, 27; @Matthew 18:19, 20; @John 20: 17 - 23
H.F.N. We might look at these four scriptures together, as bearing on the thought of the Lord coming into the midst, and the effect of His presence with His people. The presence of the Lord amongst His saints should not merely be a doctrine to us, but a greater reality to each of our hearts. The thought in one's mind is that in these four passages we get a reference -- if we might be allowed to so apply them -- to the four occasions when the saints come together. We might look at the passage in Luke as presenting this in the widest possible way, referring to the manner in which we would expect the Lord to come into our reading meetings to serve us. We often think of the Lord coming in on the first day of the week, and may live for that. But how many of us, as we wend our way to the reading meeting, have before us that the Lord will have His part in that? Then in the passage in Matthew, which as we all know is the great assembly gospel, we have the reference to the thought of the prayer meeting. The Lord says "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". In the passage in @Mark 11 the Lord visits the temple on three distinct occasions, which brings out the thought of care and scrutiny in relation to the things of God. We need this impression of the Lord, that we may see its bearing on the
{146}
care meetings. In the other instances, the Lord stands, but the great feature in Mark is that He "walked about" in the temple (verse 27) -- that is a very searching matter in regard to the assemblies. Then we might look at the scripture in @John 20 as indicating the greatest features relating to the assembly as connected with the first day of the week. It was the greatest assembly meeting that has ever taken place, and becomes a pattern for us. What marked that occasion was that everything was spiritual, in a spiritual setting, and we are told, "Jesus came and stood in the midst" (verse 19).
The Lord might help us in that connection, by a reference to @1 Samuel 16, where seven of the sons of Jesse pass before Samuel. The first one was rejected, and the rest were refused, and then Samuel says of David, "Send and fetch him; for we will not sit at table till he come hither" (verse 11). When David came in, what a complete change came over the gathering! Samuel, though one of the most spiritual men we read of in the Old Testament, had come for a moment under the influence of what was natural, as Eliab came before him, but as restored he says, "We will not sit at table till he come hither". Then David is brought in, and we read, "he was ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance", and Samuel anoints him in the midst of his brethren. What a complete change comes over any meeting when the Lord comes into it!
W.J.H. You suggest @Luke 24 in connection with the reading meeting, because the two are talking together, and afterwards they were relating in conversation with the others what had happened?
{147}
H.F.N. That is it exactly. The fact is emphasised in Luke that "as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst". It suggests a mutual state of things amongst the brethren. When the two returned, they found the eleven, who represent divine authority. It would sweep away the whole spirit of democracy from us, if we "found the eleven". And when they had found them, they were speaking of the excess of grace that the Lord had shown to an erring disciple. "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon". What follows indicates that the most obscure amongst the people of God (those whom we would account as almost unknown brethren) can enrich the saints with this precious contribution that the Lord had appeared to them in the breaking of bread. Then it says, "as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst" (verse 36).
W.J.H. The forty days of the Lord's sojourn here in resurrection before He ascended would accustom them to His appearing as they were together. The forty days would cover all such meetings as you have referred to.
H.F.N. That is really the kernel of what one has in mind; and, as you say, during the forty days the Lord was coming in and going out amongst His people.
L.P.M. Has the return to Jerusalem, in verse 33, some bearing on the matter? Must the thought of Jerusalem be recognised, as well as the eleven? Jerusalem being the divine centre of rule, the reading meeting would be no insignificant matter, viewed in the light of that.
H.F.N. That is important. When we leave our homes to go to the reading meeting, do we expect the Lord to come into the meeting? Often at the beginning of the
{148}
meeting a great deal is said, but there comes a definite point when it is felt that the Lord comes in, and then the spiritual flow of the meeting begins.
J.S.D. We would normally start the reading, as having to do with the Lord personally ourselves, as these two had.
H.M. How do we find the eleven, today?
H.F.N. We recognise the great thought of divinely given authority. Of course the eleven here were specially appointed by the Lord Himself, but the authority exists just as much today as in the early apostolic days. Some of us were saying recently that the meeting is like a river, which makes its own bed or channel. But if you turn a reading into a canal, you lose the flow of life. It is a good question to raise in our minds, Are our reading meetings canals, or are they rivers?
E.E. Would the Lord open our understandings today?
H.F.N. Yes, indeed, and we should get some distinct illumination from Him; we should expect some definite ray of His glory to shine into the hearts of the saints. We should never have a mere ordinary reading meeting.
E.E.S.L. Is there any way in which we could facilitate this and remove impediments?
H.F.N. With those in @Luke 24 there was respect for the Lord's authority, and a mutual state among the brethren. It is a great thing in a reading meeting that, while we recognise the main stream, we look for a spirit of mutuality, so that all might be contributors.
{149}
S.E.E. You depend upon the Lord to open the Scriptures as He opened them to these two?
H.F.N. I suppose the Spirit would take that place today. In @Luke 24 the Lord expounded the Scriptures, and opened their understandings, that they might understand the scriptures, speaking to them of the law of Moses, and the prophets, and the psalms. But I suppose that in the assembly, the Spirit has taken up that service.
W.J.H. Say a little more about what you meant by a reading meeting being like a canal sometimes.
H.F.N. I think if we follow a verse by verse study of a chapter, we may miss the living thought that the Lord would present. We are often held by a verbal study of the scripture, instead of allowing the river to make its own channel; wherever the river comes it brings fertility.
W.J.H. You do not know just where it will branch.
H.F.N. Quite so. A question, which is the outcome of an exercise with God, may profitably occupy the rest of a meeting as we seek to follow it up.
G.A.v.S. Every godly exercise, whether in brothers or sisters, will contribute to the general spring of what the Spirit is giving us in our reading meeting.
H.F.N. Exactly. And another feature that the Lord would develop is the spirit of enquiry. If we were prepared to wait upon the Lord with dependent spirits, we would get richer impressions of Christ, and there would be room for enquiry on the part of the younger brethren.
G.A.v.S. Taking up the thought you suggested of a river, every individual exercise really adds to the stream, bringing freshness and fulness to what is there.
{150}
E.S.S.L. Would you distinguish between the part the Spirit takes, and that which the Lord takes in a reading?
H.F.N. We would recognise the lordship of Christ. You could not have a reading meeting unless the saints were in subjection. @John 16: 13 - 15 makes clear the relative services of the Lord and the Spirit in such a meeting. The Spirit speaks what He hears from Christ. He receives from Him, and guides us into the truth. He uses the saints in this, so that we have to make room for His service amongst us.
L.P.M. What is the thought in the Lord standing in their midst, @Luke 24: 36?
H.F.N. We read in @Genesis 37 that the sheaves of Joseph's brethren bowed down, while his sheaf "remained standing". The Lord is ever the object of reverence and affection to His people.
W.J.H. Do you think it might denote that the Lord is prepared to lead us further?
H.F.N. Yes, indeed; and the meetings would be enriched if there were readiness to be led on, and we were more exercised to realise the Lord's part in the meeting.
G.A. The two who came into the city brought the present exercise forward. The issue of the hour for the saints was resurrection. Would not we expect that in every reading there would be spiritual contributions relevant to present exercise?
H.F.N. That is right and very important. It would give a living character to our meetings.
We might look at the gospel of Mark next. The Lord's first visit to the temple in chapter 11 was one of divine
{151}
inspection. That is the first thing to be noted by those who take up the burden of the Lord's interests: we have to face divine inspection. It says, "He entered ... into the temple; and having looked round on all things". As the Lord comes into a place, and looks round, He takes account of all that professes to be His in the place, and looks at the actual conditions there.
W.J.H. The word "temple", referring to the outer buildings, would confirm the thought that it has to do with the matter of care and responsibility, rather than worship and the service of praise.
H.F.N. Yes, it stands in contrast to what is said in Chronicles, where it speaks of the inner house, and the place of the mercy seat. This, as you say, refers to the outer buildings; the place where matters are administered for the Lord.
G.A.v.S. Would such inspections as these disclose to exercised hearts what really is the source of the disorder that has come in?
H.F.N. They would. If we were more prepared to say, as the psalmist did, "Search me, O God" (@Psalm 139: 23), and to come under divine inspection, there would be a revival that would afford the greatest pleasure to the Lord.
W.J.H. This looking on everything is the Lord's indication that there are things to be judged, and it is for each to see what it is, and judge it. When He comes back, He deals with it Himself in Mark, because they failed to take advantage of His scrutiny.
H.F.N. That is it exactly. It says in verse 15, "And they come to Jerusalem, and entering into the temple". The Lord had to take things in hand Himself, and He began to
{152}
cast out those that sold and bought in the temple. Is not that a challenge to us all here? We might say, I would never do such things; but if we really knew our own hearts, we would recognise how easily we may traffic in the holy things of God. If there is the least desire to be a leading brother, or sister, in the meeting, that is like trafficking in the holy things of God. So it goes on to say that He "overthrew the tables of the moneychangers and the seats of the dove-sellers". What a corrupt state of things was in the temple! It is a solemn challenge to us who are living at long distances -- I am not speaking materially -- from where the Lord has placed His name. In principle, when we get there, we have to change our money, and that brings about all this corruption. If we lived close to where God has placed His name, we should be able to employ the current coin. There is the current coin among the brethren, which it is our business to circulate.
W.J.H. That makes it clear. By being at a distance, you would mean they are out of touch with what the Lord is doing at the moment, in affection and interest and spirit?
A.H. The fact that the Lord went out and came back again, gave time to adjust things; He gives us time to adjust ourselves according to His mind.
H.M. The spirit of Abigail would save us from ambition. She says, "Behold, let thy handmaid be a bondwoman to wash the feet of the servants of my lord" (@1 Samuel 25: 41). That spirit would preserve us all.
H.F.N. That is right. So here, the Lord teaches them the true character of the house of God, saying, "Is it
{153}
not written, My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations? but *ye* have made it a den of robbers". That is the solemn issue that the Lord would raise with us. We may deal with His interests, but are we misrepresenting God in it? We see as a result of this corrupt dealing in divine things how God was misrepresented, and His house, instead of being a place of prayer for all nations, became a den of robbers.
E.E.S.L. While we have to maintain the Lord's rights, and see that they are paramount everywhere, there is a very great danger that we should misrepresent God by the spirit of exaction.
H.F.N. Yes. What our brother called attention to is important. We have first the divine inspection, but when the Lord comes to take up things Himself He goes to the root of the whole matter with us. Before we come to the third visitation we have some beautiful instruction. That is when Peter called attention to the drying up of the fig tree. The Lord emphasised the thought of faith in God. The dispensation is in faith, and everything in the house of God is to be governed by faith. The next thing is prayer, the Lord emphasises the thought of prayer, "All things whatsoever ye pray for and ask, believe that ye receive it". This is a great feature of God's house; and the third thing is the spirit of forgiveness: "when ye stand praying, forgive". These three things come in after we have met the searching and penetrating gaze of the Lord, and after He had cleansed the temple, so that He might bring about a state of things pleasurable to Himself.
G.A.v.S. Why does the question of authority arise here, @Mark 11: 28 - 33?
{154}
H.F.N. The authority is questioned today; it is a very serious thing. It was a most serious thing to question the authority of the Lord. He answers them by bringing forward what we may call a fixed principle. He asks them a question in regard to the ministry of John, Was it of heaven, or of men? That is a fixed principle by which to decide the authority of a thing, "was it of heaven, or of men?"
W.J.H. So that if persons cannot discern whether the thing is of heaven or of men, there is no value in speaking any more.
H.F.N. The Lord Himself is the great model that we should seek to follow.
In relation to the scripture in @Matthew 18, it says, "Again I say to you, that if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens. For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". Referring this to the prayer meeting, we see that the Lord would give us a definite sense of His presence as together in relation to the taking up of His interests. The "two or three" are of the assembly, not *any* two or three taken indiscriminately, and of such, as together, the Lord says, "there am I in the midst of them".
W.J.H. It is important on such occasions, as having the Lord's interests before us, that we should *ask*. A great defect in meetings for prayer, is that our prayers often lack definite requests, and become more or less statements of facts.
{155}
H.F.N. Yes; if we limited ourselves to one or two requests that have been a burden to us, there would be more power, and more incense too, in our prayer meetings.
E.E.S.L. A greater proportion of the saints would be present at the prayer meetings, if it were generally recognised that the Lord was in the midst.
H.F.N. They would be greatly augmented. How few would miss a meeting if they really believed this word, "There am I in the midst of them"!
B.O.L. Is not the matter of agreement essential? "If two of you shall agree".
H.F.N. Quite so. It is impossible to pray aright unless it is a prayer of agreement.
L.P.M. Do the 'Amens' of the brothers enter into that?
H.F.N. They do. The 'Amens' of the brothers have been likened to the cymbals in the book of Chronicles. As one moves about there seems to be a sad lack of cymbals in the prayer meetings. It is not only for the brothers to say 'Amen', but it is incumbent also upon the sisters. It says, "Let all the people say, Amen".
W.J.H. I suppose the sisters would say it just as they sing? No sister with right instincts would ever want her voice to stand out in the singing; and the same with the 'Amens'. If the brothers said 'Amen' it would give more room for the sisters to quietly bring in their quota.
H.F.N. Exactly; if every sister said 'Amen', the quiet utterance of the 'Amens' would greatly increase in volume.
{156}
J.K.J. Would you say some more about the one or two requests?
H.F.N. We should each come with at least one or two burdens upon our spirits. If you meet a brother on Wednesday, and say to him, Well, what did you pray for on Monday night? he may have difficulty in telling you. He may have compassed the whole earth, but never touched anywhere. Our prayers should be definite and brief, and there should be a directness about them. There would be more prayers, and the saints would come to the prayer meeting in a spirit of positive gladness.
J.K.J. If you were sensible of the Lord's presence, you would not make many requests in public.
H.F.N. No, and we should consider one another. In a meeting where there are fifteen or twenty brothers, should we not give opportunity for each one to pray? We are getting away from the subject, but I feel the Lord would just stir us up. It is a sorrowful fact that in some localities on the Lord's day mornings and at the gospel, you find a room full, but a mere handful on Monday night. The prayer meeting is a test as to the spiritual state of the meeting.
S.E.E. What is the object of the Lord's presence on that occasion?
H.F.N. To give His support, and as we read in Revelation, to "give efficacy to the prayers of all saints at the golden altar" (@Revelation 8: 3). There are no prayer meetings like those occasions when the room is full of incense.
A.H. Would the statements as to the golden altar help us? In @Exodus 30: 6 it was before the veil. In @1 Kings 6: 22 it was by the oracle. In @Revelation 8 it is
{157}
before the throne. If we have these three thoughts before us in prayer, there will be power and definiteness.
H.F.N. That is something well worth thinking over.
Shall we now turn to @John 20? I suppose there is no scripture with which we are more familiar. We read the message through Mary at the beginning of this meeting. She was a special vessel to convey the greatest light that the Lord has ever given to the assembly. There is a fulness in that message, which we shall never compass. Attention has been called to the fact that Luke says the Lord stood in *their* midst, but in @John 20, we get the highest thought in regard to the assembly, what is entirely spiritual and heavenly. "Jesus came and stood in the midst". Let us weigh over the thought of the first day of the week, and Mary's message, and we shall get some impression of their import.
W.J.H. Is His presence there in view of making the message effective in the hearts of the saints assembled?
H.F.N. Exactly. Often we miss that -- the very best of what the Lord has for us. In our morning meetings we often come to this point, and yet mistakenly address the Lord as on the throne, in relation to His official glory, instead of entering with Him into the realm of sonship. The great point in @John 20 is to go higher, and if we really believed that the Lord was "in the midst" we should not address Him as on the throne. Have we been sufficiently impressed with the thought that "Jesus came and stood in the midst"? Do I address the Lord as upon the throne, or am I conscious that He is in the midst? It would alter the whole character of the meeting, and instead of continuing
{158}
to address the Lord, we should enter into the reality of "my Father and your Father, ... my God and your God".
L.P.M. What relation has the retaining of sins, and the remission of them to this?
H.F.N. Is not the heavenly administration carried out by such a company? In John, the administration would be of a spiritual character, and would bear an entirely heavenly colour.
B.O.L. If things are normal in the assembly, would we count on His presence as the saints come together, or is it necessary to wait intelligently?
H.F.N. I suppose, normally speaking, the Lord is with us in a general way in support when we come together; but in the specific way spoken of in John, the affections of the saints have to be liberated first. The great power of liberation is the consciousness of divine love, and the Lord would come in in response to affection.
*From The Truth of the Assembly, pages 49 - 62, Sydney, April 1938*.
{159}
ASSEMBLY VISITATIONS (2)
H F Nunnerley
@John 19: 38 - 40; @John 20: 1 - 25; @1 Chronicles 28: 11 - 21
H.F.N. We were considering yesterday the coming in of the Lord amongst His people. We referred to four passages in the gospels; linking them with the Lord coming into the reading meeting; into the care meeting; and into the meeting for prayer; then we touched very briefly on @John 20, in relation to the first day of the week. Perhaps the Lord might help us further, as we consider this chapter.
The first thought is in relation to Joseph of Arimathaea and Nicodemus, and what was committed to them -- the body of the Lord Jesus. It is important to recognise that these two disciples were equal to the service. At the end of John's gospel the Lord commits certain things to different individuals, and as the fruit of the work of God, they proved equal to it. Joseph of Arimathaea and Nicodemus had the holy body of the Lord Jesus committed to them for burial; the most priceless possession, the most sacred trust that has ever been put into the hands of the saints. Then in chapter 20 we find Mary of Magdala, to whom the Lord was pleased to entrust great light as to the assembly. The Lord would convey that message in suitable dignity, through a suitable vessel. In chapter 21 the Lord commits into the hands of Peter, the lambs and sheep of His flock, and we know that Peter was equal to it. His epistles show how qualified he was. He wrote, "For ye were going astray
{160}
as sheep, but have now returned to the shepherd and overseer of your souls" (@1 Peter 2: 25). In connection with Peter and John in chapter 20, the Spirit of God emphasises the great thought of faith. Apart from faith there can be no realisation of the Lord's presence, but in entering into the tomb, they get an impression of the dignity of our Lord's wonderful Person, that He might be held in reverence and affection in the hearts of each one of His saints.
With Mary, we have bridal affections, developed through her sorrow. I thought we might see how the Lord has put these things together, and has brought about a trustworthy vessel, a vessel of faith. He has brought about by His work, a vessel that will treasure Christ, not only in affection, but in the deepest reverence. We see in Mary the divinely formed state of affection that is in the assembly, so that the Lord can make her a vessel to communicate the greatest light.
S.E.E. In what way do you suggest the devoted service of Joseph and Nicodemus is continued on the part of saints today?
H.F.N. It illustrates the great idea of christian fellowship. The body of Jesus is that which is the living bond of christian fellowship in the midst of a hostile world. Joseph goes to Pilate and demands the body of Jesus. The body of Jesus -- speaking reverently -- is the property of the saints, and Nicodemus would suggest the wealth of the fellowship to which through grace we have been called, and the intelligent side of it. For he brought "a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred pounds weight".
{161}
L.P.F. Why are myrrh and aloes referred to specifically here?
H.F.N. The myrrh stands in relation to the suffering love of Christ, and the aloes suggests bitterness. As standing here publicly in the place of the Lord's crucifixion, we have to accept the bitterness of the position, and be true to the public fellowship, if we are to touch the heavenly side of things in christianity.
J.J.J. The world took His garments, but His body is left to the saints.
H.F.N. In the Old Testament, the great servant Moses was buried by God, but God does not bury the body of Jesus. He commits it into the hands of the saints who loved Him. That should make a very powerful appeal to every believer to definitely commit himself. It would be a great spiritual gain if some here were to commit themselves, and if each household of the saints was definitely committed to the Lord, and to the circle of christian fellowship and divine interests.
W.J.H. The Lord's personal body is not here that we may make sacrifices in relation to it, but the assembly which is His body is here, and that calls for the same spirit of sacrifice.
J.S.D. Why is the feature of secrecy in connection with Joseph and Nicodemus brought to light here?
H.F.N. The greatest crisis in the history of the testimony took place at the crucifixion of Christ. These two, so to speak, come into the light of day, and are prepared to identify themselves publicly with the Lord, in the very darkest hour in the history of the world. We have
{162}
to admit how much secret discipleship there is. The great question is, Are we prepared to step out into the light of day, and publicly identify ourselves with the One who has been crucified? We can hardly touch the spiritual sphere of chapter 20, unless we are prepared to take this first step.
S.S. Do you suggest that this fidelity and devotion is the result of our appreciation of "My body ... for you" (@Luke 22: 19)?
H.F.N. Yes, and it lies at the basis of everything that comes out in chapter 20. The same feature comes out in the beginning of the chapter when Mary says, "They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb". The Lord is the bond of christian fellowship. The next thing is that Peter and John are linked up together in what is, so to say, the realm of faith. The great matter for each one is to see that our public identification with the Lord in His rejection, is supported by our entrance into the realm of faith. We are to be ready to accept the place of reproach here, but the support for it is faith.
G.A. Is it your thought that we see in these persons a progress in the apprehension of the truth?
H.F.N. Yes, that is what we should see.
W.J.H. The Lord stayed forty days after His resurrection, in order to bring that state of faith into our hearts. With many of us, resurrection is just an accepted doctrine, but to know consciously by faith that the blessed Lord is out of death, and moving in relation to His people, is an important side of the present dispensation. He remained forty days to assure His people of that.
H.F.N. So that the great truth of Christ risen is to be enshrined in the heart of each saint, and this would
{163}
result in understanding the Lord's living movements in the way of spiritual education amongst His people.
E.E.S.L. Do you think the wrapping of the body of Jesus in the fine linen with the spices would be the saints¬ answer to the action of the soldiers in taking His garments? The spices suggesting the inner feelings of the saints, as to the suffering and bitterness with which He was encompassed.
H.F.N. It would help us if as a result of our considerations, there was a movement of affection amongst the saints. The next thing would be the challenge as to whether we were prepared to move on in faith.
H.M. Do not these persons suggest the treasuries of the house in Chronicles?
H.F.N. Yes; you mean the divine substance in their souls is like a treasury.
It is a very beautiful thing to see Peter and John together here. In Luke's gospel we find these two brethren are brought together, first in relation to the passover and the preparation for it. The links of the brethren really begin on moral lines, that is, we are bound together in the recognition of the judgment of sin; but here, we see a further link between these two brethren: they are bound together in relation to the great realm of faith.
W.J.H. It is significant that these two are always together in that order. If we are to enjoy what is in the family of God, and heavenly and spiritual relationships, we must be marked by the spirit of subjection that Peter would maintain all through.
H.F.N. That is important. The next place where they are seen together, is going up to the temple at the hour
{164}
of prayer in @Acts 3. Then in the acceptance of the place of reproach and of public suffering for the sake of the name, in chapter 4; and in @Acts 8, in support of the work of God in Samaria. They are seen in our present chapter, @John 20, in relation to the realm of faith, and that paves the way for what follows. Resurrection is brought in here, not so much to assure the faith of the disciples, or, as in Luke, to fulfil Scripture, but so that the saints might have a definite impression of the dignity of the Person. So we have the reference to the Lord's head and feet. I suppose we shall never intelligently understand the assembly as it is presented here, unless we hold the Person of Christ in the deepest reverence and affection. There is a great necessity to hold Christ, not only in affection, but also in the deepest reverence, so that we get a sense of His dignity and greatness, which paves the way for the reception of divine communications.
E.E. Are we not, generally speaking, weak in what is proper to the dispensation?
H.F.N. Yes. The great effort of the enemy is to rob the saints of what is distinctive to christianity. If we lose the sense of our distinctive heavenly portion, how are we to fulfil our special place in the testimony of God?
A.H. What does the thought of running imply here? Mary runs to Peter and John, and Peter and John are found running to the sepulchre.
H.F.N. It would suggest that everything is in divine activity. It is not mere natural energy, but divine movement, and the Lord would have all His people run. Divine Persons themselves are typified as running. The Father ran and fell on the neck of the prodigal; David ran
{165}
to meet Goliath; and the servant in @Genesis 24, symbolic of the Holy Spirit, runs to meet Rebecca. In the Acts, Philip the evangelist ran, and in this chapter everything speaks of divine movement. One cherishes the thought of divine Persons running: the whole scene would be set in spiritual activity and movement.
A.H. I thought the action of Joseph of Arimathaea would lead to this. He reached a point where he could not wait any longer; his identification with the Lord must take immediate form in action. So, too, with Nicodemus, and then you get increasing movement.
H.F.N. Have you any thought as to why John outruns Peter? It has been said that Peter always comes first. He was a great servant in relation to the basic truth of the kingdom, and in this Peter must ever come first; but have we not to learn the lesson that, in the end, John would outstrip Peter?
W.J.H. Love will abide when faith ceases. I was wondering whether the running indicates the urgency of what is taking place, but it leads to sitting. What we need, having run, is to sit as the angels, heavenly beings sit, in contemplation of the One whose head is so glorious and His feet so beautiful!
H.F.N. So that the movements on the part of the saints are seen first in relation to the running, and then, as you say, in relation to sitting. These are great things for contemplation. Perhaps there is little power to enter into the heavenly side of things, because there is little contemplation. It used to be said of two great servants of God, that one lived in the sanctuary, the other in his study. We need to cultivate these holy, reverential thoughts in
{166}
regard to the greatness of the Lord's Person, and that would pave the way for spiritual activity, as with these saints here. The Lord is the only One who stood in the midst.
W.J.H. Does the Lord's supper bring us, first, to the contemplation in the loaf of His precious body, and in the cup to Himself as Mediator of the new covenant, who would hold our hearts in relation to God? But there is something higher than that, is there not?
H.F.N. Yes, indeed.
S.E.E. Is the activity seen here an advance upon that which marked the disciples previously? In Mark's gospel the Lord upbraids them for their hardness of heart. In @Luke 24 He admonishes them because of their slowness of heart. In this gospel, their love and faith are seen in rapid movements in relation to Christ.
H.F.N. Quite so.
B.O.L. Is this all in view of our being able to speak, as in the assembly, to the Father about Christ *as He is*, not as He was down here?
H.F.N. I am sure it would pave the way for that. The great end the Lord has in view is that we should be in liberty with divine Persons. The effect of spiritual ministry in the house of God is always to liberate the spirits of the saints, and set them in liberty in speaking to divine Persons. Whereas if you merely get a mental presentation of the truth, however skilfully it may be put, it tends to bring people into bondage.
W.J.H. I think the brethren would value a word from you as to addressing the Lord after the bread and cup
{167}
have been partaken of; as to liberty in addressing the Lord, as well as to worshipping God.
H.F.N. As having drunk out of the cup, in the import of which there is not one element of bondage, we are privileged to address the Lord as Mediator. His glory as Mediator would tend to liberate the spirits of the brethren. Otherwise the meeting drops down to a formal service, and becomes lifeless. One would like to get a fresh and living impression each Lord's day, of the wonderful service the Lord renders to the assembly.
G.C.H. Ascension involves what is heavenly and spiritual.
H.F.N. That is true. Every family in the spiritual universe that is named of the Father, will be brought into relationship, but the firstborn family, the assembly, will be put on the plane of ascension. One would earnestly desire that we might get an impression from the Lord as to the great truth of ascension. It would produce an effect upon us that nothing else will.
W.J.H. It is striking that the glory shining in Moses¬ face was so great that they were afraid to speak to him. He had to put a veil on his face. He went in and talked with God, but he put on the veil when he came out and talked with the people. Do you think we can talk in that sense with the Mediator now?
H.F.N. Exactly; though, of course, His face is not veiled now, nor is ours, showing the great contrast here. The glory of old became a consuming fire, but when you begin to speak to the Lord, you find the glory becomes a transforming power, and as you gaze, you are changed into the same image, from glory to glory. The result would be
{168}
that, without a shadow resting on the spirits of the brethren, and without the least sense of distance, they would pass in holy liberty into the realm of divine love.
G.H.C. Would you say a little as to the Minister of the sanctuary, as following the Mediator?
H.F.N. That is important. As the Minister of the sanctuary, the Lord has to do with the service of God in the assembly. It is important to recognise the Lord as the glorious Mediator who still serves us in love, but then He would take entire charge of the service of God in the assembly.
G.H.C. We should not overlook the Lord's place as Mediator and as Minister of the sanctuary. Very often in our praises, we pass over to the thought of the Father, before we have touched the Mediator.
G.A.v.S. Would you suggest then that it would be pleasing to the Lord and also to the Father, that we linger after partaking of the cup, in contemplation of the Lord?
H.F.N. That is right. It says of the disciples that they came together on the first day of the week to break bread. That is what is definitely before the saints. You may say, We have done what the Lord asks us to do in relation to the breaking of bread. We have responded to His request, then why do we not go home? It is important to learn to wait. In connection with Abraham going to worship God in @Genesis 22, he heard a voice speaking to him from heaven a second time. The first voice we hear is the voice of the glorious Mediator, and the rays of His glory shine into the hearts of the saints. We learn to listen to the Mediator. But then there is that which Mary of Magdala represents, and we can never touch the higher
{169}
realm of heavenly affection -- a sphere that is wholly spiritual, where everything is marked by incorruptible affections -- without it. Mary represents the true bridal state of the assembly. She has the most intense feeling in regard to the rejection of Christ, and a divinely formed state of bridal affections. She is therefore a vessel to whom the Lord can commit the greatest light.
W.J.H. It is remarkable that the Spirit of God records that she said to Him "in Hebrew, Rabboni". Hebrew is the tongue of one that is passing over.
G.A.v.S. Would that suggest that our language in response would have a spiritual character, indicating the reality and fulness of the impression the Lord has laid upon our souls?
H.F.N. Indeed; and we never touch this wonderful realm of light, glory and blessedness, until we have learned to say "my Lord". In speaking to the disciples Mary says, "They have taken away the Lord", and later she again refers to Him as "the Lord", but I suppose we never touch this holy realm of love until we say, in the power of affection, "*my* Lord". One would like to make the appeal, Have we ever said, "my Lord"?
S.S. And "Rabboni" is something further than Rabbi, is it not? The personal pronoun "my" coming in -- *my* Teacher -- is further than Rabbi.
H.F.N. It is. There are only three people in the New Testament who say "my Lord". One, the beloved apostle in @Philippians 3: 8; he speaks of "the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord". The other two are in this chapter: Mary says "my Lord", in verse 13, and Thomas, in verse 28, "My Lord and my God". In this chapter we are really
{170}
approaching the inner chambers, and the place of the mercy seat. Many of us know what it is to enter the courts, but in the chapter in Chronicles, David gave to Solomon not only the pattern of the courts and of the porch, but the pattern of the inner chambers, and of the house of the mercy seat. Is not that what we get in this chapter? We come into the inner chambers. Mary here was a trustworthy vessel; she did not add anything to what the Lord said to her. She doubtless conveyed not only the actual words, but the spirit of the message. Some of us are capable of conveying the words, but how a message can be enhanced by the spirit of the one who communicates it!
W.J.H. I believe that is so. It is a great test of spiritual ministry, and prepares the way for the Lord Himself to come in. Mary so delivered the message that the Lord could follow her and find things as He wished them. Is it not a great test, whether the Lord will follow what has been ministered?
Ques. What is the thought of "Touch me not"?
H.F.N. Here, the Lord is bringing in new and heavenly associations, and would not have Mary go back to the old link which she had with Christ in flesh and blood here. The great point in this chapter is that as standing in the midst He would bring us into a realm that is heavenly.
W.J.H. Do you not think it would help us all to face again the fact that in the garden is the tomb of Christ, so that our looking for something happy and pleasurable and delightful here on earth, is not to succeed while His tomb is here? This gospel says it was in the garden.
{171}
H.F.N. That is very searching. We see here also that there were spiritual instincts with Mary. In @John 1, the Lord turned and saw the two disciples following. In Revelation, John turned from what is heavenly, to view the assembly in responsibility on earth. Here in @John 20, spiritual instinct in Mary caused her to turn in view of what is heavenly.
A.H. Is it not significant that in John's account of the resurrection we read "while it was still dark". It is the only gospel that records that it was dark, but what is in view is what is spiritual.
L.P.M. Would the practical effect of this be to deliver us from what is Jewish and attaches to earth? Even what is legitimate would be left behind, so that the spiritual realm would be entered upon.
H.F.N. That is right. In John's gospel the work of God comes into evidence. He brings before us certain individuals, each one of whom represents some distinctive feature of the work of God; and in this chapter they are all merged in the brethren. We see the work of God here in its completeness, and you have a spiritual heavenly company, both in origin and destiny. That is the light in which this chapter sets the assembly.
G.A. There is thus great variety in positive and spiritual development. All leads us to the apprehension of the assembly in its truly heavenly setting, liberating our hearts for the moment from what is legal and earthly, and everything of that character, so that we might move towards what is heavenly.
H.F.N. Yes, indeed, and that would link up with Mary's message, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I
{172}
ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". I think the Lord is greatly helping us as to this. The thought of God in His greatness gives rise to the richest praises in the assembly. We think of Christ as the glorious Lord, and then we speak to the Father, as entering into the realm of love which would resound with His praises. I suppose the highest point that is ever reached in the assembly is when we touch the greatness of God. We cannot enter into the realm of what is inscrutable, but we can know and praise God, as understanding His greatness.
W.J.H. God's upper chambers are referred to in @Psalm 104: 3. They were in His mind in the construction of the universe.
H.F.N. The Lord's words, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", would show that the upper place is the place of the assembly, the place to which Christ ascends. In this chapter, too, is the thought of the inner chambers; "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week, and the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst".
G.C.H. Why does the name "Father" precede "God" in that connection?
H.F.N. The Father is the great name that dominates the dispensation of grace; but God must ever be greater than any name He has taken. The name "God" here refers to His greatness, and is to impress us with who and what He is -- the Supreme.
G.C.H. How would this compare with the heavenly position as indicated in Ephesians: "Blessed be the God and Father"?
{173}
H.F.N. Ephesians is the epistle which corresponds with it. Ephesians looks at the saints on the plane of ascension, and brings in the inner and upper chambers. The Lord is referred to as the One who has ascended up far above all heavens. One would like all to be impressed with the fact that there is something in christianity which the assembly possesses, which will never be shared with any other family in the spiritual universe. The enemy would like to rob us of it. He would tell us that it is beyond us, as indeed it is in a human sense, but it is presented to us in the way of attraction, and if we can only get the light of it, we shall never be satisfied until we get the enjoyment of it.
G.A.v.S. The exceeding greatness of it is intended to increase our spiritual desires so that the attraction of it may ever stimulate and stir us.
H.F.N. One would say Amen to that.
G.H.C. So that there is a difference between God known in a covenant relation, and as apprehended according to His personal greatness?
H.F.N. The thought of covenant does not come into @John 20.
G.H.C. Would you help us as to the way we address God as "God and Father"?
H.F.N. In answer to the question, When do we address the Lord, and when do we address God? a brother once gave an instructive answer. He said, Have you ever watched children? They know perfectly well what to ask of their father, what of their mother. If we act according to the true instincts of spiritual affections, it will become a very simple matter as to what we speak to God about, and to the Father, and to the Lord. One dreads mere theology
{174}
in these matters. One might have the truth in all its exactness and not depart one hair's breadth from it, but yet lack that spring of spiritual power and life that should mark the assembly.
W.J.H. That finds an echo very definitely in our hearts. We read in @Ephesians 4 of the Lord ascending up above all the heavens, and @John 20 would show that He would take us up as far as we can go on the way to the upper chambers.
A.H. It says in @1 Kings 6: 8 that there were winding stairs leading to the upper chambers. Does that involve our part in exercise as to it?
H.F.N. Yes. In looking at Ezekiel, I was impressed by the fact that to the inner courts there were eight steps, but to the lower courts there were seven. In @John 20, the saints are to take the eight steps, and they lead into the upper chambers. We see here that the Lord came into the midst, and showed them His hands and His side. There is much in John in relation to His hands, and what those hands hold. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand" (@John 3: 35). Then there is the suggestion that, like Adam, out of His side there came His counterpart -- the assembly. So, as we have often remarked, the assembly has no past history.
W.J.H. Should we be here in heavenly character consequent upon this, hence we need His Spirit -- His breath?
H.F.N. I am sure that is it. The Lord is seen here as the last Adam, and He infuses the breath of life into God's creation as seen in persons. So that the whole is spiritual and can respond. The Lord's breathing here is a most intimate action. It is not the Lord coming in in an
{175}
official way, but coming into view in relation to what is personal. There is here a double transaction: the Lord breathing, and our receiving. The result is we are constituted heavenly in our spirits.
W.J.H. Even as when God breathed into man, it elevated man immeasurably above the beasts; so when Christ breathes, His breath elevates the saints of the assembly above every other family.
S.S. The climax is in eternity when everything that hath breath shall praise Jah.
S.E.E. Why does the Lord repeat the word, "Peace be to you"?
H.F.N. The first is in regard to what is internal; that is, peace, not merely in the absence of confusion or conflict, but a positive atmosphere in the assembly. The second peace is what you carry with you into the sphere of representation. Is not the great thought in this company that they might go into the inner chambers, the house of the mercy seat? So we carry what is spiritual and heavenly with us, and the Lord says, "whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". This heavenly spirit characterises this administration, a marvellous administration. How it would express the grace of heaven as seen in our public attitude towards believers generally in christendom today! We have such a sense of what the inner house of the mercy seat is that we would breathe that spirit in remission of sins.
*From the Truth of the Assembly, pages 63 - 80, Sydney, April 1938*.
{176}
{177}
ELDER AND YOUNGER
H F Nunnerley
@1 Peter 5: 1 - 7; @Acts 2: 14 - 18; @Psalm 144: 9, 12 - 15; @2 Kings 6: 1 - 7
H.F.N. It was a practical thought that was in my mind in relation to these scriptures; the mutual and happy relation that God would have to exist between the elder and the younger brethren. The greater part of our assembly life is spent in the local companies where the Lord has been pleased to set us, in His sovereignty. These scriptures suggest to us how we would get the fullest possible gain from the spiritual experience of elder brethren, coupled with the energy that should mark the younger in the house of God. One might give a simple illustration of this. A father, who in a business has gained valuable experience over many years, is joined by his sons; but when the experience of age is coupled with the energy of youth, what results should flow! So with us, the Lord would have us get the greatest possible advantage from the elder brethren, so that the younger ones might be rightly directed.
Peter deals first with the elder brethren, and then addresses a word to the younger ones. He says, "Likewise ye younger, be subject to the elder, and all of you bind on humility towards one another". He says to all, "bind on humility".
In @Acts 2 we are told, in relation to the coming in of the Spirit, that "your sons and your daughters shall
{178}
prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your elders shall dream with dreams; yea, even upon my bondmen and upon my bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy". So that in every meeting where there is spiritual prosperity, sons and daughters are prophesying, and the elder and the younger are together in a mutually delightful state of things. The Psalm we read is one of those which refer to an instrument of ten strings. In it we read that the sons are to be as plants grown up in their youth, and the daughters are to be like corner-columns. We get there a beautiful picture of features of true spiritual prosperity, which should mark every local meeting.
Then the thought in the last scripture is in regard to the younger men. We know what so often marks young men naturally -- that they know more than their parents; a feature which has perhaps been common to many of us. But we see in this scripture how the youthful element amongst the saints, the generation that is growing up, ask the man of God to go with them, and they will get all the gain of his experience. We see, too, how their energies are wisely directed, so that the axe-head having been lost, is recovered at the direction of the man of God.
W.J.H. Does that line run through the ways of God all down the history of the testimony? There were Moses and Joshua; Elijah and Elisha; Samuel and David; David and Solomon; then Paul and Timothy. There is the thought of the ass and the colt too.
H.F.N. Yes; what you say is very confirming. Is it not the great business of the elder brethren to see that they
{179}
make room for the development of the younger, and give scope for their spiritual energies?
G. A. Peter says in chapter 5 of his first epistle, "By Silvanus, the faithful brother". Silvanus was a younger brother and Peter an elder, but he was serviceable to Peter.
H.F.N. Yes; he speaks of him in an affectionate way, as one valued.
J.H. Every local gathering should be marked by experience, and by freshness and energy; it is a serious thing if any part is lacking.
H.F.N. I am sure it is. If there is a generation missing from a meeting, there is great spiritual lack in it. You would not like to see a meeting composed only of old men, nor a meeting composed only of young men, who might lack experience. You seldom see a meeting really prosperous, spiritually, unless there is room made for both elements.
W.J.H. I am sure that is right, and that elder brethren should keep that definitely in mind. I suppose the one place, beyond any other, where the younger men would develop as priests, would be the prayer meeting.
S.S. Moses sent the youths, in @Exodus 24.
H.F.N. Yes, that is another instance.
E.D.L. Would John's ministry be in line with what you were saying? "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong" (@1 John 2: 14).
H.F.N. It would. In this first scripture we read, Peter brings in the thought of shepherding. There is an abundance of ministry today, but many of the local meetings feel the lack of shepherding. We should be
{180}
spared much of the sad experience arising from those who have wandered into the world and have lost heart, if there had been more of this spirit of shepherding. It is a service open to a young man too, though it is presented generally as a feature of an elder. Peter says, addressing the elders, "Exercising oversight, not by necessity, but willingly; not for base gain, but readily; not as lording it over your possessions, but being models for the flock". The elder brethren are thus to be models for the flock.
W.J.H. I am sure there is great need for more shepherd care of one another. "The flock ... which is among you".
Ques. Would you say the service of shepherding does not necessarily need gift?
H.F.N. No; though shepherd and teacher is one gift, according to @Ephesians 4. We have to remember that gift is subject to desire, and if we really have the desire to shepherd the flock of God, the Lord would give us the ability to do it.
J.H. What place would the "witness of the sufferings of the Christ" and "partaker of the glory" have?
H.F.N. To be a witness of the sufferings of the Christ would bring mellowness of spirit. They produce holy sensibilities in the saints, which would fit them to take up this shepherd service. Then being "partaker of the glory" would show what is in view, so that the service of shepherding would be taken up in the light of the coming glory! It has often been pointed out that many great and distinguished servants in the Old Testament were shepherds.
{181}
S.E.E. In those sufferings you would learn the shepherd heart of Christ.
H.F.N. That is it.
J.L. Is this the filling out of the commission the Lord gave Peter in @John 21, "Feed my sheep"?
H.F.N. It is indeed. "Feed my lambs", and "shepherd my sheep". We know that it is a much more difficult thing to shepherd sheep, than to feed lambs. In dealing with young saints, there is a certain responsiveness, but the older ones are sometimes restive, and it needs peculiar skill in the shepherd to shepherd the sheep.
W.J.H. The danger with the older sheep is that they want their own way; that is where we need shepherding.
G.A. Sheep not only need feeding, but a great deal of care. They have their ailments; they receive injuries; there is the call for a constant watchfulness.
W.J.H. Do you think we are tested by the sheep that are amongst us? We think very kindly of the dear brethren in the Arctic circle, for instance, but they do not test us very much. The sheep that are amongst us are the test of our ability to care for one another.
J.H. A sense that they are the sheep of the flock of God would help us.
H.F.N. Peter, having addressed himself to the elder brethren, turns to the younger, and says, "be subject to the elder". If we are to qualify in relation to the house of God as vessels in His service, the first great lesson is that of being subject to the elders.
{182}
J.L. Do we get these things in David? He learned to keep the sheep, and then was available, under Jesse, to go to his brethren.
H.F.N. Quite so. He is a beautiful illustration of it. In addition to the word to the younger brethren, "be subject to the elder", the apostle says, "and all of you bind on humility towards one another". This is one of the garments in the christian's wardrobe, and it fits us as well in December as in August; and whether we are in Australia, South Africa, or Europe. It is a garment that fits every country and every clime, and it never grows old. It is of great importance that every one of us binds on humility.
G.A. One is concerned to learn how we may, with constancy, bind on humility. We may learn the manner of doing it at the feet of the Lord, I suppose, thinking of how He emptied Himself. Is that the line, as learning of Him?
H.F.N. Quite so. In the service of feet-washing, the Lord laid aside His garments and girded Himself with a linen towel -- He bound it on, in that way would not that be a great object lesson for us?
W.J.H. Do you think to "bind on" indicates it is there permanently. It is not a thing you put off and on occasionally, but it is always there. In a care meeting, in a difficulty, in ministry, or in taking part in the assembly, or maybe in care for one another, that spirit is there.
B.M. Does the thought of binding on suppose control?
H.F.N. Yes; it is a delightful thing to come into touch with those who have bound on humility. I remember a brother once saying that he gave an address on the
{183}
subject of humility, and when he had finished he said he had to get to the Lord, because he was very proud of it!
S.S. Peter says that He "to the humble gives grace".
H.F.N. That is very fine. "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in the due time" (verse 6). The Lord gives grace to the one who has bound on humility, and then exalts him in due time. You find that those who exercise true spiritual influence are marked by humility, and the Lord has given them this excess of grace. As bowing under the mighty hand of God, He exalts us in due time.
G.H.C. Is it that you see it in Christ, and then are exercised about it? It is only by the Spirit it can be done.
H.F.N. I am sure that is so.
W.J.H. Humility would enable us to wait for the due time. God has a time in His own mind for all His people. David stands out as one who waited humbly for the due time. The trouble is that the flesh cannot wait. Young men have to wait on the Lord in humility, before they are brought forward in the Lord's time, whether locally or generally. Wanting to push oneself forward will never give one what the Lord has in mind for one.
H.F.N. I am sure that is true. As one waits humbly and patiently, the Lord's time comes. As we really bind on humility, the Lord gives grace, and then exaltation comes in time as we are morally equal to it. It is a question of time.
E.P.H. Do we see that coming out in Timothy, as having bound on humility -- having the entrusted word given to him to pass on to faithful men?
{184}
H.F.N. That is it, and I suppose it paves the way for our second scripture -- @Acts 2. You get four things there; the first is, "your sons and your daughters shall prophesy". What we would look for in relation to the younger generation, referring to them spiritually as sons and daughters, is that they might prophesy; that they might be vessels to communicate the mind of God. The next thing is that "your young men shall see visions, and your elders shall dream with dreams; yea, even upon my bondmen and upon my bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy". So that, if there are to be true spiritual features of prosperity, these things must be present.
W.J.H. Would you distinguish between "visions" and "dreams"?
H.F.N. It says in the book of Proverbs that without a vision the people perish; that is, they become unbridled and exposed.
W.J.H. The dreams in Genesis seem to look on to what is future; whereas a vision refers to what should be present, as with Elisha's young man in @2 Kings 6: 17. The young men would be more especially concerned with what is *now*, whereas the old men would think of what is coming.
H.F.N. Quite so. The old men would be seeking to educate the younger brethren as to the coming glory. Do you not think that the test of brethren in their service in the local meeting, is not exactly what they say, but the spiritual value of what they have left behind?
W.J.H. I am sure it is. I have been greatly impressed as to what has been said of David and Solomon;
{185}
that David definitely provided for Solomon to be on his throne before he vacated it.
G.A. Peter fell into a trance and had a vision in @Acts 10; that was in the early days of Peter's ministry.
H.F.N. I think that is very suggestive. It is a great thing to sit down in your local meeting, and have a look at the kind of material the Lord has put there. If we look at it with the Lord's eyes, we shall discover the wisdom and skilfulness of divine love in the way the Lord has put us together. Then, how exercises would spring up in a living way in the hearts of the younger brethren, and in those who are older. So that one would see the possibility, and the other would see the thing operating in a living way at the present moment.
T.F. Both a dream and a vision relate to the speaking of God.
H.F.N. I am sure that is so. We do not see much of sons and daughters prophesying. One would love to see that feature more in evidence. In Philip's house, the four daughters prophesied. What a delightful house that would be to go into! There was the evangelist Philip, then there was Paul, the great vessel of the testimony in that day, and then there were the four daughters who prophesied. What an atmosphere there must have been in that household in @Acts 21, as Agabus came in and prophesied.
W.J.H. It does not say they were prophetesses, but they prophesied. They had the mind of God at that moment. Is that not greatly to be desired for sisters and brothers, that they should be intelligent and able to communicate God's mind at the present time?
{186}
H.F.N. One has felt, in that connection, the wisdom of what has been said, that sisters do not think enough of themselves. We may think too much about ourselves in one direction, but when it comes to our part in the service of God, we may not think sufficiently of ourselves. If every sister were really a vessel ready to communicate the mind of God, as the occasion offered, how the local assemblies would be enriched.
J.H. These things should exist as the fruit of the pouring out of the Spirit?
H.F.N. Quite so. I am sure that if we were more in the living gain of the pouring out of the Spirit, they would exist. This pouring out of the Spirit is upon God's bondmen and bondwomen. We sometimes wonder if there has been sufficient recognition of our place as bondmen and bondwomen; because in Deuteronomy, not only was the man's ear bored, but the woman's ear too. We have to challenge ourselves as to whether we have been to the door, and had our ear bored.
W.J.H. You mean by that, have we been permanently and irrevocably committed to the Lord and His interests? Is that the bondman's and the bondwoman's position?
H.F.N. That is it exactly.
W.J.H. Do you not think we are in danger of looking upon ourselves as hired servants, to come and go as we please?
H.F.N. And sometimes we do almost as we did in our school days, take up things as hobbies. There is none of that spirit in christianity; we are to be irrevocably committed to the Lord.
{187}
Ques. Would that be equal to a vow in the Old Testament?
H.F.N. It is the same idea exactly.
G.A. Is it the evidence of ownership that you are concerned about -- that these things should be seen in the saints? The boring of the ear was an evidence of subjection and ownership was it not?
S.E.E. Although it is impossible to go back to Pentecostal days, we can still have Pentecostal features in that way?
H.F.N. That is so. We have often been reminded that in Pentecost there was no time limit. The Lord has not put any limit on Pentecost.
To pass on to @Psalm 144, we read in verse 9: "I will sing a new song unto thee; with the ten-stringed lute will I sing psalms unto thee". We get references to a ten-stringed lute in @Psalm 33, @Psalm 92, and @Psalm 144. I do not think there are any more. @Psalm 92: 13, 14 refer to the elder brethren: "Those that are planted in the house of Jehovah shall flourish in the courts of our God. They are still vigorous in old age, they are full of sap and green". @Psalm 144 has reference to the younger ones; in verse 12 it says, "That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; our daughters as corner-columns, sculptured after the fashion of a palace". One has sometimes thought that this is a beautiful description of what might be called a truly spiritual and prosperous local meeting. The first feature is that the sons would be as plants grown up in their youth, indicating that the growth in the house of God is normal. When you think of the daughters -- that is, the younger sisters -- the illustration is used of a corner-column, "sculptured after
{188}
the fashion of a palace". You look first for the development of spiritual growth, and then for this ornamentation in the house of God. Peter refers to the ornament of the sisters, that is, "a meek and quiet spirit" (@1 Peter 3: 4).
W.J.H. It is a great thing in youth to grow up. @Zechariah 6: 12 speaks of one who would "grow up from his own place". Have you ever seen one who wandered from place to place, grow up?
H.F.N. No, such a one does not take root properly; we are to be rooted in love among the saints. Then there are these sculptured columns which would add beauty. So with the younger sisters -- how they would adorn the house of God! God loves the idea of spiritual beauty in His house. I suppose Timothy would be one of the best illustrations of one planted in the house of God and growing up in His courts. He had all the vigour of youth, combined with the depth of a father. I think what we should look for in our local companies, is the growing up as plants, and then the ornamentation and beauty in the young women.
G.H.C. @Psalm 92, which you refer to, speaks of trees; there we have what stands, so that everything is perfect in that way.
H.F.N. It is indeed; and what follows in @Psalm 144 is so beautiful; it says, "Our granaries full, affording all manner of store". There is a variety of food, something like the tree of life affording all manner of fruits.
G.A. The early and the latter rain would secure the supply, so the granaries are full under the blessing of the Lord; there is no lack of anything.
{189}
J.H. Would you say something of the ten-stringed instruments?
H.F.N. Some of us seem to have only one string. You can certainly get music out of one string, but the brother who has only one will not make much of a musician in the house of God. One has often thought of @Romans 5. One of the first strings is tribulation, which worketh patience; that is a string in the instrument. Then if you go on in the knowledge of God, you get a completed instrument, one that has ten strings.
W.J.H. Do you think that there should be a note rising from *whatever* sphere of responsibility we touch -- not only from one? We may have our special note in the assembly, but all ten combine.
H.F.N. In @Psalm 33, everyone has an instrument of ten strings; and if the young people will look into these three psalms, they will be helped to become true musicians in the house of God.
S.E.E. Sometimes the young think that what they have is too meagre to contribute, but if it is spiritual it is an acquisition.
H.F.N. That is right. It has been said of some, that because they cannot sing like a nightingale, they will not chirp like a sparrow. We do not expect them to begin with the song of a nightingale, but the One who made the nightingale made the sparrow as well.
G.H.C. Where does the question of tithes come in? The storehouse is dependent upon tithes, and this calls for exercise on the part of all, that there might be power to consider for God, and bring the tithes into the storehouse.
{190}
H.F.N. That is very helpful. Following on that, the next feature is "our sheep bringing forth thousands, ten thousands in our pastures", that is, you never would have a meeting where they had lost a generation. The local meeting should never die out. Then following on that it says, "Our kine laden with young;" that would follow spiritual increase and abundance of store. You find a local meeting prospers as each one is doing his or her part in the service, "laden with young".
W.J.H. That is important; you help people greatly if you encourage them to do something.
H.F.N. That is right. In God's world there is no unemployment; each one has to find out his or her bit of service, and labour at it heartily.
G.H.C. So the service would be distributed; no brother would think of holding two or three offices regularly.
H.F.N. No; he would not hold any as a life office. There should be room made for the young men to develop on the line of service. Three things follow that are very beautiful. There will be no breaking in -- no lawlessness will be working in the local meeting. In a spiritual setting like this, there is no breaking in. And then it says, there is no going forth: that is, the whole life interest is in the local company. "No outcry in our streets" -- what a delightful suggestion! "I exhort ... be of the same mind in the Lord" (@Philippians 4: 2), the apostle says. Perhaps two sisters are complaining against each other; you could not have a delightful state of things such as the psalm describes, if there is a complaining spirit. So the psalm ends with this, "Blessed the people that is in such a case! Blessed the
{191}
people whose God is Jehovah!" That is a wonderful climax. I do not think anybody would want to be absent. The same number of people who sat down to the breaking of bread (I am not speaking of mothers with children and those who have legitimate responsibilities) would be at the prayer and reading meetings.
E.L. If the spirit of the shepherd you spoke of was found in exercise amongst us, these conditions would be reached.
W.J.H. Had you in mind in @2 Kings 6, that the sons of the prophets there, representing the young, get all the benefit of having an aged servant like Elisha among them?
H.F.N. Yes. Do you not think that is a great feature in the local gathering to go forth under the direction of the man of God? In many of our activities, there is no spiritual gain or real fruit for God, because we do not come under spiritual leadership. That is the great lesson of the last scripture.
*From The Truth of the Assembly, pages 95 - 109, Katoomba, N.S.W., April 1938*.
{192}
{193}
AUTHORITY
H F Nunnerley
@Romans 14: 8, 9; @Ephesians 4: 10, 11; @Proverbs 4: 1 - 4; @Joshua 1: 16; @Numbers 4: 16; @Mark 13: 33 - 37
H.F.N. What is before me in suggesting these scriptures is the importance that the Spirit of God attaches to authority. We would all recognise that one of the peculiar dangers of the present moment is the spirit of lawlessness and democracy, leading to the overthrow of authority. These scriptures would impress upon the hearts of all, not only of those who have had experience in the ways of God, and who care for the interests of the Lord in this city, but also of the very youngest in this company, that the security and continuance of what we all value hangs on our recognition of authority. We might look at it first, in relation to the Lord Himself. In @Romans 14 He is presented to us as Lord both of the dead and living. Then in @John 5 the Father has given all authority into His hands, and, as the Son of man, authority to execute judgment is also committed to Him. Peter said, "Who is at the right hand of God, gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him" (@1 Peter 3: 22). Every writer in the New Testament emphasises that unlimited authority has been placed in the hands of the Lord Jesus.
The second thought is the authority of the apostles. We read in @Ephesians 4, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things; and *he* has given some apostles".
{194}
Apostles come first, representing the authority of Christ. Paul, speaking of that authority, said it was given to him for building up, and not for overthrowing (@2 Corinthians 13: 10).
Then, in relation to the assembly, authority is seen in four ways. First, as set forth in @Proverbs 4, we have parental authority; for in the assembly the basis is the recognition of authority as bound up with what is parental. Authority is in the house of God, but the holy blend of love is seen connected with it. In @Joshua 1, we see in Moses ministerial authority. He was the great minister raised up of God, and God put authority into his hands. Then in relation to Eleazar, we have in @Numbers 4: 16 priestly control in authority. The seven things of which he was to have charge would indicate his control of all the services that stood in relation to the house of God. And, finally, upon Joshua God conferred authority connected typically with the spiritual realm. So we have in the assembly these four kinds of authority; first, what is parental; secondly, what is ministerial; thirdly, what is priestly; and fourthly, what is spiritual -- though in the spiritual realm what is authoritative does not come so much into evidence.
In the last scripture we have a very wide thought. When the Lord was going away He gave authority into the hands of His servants: "having ... given to his bondmen the authority". Then in @Matthew 21 the Lord is challenged as to His authority, and He met the challenge by referring to a fixed principle; that is, whether the ministry was of heaven or of men. Its origin determines the authority.
Our subject is rather wide, but one hopes the Lord will help us to see the importance of it, and that the Spirit of
{195}
God will bring it home to us in power, for the welfare and prosperity of the saints is dependent on the recognition of authority.
E.E.S.L. Does God present it in such a way as to make it attractive to us?
H.F.N. Yes; it is said in another connection, that we are brought into the kingdom of the Son of His love, that is under divine authority exercised in love.
W.J.H. As in the closing days of the gentile monarchies, as seen in Daniel's image, where the feet were partly of iron and part of clay, are we not in great danger of these elements being found among us? On the one side, the assumption of arbitrary power, and on the other, the will of everyone being active in setting aside authority?
H.F.N. That is true, and these peculiar difficulties will, if we are not on our guard, intrude themselves into the assembly.
S.E.E. Christ's exaltation is brought out in Peter's first preaching in @Acts 2, showing how prominent it was in God's mind. Peter says, "God has made him, this Jesus whom *ye* have crucified, both Lord and Christ" (@Acts 2: 36).
H.F.N. This is supported, too, by @1 Peter 3: 22, "who is at the right hand of God, gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him;" and you can almost catch the joy that filled Peter's heart as he wrote this.
S.E.E. It is necessary for us to come under the direct rule of Christ, so that room is made for carrying out God's thoughts as to us.
{196}
H.F.N. In @Romans 14: 9 it says, "For to this end Christ has died and lived again, that he might rule over both dead and living". What a powerful appeal this is to our affections, so that each one of us should come under His gracious, subduing power. This comes out in connection with the weak brother, and in relation to the kingdom, and I thought this was the start, the real spring of everything that follows.
G.A. There is only one alternative that is left to us, that is, lawlessness. There is a great end to be reached by means of this authority, in the different ways you have called our attention to it.
H.F.N. Would it not be to anticipate what we get in @1 Corinthians 15, that when all authority shall come to an end, Christ will hand over the kingdom, that God may be all and in all. Is not that the great end in view in relation to authority -- "that God may be all in all"? In eternity the idea of authority will not be prominent. While there is still something to subdue, the Lord will exercise authority to the end that God may be all in all.
W.J.H. Do you not think that the meagre way in which we enjoy what is eternal, is due to our not accepting the Lord's authority primarily? Is it not the authority that leads us into what is eternal?
H.F.N. @1 Corinthians 15 clearly shows that when the Lord hands over the kingdom it is to this end, that God may be all in all. Should we not really begin today to touch the day of God's eternal supremacy?
S.E.E. You have referred to the three thoughts of ruling, dwelling, and blessing. Does that connect with what you have in mind in the thought of God removing
{197}
everything, firstly in grace, and finally in judgment, so that He can occupy the ground and give effect to His great thoughts of blessing?
H.F.N. That is right. The whole security in relation to the saints hangs upon this recognition of authority. If we might touch this thought first, in relation to the Lord Himself, it would give us an impression of His absolute supremacy. He is Lord both of dead and living. "For both if we should live, it is to the Lord we live; and if we should die, it is to the Lord we die: both if we should live then, and if we should die, we are the Lord's". If we are weak in regard to that, there will be little apprehension of what God is. One would like the youngest saint to get an impression of the absolute supremacy of Christ. You could not get a wider realm than that over which Christ has authority.
W.J.H. That we are the Lord's would cover every hour, and every sphere of activity in our lives.
R.S. Would Mary Magdalene be a beautiful illustration of one coming under the authority of the Lord?
H.F.N. Yes, she would indeed.
J.S.D. Why does the Lord go into death to reach this place of authority? He is so great in Himself, yet goes through death in order to reach this place.
H.F.N. It was for the overthrow of everything that challenged His authority, and to establish His own right beyond question. Love lay behind it, for He gave up His life to establish His rights. Christ has died that He might be Lord both of the dead and the living. Divine authority now is exercised in love, and what a beneficent authority it
{198}
is! When people speak of authority, they usually speak of what is harsh.
L.P.M. In Romans, it is in connection with the weak brother that you get the thought of authority introduced.
H.F.N. And it adds later, "Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ has died" (@Romans 14: 15). What love lies behind this! So it is a most beneficent authority. I take it we are all prepared to admit the Lord's authority, who has gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers all being made subject to Him! There is nothing to dispute His authority in the heavens. He has ascended up, and has received gifts for men; the first gift was apostles, for the apostles represent His authority. Paul said that his apostleship was given him for edification, and not for destruction. It is important in relation to the assembly, to see that when the Lord left His own here, He left the authority. As walking in the truth and in separation from iniquity, the authority operates.
W.J.H. The apostles¬ doctrine is authoritative, and anything outside that is lawlessness.
H.F.N. That helps: the apostles¬ doctrine is the great expression of this authority. You could not have true spiritual activity in the house of God apart from the recognition of authority.
L.P.M. We might profess to acknowledge the authority of the Lord, and yet refuse to recognise those through whom it is expressed?
H.F.N. In the opening of the Acts, we see how believers laid their gifts at the apostles¬ feet. That is, they recognised those in whom the Lord had placed the
{199}
authority. We may say, today there are no apostles, but when the Lord left this scene, He gave "to his bondmen the authority" (@Mark 13: 34).
W.J.H. Does the authority pass down to such a broken day as this?
H.F.N. Yes; the apostles¬ authority remains and is binding; but there is also what the Lord speaks of as "the authority" at the present moment. If we have not the apostles, we have bondmen. The passage in Mark says, "it is as a man gone out of the country, having left his house and given to his bondmen the authority". The authority given to His bondmen remains today. When we come to the actual working out of it in the assembly, it would shine out first in a parental way. As it says in @Proverbs 4: 1 - 4, "Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know intelligence; for I give you good doctrine: forsake ye not my law. For I was a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of my mother. And he taught me, and said unto me, Let thy heart retain my words; keep my commandments and live". So that prosperity in the house of God begins with the recognition of parental authority. I think you will find that in @Proverbs 3 it is the mother speaking, and in chapter 4 it is the father. The book emphasises the spiritual gain bound up with parental authority; and that authority is seen in the house of God at the present moment. The apostle said to the Corinthians, "If ye should have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet not many fathers" (@1 Corinthians 4: 15). So the thought of parental authority was to underlie all that follows.
W.J.H. Jerusalem above is said to be our mother, and her law is authoritative. The Lord would help us to
{200}
realise that, as to assembly principles, there is authority there and it is not open to us to dispute it.
H.F.N. If we are to prosper spiritually we must bow to the feature of authority in the house of God.
W.J.H. When you speak of a father, what have you in mind? Do you mean the mother represents the assembly in principle?
H.F.N. The father would represent the element of authority among the saints; his speaking would be authoritative. We learn from Galatians that Sarah is our mother, and Abraham our father. Abraham was marked by light and faith, and his words carried authority.
E.E.S.L. Would you tell us why @Proverbs 3 is maternal?
H.F.N. The chapter itself conveys the thought. The mother explains the father's discipline, saying, "My son, despise not the instruction of Jehovah, neither be weary of his chastisement; for whom Jehovah loveth he chasteneth, even as a father the son in whom he delighteth" (verses 11, 12). The chapter seems to suggest the appeal of the mother, and in the next, there is the voice of the father.
E.E.S.L. That is very touching. The mother interpreting the voice of the father.
A.C. There is what is paternal and what is maternal in the assembly. The mother sets out the affections, and the father the authority. Paul had both these features; to the Thessalonians he was as a mother and a father; and in Corinthians he speaks as a father.
H.F.N. There is great importance in recognising parental authority among the saints. It has been truly said
{201}
that authority has been placed in those who love us most. You feel how tender we should be in the exercise of parental authority. Solomon could say, "I was a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of my mother". He brings the two together.
That would pave the way for what we spoke of as ministerial authority in the house of God. It is illustrated in Moses. It says in @Joshua 1: 16, "And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou hast commanded us will we do, and whither thou shalt send us will we go. According as we hearkened to Moses in all things, so will we hearken to thee". Authority is here seen in Moses, the great minister that God raised up for His people, and if we recognise parental authority, the next thing is to recognise ministerial authority that the Lord has given.
L.P.M. Would you explain more fully what you mean by ministerial authority?
H.F.N. The apostle spoke of himself as an able minister of the new covenant. The word ministerial has been given a false meaning, but used rightly it relates to those whom the Lord takes up for ministry in the house of God. He clothes with evident authority, those with moral and spiritual qualifications for ministry in the house of God today.
W.J.H. Referring to Moses and Paul, no one could challenge their love to the people; behind their ministerial authority was the parental love of which you speak.
H.F.N. Yes, we have abundant evidence of that. Paul says, "*I* shall most gladly spend and be utterly spent for your souls, if even in abundantly loving you I should
{202}
be less loved" (@2 Corinthians 12: 15). No one could question the love these two ministers had for the people of God.
W.J.H. It is a great matter for those desiring to be used in like service, that they should understand that they cannot serve ministerially, except as they love the brethren. The brethren would not be ready to hear them unless there was a background and proof of such love.
H.F.N. Elisha is introduced to us as pouring water on the hands of Elijah; and Joshua, as Moses¬ attendant.
W.J.H. It is a great matter for any young brother on whom the Lord may have His eye for service, to conduct himself in a way that makes it clear that he loves the saints; serving them constantly and patiently, so that when the time comes for him to minister, he will be listened to.
H.F.N. Exactly. Paul says, "Take Mark, and bring him with thyself, for he is serviceable to me for ministry" (@2 Timothy 4: 11). Mark himself was now serviceable as coming under authority. Unless the younger brethren have secured not only the affection, but the respect of the local brethren, they can hardly expect room to be made for them in relation to ministry in the house of God. One feels the great importance of recognising that ministry is clothed with authority.
J.S.D. That comes out in Peter's word, "If any one speak -- as oracles of God" (@1 Peter 4: 11).
G.A. Timothy, we are told, was well reported of by the brethren. The spiritual background could be seen in Timothy.
H.F.N. That is perhaps the most outstanding witness of what we were saying. He had qualified in
{203}
humble service, and the Lord took him up and gave him, perhaps, one of the most distinguished places in the ministry, next to the apostle. We do not want to lose the gain of any gift the Lord has been pleased to place among the saints, but we must begin by being well spoken of by the brethren.
J.S.D. Does this in any way bring in the sisters? God took up Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
H.F.N. Speaking strictly of the ministers, it would be limited to those whom the Lord makes use of in the house of God. You might bring the sisters in as influencing, on the maternal side of the service. Deborah arose a mother in Israel. A true mother in Israel would be a powerful influence in the house of God.
G.A. Is this seen in the way sisters would support an assembly judgment in its entirety; accepting it, and in conversation supporting and strengthening it; never weakening it?
H.F.N. That is a most important point. The enemy is ever seeking to undermine authority in the house of God, and especially among those who have been so richly blessed in regard of the truth. As the sisters support the authority of the Lord in relation to the house of God, they become an element of power in the testimony.
E.E.S.L. Would not spiritual sisters seek to support the deliberations in the care meeting intelligently, as well as what is done in assembly?
H.F.N. I am sure they would. As to priestly authority, it is said in @Numbers 4: 16, "Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall have the oversight of the oil for the light, and the fragrant incense, and the continual oblation".
{204}
Light first, then the fragrant incense, then the continual oblation, and then the anointing oil, and added to that, the oversight of the whole tabernacle. Then all that is in the sanctuary, and its furniture. Those are the things over which Eleazar was to have control, indicating the sphere of authority in relation to the priestly service in the house of God. Eleazar is in one way a type of the Lord; and he is also a type of that spiritual element found in the priestly company.
W.J.H. So that such as have authority watch every service in the house of God, including the articles of service, and the persons. What has come out recently as to the Lord's Person and sonship is supported by this very thing -- priestly authority.
H.F.N. Apart from that priestly authority, the saints might have been rent asunder. The psalmist says, "Moses and Aaron among his priests" (@Psalm 99: 6). Moses was a greater priest than Aaron; he was a greater minister, and had a greater access to God. What is said in regard to the "furniture" suggests that the Lord would exercise the saints in relation to details in the house of God. The order of the Lord's supper as to the cup and other things, has been carried by priestly authority in the house of God.
S.E.E. Did Peter resent that at first, when he said, "Thou shalt never wash my feet" (@John 13: 8)? The Lord insisted, and to that priestly authority Peter submitted.
H.F.N. Exactly. Now the last subject for consideration is spiritual authority suggested in Joshua. In @Numbers 27: 18 - 20, in answer to Moses¬ request that the assembly be not as sheep without a shepherd, Jehovah said, "Take Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the
{205}
Spirit, and thou shalt lay thy hand upon him; and thou shalt set him before Eleazar the priest, and before the whole assembly; and give him commandment before their eyes. And thou shalt put of thine honour upon him, that the whole assembly of the children of Israel may obey him". There is this spiritual authority of which Joshua is a type; he was the spiritual leader so that they might take up their inheritance. The idea of authority is not so much in evidence in the spiritual realm as in the wilderness, yet we read in Ephesians of what is growing to a holy temple "in the Lord", suggesting that even in the spiritual realm we come under His authority and leadership.
A.H. God does not give anyone the authority to appoint a successor in this matter.
H.F.N. That is right. We have a relentless foe who would seek to undermine and overthrow this element of divine authority. Those who have turned aside from the truth, in the refusal of the authority, have lost everything that is vital. There is a great deal more underlying what we have been speaking about than appears on the surface.
B.O.L. There is a great need for us to recognise and bear in mind that the Son Himself will be subject, that God may be all in all. We should anticipate that now.
H.F.N. @Mark 13: 34 says, He gave "to his bondmen *the* authority", and that authority remains as much today as it did on the day of Pentecost.
W.J.H. In @1 Chronicles 24: 5 a remarkable expression occurs, "princes of the sanctuary", not only ministers, but princes, in whom authority in the sanctuary is expressed.
H.F.N. Very good.
{206}
G.H.C. What is the difference between priestly and spiritual authority? I take it that what is priestly would also be spiritual, would it not?
H.F.N. I suppose priesthood is connected with the *moral* system in which God is served, on the ground of sacrifice. What is spiritual has more relation to what is eternal, and to the inheritance of the saints. In Ephesians we have what is spiritual. What is priestly would underlie what is spiritual as to moral state, but priesthood is related to what is rightly official in the service of God. The spiritual is beyond what is official.
E.E.S.L. We should greatly value authority in every sphere in which God has set it.
*From The Truth of the Assembly, pages 110 - 123, Sydney, May 1938*.
{207}
THE MYSTERY (1)
J Collie-Smith
@Romans 8: 9 - 11; @Romans 12: 1, 4, 5, 10, 16; @Exodus 26: 5, 6
J.C-S. Paul's ministry gives distinction to our dispensation, indeed it introduces a new hue, lending a lustre to everything that had gone before. All that had been introduced by the twelve is handled in a new way, taking on the colour of Paul's ministry. Not that we would in any way discount what the twelve introduced, for Paul recognises that and carries it over, fitting it into his own structure, indeed referring to it as built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets. All that admitted, nevertheless he was conscious when he went up to Jerusalem that the twelve added nothing to him, that they could not enlarge what he had.
He had distinctive light that had been given to him by the Lord personally, directly from heaven. That light was to shine in its own beauty and lustre in this dispensation, filling out and giving completeness to, "the word of God". So that he alone writes and speaks of "the body" in his ministry, the great burden of which was the truth as heading up in "the mystery". Any thoughtful reader of the epistle to the Romans will, at the conclusion of it, be forced to raise the question, What is the mystery? That is what Paul has in mind even in this foundational epistle, in spreading out the truth as covering the whole ground embracing man's relations with God; the adjustment of them; the introduction of another Man; and the spirit of
{208}
another Man. This is all introduced by the apostle as laying the foundation for the great structure which he has in his mind, and on account of the greatness of the structure there must be deep foundations laid. The epistle to the Romans is Paul's great foundation, laid in view of his own peculiar ministry. So that a right apprehension of the truth as presented in this epistle is essential. For the measure in which we have an entrance to the truth as presented to us in Romans, will determine our ability to proceed, and to follow the apostle in the further development of his own peculiar line, leading up to the mystery.
C.D. We need to constantly come back to it so that those foundations may be strengthened in our souls.
J.C-S. We never dispense with what we began with; that is, the foundations must be carried forward; they are not like the foundations of a material building, for as the structure develops in our souls the foundations must develop correspondingly.
G.H. Would @Romans 16: 25 bring before us that God is able to establish us in view of the mystery being made known?
J.C-S. I think that is the point. This epistle is calculated to establish us, so that there is spiritual ability to pass on to the mystery. The apostle does not unfold it in this epistle, but merely lays the foundation in view of it, and touches lightly the idea of "the body", which is not even formally recognised as the body of Christ. The epistle to the Romans is the church genesis, and from this epistle you will find the apostle develops his great thoughts in his more mature ministry.
{209}
A.H.S. Why did you say that it is not recognised formally as the body of Christ in Romans?
J.C-S Because I think the apostle is giving us the preparatory work, so that in chapter 12 we are only stated to be "one body in Christ", we are not there recognised as His body, which goes more with the development of the mystery. Chapter 8 is really the introduction of the vital idea underlying the body in an informal way. The body is not mentioned in the chapter, but the apostle makes a great deal of the Spirit, and also deals in this chapter, as in earlier chapters, with our bodies, because our bodies are to be introduced in conjunction with the idea of the one body.
G.H. Why does it say "*Ye* are not in flesh", leaving out 'the;' is it characteristic of us as having God's Spirit?
J.C-S. That is it. You are no longer in flesh as a state characteristic of you, but in Spirit as standing over against that. I take it that it is the Spirit of the one Man which the apostle introduces in @Romans 5. He develops the thought of the one Man, showing how all those standing in relation to Him are constituted righteous. Then in chapter 8, I think, for the first time we have "the Spirit of Christ" in a formal way, which I believe is the foundational idea in connection with the body. It gives you the first inkling of the body, because "if any one has not the Spirit of Christ *he* is not of him", but it establishes the great thought that the Spirit of Christ underlies the thought of the body.
J.D.U. The Spirit of Christ is thus to be in evidence in these bodies of ours, as being secured now for God's will.
{210}
J.C-S. That is right, so the apostle goes to some length in the earlier chapters to show how the body is recovered, no longer to be in bondage to sin, dominated by lust, and so on. The body now is to come under fresh ownership and under the influence of the Lord and the Spirit, so as to become a vessel in which the Spirit is to take up His abode.
J.W. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin". How do we understand that?
J.C-S. The body is no longer available in that way for sin, but is now to be held entirely for the Spirit, it is looked at as dead on account of sin. That is a very important start, I believe, as commencing the idea of "the one body". The believer's body in that way is recognised on account of the reception of the Spirit, and the Spirit of God dwelling in him; "the Spirit life on account of righteousness".
S.E.E. Does the apostle raise moral issues in this epistle so that the foundation in our souls is of a moral character?
J.C-S. Quite so. In the early chapters he goes over the ground very carefully, and exposes the roots of the old order; showing what man after the flesh is. The first three chapters deal exhaustively with that, and then show that the man is removed. The blood of Christ being the witness to this removal, and righteousness established. Then all is presented in testimony in chapter 4. In chapter 5 you have the administration of it, and the apostle proceeds to speak of things as seen in the "one man", bringing in another order of Man. In Romans you see the spirit of another Man, no longer Adam, for all his roots
{211}
have been exposed and judged, and the apostle brings us along on moral lines in the judgment and repudiation of man after the flesh; so that the conscience and mind enter into these things. All this is in view of this structure which he is building, and the apostle knows that the material required must be of the very finest quality, and it calls for sensitive feelings, involving the repudiation of ourselves and a total refusal of man after the flesh. Thus moral issues are raised.
S.E.E. Unless our foundation is laid in that way, as to what is moral, it would be impossible for us to go on to what is spiritual. Would not the spiritual structure be erected in that way and God's thoughts as to us secured?
J.C-S. The apostle clears the ground, and takes account of the saints in chapter 8 as characterised by state which lies in the Spirit; and as set up in righteousness. "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit". All that brings us very close to the point where the apostle could bring in the Spirit of Christ, because this is a new setting.
C.D. I feel what you are saying regarding the Spirit of Christ is of great importance, and I think we would do well to dwell on it a little.
J.C-S. It is not said to be the Spirit of God, or the Spirit of the Lord, but the Spirit of Christ. It is the Spirit of another Man, an order of Man that God has anointed, and we are to be characterised by the Spirit of that Man. It is
{212}
put in a negative way here, "If any one has not the Spirit of Christ *he* is not of him". The underlying suggestion is that we are to be characterised by the Spirit of the anointed Man, linking us up with Him and involving the idea of quality.
C.D. This is the Spirit that is going to fill out the structure. Paul's ministry is completed in that.
J.C-S. That is so. The moment the apostle clears the ground of moral issues, he brings the Spirit into great prominence. As if to indicate to us that it must now be a spiritual matter, calling for the Spirit as entering into this great thought that is so close to the apostle's heart. I venture to say Paul never preached, never ministered, without the mystery in his mind.
E.A.K. I wondered if there would be some measure of analogy in the experiences through which God passed Job, in effecting a moral foundation in his soul, and bringing him to a point of spirituality expressed in his ability to see God. So that the *quality* you spoke of was reached in an experimental way in that man?
J.C-S. I am sure. Showing how he had cleared the region in which he had been held in bondage and largely in the grip of the legal position. I believe that is a point we do well to remember, that the apostle in @Romans 7 releases us from the grip of the legal husband, who would dominate in a legal way, holding us in bondage. Now he brings us into the realm of the Spirit where the Spirit comes to our aid and does things for us. It is a remarkable thing that the Spirit is said to do things for us.
Ques. Would new creation come in here? "if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation" (@2 Corinthians 5: 17).
{213}
J.C-S. It is simply a statement of the fact, which would link it up with the position, in Christ Jesus, which gives us a new status outside of all that is of the old order; but new creation does not come in in Romans. We are not said to be risen in this epistle, Christ has been raised, but we are not said to be raised. Romans does go as far as walking "in newness of life". The position is, we are still here in the scene where we incurred all the liabilities, where all the ruin occurred; but set up now in a new state by the Spirit, with power in the Spirit to meet the demands made upon us. I think the apostle in this chapter is seeking to catch up our thoughts, and carry them with him that he might bind them up with the great vessel which he has in mind to develop; so that out of these verses he develops many thoughts. No doubt the thought of the house of God develops from the Spirit of God dwelling in us. Just as the thought of the body develops out of the thought of "the Spirit of Christ" being in us, going on to the idea of adoption. But it is only the foundational idea. It speaks of *a* spirit of adoption, not the Spirit of His Son, indicating that things in Romans are in initial form, on elementary lines. The apostle is showing us foundations great enough to carry the whole moral universe in relation to "the one Man". This is seen in @Romans 5 covering the idea of the structure of "the world to come".
J.W. As to what you have said as to our not being risen here, does @Romans 8 correspond with the plains of Moab?
J.C-S. And the wilderness according to God. We pass the springing well in that way, and the Spirit is
{214}
coming into command. The Spirit, you will observe, is brought in in a very distinct way.
J.W. Is this the point from which we are able to see all the way we have come, as it were from Pisgah's high region of the Spirit, and all we come into in purpose?
J.C-S. Like the light of the land of divine purpose, shedding its beams across the Jordan, and as throwing the light back on the wilderness, you see these gems sparkling in their own light, but not yet in their proper setting.
J.W. It says of Pisgah in one place it was the point from which Moses looked into the land, and also it overlooked the waste, giving a marvellous outlook.
J.C-S. This would beckon us on, the apostle showing how our bodies are to be regarded on account of the reception of the Spirit. I think it is more than the idea of @Romans 5, "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us", which is entirely on the divine side. Now the Spirit comes in on our side. It is a question of the Spirit actually dwelling undisturbed, in hearts that have made room for Him.
V.D. Referring to the Spirit of Christ again, I was wondering whether Stephen would help us as a living exhibition of that. He said "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit" (@Acts 7: 59). He was one in whom we might see the Spirit of Christ worked out practically.
J.C-S. All the grace of it shone in Stephen, his very face reflecting it. No doubt he was one who had drunk into the Spirit of Christ in a very deep way. All this will be carried forward into the vessel which eventually comes out as the expression of Christ. For a moment one
{215}
had thought to keep to the foundational idea, and see how first of all your body is controlled for Christ, for God, and for the Spirit. So it is no longer your own to use it for your own pleasure. It is now held as dead on account of sin. That word should be noted by the young people, because they are inclined to use their bodies as they think fit, doing with them as they please. Your body is to be held as dead on account of sin, because it is to be commandeered for other purposes, for holy purposes; and the Spirit as residing there would now be energetically active in the soul in view of righteousness.
J.W.H. Are you suggesting that this would begin with us as an individual matter in our apprehension of the thought of the Spirit of Christ, "If any one has not the Spirit of Christ *he* is not of him"?
J.C-S. Quite so. That is what I had in mind that we might see how Romans deals with the individual. It is like the boards of the tabernacle being adjusted to fit in their place in the divine system. So that the Spirit of Christ would give you the sense that you are a board, it is an individual setting. You will observe that while Paul deals with the individual history exhaustively, he always gives it a bearing in the direction of his own particular ministry.
A.B.J. Do you think many of our early mistakes as individuals, and in our assembly activities, arise because we do not sufficiently recognise that the indwelling of the Spirit, and making room for the Spirit, are foundational.
J.C-S. That is what you and I have to do in our relations with God. All our past history has been accounted for and disposed of. We have been justified and
{216}
reconciled, and the Spirit given; the love of God thereby being shed abroad in our hearts. It comes about on God's side, but is here on our side. It is touching to see how readily the Spirit draws near; as if Paul would invoke the Spirit to come to his aid in the establishment of these great thoughts in their initial form, because they are essentially spiritual. The Spirit must be in command in the heart and mind of the believer, otherwise he is not eligible for the opening out of these thoughts and the fitting into the system that is in mind.
J.W. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin". How much further does that go than @Romans 6: 11, "Reckon yourselves dead to sin"?
J.C-S. Well, that is a matter of reckoning. Sin is looked at as a great system and we are to reckon ourselves dead to it. We have no life for that system, so that its appeals would fall on a deaf ear; but here it is the body regarded as *dead* in relation to sin; there can be no further movement. It is to show the place the Spirit has in relation to the believer's body. How He would come in in relation to it, and the fact that "the Spirit of God" and "the Spirit of Christ", dwells in the believer's body. The Spirit of Him who raised up Jesus, becomes the pledge on the part of God that our bodies shall be quickened.
G.H. You spoke of the Spirit becoming energetic; the Spirit is life on account of righteousness. It has been said, that in that way what the Spirit does is credited to the believer. Is that so?
J.C-S. Quite. So here it says "But if Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness". It is not a question of *may be*
{217}
or *should be*, but a definite statement. That is how the position stands and you take account of yourself in that light. You say my body is no longer the vehicle of sin, it can only be used for righteousness.
J.D.U. How good to get an impression of the wonderful fact that these mortal bodies of ours, which were formerly used for sin, are now secured by the Spirit for God. So that here in individuals, God has secured the material that is to be built together in regard of this wonderful mystery. So that in the very scene where formerly we were moved by sin, being governed by that principle, here in the same bodies we are secured for God, and moving in relation to Him in the power of the Holy Spirit.
J.C-S. That is what I had in mind, that we might see how the Spirit takes possession of the body for God. The Spirit is life; He becomes the great active power, the great force in the believer's body, being active and in that way productive. That forms the link between this and chapter 12 where we are called upon to present our bodies a living sacrifice.
J.D.U. It says that is our intelligent service. Following on chapter 8 our intelligent service now is that these bodies should be actually held and presented to God.
J.C-S. That is the idea, so that under the influence of the compassions of God entering into our hearts and minds, the apostle would use it as a lever to appeal to us. It is not a compulsory idea, but rather the voluntary outcome of the mercies of God penetrating our innermost beings, and the apostle says "which is your intelligent service".
{218}
C.D. There is this thought of the body as a living sacrifice, and then you have the other side of the scripture in chapter 8, the body being dead. Have we not an attractive thought in this, that the body is living in relation to a new order of things, a new service, under new control?
J.C-S. The body viewed in relation to sin is dead, there is no life, but that same body is now controlled, and being actuated by the Spirit, becomes suitable to God, acceptable to God as a living sacrifice. God in that way would count on the richness of His grace and compassions so affecting us, as we have received the gospel, as to produce a response, causing us to hand over our bodies voluntarily to God, never again to be our own property.
C.D. So in this foundational thought, is it not good to see God's triumph as there is the recovery morally of the man, and in the body in which he had been away from God. That comes in before you can enter on the thought of what is heavenly.
J.C-S. Quite so. Man is fully recovered to God in another Man.
G.McK. Would you say something about the expression "quicken" in verse 11, "he that raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also".
J.C-S. "Shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you". That is the quickening of our bodies, making our bodies to live, but it is on account of the Spirit that dwells in us, for that is the spirit of the Man that God raised from the dead. Hence, He will quicken our mortal bodies on account of that same
{219}
Spirit dwelling in us, so that we have a pledge on the part of God that our bodies will not be overlooked when the Lord comes. The Spirit comes in and takes entire control of our bodies. It is not supposed there will be any rival; the Spirit has entire control, the person in whose body He comes to dwell being entirely at His disposal, He can do what He likes with it. Hitherto that person did what *he* liked with it. It is a beautiful touch showing how the Spirit draws near to us in relation to this great economy, the readiness of the Spirit to serve us in view of the great mystery that Paul is desirous of unfolding.
J.D.U. Is that why the offering of our body to God is spoken of as a holy sacrifice, because of the Holy Spirit?
J.C-S. That is so, because we see there has been a change of ownership, and a change of feelings, so that the body is now a holy vessel that can be presented to God acceptably. That is what God counts upon from everyone who has taken up the advantages that flow from the glad tidings. It is never intended that you should take up the advantages of the death of Christ, and the dispensation of grace, without being responsive.
A.H.S. The thought of the Spirit of Christ enters into what you have been speaking of. "If any one has not the Spirit of Christ *he* is not of him". We think of the Spirit of Christ as being evidenced only in our manifesting grace towards one another, but in speaking of handing over the body fully, does not the Spirit of Christ come out in that way, the Spirit of the One who was wholly devoted, wholly obedient?
{220}
J.C-S. Indeed it does. It is the Spirit of the anointed Man so that you have come into moral correspondence with the Spirit of that Man, who was here in a body prepared for Him, in which the will of God was carried out exclusively, wholly devoted to God's will. He becomes the pattern for us in that way.
J.W. There is no recall, no taking back; is that the thought of sacrifice?
J.C-S. Yes, and it is a living sacrifice. You can think of a man in the old dispensation devoting a bullock to God; it was with the idea of sacrifice, and though the time had not yet arrived for the presentation of it, yet he has devoted it. He reminds himself it has been devoted, and it cannot be used for any common purpose. So your body has been devoted, it has been handed over to God and you cannot recall it.
E.A.K. It says in @Psalm 118: 27, "bind the sacrifice with cords, -- up to the horns of the altar". It is in response to light that comes from God as the source. Does that give the idea of what is not to be recalled?
J.C-S. It can never be taken back again, and that enters into this scripture. So that we should understand it is our intelligent service to do this. It becomes a kind of foundation for the service of God. We see how the apostle groups a great many ideas in these scriptures, which he later on develops, bringing them to fruition in his more matured ministry. But here he gives them a foundational touch as laying the basic idea, so the service of God would flow out of this, just as the body of Christ finds its foundational idea in "the Spirit of Christ". "If any one has not the Spirit of Christ *he* is not of him".
{221}
J.W. Could you give us a word on chapter 12: 2; "Be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God"?
J.C-S. It is an entirely different outlook. Hitherto our minds and thoughts have been in the grip of the world and formed by that; our whole course of thinking has been modelled on the present world. Now our minds are to be transformed; the outlook being entirely different. The will of God is to be the governing thought, which is to be proved in all its acceptability. Then the apostle passes to the idea of the "one body". "For, as in one body we have many members, but all the members have not the same office; thus we, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other" (verses 4, 5). That gives things a new turn, the apostle formally stating that we who are many, each having come under the influence of God as presented in this epistle, are now to become body-minded. We are no longer to regard ourselves as solitary units in this world. All that has been done for us; forgiveness of sins; justification; reconciliation and so on; are personal matters. My sins are forgiven for me *only*; justification is for me personally. But when we come to the idea of many formed into one body we are to think, and it is to become the habit of our minds to think, in terms of one body. No longer are our associations in Adam, but in Christ, in another Man. I think the underlying thought in chapter 8, in the Spirit of Christ, links on with this, because it is "one body in Christ". It is not in Adam, it is another Man, and it is the anointed Man, so we are to regard ourselves for God, no longer as units but as "members one of the other".
{222}
S.E.E. Are you coming to the loops of blue and clasps of gold now?
J.C-S. That is the idea. Though you may know clearly what it is to have all your moral questions settled, your past history disposed of, and have no cloud between your soul and God, as to anything that has transpired in your life; having received the Spirit, the Spirit has not come to you merely for your own personal comfort. Of course, without Him you can enjoy nothing, but the moment you become conscious of having the Spirit, you are intended to become conscious that you stand in relation to others. There are others, so that you now have brotherly affections which will bind you to others. It is no longer a matter of a unit. You are fitting into an organism (although that is not developed, but it is the foundation of it, it is "one body in Christ"). That takes you right out of the region of man in the flesh, and whatever links you may have had in that condition, whether commendable or otherwise; your links are now to be spiritual in their nature and character.
G.H. It is a good word *body-minded*. You meet christians who are independent and isolated in outlook, but being body-minded would correct that.
J.C-s. It would. There are a great many christians who know something of the clasps of gold, and we would not deny that they have received the Spirit, but they have no consciousness that the Spirit has come to reside in a vessel here. If the Spirit has come to dwell in my heart, He does not give me any option in the matter, it is not His intention that I should receive Him without my having part in the vessel in which He dwells.
{223}
There are two verses which we read in @Romans 12 that stand related to the thought of *one another*. "As to brotherly love, kindly affectioned towards one another", then, "Have the same respect one for another". In reading @Exodus 26: 5, 6, it was with the thought of enlarging on the words *one another*, which introduces the initial links proper to "one body in Christ". The "loops of blue" anticipate the epistle to the Ephesians, for @Romans 12 puts us on the direct route to "the mystery" as developed in Ephesians. As coming into the first flush of feeling relating to the body, it would immediately make you conscious of the fact that you have spiritual links with others. Those links are not based on your social status, or upon any agreeability that you may have between you and other persons, but such as are entirely spiritual. That is, immediately the idea of the body is touched by Paul it sets the feelings and affections flowing towards one another, from the point of view of @Romans 12, without any discrimination. There are scriptures where discrimination comes in, but here every member of the body is to be regarded in your mind as having the Spirit of Christ, and thus the same qualities, the qualities of the anointed Man. Now your loop will fit any loop that can be produced (in the body), in that company. There is not a person in the company whose loop will not match yours, all are of the same colour, and the same size from this point of view. They are placed one over against the other. It is a remarkable thing the word for "one another" in that particular scripture is drawn from the word for "sister". The word is used again as regards the tenons of the board, and it is also used in regard to the living creatures in
{224}
Ezekiel. It is never used in a common sense, that is, outside the range of divine ideas, as if to indicate that the thought of "one another" is founded upon the very finest and most delicate spiritual feelings and affections.
J.D.U. It is helpful to connect these thoughts, keeping in mind what we have at the beginning of the chapter, the holy acceptable sacrifice to God in relation to our bodies. In these vessels now, through the Spirit, the features that you are illustrating from the loops of blue and so on, are in evidence.
J.C-S. Quite. It is not a question now of conduct, but what results positively from the Spirit coming to reside there. So you have a loop of blue, and I have a loop of blue, and they match perfectly. The golden clasp would come in and put us together, so that unity is maintained in connection with the tabernacle, just as it is maintained in connection with the body. It is said to be "one body in Christ". All the members of the body, though many, are one, all having the same qualities, the same nature, the same feelings, and the same affections. So that, immediately the idea of the body is stated by Paul *love* takes its natural course. You are "kindly affectioned towards one another". It is a natural sequence. The moment any brother or sister comes into view what are your feelings? "Kindly affectioned towards one another".
J.D.U. These exhortations be kindly affectioned towards one another, and so on, seem to illustrate what you spoke of as implied in that word "one another;" that is finer feelings. They seem to cover what are very fine feelings.
{225}
J.C-S. That is what I had in mind that we might see, that flowing out of the body there are the most sensitive, delicate, rich feelings of affection which cannot be matched anywhere else. The fineness of affection that flows in the body cannot be matched anywhere in this world. The loops are loops of blue -- heavenly attachment. Are you prepared to bring your loop over opposite mine, regardless of what I may be in my natural temperament, in my social standing, in my status of life here? Are you prepared to bring your loop over against mine without any natural consideration?
J.S.T. Did Saul get a sense of this when Ananias said to him, "Saul, brother"?
J.C-S. I am sure he did. He felt in that way that he was immediately introduced into a circle of great affection. I would like to remark again, in regard to this idea in the curtains, that the word "one another" occurs several times in @Romans 12, suggesting the "one another" of @Exodus 26, which, as remarked, is a word implying the thought of *sister*. This indicates, I suppose, affection, and a finer grade of affection than would be found in the male.
J.N.G. This very epistle is the occasion of a letter of commendation of a sister.
J.C-S. That fits in very well indeed. There was no question about her, she had her loop of blue well developed. I would like to raise the question with the young here, as to whether your loop has come into evidence yet. Whether you have regarded yourself as an integral part of this great vessel that the apostle is developing. So that at the very outset you would show those feelings, and be "kindly affectioned towards one
{226}
another". This is not toward the people that you know naturally; some might be very far from agreeable, their temperament might be a disadvantage, and their make-up very trying. All that is overcome as you rise above it in spiritual energy and power. It is a question of attaching yourself to others, to "one another", in all this fine feeling and affection with kindness running over, always present in your affections. Should one of the brethren come along, the kindly feeling is there ready to express itself. It is not the warmth of natural affection, it is a loop of blue. Then we are to have the same respect for one another. I believe, dear brethren, that a lack of this loop oftentimes lays the foundation for a great deal of difficulty in localities. It is assumed that, having tasted the fine feelings of affection which are circulating in "one body in Christ", you are now to take account of each person in the body, whether it be locally or in the general sense, as having the Spirit of Christ, as having His qualities. That would command your respect.
J.D.U. It may perhaps be well to point out that the word *respect* comes into the new translation in verse 16, "Have the same respect one for another".
J.C-S. It is the idea of respect in a spiritual way. It is not respecting a man because he has some big position in this life, or a status socially. It is having the same respect for one another as deriving from Christ, and as being a constituent part of this vessel, which the apostle formally recognises as "one body in Christ". Well now, dear brethren, if this enters into our feelings and affections, you can understand that we will view one another in a rather different light. That is, we will not differentiate
{227}
between persons. Our loop of blue will be brought over opposite to any loop that exists in any brother. Your loop is ready to attach itself to any brother or sister, and the insertion of that golden clasp would, no doubt, refer to the divine nature, bringing in the incorruptible affections in which the saints are linked up here in a spiritual way.
C.D. I feel this is very searching. One was thinking of the words *each one*, leaving none out, no distinction in this matter. It is not a question of distinction in the body, but of what is common to all, "each one members one of the other".
J.C-S. So there is no distinction in this setting. If you look round your local meeting you are impressed with the fact that the persons you are surrounded with are the Lord's own selection. He selected every one of them, and they are regarded as being fitted into this vessel. My relations with them are to be regarded now as in a heavenly light. There is no other colour. You cannot introduce a green loop. You must match the colour scheme of the tabernacle which is being coupled and unified in order that it may be *one whole*. So that now in our local settings we are to regard one another in that light. We are to be prepared to link up with anyone, any brother, any sister, so that your loop is always ready there with all the affections of a brother or sister. With all these fine feelings, not merely in a passive way but in an active way, with all the fervency of spirit giving character to it. So that you readily fit into your place in a locality, and people do not feel it difficult to fit in with you, because your loop is the right quality and your golden clasp is of the right quality. You are not trying to build up social links.
{228}
E.T. Does the last chapter of Romans illustrate the fine feelings in the salutation of Paul? "Salute ... my kinsmen and fellow-captives ... who were also in Christ before me". Feelings of respect were there for one another.
J.C-S. That fits in beautifully. A brother or sister may have a disability, but that is not the basis of your link. It is based on what is spiritual, and you have those fine feelings which will readily attach themselves to any of the brethren. So your feelings are flowing out, and there is that kindly feeling in your heart, ready at any time there is an opportunity of expressing itself and it does not matter to which one.
J.W. I was thinking of the feminine side in all this. In @Proverbs 31: 26 it says, "upon her tongue is the law of kindness". This is not spasmodic, it is a perfect law.
J.C-S. The person is governed by it. It is the rule of life and the feminine side suggests the delicacy of the feelings and unifying character of them, the permanency of them. I believe it is a very choice word that the Spirit has drawn upon in the book of Exodus, because it also fits in to Paul's ministry, which, of course, he develops in relation to the assembly, not only as the body but as *the wife*.
S.E.E. I was thinking of the apostle's word to the two Philippian sisters, Euodia and Syntyche, who evidently had allowed something to interfere with this precious feature of the body. "I exhort Euodia, and exhort Syntyche, to be of the same mind in the Lord". Would it not help us to remember the ties which bind us to one another are not only the strongest, but the slenderest and tenderest of ties?
{229}
J.C-S. That is very good. I am glad you mentioned that scripture, because you have a concrete case of two sisters who had allowed something to interfere with their relations. He infers, as you have been a true yokefellow with me, you yoke these two sisters together, so that they may be able to work together. There would be no strain upon the yoke.
J.M. Would it be right to say, that we should be greatly encouraged to accept the moral process of the chapters in Romans, having in view that these things might be found in us? The thought of the mystery is dependent on these things being worked out in us.
J.C-S. That is the way it works. Without this as a foundation we could not go on to the finer feelings which the apostle had in view. All this would call for exercise on our part, that we do not miss what the apostle is driving at in his initial ideas in connection with this vessel. This is the starting point, and everything is set in relation to "one another". This word is emphasised in chapter 12; it is the normal thing that we should love *one another*, anything less should never be entertained, because amongst the brethren we have links and affections which far exceed and excel anything that we have in a natural way.
*From The Mystery, pages 1 - 21, Australia, 1939*
{230}
{231}
THE MYSTERY (2)
J Collie-Smith
@1 Corinthians 1: 10; @1 Corinthians 12: 11, 14, 23 - 27; @Exodus 26: 10, 11
J.C-S. We were looking this morning at the thought of what is foundational in connection with the body, which is the distinctive line in Paul's ministry, and how our own bodies are taken possession of by the Spirit. The Spirit comes in to dwell in the believer's body, who is said to have the Spirit of Christ. The Spirit of Christ is the basic idea in connection with the "one body" which the apostle introduces in @Romans 12, after having appealed to us for the presentation of our bodies as a living sacrifice to God, which he refers to as our "intelligent service". So that any believer who knows the compassions of God and all that they carry, would be penetrated by the grace of God, bringing about a voluntary desire to hand over his body to God, so that it might become a living sacrifice, never to be recalled. He would thus, so to speak, be claimed in view of entering into the one body in Christ which is normally composed of persons who have presented their bodies to God as a living sacrifice. Then we touched on the way in which the feelings are set in circulation in the "one body", which is said to be "in Christ", not in Adam. They are so fine, so delicate, so sensitive, that they are capable of deep emotions spiritually. So that persons who compose this body, this vessel, are to be "kindly affectioned towards one another". That is, the one body would set us on the line of having
{232}
others now to love, to think of, and to have the same respect for. Finally, the loops of blue would be expressive of those heavenly feelings taking shape in our relations with one another binding us to one another in a spiritual way with the clasps of gold.
This afternoon we should pursue the thought into the epistle to the Corinthians, which advances the idea and carries it into a corporate setting. As we remarked, the epistle to the Romans is largely the adjustment of our individual relations with God, but putting us in touch with others. When we come to the epistle to the Corinthians we carry forward with us all that we have gained from the epistle to the Romans. But the position is advanced in so far that it now introduces a corporate thought, viewing us together more particularly in local form. I think the epistle to the Corinthians is designed to give us light for the local situation as set together, merging in one fellowship and in one body. So it would show how these ideas are carried forward and expanded; the local company becoming "the tent" for it all.
A.H.S. The first verse you read in Corinthians refers to the local company; "that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion".
J.C-S. Clearly. No doubt the idea of the fellowship is a universal one, but then it is in local companies that these ideas are worked out, because there are no ideas in christianity that are not workable. Every bit of Paul's ministry is workable today, despite the fact that the responsible vessel has greatly failed, indeed has broken down. But the light of the epistle to the Corinthians is that which governs us today, just as much as it would have
{233}
governed the saints at Corinth. We, of course, on the public side, have to modify the situation on account of brokenness. We do not claim assembly position in an absolute way, but all the principles and all the light entering into the vessel are available to us locally. We cannot put ourselves into relation to one another on any lower ground than the original idea.
G.H. It was addressed to the assembly of God in Corinth. Is the epistle to the Romans taking up the glad tidings on a different line?
J.C-S. The apostle had never been to Rome; he was ready to preach the glad tidings there, but he does not present the truth in Romans from the same platform as he addresses the Corinthians. You would bear in mind that the ministry we get in this epistle does not give us the state and condition of the Corinthians when Paul was amongst them, or at the time of his leaving them, but what they became after he had left them. The apostle went to Corinth like an architect with all the original plans and specifications in his hands, and entering into Corinth, he proceeds to build there according to the original plan. Like Moses who built according to the pattern of the representation of heavenly things shown to him in the mount. Paul came to Corinth and, proceeding to work there, he would not deviate in any detail from the original specifications. Indeed, he went to Corinth in fear and trembling, the Corinthians being somewhat given over to Greek learning, education, culture and also to pretentious buildings. Paul goes into Corinth as a tent-maker and lives there with tent-makers. He would not sanction anything that would tend to flatter the Corinthians, or make
{234}
anything of man after the flesh. So he proceeds amongst them in this simple way, cautious lest he should at any time endorse in them what belonged to the first man, seeking as it says, not "to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified" (@1 Corinthians 2: 2).
E.A.K. Is that why the cross and the word of the cross have such a place of prominence in the beginning of the epistle?
J.C-S. Exactly. Paul would at the very outset shut out man after the flesh. Paul left the Corinthians well equipped, like a beautiful tent, according to the original model in that setting, with the colour scheme matching exactly and all the parts fitting perfectly. After he left, the enemy came in. Paul had laid the foundation rightly, but then a rival man was introduced. The Corinthians were making room for man after the flesh, for his culture, his mental ability, his authority, things that would make much of them, and they were using spiritual gift to distinguish themselves. Paul brings the word of the cross to bear upon that, because in the cross that kind of man has been ended, repudiated in shame, never to be reinstated.
S.E.E. Would you say that nothing can detract from the value and dignity attaching to that description of the saints in Corinth, "the assembly of God;" that abides in all its value?
J.C-S. Undoubtedly. I think that greatly helps us when it comes to our approach to the assembly locally. Instead of looking round and enumerating the various persons, it is "assembly of God;" you clothe the saints with that dignified position, so you can see how easy it is to have the same respect for one another.
{235}
S.E.E. If you view or enter upon any conditions or circumstances from that standpoint, would it not promote a sense of stability and confidence in God which would bring about recovery?
J.C-S. Indeed it does, for, being God's assembly, He has the right of way and He can do anything, and although our day is one of brokenness, I believe we exaggerate the ruin and overlook what He maintains in keeping with the original idea. The ruin is very great and you may say very complete. It is right we should recognise that and feel it and bear it upon our spirits. But I think that at times the ruin is so exaggerated in the minds of some, that it amounts to giving up what God has established here on earth and maintains by the Spirit. That which the Lord Jesus says, the gates of hades shall not prevail against; it will not be overthrown. We must cling to the original idea and when we take things up together locally, putting ourselves in relation to one another, it must be with the light of the assembly in our minds.
C.D. The ruin is the work of the enemy, but there is something far greater than that, the work of God. Is that what you had in mind?
J.C-S. Quite so, and Paul when he comes to approach the Corinthians is well aware of the condition into which they had lapsed. But in the early verses, up to the tenth verse, you will observe how he makes an appeal to them; looking at them according to the divine thought. Although their state and condition were bad, that did not change his thoughts. The moment, however, he begins to touch the local conditions, the first thing he addresses himself to is their divided state. We are coming now to the
{236}
working out of the ideas which we touched this morning in an initial way in the local companies. We are now tested as to how we can work out these thoughts together.
C.D. Moses came down from the mount with the heavenly pattern in mind, but found confusion, and issued a challenge as to who was on the Lord's side.
J.C-S. It is very much the state of christendom today; that is, the public position.
J.D.U. So that if it is only a handful in a locality these principles that attach to the scriptural idea of the local company should govern us, without any thought of pretension on our side.
J.C-S. Yes, that is the point, because the breakdown has not in any wise weakened those original thoughts. They are still available, though we do not take them up in any pretentious way. But if we put ourselves in relation to one another company-wise, we must do so in the light of the assembly; one cannot bring the standard down because of the altered conditions.
G.H. Would it bring in the thought of authority? He exhorts them in the name of the Lord.
J.C-S. The thought of the Lord's name is authority, but it brings in the full title, the Lord Jesus Christ, as covering the entire wealth of the fellowship that is contained in those names. Though it is a day of small things, the resources of the fellowship have not in any wise been impoverished.
J.D.U. And that would operate effectively against any idea of ranging ourselves behind any particular leader; it is the fellowship of God's Son.
{237}
J.C-S. Exactly. The fellowship means that we are all partners. It is not intended that anyone in the fellowship should not take up the spirit of partnership, and attach himself to the interests of the concern. Thus he would not at any time allow himself to be involved in a rival concern of any kind.
C.D. It is on a sure foundation; "for other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 3: 11).
J.C-S. That was the foundation Paul laid amongst them. He went to Corinth and laboured amongst them for about eighteen months, and his work was largely connected with the founding of the local assembly, and he laid the foundation rightly. No other foundation could be laid, because it was "Jesus Christ;" that order of man. Paul laid the foundation there in the souls of the Corinthians, but now others had come in and built on that foundation things that were not in accord with what Paul had laid in Corinth. Though the body is not formally stated in the tenth verse of chapter 1, the idea is implied. "That ye all say the same thing, and that there be not among you divisions; but that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion". There was a reason for Paul addressing them in that way, and they would readily understand what was in the apostle's mind, because the state and condition of the Corinthians was far from happy. They were not thinking the same thing, nor were they saying the same thing, and there were divisions existing. Although there was no public rupture, they were far removed in their spirits from one another. Apparently there were factions, parties, and each party would have its
{238}
influence and following, and Paul strikes at the very root of this in the opening chapter. This is very far removed from the feelings which we had this morning in the thought of "one body in Christ" which is carried over into this epistle.
E.T. Is what you have in mind illustrated in @Ezekiel 43: 11, where the prophet is told to show the house to the house of Israel. It says "if they be confounded ... make known to them the form of the house, and its fashion, and its goings out, and its comings in". Would that illustrate the apostle's ministry to the Corinthians?
J.C-S. So that he shows them the pattern in that way, keeping in mind that he had ministered amongst them and had presented the full light of the position, leaving behind him a very beautiful answer to his ministry. When Paul left Corinth there was an orderly tent there, but the enemy came in, apparently in the form of culture, expressed in refined man seeking to acquire a place amongst the saints on mental lines. The Corinthians were unaware that in opening the door to this rival man in his refined form, they were actually opening the door to him in his most profligate form. If you open the door to the man after the flesh in his most refined form, he will come in in his most degraded form. Paul calls attention in chapters 6 and 7 to our bodies; showing that it is in the body the enemy would bring in destructive effects to break up the unity. We all carry the elements that make it possible for the enemy to get a footing in our localities. Each of us should exercise great care lest we should, by anything that is allowed in us to go unjudged secretly,
{239}
open the door to the enemy to come in and break up what answers to "one body" locally.
J.W.H. Would the failure to recognise the necessity for the truth presented to us in Romans being carried forward into the local company, bring in these conditions? And on the other hand would what the apostle brings before us suggest the wisdom and skill with which these things should be met in the company locally?
J.C-S. It would. On the one hand it shows we all carry with us the element which would contribute to the state of affairs indicated. On the other hand it shows how skilfully the apostle handles the situation, and in his great affection for the Corinthians, he goes to great lengths to recover them. His ministry in this epistle brings about recovery. It lets us into the great affection which the apostle had for the Corinthians. "If even in abundantly loving you I should be less loved" (@2 Corinthians 12: 15).
S.E.E. Would the house of Chloe represent that feature amongst the saints, particularly as seen in sisters? I was thinking of your remarks on the thought of "one another" this morning, a feature which would find expression in our concern that those loops of blue and clasps of gold should be held intact and opposite to one another.
J.C-S. I am sure that is right; so that she had spiritual feeling about the matter and would, no doubt, be like a rallying point in the midst of conditions there. It is a great thing when difficulties come in in a local company to find this element. It stands in a spiritual way for what is of God and maintains fine delicate feeling, not allowing itself to be drawn into anything short of the full thought of the
{240}
assembly of God in a locality. Such will not say "*I* am of Paul, and *I* of Apollos". The tabernacle being *one*, the loops of blue would be there held together by the clasps of gold. As we proceed through this epistle, Paul deals with the deplorable state that had come in amongst them, and has to say a great deal about the divided state that existed amongst them. You can understand where a party spirit exists, and estranged feeling in regard to one another, you cannot have the development of divine thoughts in such an atmosphere. So the apostle goes on step by step and brings us through chapter 10, showing the fellowship in its universal bearing and what is proper to it. Then the Lord's supper with all its touching appeal expressed in the body of the Lord Jesus and the cup of the new covenant, all being calculated to touch the inward springs of affection. Then he proceeds to deal with the thought of the body of Christ, saying that *we* have all been baptised in the power of one Spirit into one body and all been given to drink of one Spirit.
C.D. I was thinking how Paul would bring down the wrong man, whom they had enthroned in their hearts, and set the right man on the throne. All these features which the apostle puts before them are in keeping with the heavenly pattern; the divine order is in his own mind, and it was before him to bring them to that.
J.C-S. Quite so. The apostle does not deviate from his original model. The state of the Corinthians will not drive him from what he knows as divine light, what is proper to the local assembly. "As the body is one and has many members, but all the members of the body, being many, are one body, so also is the Christ". That is what the
{241}
Corinthians were locally and Paul does not deprive them of that, although failure had come in; that was their status in the Spirit. As having the unction of the Spirit, the anointing, they are regarded in that way as "*the Christ*".
Ques. Would you explain, "so also is the Christ?"
J.C-S. When the Lord Jesus was here in the days of His flesh, when He came into this world He could say, "thou hast prepared me a body" (@Hebrews 10: 5), and He was here in that body under the eye of heaven, heaven following Him here with great delight. When about 30 years of age the Spirit came down and publicly identified Him; and He is seen as the anointed vessel here in order that all the light of God might be diffused. No doubt our anointing is patterned after His anointing. The saints locally are regarded as "Christ's body", indicating they were characteristically that in the locality. As such, the Spirit having come down and anointed Christ, is also seen coming down and anointing the saints, so that the anointing extends to the local company, and they are said to be "the Christ", the anointed vessel.
J.D.U. I think that puts it very clearly. It is very interesting, as following on what we had this morning, that as having the Spirit of Christ now, there is a vessel here that is so identified with the Spirit of that Man, that it is called "the Christ" and meets with the approval of heaven in every way.
J.C-S. The basic idea in @Romans 8 is developed and carried into this chapter, being expanded under the thought of the anointed vessel, "so also is the Christ". This vessel is taken possession of by the Spirit, just as when the
{242}
tabernacle was finally erected the glory of God came and took possession of it, God dwelt there. So in this epistle the Spirit is seen residing, and the anointing effected, and when there is speaking under the influence of the anointing those who are present are conscious that God is there (@1 Corinthians 14: 25).
C.D. You would encourage the saints in every locality, however small the company may be, to have this complete thought before them. It says, "all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours" (@1 Corinthians 1: 2). However small the company, it would encourage them.
J.C-S. I am sure that is right. Anything short of that will be a failure. The Spirit takes such control that we are all brought in the power of one Spirit into one vessel, all that *we are* is submerged. You may get a Jew who has preference, or a Gentile who may have disadvantages, but all that is submerged and we are given to drink into one Spirit. I believe that "given to drink of one Spirit" (@1 Corinthians 12: 13), means drinking of that which is flowing amongst the saints, as current in the local assembly, as a source of satisfaction for our affections.
C.G. Would you distinguish for us the thought of the body as presented in Corinthians, and the thought we had before us this morning, "We, being many, are one body in Christ" (@Romans 12: 5)?
J.C-S. In Romans you are taken to the threshold of the body idea, showing that although many, we are one body in Christ. It is in another order of man, not in Adam, not in that condition of things in which we have a place naturally, or in the flesh, but in Christ. When you come to
{243}
the epistle to the Corinthians the idea is carried further, and it is formally recognised as Christ's body, not only is it "one body" but Christ's body, showing that it is descriptive of Him.
C.D. And the expression of Himself.
J.C-S. Quite so. That is the great thought in connection with the body, the expression "Christ's body", or "the body", or the "one body", or "His body", is language that is used exclusively by Paul. No other writer speaks of "the body", it is the distinctive feature of Paul's ministry, and the outstanding thought of our dispensation. It is the great thought that is exclusively ours and entirely new.
Ideas such as the kingdom and the temple, both referred to in this epistle, are carried over from the old economy, and put into a spiritual setting in our economy, but you have nothing corresponding to the idea of "the body" in the old economy.
C.D. So that when the Lord spoke to Saul of Tarsus and said, "Why dost thou persecute me", that was an entirely new thought.
J.C-S. Quite so. Saul of Tarsus had to learn that there was a suffering vessel here with which Christ could identify Himself; He said that is *Me*. That was no doubt carried into Paul's heart by the Spirit and became the foundation of all his exercises, and all his light which matured in later days. Paul did not produce the vessel, it was there before he came on the scene, but it had never been designated "the body", it had never been spoken of as "one body" or "the body of Christ".
{244}
E.A.K. Does not the truth of the incarnation underlie what you are speaking of, in that it would be impossible for the thoughts of God to be fulfilled in such a way until there had been a glorious Man here, who had taken a body, in which to carry out the will of God. So that it would magnify in our souls the wonder of the incarnation.
J.C-S. I am glad you have referred to that; "thou hast prepared me a body". The Lord Jesus was here in a body in which He carried out the will of God in every detail; every day He lived here was a day of interest to heaven, everything fresh and green in the midst of a dry, barren world. You see Him here moving amongst men, but different in His manner, different in His bearing from men who had derived from Adam. You see the Lord moving about day after day in the most ordinary circumstances, and as He speaks, every word is just exactly what it should be. He never has to recall anything that He says. He never takes up a position which He has to abandon. He never makes a remark which He has to modify. He never came to a conclusion which He had to adjust in any way. He never had to retrace a step He took. The whole of His movements here were in absolute agreement with what was going on in heaven, and in His life here He was bringing daily delight to the Father's heart, whose eye followed Him here with intense joy. But the time came when that body was offered up as a sacrifice, without spot. @Luke 24 says they found not the body of the Lord Jesus. Earth had been bereft of the body of the Lord Jesus. Now "the body of Christ" is the answer to the body of the Lord Jesus being withdrawn from the earth. He having died out
{245}
of this scene, the Spirit comes down and forms the saints into "one body", and they become the competent expression of Christ here in moral features. So that Jesus is continued here under the eye of God; the same qualities, the same features, the same beautiful graces appearing now in "the body of Christ".
E.A.K. We love to sing,
<blockquote>Holy vessel of God's pleasure <br>In His service day by day. (`30:2)</blockquote>
As appreciating the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ in that way, would we not be formed so that there might be under the eye of God a vessel down here that is fulfilling the will of God, formed of individuals who are pursuing that pathway as energised in their affections by the One who trod it so perfectly?
J.C-S. That is it. It produces the thought, or feeling or act, that is the reproduction of Christ, so that the body of Christ in that way is the continuation in moral features of Jesus, the One who was here exclusively for God. That is to take local form, and in chapter 12 you will observe there is distribution of the services and gifts and so on. All is traced to the same source, the same Spirit, the same Lord, and the same God. All is traced back to the same great Source, the activities of divine Persons in this economy, which has been set up in time, and for the working out of it locally in the body, for we are all to be in the power of "one Spirit". "For also in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bondmen or free, and have all been given to drink of one Spirit". Now it is the working out of all this that brings so much testing. Often we are not
{246}
prepared to submit to the arrangement of divine Persons. We get our own ideas about things, and we may get wrong ideas about ourselves, and think we are equal to much more than the Lord has given us. On the other hand, we may have wrong ideas about others, and not be prepared to submit to the sovereignty of the Lord in His selection. With the result that I may force a course on the saints which is directed all the time toward the establishment of myself, using my gift for my own distinction, instead of seeing that any gift the Lord graces me with is for the distinction of Christ.
S.E.E. A person may be even breaking bread and yet not be merged with the brethren as one who has been baptised into one body. Would it be still more incongruous to find one who merges with the brethren, and yet is not breaking bread?
J.C-S. That is rather an irregular position. In receiving the Spirit it is not in the thoughts of God that anyone should receive Him and remain in an isolated, or independent, position; but that he may merge with the brethren and drink of the one Spirit amongst the brethren. It is unthinkable that one who finds his joys amongst the brethren should not commit himself to them.
A.B.J. Does this emphasise the necessity of rigidly viewing one another as members of the body? So that there is no schism, no independence, no isolation, but there is a responsibility taken up by each, so that each is living in the good of this, the one body consisting of many members.
J.C-S. We do not want to have the truth only in an abstract way. The divine thought is that every idea
{247}
presented in Paul's ministry is workable in any locality, so that the idea of the body should take form locally. I think @1 Corinthians 12 is in the main particularly the local assembly.
C.D. Where there is a definite acceptance of the merging, there is a readiness now for the distinctive place that such have in the body, according to the sovereign pleasure of God. There is a distinctive place for each member according to the sovereign choice and pleasure of God, as it has pleased Him.
J.C-S. Exactly. So the Spirit divides severally as He will, we must learn to accept that. Then there is no schism in the body, no rivalry, no competition, no idea that this brother is on a level with me, and I must get past him. It would not enter into the service, because it is all part of one great service and everything now must be regulated. My part in the assembly being regulated according to the Lord, and recognising the measure which He has assigned to me.
C.D. That emphasises the importance of the merging, and the going out of sight, so that there may be the acceptance and the adorning of the position in which God has set one as it has pleased Him.
J.C-S. Quite so. A man may be an excellent business-man, a great administrator, able to organise, but it does not qualify him for things in the assembly, because it is what is spiritual that is essential there.
J.S.T. Do the clasps of copper come in yet?
J.C-S. Just as we have our loops of blue, with the clasps of gold, fifty loops and fifty clasps of gold, so now we come to the fifty loops and clasps of copper.
{248}
C.D. Does the fifty suggest what may be found in a local company?
J.C-S. I have sometimes suggested that. It gives you something like the number in which these things take form locally.
E.A.K. Did you have a connection in your mind between the curtains of goats¬ hair and the Corinthian position, as being the responsible outward position? And then I was going to ask as to the matter of righteousness, concerning the clasps of copper.
J.C-S. I believe it would suggest that, when it comes to the public position, to the working out of things in responsibility, even the curtains of goats¬ hair figure. It links up with the Corinthian position which involves separation, the goat suggesting separation; and the goat also comes in as the suffering animal, representing the idea of suffering. I believe it would suggest that our public position in that way has to be taken up in unity on the basis of separation from evil, and it means there is to be judgment. The idea of the copper connects with the altar. Copper was to be employed in everything connected with the altar. I believe that the change here from gold to copper would suggest that our links with one another must be on the basis of the judgment of evil; that is, there can be no unity apart from the judgment of evil. So in our links with one another we have to see to it that we do not overlook the loops which are in the curtains of goats¬ hair. The connecting link of copper referring, no doubt, to the judgment of evil. All that has to enter into our relations with one another as seen here in regard to *the public position*.
{249}
C.D. Would it be seen in the eleven in @Acts 1, when taking up the matter of Judas? That is, the unswerving judgment of evil as together.
J.C-S. I think it would indeed. Nothing is glossed over. We have to come to this, not only individually, but as a company, that our links must be maintained on that basis, unity on the principle of separation from evil, and the judgment and refusal of it so that we can walk together in holy associations.
C.D. They said of Judas, "he was numbered amongst us" (@Acts 1: 17).
J.C-S. Quite. What I thought to emphasise is that very often in our localities, when it comes to the working out of what is seen in @1 Corinthians 12, we get out of alignment and oftentimes, perhaps, there is a good deal of natural feeling. We like ministry from persons whom we like, and we do not like ministry from persons we dislike. We measure up one another on the basis of what we are naturally, temperament and make-up, overlooking the fact that God has tempered the body together. We have to come to this, they are the Lord's selection, He has selected every one of them. We must have our loop in readiness, not only on the line of the divine nature, but also on the line of what is practical as working into the daily life of the brethren in their localities. So you do not allow yourself to be carried by what is natural, it is refused and judged. It is a menace to the brethren; because oftentimes the brethren clear themselves in regard of gross evil, but, like the Corinthians, we are apt to leave a place for the cultured man, the flesh in a more cultured form, and to leave room for it in such a way, that it is evident we are
{250}
not using the copper clasps in our associations with one another. This leads to strained feelings and distance creeping in between brother and brother, and between sister and sister, whereas no matter how much we may differ about any procedure, we should not disagree in principle. Even supposing there is a matter about which we have not the same judgment, that should not bring about strained feelings, a rupture between brother and brother and sister and sister. Where these things do exist and call for action, there is always the danger of having over-developed military feelings, which overshadow family feelings, which must be preserved at all times. I am not thinking of where evil has to be judged assembly-wise, but there are a great many irregularities which come in amongst the saints, which do not touch the holiness of God's house, but which bring about distance and estrangement, and we find ourselves drifting apart from one another. In order to check that we must hold to the truth that the body is *one*. We have all been baptised in the power of one Spirit, and have all been given to drink of the same refreshing stream. As drinking from that how near it brings us to one another in our minds and affections!
S.E.E. Would not the drinking of one Spirit produce satisfaction, so complete that every other desire would be eliminated, other than to promote and strengthen the links that bind the saints together?
J.C-S. I am sure that is right. As we are given to drink of the one Spirit, that brings us very close to one another in affection and in our thoughts. So that when a matter comes up concerning a brother, there is a readiness on our part to understand one another, to be with one
{251}
another; accrediting that you are just as desirous of protecting the interests of Christ as I am; and that we have committed ourselves to the refusal and repudiation of evil; and that you are carrying your copper clasp, as well as I am. Drinking in that way into the one Spirit would widen out, and affect and influence the minds of the brethren, even in their deliberations in the care meeting, bringing us close to one another in personal links formed in a spiritual way; not social links. So that we love one another personally now as family feelings and affections are developed. We do not readily surrender those fine feelings alluded to in connection with "one another", for the loops will not easily give way. As committed to these things it would mean you are not prepared to allow, on your part, anything that would interfere with the loops coming together. Think of a brother or a sister amongst us with no loops evident; you cannot make contact with them, you cannot join in spirit because there are no facilities on their part for this harmonious binding together of the brethren in one whole.
J.W.H. You spoke this morning of the loops of blue. It does not state the colour or material the loops are made of here. Would that in any way be suggestive of the operations of the Spirit, giving us a measure of what is needed, as to what calls for judgment?
J.C-S. It would. Of course the curtains of goats¬ hair here, are a dominating thought as fitting in with the Corinthian position, and the copper clasps as to our relations with one another. When it comes to our practical unification, it must not be on a footing short of the death of Christ in which there is the judgment of evil, unmitigated
{252}
judgment in dealing with evil at the brazen altar; there sin is dealt with in its totality.
*From The Mystery, pages 22 - 40, Australia, 1939*.
{253}
THE MYSTERY (3)
J Collie-Smith
@Colossians 1: 17, 18, 24 - 29; @Colossians 2: 19; @Ephesians 1: 22, 23; @Ephesians 3: 8 - 11
J.C-S. In looking at the thought of "one body in Christ" in the epistle to the Romans it was emphasised that things there are largely connected with the Spirit. It is what the Spirit of God does for us and what we do by the Spirit; showing that the Spirit even comes to our aid, joining Himself to our weaknesses. For, according to Romans, we do not know what to pray for as we ought, so the Spirit would come to our aid in such a matter as that. It was remarked that the epistle to the Romans shows us Christ raised from the dead, but we are still here in the scene of responsibility. So that our bodies have to be taken account of as now under the control of the Spirit in view of our merging into one body in Christ; this being the initial idea of the mystery. We also saw in 1 Corinthians that in the power of that same Spirit we are all baptised into one body, and all given to drink of one Spirit; showing how the Spirit would unify the saints in mind and in affection. Putting them in touch with the same source of satisfaction, giving them to drink into one Spirit, which would bring about a very great sense of satisfaction. There would not be a disgruntled person, there would not be a person with a vacancy in his heart. All given to drink of one Spirit would lead to abundant satisfaction among brethren.
{254}
In the epistle to the Colossians we pass on to a different point of view. You will observe in reading this epistle that the Spirit does not come into prominence, being mentioned but once. It is rather now what He has formed; divine formation in the saints comes into view, the saints being regarded in this epistle as quickened together with Christ, showing that we are now in an entirely different region, where Christ is "everything and in all". The body fills such a great place in Paul's ministry that he brings it forward as completing the word of God, showing that the mystery introduces a very important subject for our consideration.
G.McK. Would you explain what is meant by the thought of completing the word of God?
J.C-S. I think it is that all that has come out in revelation, all the unfolding of divine ideas, all that came out in Christ as expanded under the ministry of the twelve, must have its completion, its finality, in Paul's ministry. It is not a question of completing the Scriptures. Paul did not write the last portion of the Scriptures, but it is a matter of filling out, and giving fulness to, the whole thought of revelation, because without the mystery it would be incomplete. It had been hidden throughout the ages, indeed Ephesians says it is hid in God; but it is revealed and we are initiated into the great secrets of God in connection with Christ and the assembly.
S.E.E. You remarked that the position is now reached in which Christ is seen supreme. Is that why the apostle brings forward that wonderful range of glory attaching to His Person, before he introduces the thought of the assembly as the body of Christ?
{255}
J.C-S. Quite. It is to show the greatness of the Person who is Head of the body. The Colossians were in danger of losing Him in this unique character, and were bringing in creatures, seeking to make them a means of contact with unseen things. Whereas he brings forward the fact that everything subsists by Christ, who is the Head. The beings they were giving place to are really His creation; all things received being through Him, and all things subsist by Him. So that Paul brings Him forward in all His greatness, the "image of the invisible God;" and that is the Person who is Head of the assembly. Think of His greatness! We can think in terms of things that have a beginning, but you can go as far back as your mind will carry you, and He was there before anything had a beginning. You go back to a point in eternity where there was not a breath of life outside of the Godhead.
J.M. Does this glorious Person complete the thought of the organism according to Colossians?
J.C-S. The body viewed as an organism is complete in itself, but its greatness calls for such a great Person to be Head of it. Colossians brings Christ forward in His own greatness, showing what He is in His own Person, but this adds lustre to the body.
C.D. Is the mystery, that which the apostle speaks of as completing the word of God, the key-stone, so to speak, in the arch of purpose, which gives stability and completeness to the whole structure in that way?
J.C-S. Yes, because it links things up with Paul's own particular light. We do well to pay attention to Paul, because his light is the distinctive light of our dispensation. He would lead us along the whole moral
{256}
road leading to this great spiritual thought where we are divested of all that is natural, to discover that the body is a spiritual organism linked with Christ as its glorious living Head. All its impulse and enrichment is received from Himself, living completely outside what is natural, human and fleshly, it is a spiritual idea.
E.A.K. Is that what the apostle refers to when he speaks of the dispensation of God which is given him towards you, to complete the word of God. I was wondering whether that linked up with his commission at the outset as it was said, "how much he must suffer for my name", and with this verse as to filling up the sufferings of Christ which are behind for the assembly, His body's sake.
J.C-S. Paul got the impression at the very outset that he was not only to be a minister in regard to these things, but also a witness, and that the element of suffering was to enter into his service. He not only moved about in a ministerial way, but as a witness to this great light which grew in his apprehension as the thought of the body developed in his mind. Seeing the suffering vessel here, he is prepared to fill up what was left over of the tribulations of Christ. Paul was prepared for any amount of suffering that might come his way; he would take his own share in it and he was prepared to take what was left over.
J.D.U. He says that he rejoices in suffering, and it seems to connect with the thought in verse 27, that which God would make known. It seems to lie very near to the heart of God. He "would make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations, which is Christ in you the hope of glory". The apostle would thus rejoice in sufferings.
{257}
J.C-S. He did not make any attempt to minimise the sufferings, and he made no attempt to evade them. Indeed it was a matter of joy to him to fill up this suffering that had been left over. He covers it with the wealth of the glory of the mystery, with all the enrichment that lay in it, because the suffering must run along with that idea, the development of the vessel necessarily involving suffering. I believe each of us should understand that, as participating in this great vessel for which Paul served and suffered.
J.W.H. Is that why Timothy was told to take his share in suffering?
J.C-S. Quite so, he was to take his share in it, and we are all to go forward as prepared to suffer in connection with this vessel; these sufferings may be excruciating. @Colossians 2: 1, shows how Paul had combat, the agonies of spirit which he went through in connection with the Colossians, so that this truth might be formative, that it might not only be a matter of light. But that it might form them to enter into the idea in a spiritual way. Suffering must run along with that, and every person who knows his place in the body must be prepared to take his place in suffering.
S.E.E. Is there not a peculiar lustre attaching to the glory belonging to that which is produced through suffering?
J.C-S. Yes, I am sure of that. The glory, and the lustre of it, connected with this suffering is of a very special and unique kind, because it is suffering in connection with the testimony, and not in relation to our individual pathways and the difficulties we encounter
{258}
there. I do not think a person would suffer in this way until he has apprehended the fact that he belongs to the body.
W.B.P. Do we understand more of the sufferings of Christ as we suffer body-wise?
J.C-S. Quite so. His sufferings are continued here in the vessel. You see when Saul began his opposition to Christ in persecuting the saints, the Lord Jesus met him and said: "Why dost thou persecute me?" Saul was persecuting Christ.
A.B.J. Do you think the apostle knew, as Joshua did, how to hand everything over to the captain of Jehovah's host? Joshua said: "What saith my lord unto his servant?" (@Joshua 5: 14).
J.C-S. I think his intimate contact with Christ made lasting impressions on his heart and mind. When the Lord appeared to Saul of Tarsus, He gave him a very definite and deep impression of what the assembly was to Himself. The apostle never forgot that; indeed it grew in his affections, so that his service here was in relation to it and nothing would stand in the way, even if it involved great personal suffering.
S.E.E. May this character of suffering be experienced in spirit?
J.C-S. I think that is largely how it is felt. Our spirits are developed on lines which enable us to rise above what may belong to our own circle. We may have our tribulation there, but this is tribulation in connection with the interests of Christ, calling for very fine sensibilities. There is no vessel that calls for such a high standard of feeling as the assembly.
{259}
C.D. The secret of his endurance in suffering was that he drew on the great love of Christ for the assembly.
J.C-S. Quite so. The apostle was constantly drawing upon Christ, and learnt to rely entirely upon the resources of the Head for the body. He knew the Head of the assembly and the resources that lay in Him. He was not afraid to develop the idea of the body, he was not afraid to open it out and administer it and to develop the truth in relation to it, because he was well aware of the great consummation of his ministry. He knew that the idea would not break down.
A.H.S. I was thinking of @Colossians 2: 2, 3: "The mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge".
J.C-S. The responsible vessel has broken down and things outwardly may look very small. Oftentimes persons may be discouraged, because they see only what the assembly is as a responsible vessel, with all that has befallen it. But a gleam of light from Paul's ministry, a ray of the glorious light that filled the apostle's heart, will entirely change your outlook in connection with the present situation. I do not believe that any person gets a real anchorage in regard to the present situation, and in regard to the truth, until he gets the light of "the body", which is distinctive to Paul's ministry.
L.L. Is the subject not of peculiar importance at the present moment, seeing that we are living in a day when this vessel is nearing completion?
J.C-S. I believe the history of the assembly here, is now a very short one, and the Spirit would call attention
{260}
to the special light of our dispensation. Paul's ministry must of necessity enter into it, filling it out and developing us in relation to this great light. One would wish that the youngest here might just get a gleam of Paul's ministry in his soul, because it would entirely alter his outlook here.
G.H. Does his concern for those who had not seen his face in flesh, as those at Ephesus had, indicate the fine sensibilities of the body that he had? Such feelings would arouse our interest in the work of God in other places. Would that be body-minded?
J.C-S. Indeed, because the Colossian point of view is somewhat different from the Corinthian, which as we have said, gives us the body in local form. The epistle to the Colossians is a viewpoint of the body, seen here in time, but as embracing the whole work of God on earth. It shows the body as united to Christ, as drawing down from Him all the nourishment required for its building up, united and developed in all these holy feelings and affections. The idea is of the body in a general sense as an adequate expression of Christ here at any moment.
Ques. What is the meaning of "Christ in you the hope of glory"?
J.C-S. Well, the apostle was no doubt referring to the nations. The epistle to the Colossians shows the mystery taking form among the nations. The thought of Christ among the nations (or in you), was the way in which Christ was held in the affections of the vessel, as being the pledge of all the coming glory into which that vessel would eventually enter. The assembly is destined to be the great depository of divine glory to the age of ages.
{261}
G.McK. In such a simple epistle as the Thessalonians, these thoughts of sufferings connect with those who are members of this body, and you have spoken now of the glory. Thus at the very beginning of Paul's ministry attention was called to them, showing the importance of it for the youngest.
J.C-S. I do not think Paul ever administered the gospel without having the idea of the body in his mind. The things he would speak of in their initial form were spoken of with a view to the development of his own peculiar ministry. No doubt Paul would speak about many things which the twelve would speak about, but Paul had light that exceeded that of the twelve, and I believe the twelve would receive it through him.
E.A.K. @Colossians 1: 4 speaks of the love which they had towards all the saints. Then lower down it speaks of "the truth of the glad tidings, which are come to you, as they are in all the world". Would those expressions bear upon the universal aspect of this epistle? Does not the truth you are bringing before us involve the appreciation of the assembly universally as the dispensation draws to a close?
J.C-S. That is very good, because the love they had for all saints was really proper assembly feeling. We are inclined to become too local, and think only of divine thoughts centring in our localities. But we have to see that the body is a very extensive idea, covering the universal thought, so that every increase in this locality is an increase in the body in a general way, just as every person born in Australia is an increase to the British Empire.
E.A.K. The conferences of recent years have served under the Lord's hand to develop greatly what is
{262}
universal amongst the saints in sympathy and affection, both in the movements of brethren towards one another and the kindling of interest in that which is outside of our immediate locality and setting.
J.C-S. Our prayer meetings would embrace all that, as linking us up with the work of God in its universal bearing, because the body from the point of view in Colossians goes beyond the local idea. It does include the local, because that is where things are worked out. But we are not to regard ourselves as an independent local company, but as part of this great organism, the body, looked at in the second chapter as united to the Head, and deriving from Him, "from whom all the body". This indicates that the whole body here on earth is united to Christ, deriving its nourishment from Him, so that each person in the body would in that way be a potential joint or band for the reception of this nourishment. In the second chapter, the thought of holding the head is in the singular; you do it for yourself, and I do it for myself. But then the Person whom we hold in our affections as Head, "*is Head of the body*".
S.E.E. Would that also intensify the character of the suffering in relation to the body? It is different from what we have in Corinthians, where if one member suffers all the members suffer; it is not suffering with a member of the body, but suffering for the body.
J.C-S. It is the universal thought here, whereas there it was the local idea.
W.B.P. Does Paul give us the lead, when he says: "the burden of all the assemblies" (@2 Corinthians 11: 28)?
{263}
J.C-S. Yes, in a special way he would assume all that care. It came upon him daily, as he carried on his heart the assemblies spread over the earth, with all the cares that came in on his spirit in relation to them, and no doubt in our measure we would follow that lead.
A.H.S. Is there a danger of our thinking that these thoughts are all centred in ourselves. We speak of the universal aspect of the body and think only of those members known as brethren. You are speaking of every individual member in the body being a potential joint or band. Should that not always be present in our thoughts?
J.C-S. In speaking of the body from this point of view, we think of all who have the Spirit, and who are in that way united to Christ. You see the vessel in its entirety on earth in the body. When it comes to the working out of things in this way practically, we have to address ourselves to different conditions. That involves the principle of separation, but we are looking at it in itself as standing in relation to Christ without the idea of what has come in on the responsible side.
J.S.T. Is that why we have no mention of the gifts in Colossians?
J.C-S. Quite so. The joints and bands are seen as capable of receiving nourishment for the body. So that I think, from this point of view, any impression that you get from Christ as Head of the body is not entirely for *your* personal enjoyment. You enter into it, but whatever comes from the Head is for the body. We have our own personal matters about which we have to consult the Lord. As the Head of every man He would give us help, but here I think what is introduced in @Colossians 2 is what comes from
{264}
Him as Head, exclusively for the body. All the spiritual wealth and substance that is enriching the body is coming down from Him, and the body is being ministered to by the Head, through the joints and bands.
E.J. Would the youngest here get help in this wonderful truth you are bringing before us in starting with the meditation as to what it has cost God, even the blood of His own?
J.C-S. Well, we should start with a very great sense of the value of this vessel in the eye of God. I do not believe anyone makes a real start in divine things, until he gets a ray of light from Paul's ministry. It accounts for the instability of many persons who are tossed to and fro and carried about. This can be traced to the fact that they have never had a ray of light from Paul, because it would entirely change their outlook.
J.D.U. Every personal consideration then would be lost in the realisation of the considerations that are due to the body through the Head?
J.C-S. It brings you into a very dignified place. When you realise that you belong to the body as associated with Christ, its living Head, bound up together in one bundle of life, it takes you out of the pettiness and smallness of things which we would naturally succumb to as deriving from Adam. It would lift us up to the dignity of this great vessel that eclipses everything one can think of.
C.D. Paul's ministry is peculiarly light from heaven, and 'Heavenly light makes all things bright'.
J.C-S. It does. Paul's light throws a distinct hue back on all that went before.
{265}
I thought we might pass on to the thought of the Head being held in our affections. I think the point is that we have come to it that we prefer Christ to ourselves. Our own wisdom is disregarded and Christ as Head of the body is carried in the affections of the saints. All that would spring from you as a man naturally is shut out now. You may have great ability as a man, which may be very useful in this world; but it is of no value in the assembly, because what the assembly has comes down from Christ, and the saints have learnt to hold Christ in their affections as Head. You can imagine, when a local difficulty occurs, Christ as Head is consulted about the situation. The saints bring Him in as Wisdom, and He presides in our hearts as it says: "Let the peace of Christ preside in your hearts". So Christ as Head in a very practical way would come in in relation to difficulties that might exist in a locality.
Coming to the epistle to the Ephesians, the scripture we read in the first chapter would, I think, give us a very wide view in relation to Christ and the assembly. For it is said here: "and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". The epistle to the Colossians would view the saints as here, the body competent to be an adequate expression of Christ in this scene. The point of view in Ephesians is the body in its entirety, expressing every bit of the Spirit's work from Pentecost down to the rapture, giving us the thing in its finality in words which are peculiar to this epistle. Paul seems to give every idea that he introduces in this epistle finality, completeness, so the body is seen here in relation to Christ. Christ is Head over all things to the assembly, which is seen in relation to
{266}
divine purpose but necessitating the fitting together of every bit of the Spirit's work here; really involving the thought of union.
J.D.U. That part of the verse: "the fulness of him who fills all in all", takes us back to verse 10. The good pleasure of God's will is "to head up all things in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth". The great system of glory all derives its character from Him.
J.C-S. Everything will be headed up in Him; whatever principality or power there might be, it must all be headed up in Him, things in the heaven and the earth, there will be nothing that will not pass under His feet. There may be powers in this world today taken account of as great forces, disturbing forces, but there is not a principality or power that will not eventually pass under the feet of Christ. He is so great, and the body is associated with Him "the assembly which is his body". Just as the Queen is associated with the King in his dominion, in his lordship, in his kingly position; so the assembly comes in in this way as a vessel which has been fitted to become the competent and intelligent companion for Christ in the glorious position which He is to fill as Head over all things to the assembly which is His body. As you will observe, the order is reversed; it is "his body which is the assembly", in Colossians, but in the verse in Ephesians it is "the assembly, which is his body".
A.B.J. Does the glory you spoke of relate to what we get in verse 17: "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory"? All things are put under His feet with a view to completeness.
{267}
J.C-S. Yes, He is the Father of glory. I suppose the idea is of the Originator; all glory in this way having its starting point with Him, but the world to come is in view in this chapter, the heading up of all things. You have first of all "principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come; and has put all things under his feet". So the apostle traces things to an issue and shows everything coming under Christ in the world to come, but then the assembly is alongside of Him in this, He is head over all things to the assembly.
A.H.S. Would you just make plain the reason for the difference in the order in the two epistles?
J.C-S. I suppose the body coming first in Colossians would be the way in which the apostle was contemplating the expression of Christ here, that is, the body is here for the expression of Christ during His absence, and thus He says, "his body, the assembly". The assembly is brought in to bind the two together identified as one vessel. But when you come to Ephesians it is the purpose of God that is in view, and now the thing is complete, and it is the assembly, that august body; *the great vessel of divine intelligence* is now associated with Christ. It is also identified as "his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". So it is now more a question of display rather than what is seen in expression, as in Colossians.
C.D. Is this the filling out of the type we were considering yesterday in Eve being alongside of Adam as head in creation?
J.C-S. Quite so, and I believe the idea here is that "head over all things to the assembly, which is his body"
{268}
really involves the thought of union. She is united to Christ and of Him in this glorious position. Paul does not develop the point there. But in chapter 3, Christ dwelling in the affections would be a subjective answer to it. In chapter 5 he develops the idea as to Christ and the assembly: "the two shall be one flesh", thus bringing the thought to full fruition in union.
G.H. Is not the thought of the assembly a more public one than the body?
J.C-S. Well, of course, the assembly stands in relation to God, too, and it is "my assembly". It may be regarded as a great administrative vessel, and indeed the city takes this character as coming out publicly, for it is really the bride, the Lamb's wife, but here the point is to show that the assembly, which is His body, is His fulness, His own personal fulness. He is the fulness personally, but here is a vessel which is competent to be His fulness, and the full expression and display of all that He is to a wondering universe.
J.D.U. I was thinking of the greatness of this thought as to Christ filling all in all, and this wonderful vessel which is to be His fulness, being the means by which He carries out this marvellous work, the vessel of administration. It is a vessel taken up that is so wonderfully expressive of Himself that He is able through it to stamp Himself, so to speak, on the whole universe. Is that the thought?
J.C-S. So you see the vessel from this position of glory with Him too. He really uses the vessel to exert His own influence over the whole universe and to give His
{269}
own impression to every family that will stand in relation to Himself.
J.D.U. What a wonderfully dignified position it gives every member of that vessel!
J.C-S. It does; no ministry helps us like that which elevates us according to the divine thought. It lifts you up to a level which clears the whole region of natural and human feeling and thought. Then the apostle begins to appeal to them in regard to the practical side; but there would be no point in so doing until the light of the glorious dignified vessel has entered into the soul. Now there is power, and the Spirit would come to fill out these thoughts in our minds, giving them a practical bearing in our conduct, in relation to the saints in any locality and universally.
A.B.J. Is this God's answer to the Lord's prayer in @John 17: 21, "that they may be all one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee"? Is this the evidence that God has answered that prayer?
J.C-S. The great thought there is the unity that is to come in as under the influence of the Father's love, and the love of the Son. We are also being bound up in this family circle of affection which would underlie what we have now.
J.D.U. It would preserve us from coming under the influence of what emanates from earth if we realised the heavenly dignity and glory of the position of this wonderful vessel to which we belong.
J.C-S. Nothing will give stability like the light of divine purpose in relation to Christ and the assembly. Indeed, you might write across the epistle to the
{270}
Ephesians: "Christ and the assembly". The apostle would constantly reach a climax as to some thought of Christ and the assembly.
J.D.U. The enemy is doing his best to distract the people of God. Would that emanate from the earth and make it all the more necessary that we should learn the dignity of our heavenly position, that we belong to heaven and it is what is of heaven that should be seen in this vessel today?
J.C-S. The next chapter shows that, the attention of heaven is being attracted towards the assembly here. "In order that now to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God, according to the purpose of the ages, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord". So you see now, the assembly becomes the lesson book of principalities and powers. They are looking down here and seeing this wonderful vessel which has taken the place of Christ on earth. When angels looked down and saw Christ, they must have done so with great delight. Now they see a vessel here in this scene which is the continuation of Christ, in which the all-various wisdom of God is working out, in the midst of hostility where the enemy would endeavour to shatter every bit of this vessel, but it is being held intact.
C.D. It is the administration of the mystery that draws the attention of heaven. Do not the gates, the one pearl, suggest the administration of the mystery?
J.C-S. I thought the administration of the mystery was the thing as it was administered by the apostle, the thought of the mystery being handed to him peculiarly. It
{271}
was not handed to Peter or John, great men as they were, but to Paul, and he speaks of "to me, less than the least of all saints". I do not think that any brother who ministers, and at the same time conveys to the brethren an impression of his own greatness, will accomplish much.
Chapter 3 is parenthetical: "If indeed ye have heard of the administration of the grace of God which has been given to me towards you, that by revelation the mystery has been made known to me". When he comes to the mention of "you nations", his feelings begin to well up and all this wealth of truth flows into his soul, as if to induce them to come over to his side and take in the great thoughts of God, which he would unfold to them under the heading of "the mystery".
G.D. Do we understand that God is teaching the created intelligences His all-various wisdom through Christ and the assembly?
J.C-S. I think that is quite evident from the verses read; the assembly will maintain this place permanently. The city is seen coming down from God, and the tabernacle of God is said to be with men. The assembly will maintain its dignified position throughout the eternal ages. It will never lose its place.
A.H.S. In connection with the administration, you were speaking of everything in this vessel being carried through in divine power and glory, in spite of adverse circumstances, and I wondered if that was the administration that was seen by the apostle Paul?
J.C-S. It reads, "and to enlighten all with the knowledge of what is the administration of the mystery hidden throughout the ages in God, who has created all
{272}
things". In the first place, Paul had the administration of it in his mind, knowing that the administration of that light must come to the saints through him. But to make all men see what is the administration of the mystery, would indicate, that what he was passing on was to flow into the vessel, and to form it and mark it, so that it becomes the great administrative vessel here for the working out of the all-various wisdom of God.
A.H.S. What a wonderful vessel it makes the apostle Paul, particularly as against what he says: "less than the least of all saints".
J.C-S. We must bear in mind that God did not allow any other writer to use the term "body of Christ". It was Paul's own peculiar light which he had, and although it made him feel small, he does not hesitate to show he has great intelligence in the mystery, how that Jew and Gentile should be brought together in one body; and that this vessel should eventually become the great display of Christ. Then, as chapter 3 shows, it becomes the vessel in which the glory of God is to repose permanently. Now at this present moment it is the great exposition of the wisdom of God to the principalities and powers in the heavenlies.
E.A.K. Do the deep feelings of Paul find an outlet in the intensity of his prayer at the close of chapter 3? It speaks of Elijah putting his head between his knees, but the apostle bows his knees to the Father.
J.C-S. That is so; as if to show the great depth of feeling. At the same time he is sensible of his own impotence, as he spreads this great light before their souls. He is conscious that God alone, by the Spirit, could give
{273}
them an entrance into it, together with his desire for them that they "may be filled even to all the fulness of God".
*From The Mystery, pages 41 - 58, Australia, 1939*.
{274}
{275}
CHRIST IN RELATION TO THE SYSTEM OF DIVINE GLORY
J Collie-Smith
@Isaiah 22: 22 - 25; @Acts 9: 13 - 17; @Ezra 8: 27 - 29
There is no person here who has any little true knowledge of God, and His divine and heavenly thoughts, who has not a real regard for Christ. For you cannot come under the influence of divine Persons without being made aware of the fact that Christ is the great Accomplisher of the divine glory; and the One in whom God proposes to centralise every divine thought and purpose. Everyone who knows Him, the youngest here, only converted very recently, however little the knowledge you have of Him, I am sure will be found endorsing what I have said. You cannot come close to Christ, or to God, without immediately being made aware of this outstanding fact. God has confined us to Christ for everything that we are to learn about Himself. From the very inception of His ways with men, every page of that history bears ample evidence that God set out with Christ in His mind. He would not be induced by any circumstances intervening here on earth to deviate from that thought which He had; and to which the Holy Spirit adheres all the way down through the ages.
In the first passage I cited, we have an advance copy, shall I say, of the framework, the structure, of that great system of glory that God prophetically unfolds to Isaiah. Looking down through the ages, He sees all its glory resting upon One who is competent to sustain everything
{276}
that was laid upon Him, the Man of God's choice. The prophet speaks of Christ, and as speaking of Him, sees Him in the place of power and government having the key of the house of David upon His shoulder. Thus indicating the strength of that shoulder to sustain and to carry divine government in every form and phase, no matter to what extent it might be called for. If He opens, who will shut? And if He shuts, who will open? He is to be in supreme power and in absolute command of the situation, as the divinely appointed Governor. He is the One who will rule on the part of God, and fill out the great thoughts of the kingdom as represented in David, the man of God's choice, the man according to God's own heart. Eliakim, who is typical of Christ in this passage, is referred to as "a nail in a sure place". God fastens Him in this remarkable manner, as a nail in a sure place. There need be no anxiety in regard of the fastening. There need not be the slightest restlessness as to what will transpire, for this nail fastened by Jehovah in a sure place, is strong enough to carry all the glory that is hung upon it. Whether the vessels be great, or whether they may be small, and of endless variety, all must be hung upon that nail, and the whole glory is, so to speak, attached to it. Every vessel, whether it be large or small, no matter what the utensil, it must be hung upon the nail fastened in a sure place, for God will not allow glory to go elsewhere. He will not allow the vessels of His glory to be hung elsewhere. He has decreed that Christ must be the centre and sustainer of every ray of glory that has ever shone, or will shine, according to God.
So we can understand those men, outstanding men in the holy writings, who have given us from time to time a
{277}
glimmer of the incoming glory. How their ray was superseded by this Man, and how willingly, too! How Abel would stand aside willingly, to put forward Christ as superseding him in that ray of glory in which he had shone as bearing witness in his blood to the testimony which he had rendered. How Enoch, who had distinguished himself in that long walk with God, here in a scene where all was dark, would step down in order to see Jesus stand out in the bold relief. He would rightly assign this place to Him as the One who had walked here with God; and under the eye of heaven so perfectly, so delightfully at every step. And so Noah, one who had been distinguished, as having government assigned to him in a special way, how rightly he would stand aside to make way for Christ. He would see all the glory of government shining in this Man, as the nail fastened in a sure place. And if we pass on to Abraham, a distinguished person indeed, the father of the faithful; he could exult in the anticipation of Christ's day, as he saw typified in Isaac, this glorious Person who is the Leader and Completer of faith. Isaac too, who had the distinction and glory of setting forth the great principle of resurrection, upon which God would secure everything; he would gladly make way for Jesus. So that this glory might shine in all its radiancy in Him, who could speak of Himself as "the resurrection and the life". And Jacob would gladly add his quota. He would gladly bring forward Jesus, seeing in Him the supersession of every other man. He himself had learnt in his small measure to supersede the man after the flesh; but to see this introduced in Jesus in all its perfection and glory, the supersession of every other man. And so we pass on to
{278}
Moses, a most remarkable man, an outstanding man. A man whom Peter would even make room for alongside of Jesus. But Moses would draw away, in order to see the glory shine in this Person in whom God had vested every idea of rule, authority, kingship, and government. Every idea that Moses had stood for in authority amongst the people of God, is seen in brilliance in Jesus, the One spoken of as "a nail in a sure place". We might speak of Aaron too, who wore for a brief moment those garments of glory and beauty. But he would quickly discard them as feeling incompetent to sustain the beauty and glory suggested in those garments; knowing that there was only one Person in the universe who could wear them, who could sustain the beauty and glory attaching to them. And then we think of David, a man who stood in a special way for the thought of the kingdom, a king indeed, of God's own choice. No one would yield obeisance to Christ more readily than David. He would fall at His feet, and would say, 'This is the Man; this is the Person; the nail fastened in a sure place; that is where the glory of the kingdom can rightly hang'. And then to close with Solomon, whose glory was referred to by the Lord Himself. He said, "Not even Solomon in all his glory was clothed as one of these" (@Matthew 6: 29), showing that the idea of glory terminated in Solomon, from that point of view, but Solomon would vacate the throne in all its splendour to make way for Jesus.
Now, that is how these men would feel about Christ. They were all great men, distinguished men; they would say, 'We want all the glory to go to Him; we want to see everything hanging upon that nail; we want to give our
{279}
quota to that glorious Person'. And I want to ask you, What about your quota? How do you feel about it? How do you feel about this Person, this glorious Man who fills the throne, and who fills the whole scene with glory for the blessed God? What do you think about Him? Has He superseded in your heart every other person? I put it to the youngest here tonight, What do you think of Christ? Are you only a casual lover of Christ, or has He acquired that place in your affections which has disposed of every other person; disposed of this world, and every phase of its glory? Though in reality it has no glory, but all that seems like glory, for all that appears to be secure will eventually be cut down. The nail will give way, and the burden will fall, and all the glory of this world will crumble; it will break up. There will not be a fragment left; the whole system will be ground to powder, and it will be blown away before the wind.
Now, there are those here who have already come to that in their souls; they have come to that decision soberly, in the calculation of their souls. They have deliberately come to a judgment of the world's system, with all its professed glory. The nail fastened in a sure place has completely superseded in their hearts and minds all that could be presented to them by this poor worthless world. I wonder whether some of you young people have hesitated on this line. Whether you have been held by some phase of this world; some ambition in your heart and mind; some desire to retain something that could never go on the nail fastened in a sure place; something that could never be permitted by God in this glorious system. Is it possible that you may be retaining in your heart some phase or form of
{280}
the man that God has rejected in totality; witnessing in the cross of Christ to his utter corruptness, and the complete abandonment of the man after the flesh by God in every phase and form? The most cultured, the most refined man after the flesh, God has done with him, and the death of Christ is the witness of it. But then if you have come to that judgment, I know that you appreciate Christ. I know that in your heart He has a place, and He produces feelings in your heart, that nobody else could possibly produce. The glory of Christ as it comes before the hearts of the brethren has an effect. He produces an effect upon their souls, that nothing else could possibly achieve. It is Christ in the glorification of this blessed system of which God has made Him the Centre. The One who has died and has been raised by His mighty power, setting Him at the right hand of God in the glory, and the Holy Spirit coming down here in order to diffuse all that which lies in Him.
That brings me to the second scripture which I read, which, as you are aware, refers to one who in his first introduction in the holy writings was a bitter opponent of christianity. He was the most hostile person that christianity ever encountered. He is first mentioned, as you are aware, at the stoning of Stephen, when the witnesses laid their clothes at the feet of a young man whose name was Saul. A young man full of animosity to Christ, seeking to obliterate His name from the earth, moving hither and thither, going beyond Judaea in his persecution, in his mission of destruction, because he hated Christ. He disliked Him, and he disliked anybody that resembled Him, any person whom he saw, who had features which resembled those of Jesus, he was admittedly the enemy of
{281}
such, and was opposed to him. And at the very zenith of his opposition, God set the power of His kingdom in motion, and the authority of grace completely overthrew this young man, and disarmed him of his opposition in a moment. Like a little child, he became submissive to Christ, and to the brethren, and he became an elect vessel. I believe he is the only person specifically said to be a vessel in the Scriptures. The fact that Ananias is made aware of this, that Saul is now to be an elect vessel, I believe indicates that he is now to serve in a distinctive way in relation to that suffering vessel which the Lord spoke to him about when He appeared to him and said, "Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?" He was appealing to him in regard of that suffering vessel in which Jesus was being represented here on earth under the eye of the blessed God, in those features which were so delightful to God, but which had been withdrawn from the earth when the Lord Jesus was no longer found here. Luke says, as you know, at the end of his gospel, that "they found not the body of the Lord Jesus". It was no longer here as in the days of His flesh, moving in and out amongst men, expressing features which were entirely those of a Man of another order, a Man out of heaven. Those features were for the moment absent, as it were, when the body of the Lord Jesus was no longer found here. But the answer to the withdrawal of that body was seen in a vessel which was eventually to be known as the body of Christ, and that vessel was here in suffering.
The Lord appealed to Saul as to why all this opposition? Why dost thou persecute me? He was prepared to identify himself publicly, unreservedly with
{282}
that suffering vessel, because it was of Himself. The spirit of Christ was there, His own sensibilities, His own feelings, His own affections. All that He was here in the days of His flesh morally, was now being continued in this vessel, suffering at the hands of this young man. But he was to be taken up in a distinctive way, to develop this vessel, and to develop it under the light that the Lord Jesus communicated specially and peculiarly to our apostle, to Paul. So that you can understand how he is spoken of as an elect vessel, selected by the Lord Jesus. Selected by God, and selected in order to develop the great truth of our dispensation, for without Paul's light our dispensation would be incomplete. Indeed, it was given to him, as he says himself, "to complete the word of God;" not exactly the holy writings, but the word of God. The light of the mystery, given to Paul, giving its character to all that had hitherto come out; all the precious substance that was found personally in our Lord Jesus, seen under the hand of Paul, being developed in a special and peculiar way in relation to a vessel which he alone designates as "the body of Christ". Although Peter and John, and the others of the twelve, had rendered remarkable service, important service, so great indeed that these men are said to be the foundation; the testimony is built upon the foundation. These men themselves being that, yet what they had was not what Paul received when the Lord arrested him and selected him as a vessel for the development of the truth. So that, in reality, instead of discounting the work of the twelve, Paul at no time suggests that his own light in any way tends to destroy or to cancel the light of the twelve. Far from it! Although conscious of the fact, as he said
{283}
himself, "to me those ... communicated nothing" (@Galatians 2: 6). The twelve could add nothing to him, for his own peculiar light, the light of the mystery, from which a heavenly hue fell back on the work of the twelve, which really enhanced it and filled it out. And so we have to pay attention to this elect vessel, and he does not hesitate in his epistle to the Ephesians to show his ability and his intelligence in the mystery. The administration of it had been committed to him. He shows that he had something that no other had. Although he states the position with meekness of spirit, with the lowliness that ever marked him, at the same time he did not hesitate to show what he knew well, that light of a distinctive character had been given to him. He stood for that, and he moved about seeking to place that light wherever he went. Whether at Corinth or at Ephesus, no matter where he went, although he preached the gospel and preached the kingdom, he taught the truth of the mystery. This really was his absorbing service, his labour in the testimony. In order that Christ in moral feature here, in his body, might be expressed without any encumbrance, without any impediments, that the brethren in any locality might be a free and full expression of the truth of the mystery as Paul knew it and administered it.
And so as the result of this vessel and the light communicated to him, which he has handed down through faithful men, we are, through grace, here tonight, as in answer to the prayers of our apostle. He bowed his knees in the prison at Rome, as he went in like a priest with his censer full with all those yearnings, with those inward affections that were stirred, as the travail of his soul went,
{284}
as it were, to its full extent, as he pleaded in regard to the saints in relation to the great truth of the mystery. How his prayers have a living answer today in this city, and in many cities! And so the truth of the mystery, beloved brethren, should have its own weight, its own place in our hearts and minds. Whatever else we may acquire in the way of divine property, if we fail in the apprehension and enjoyment of the mystery, I believe that every circle of truth which we touch is more or less defective, because it is wanting in this particular light, Paul's light. The truth of the mystery, the body of Christ, involves that this great vessel the assembly is that in which He is being expressed in this world today, being continued here in moral features under the eye of the Father. It is the vessel in which Christ will be displayed in the world to come. A vessel in which will be seen every particle of the Spirit's work from the day of Pentecost down, all perfectly unified and fitted together in such a way that it will become a perfect display of Christ, "the fulness of him who fills all in all". And further, that vessel is to be the retainer of divine and heavenly glory to the age of ages. The assembly is to be that great eternal vessel, in which God's glory will shine and where it will rest, even as now it securely hangs upon Him, who is prophetically spoken of here as the nail in a sure place. The certainty, the security, the permanency, the abiding character of that glory, as in the assembly will be unassailable because of its relation to Christ personally in all His glory. For it is by Him and in Him that all this is to be achieved.
You will remind me perhaps that we are still here in responsible conditions, and that if we think of the
{285}
assembly in its responsible character today, what a very, very different picture is seen, and we must face these facts. We cannot afford to ignore the ruin; it would be displeasing to God were we to do so. The more we feel the departure, the more we carry it upon our spirits; the more pleasurable we should be to God. The more we know the true thing, the brightness and glory of the assembly according to divine purpose and glory, the more we shall feel the departure. As we look around and see the assembly in its responsible character here, as broken like a vessel shattered to pieces; outwardly everything gone, a vast profession which but assumes the name of Christ. Publicly, you might think that christianity was swamped. But there are still those who carry the light that Paul suffered to establish and secure in the hearts of the saints, and who, as following that light above everything else, as prepared to be discounted morally in christendom, and to be excommunicated from it as of no account or value whatever; for reproach *must* be our portion in our acceptance of the position.
And so the book of Ezra shows us a day similar to our own, in which recovery has been secured, and when the carrying back of many of the original utensils and vessels belonging to the house of God marked the day. These vessels had been demoralised for the moment in Babylon, and its polluted circumstances, unholy circumstances. But recovery is effected and they are carried back to their true position; and established in their own proper, holy environment, and amongst the many vessels; vessels of silver and of gold. They were given to the priests and the Levites to be used again in the land of God's thought for
{286}
His people. And there are two vessels mentioned in a distinctive way; vessels of copper, but as precious as gold. Think of copper so highly polished (and the polishing process is a severe one), and you will readily connect these vessels and the brazen altar, where God judges sin and evil. May I suggest that these vessels of copper speak of the moral side of the truth, whereby the saints come at it by a process of discipline and a severe process, indeed, as the polishing suggests, but a moral process in the souls of God's people. It is by this that the element of self-judgment enters into the soul in all its force and power by the Spirit. He gives us the sense of all the departure, the departure from God, which has to be judged in the light of His house, according to the high, holy standard which "the law of the house" prescribed. So that God is securing, at the present time, an adequate testimony to every original idea of every divine thought, presented in the light of the truth of the assembly; arrived at by a moral process in the souls of His people; whereby the copper changes, as it were, to the value of gold, the preciousness of gold. It takes on a new value; the copper is assessed at the intrinsic value of gold. There is something quite distinct and different from all the other vessels carried back.
And so God is maintaining at the present time in the hearts of His people, a true moral answer to the truth and power and blessedness of the assembly, although here in a day of ruin, in a day of brokenness. There are those who have separated themselves from the moral corruptions of christendom; who have departed from iniquity, and they have become vessels serviceable for the Master. Vessels in which the work of God has been effective. It is by a
{287}
process of discipline, including local difficulties, conflicts of the testimony here, the many and varied ways in which the saints are submitted to testing, which God employs, that He secures this highly developed, polished effect spoken of in regard of these two outstanding vessels. It is thus that He secures, in spite of all the failure and breakdown, an adequate testimony to His own thoughts maintained in this world in the day of the opposition of the enemy, and this testimony cannot be overthrown.
May God help us, all of us, to give ourselves more definitely, more entirely to these things, not only for God's portion now, His pleasure in us and His service, but that we might each definitely have our quota in that system of glory which centres in Christ, the One who is great enough to carry every vessel, great or small, every one will hang upon Him, and He will never fail.
*From The Mystery, pages 69 - 80, Australia, 1939*.
{288}
{289}
POWER, SERVICE, GRACE AND LIGHT AS SEEN IN CHRIST
J Collie-Smith
@Matthew 9: 8; @Mark 7: 37; @Luke 4: 21; @John 9: 5
This afternoon we were speaking together about the advantages and the disadvantages of the present moment. The disadvantage, if we may so speak, of being connected with the testimony of the Lord, is that it offers no return or compensation in this present world. The whole outlook as regards the present world is that your connections with christianity, as presented in the holy writings, will mean that your position places you at a disadvantage as regards this world, for the world has nothing to offer you but a grave. That is how the matter stood in relation to the Lord Jesus as here in this world. Now that He has gone out of this world, and has gone to the right hand of God, sending the Holy Spirit down here to continue all that which was introduced in Himself, there is a divinely constituted vessel in this scene in which are now continued the days of His suffering and reproach.
That is how we are placed as regards this world; that is one side of the truth. But I wish to show you how evident it is that, notwithstanding all this, we are connected with the wealthiest order of things that could be conceived. Christianity is not a bankrupt concern; it has undiminished resources, despite the scene in which it is, and we are entitled to take account of it from that point of view. With this in mind I have grouped these scriptures,
{290}
drawing them from the four gospels. Each of the gospels presents Christ in a different light; each writer having his own personal apprehension of Christ; the Spirit dictating through him the special point of view in which we are to hold Christ as presented in the gospels.
Matthew is a gospel which speaks much of the Lord Jesus in relation to His regal position. He comes into this world as the Son of David with legal title to the kingdom, and His coming in at once agitates the hostile world, and stirs up the murderous spirit which is there. If we follow Him in Matthew's gospel we shall see that from His baptism, when the Holy Spirit came down from heaven and publicly committed God to that Man, the One who was the vessel of power here, anointed as Jehovah's King, anointed by heaven. The great thought underlying the Lord's movements in Matthew is that of power. In Jesus¬ movements amongst men, dealing with every kind of disease, healing all that were oppressed by the devil, we see that which indicated the great power of God, the power of the world to come, present in a Man here. He dealt with all kinds of cases, baffling cases, hopeless cases. He deals successfully, perfectly, with every case that is submitted to Him, demonstrating the great power that was present in Him, for He dealt with death itself, breaking its power. Even death had to give way before the power of Christ in a world of hostility dominated by the power of Satan.
As the people saw Him administering the bounty of God, and saw Him putting into motion the power of heaven in regard to the many cases dealt with, it is understandable how they "glorified God who gave such power to men". Jesus was here exercising the power of
{291}
God. He was not wielding that power in a destructive way, He was here representing all the power and authority of heaven, but in favour of men. And Jesus as He moved from circumstance to circumstance in His passage through this scene, emphasised in every case He handled, that He was dealing with things here morally, and bringing the power of the world to come to bear upon the situation.
At the end of this gospel He is seen as the great Vessel of power, all power being in His hands. The whole domain is under Him, and that power is to fill the whole universe publicly; that great power is at the disposal of everyone here. I would like the youngest believer to understand, that in making your choice to follow Christ, you are following the great Vessel of power, and His power is at your disposal in regard to any difficulty, or danger, which you may have to confront. You may be tested by things which you find in you, the power actuated by the devil touching the flesh in you. But there is a power far greater than that, and the Vessel of divine power is at your disposal, so that you may not fall under the power of the enemy, so that you may not fall under the power of the world. The world, with all its glitter and glamour is constantly inviting you, it would take you along its paths, those paths of glory which lead but to the grave. But the Vessel of divine power would be near you ready to throw all that power into the fray, and it is greater than any hostile power you may meet here. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world" (@1 John 4: 4).
I would encourage the youngest believer as going through a world, where you are meeting the power of the enemy in its various forms, to turn to Jesus the One in
{292}
whom power is found. Jesus, in His passage through this scene, met the enemy in every form. He bound the strong man and spoiled his goods, and now as the great Vessel of power He is available for you. I would urge you to cling affectionately to Christ as the Vessel of power. He will see you through every difficulty and He can deal with every disability under which you labour. He can dispossess the enemy and heal all that are oppressed by the devil. Matthew would encourage our souls and attach us to this great Vessel, the Vessel of power.
Now we come to Mark's gospel which presents Jesus from another standpoint, and introduces Him almost abruptly, not like Matthew who would go to great pains to establish His legal right to the throne. Mark would bring Jesus in as the great Vessel of service, and would introduce Him in His service. It is not a question of going over His past and showing you the line along which He has come into this world. It is a question now of qualifications, and therefore the Servant is immediately ushered into His service. Mark has great delight in retracing the service of Jesus here, for Mark would call attention to the way in which He served, the way in which He did things, taking account of the most minute detail in connection with the Lord's service, for the service was *exacting*. There were long, long days of service, in which He was oftentimes weary; you may even see Him sleeping with a pillow under His head after much service. But the days were very full days in the life of Jesus, as He served in the most unselfish manner. His service was rendered so freely, so ungrudgingly. No one who made a demand upon Him would be made to feel that he was breaking into His
{293}
rest. No one would be reprimanded for making a claim upon Him, in the fulness and freeness of that service day after day; indeed a service extending into the night, as He would place Himself at the disposal of men that He might serve them.
So the great Vessel of service is seen by Mark, who records the feelings of the people in regard to how He did things, for as astonishment filled their hearts, they recorded this great fact that Jesus did all things well. He had done everything well; everything that He did, He did perfectly, and it could never be improved upon. Had it been required to render that great service again it could not be improved upon. That is how the great Vessel of service carried on day by day, and Mark would give us some beautiful touches in connection with the Lord's service. He would call attention to the fact that He takes a blind man by the hand, and leads him out of the crowd and puts His hand, His fingers, upon his eyes. What a touch, what a service, what an impression it must have conveyed to that blind man to feel the hand of Jesus, the fingers of Jesus upon his eyes! The Vessel of service come down from heaven, here amongst men, served all who put in their claim for service. He would serve in a most impartial way, and He would touch, as if identifying Himself voluntarily with what there was in the way of disability.
Then you remember the deaf man, how the Lord puts His fingers into the ears of that man; what an impression, what a feeling! How his heart must have been stirred with deep emotion to feel the fingers of Jesus touching his ears, opening them! What a wonderful service was that of the Lord Jesus! I wish to convey to those who are young that,
{294}
when starting out in your career spiritually, Jesus the great Vessel of service would serve you. Whether it is a question of your eyes being opened, or your ears unstopped, Jesus would touch you sympathetically and feelingly, giving you to know the great depth of feeling that lies behind all His service that is at your disposal tonight. So Jesus as the Vessel of service is inviting you to make use of Him. He delights to serve, and is still serving though mediately. All this is being carried out at the present time, and He is working with heaven as His base for He has gone to the right hand of God.
To come to Luke's gospel, we find that Luke gives us still another presentation of Jesus. Luke himself had a very exact knowledge of what Jesus did and what He said here. Indeed he speaks in the opening of the Acts of "all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach". Luke, in writing this gospel, does so with method, and he draws up a relation of the facts, setting them out in order and making every circumstance lend itself to the distinctiveness of the grace of God as seen in Jesus. For He is presented by Luke as the great Vessel of grace, moving in and out amongst men in this scene, constantly dispensing the grace of heaven. How delightful to think of Jesus here in the days of His flesh as presented by Luke in His perfect humanity, touching humanity at this point, coming into this world as a Babe and growing up. We see Him as a Child of twelve years of age in all that was comely and proper to the occasion when in the midst of the doctors. And then reaching full manhood standing as a young Man in all the vigour of life on the banks of the Jordan, the Holy Spirit coming down like a dove, and
{295}
stretching out sensitive feet, for nowhere on earth could a resting place be found save on Jesus.
As we trace Him in His pathway here, every step was full of grace, and as we observe Him in His goings, how beautiful they were! Think of a Man in a hostile world like this, surrounded by everything that was unholy, but being uncontaminated by anything that belongs to this world! As we hear Him speak He does so with such grace, for He stood up in the synagogue to read the holy writings as was His custom. And as He selected a passage and read, we observe that in order to make this scripture conform to the dispensation, He gave it a new punctuation; closing the book at "the acceptable year of the Lord", showing how the Lord Jesus was in this world as the Vessel of grace. They "wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth". All the words of Jesus were full of grace. But Luke would throw into high relief Jesus as the Vessel of grace. Everything He did and said was in absolute harmony with the grace of heaven, to put it in Luke's words, "All things which Jesus began both to do and to teach". Everything He did and everything He said would agree at any point, there was no disparity in what Jesus did and what He said.
The words of grace came out of His mouth, and there was nothing in His pathway here to contradict that. So Luke would follow the ways of Jesus in grace that we might know Him in this light. Time will not permit to detail it, but as we see the Vessel of grace in this gospel by Luke, we should understand that the divine fulness in the Vessel of grace would be available for us. So that the spirit of the dispensation is imbibed, and we pattern our ways
{296}
here by the spirit of the dispensation as seen in Jesus -- "the words of grace which were coming out of His mouth". Jesus never contradicted that in anything He did, no matter what the circumstance, no matter what His reception, or how people regarded Him or addressed Him, or what the feelings present about Him were. Jesus never contradicted the spirit of grace, it was there present in Him at all times, and the words of grace were coming out of His mouth. What a Model for us. Oftentimes other words proceed from our mouths. Oftentimes we contradict the spirit of the dispensation. Often we speak to one another far removed in our spirit from the words of grace, and so Jesus as the Vessel of grace would become a model to us so that we might know how to speak, and that the speaking would be supported by what we did. Oftentimes there is great disparity between what we say and what we do, but Jesus was "altogether that which I also say to you" (@John 8: 25). What He did and what He taught were in line at any point. It would not be necessary to bring about adjustment in any way, for all that Jesus did, and all that He said were in absolute harmony with heaven; and so when He speaks His words are full of grace.
Hence, if it is a question of saying anything, what He says is entirely right, it never has to be in any wise modified. We often say things which we have to recall, we often take a step which we have to retrace, we often do things which we have to repudiate. But in Jesus, the Vessel of grace, everything was perfectly balanced and all was of such a character that He never expressed a word that had to be modified, never took up a position which He had to abandon. He never came to a judgment which He had to
{297}
cancel. All that He did and said were entirely in keeping with the spirit of the dispensation, which He had come to introduce, for He closed the book to shut out that which would not for the moment fit in with this acceptable year, a time of great favour. Luke would put Jesus forward as the Vessel of grace, so that we might imbibe His spirit and come out in the same spirit in our relations with one another, and not under any circumstance allow the spirit of the dispensation to be impaired. The spirit of the dispensation must go through unimpaired, no circumstance will allow the contradiction of that. The spirit of Christ would be upon the brethren, in drinking in what is seen of Jesus as presented by Luke.
In John's gospel, Jesus is presented as the Light of the world. John's opening chapter refers to Him thus, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men". Jesus being here in a relationship which was entirely new to Him, taking a relative place as the Son of God, but here as the official representative of God in a world of darkness. I am not overlooking the fact that as to His person, He is God. John leaves no doubt as to that, but He had come here as the Light. John the baptist came from God as a messenger, but Jesus was not a messenger, He was God. He "became flesh" and as here in that condition, in the relationship of Son, He declared God. John at the very outset tells us that "the Word became flesh", tabernacling amongst us, he would introduce us to the One who would flood our souls with light in regard to God, who came here in order that God might be known, that all the darkness and ignorance of God might be banished from our minds. He shone like the sun, impartial in its shining, the true Light which
{298}
lightens every one, that comes into the world. He came into the world as the true Light shining in all its brightness and He said, "as long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world".
Jesus when here was the Light of the world. All around was dark, indeed it was like a moral sea of death, the waters of death covering the face of the deep, but the Light in all its brightness throwing its beams across the scene. The world in its disposition and hostile attitude would put it out, for "the world knew him not". He was not known here, but He had come to give the light of the knowledge of the blessed God. John would take us along this road with adoring spirits as we see Jesus day after day in this world shining in strength and glory, making God known at every point. For "no one has seen God at any time", but this glorious Person, this glorious Man, He declared God. Jesus said, "As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world". That is the position He held here and so the light of the blessed God has shone out in Him. Every believer cherishes divine light as having come through Jesus. If there is any conception of God which one has apart from Christ let us be assured that it is a misconception, it is not light, it is darkness. There can be no ray of light for men in regard to God that has not come through Jesus, in whom God was seen shining out in all His fulness, for Jesus was here making Him known. "In him was life, and the life was the light of men".
Now that He has gone out of this world, He has gone, according to John, to the Father. He came out from God and He has gone back to God, and between those two points all the light of divine revelation has shone. Now our
{299}
hearts are lighted up with the knowledge of the true light, and that light will shine until it fills the whole universe. There will not be a dark spot anywhere. That is how John would present Jesus to us, the true Light shining into our hearts now, breaking up all the darkness, dispelling all the gloom and bringing the knowledge of God's love into our hearts. Jesus has died so that the Spirit might come down from the Father and that He might fill our hearts subjectively with all this blessed light. So that each believer, having received the Spirit, is now able to avail himself, or herself, of all the light that came out in Jesus when here in the days of His flesh, the Light of this world. That light is now deposited in a vessel here. The assembly becoming the circle in which it shines now, and it will shine, for the darkness is passing and the true light already shines, and it will shine until the whole universe is lit up with that light that shone in Jesus.
In closing let me encourage the youngest to draw near to Jesus, in order to learn these great thoughts of power, service, grace and light. The assembly is here constructed, and divinely constituted, to become the depository of all that came out in Him here so that all that Jesus began both to do and to teach is being continued in this vessel. The book of Acts would show how this vessel is qualified to continue all that Jesus began both to do and to teach. May the Lord help us by the Spirit to imbibe the richness of all that has come to us in the "man, out of heaven".
*From The Mystery, pages 88 - 97, Australia, 1939*.
{300}
{301}
THE TESTIMONY IN THE WORLD
J Collie-Smith
@1 Timothy 3: 16; @John 1: 32, 33; @John 8: 42; @John 10: 36; @John 17: 23
The course of the testimony of God and of Christ through this scene is one which gives a record of much sorrow. There have been joys that go along with it, but the passage of the testimony has been one of great difficulty, and as encountering the hostility of the enemy, its career has been a checkered one. I am thinking of it as entrusted to men here in responsibility, and how the enemy has, all the way through, endeavoured to wreck that which has been set up here for God. Our Lord Jesus, in building His assembly which would represent Him here, took full account of the enemy's designs. He was well aware that the enemy would dispute the ground, and that he would constantly rally his forces against the assembly. But He intimated at the very outset that the gates of hades would not prevail against it. All the scheming of the enemy cannot overthrow that which Christ builds. But on the side of the responsibility of man the enemy raided the territory, and subjected the people of God to constant warfare, invading and carrying off that which belonged to them as their inheritance. The history of the assembly will bear witness to this, particularly the letters to the seven assemblies in Revelation, which show how the assembly in its responsibility, as under the pressure of the enemy, has given way from time to time, surrendering valuable territory. We find that Thyatira represents how completely
{302}
the whole outward position was corrupted, and from man's point of view there would be nothing left; everything gone. But even there Christ had those with whom He could make contact and to whom He could appeal. Then after those many conflicts, in which so many valuable treasures had been lost, the Lord has been faithful, and the element of recovery appeared, and the saints through warfare, no doubt, recovered some of those precious things which had been forfeited.
For example, in the Reformation, in which the truth of justification, and other truths which had been lost were recovered. Then in Philadelphia we have assembly revival, the most wonderful recovery of the great truth of the assembly as loved by Christ. Just as these conflicts were spread over a protracted period, and the losses sustained were sustained not in one engagement but many, so the recovery of the truth and the recovery of the valuable property lost was not accomplished in one conflict. Soon after the recovery of the truth bearing upon the assembly, we find it contested by the enemy, and those who valued the truth of the assembly were quickly to be tested as to whether they could hold the ground in the face of the opposition of the enemy. The conflict was severe, and it centred around the Person of Christ. It was an attack on the Person of Christ and the order of His manhood. That attack was repulsed, but not only repulsed; it resulted in great spoil to the testimony and the enrichment of the truth.
Then came a most subtle and severe conflict, not this time in relation to the manhood of our Lord Jesus, but in relation to "the body" which is the sequence to His manhood. The enemy was unable to dispossess the saints
{303}
of the truth of His glorious manhood, but he endeavoured to rob them of the vitality of the truth as related to "the one body", and that "the body of Christ". This, instead of overthrowing what had been recovered, resulted in expansion and development of this inheritance of the people of God, giving further light in regard to the truth of "the body". The enemy still assailed the testimony, and the question of eternal life as the order of life promised, as the thought of God for men, and which was found in our Lord Jesus the "man, out of heaven", was also attacked. The result was that great light was imparted and further lost territory regained.
I mention all this as a preface, by way of answering a question which is constantly being addressed to us, as to why the light of our Lord's sonship, as now known, had not been brought out until the present moment. Just as the ground was not vacated in one engagement, but the battles were numerous. So too, the recovery is spread over a long protracted period, fitting in with the developments of the testimony in unison with the mind of heaven. And fitting in wholly to the thought of God, and as suited to what He is developing in the affections of the saints. So during the last twenty years there has been a remarkable flood of light. I do not question that it is light from God, coming through holy vessels which He has honoured, and to which we do well to give heed.
This light to which I refer specially, as having come to us within recent years, is that which concerns our Lord Jesus, which I believe has meant a better understanding of His Person; a better knowledge of the order of His manhood; and also His relationship with God the Father. I
{304}
say that, because I would invite your sympathetic, unbiased attention to what I propose to submit for your consideration. It may be that you have already made up your mind that you have the truth, and that you cannot receive more than you have in this matter. I would beg of you to be receptive, for the voice of the Spirit is speaking in the assemblies in this day. He is still speaking, and we do well to listen. In @1 Timothy 3: 16, we have a statement that I would venture to say is the greatest statement that could be compressed into a few words, and it conveys the greatest possible truth to our hearts and minds. Paul writes, "Confessedly the mystery of piety is great". The secret of piety is great, for wrapped up in it is the great truth of the incarnation, the basis, the foundation of christianity. All that we have as light at the present moment must rest upon this great statement, which follows upon the announcement of the fact that the assembly, the house of God, is "the pillar and base of the truth". It is the pillar supporting all the truth and the foundation upon which it all rests, and this great mystery, this great secret is supported there livingly. Paul says, "God has been manifested in flesh". Think of all that is wrapped up in that statement! Think of the comprehensiveness of it, the vastness of that brief statement. It is a concise statement, but what does it mean to your mind? What does it mean to your heart? Do you cherish it? What has it brought to you?
Have you really contemplated the glory of this statement, "God has been manifested in flesh". It refers to One whom we know and love, Jesus, One who, subsisting in Godhead's form, sharing equally in all that is proper to Deity, all that is proper to God in His own essential Being,
{305}
was yet found here in flesh. What a profound thought! It goes beyond the human mind. The human mind cannot grasp the immensity of it. It is measureless, for it is God come here, as the Lord Jesus says, "thou hast prepared me a body" (@Hebrews 10: 5). Here in that body we see Jesus moving about in this world in the most ordinary circumstances of life, for He came into this world in poverty; he grew up in it misunderstood and unknown, disliked and even hated, but this was God come in flesh. It was the Word become flesh, tabernacling amongst us. What a sight for our eyes and for our hearts to see God here, God manifest in flesh. His coming into flesh and blood condition did not in any way cancel anything that was true of Him in His own blessed Being prior to incarnation. There was no deterioration in His Person! God was shining out here in all His ways, in all that He said.
There was nothing seen or heard or known in Jesus that could not be fully identified with God. Every thought, every feeling, every word, every action brought God into this scene. For Jesus, as here in the days of His flesh, moved about in all the grace and evenness of His own blessed Person. He never uttered a word which He had to recall. He never came to a conclusion which He had to abandon. He never took a step which He had to retrace, nor was there anything done in such a way that, were it necessary to repeat that action again, could be improved upon; never! Jesus was here in the perfection of His ways, in all that moral glory which had its springs in this great statement, "God has been manifested flesh!" He came here in order that God might be known, that He might be understood, for the mind of man was shrouded in
{306}
darkness; man had no understanding in regard of God. Early in his gospel John says, "in him was life, and the life was the light of men. And the light appears in darkness, and the darkness apprehended it not" (@John 1: 4, 5). The disposition or attitude of the darkness was that of putting the light out. There was no affinity between what was shining in Him, and the world into which He came, which was one of darkness. But the light that shone for it was that true light which, come into the world, sheds its light on every man. Jesus as come here into manhood, as seen in John's gospel, is shining like the sun in all its brilliancy, regardless of how the shining would be entertained. Whether welcomed or repulsed, it shone there impartially; shining for every man. He came, as John would show us, to declare God, to make Him known, to bring Him out, for that, I believe, is the idea of declaration, that God might be known as declared by One who was competent in every way to make Him known.
Then we find that John the baptist comes forward as one who had a great appreciation of Christ, though he saw in the incoming of Jesus the displacement of himself. He saw that it meant his retiral, but he gives way gladly to the Lord Jesus, as preferred before him, for He was before him. John shows us that God had intimated to him that Jesus was coming in, not to baptise with water as John was doing, but to baptise with the Holy Spirit, and God intimates to John the baptist that a moment would arrive when Jesus would be singled out. John hails with delight the arrival of that moment when the Spirit of God descends from heaven, and abides upon Jesus. The only spot on earth where the Holy Spirit could, like a dove
{307}
stretch out its sensitive foot, and find One upon whom He could alight and find nothing there, other than that with which He Himself, as coming down from heaven, could be perfectly identified. He did not come to produce in Jesus what He sought, for it was already there. He came to identify Himself in every detail with what was found in that blessed One who stood under the eye of heaven so pleasurable, so delightful, that heaven could mark Him off, distinguish Him, "for him has the Father sealed, even God" (@John 6: 27). God sealed Him *publicly*, and *publicly* sanctified Him, set Him apart for Himself and sent Him into the world. John the baptist comes in with a positive testimony, he comes in as bearing witness to that which he had seen, for John delighted to behold Jesus, not only to hear His words. He had great delight in looking at Christ, and he bears witness as to what he has seen, and he testifies as to the One upon whom the Spirit came, saying, "this is the Son of God" (@John 1: 34). John had this intimation that the Person upon whom the Holy Spirit would descend and abide, that *He is*, "the Son of God".
Now this is a remarkable witness, for it is testimony in regard of Christ as being distinguished publicly by God, and as calling attention to the relationship which exists between Him and the Father. The Holy Spirit coming down at this juncture would remind us of how Zadok the priest took the horn of oil out of the tabernacle and anointed Solomon, who was the first to come in on the royal line as succeeding his father. The first to take over the kingdom on that principle, and God would make a note of it by the fact that a horn of oil was brought from the tabernacle to anoint Solomon, and that on the basis of his
{308}
sonship. The horn of oil speaking, no doubt, of the Holy Spirit, and as coming from the tabernacle would link up with John's presentation of Him in relation to what is eternal, and so John speaks in his gospel of the Spirit being given without measure. It is immeasurable, and it fits in with the thought of what is suggested in the tabernacle, what is eternal. Here we are called upon to join the baptist in his appreciation as he contemplates Christ in the relationship of Son. To see Him, and to come into the appreciation of heaven in regard of Him, so that we too endorse in our hearts and minds what has transpired in this scene which John would invite us to contemplate. For, dear brethren, this is a subject which calls for affectionate contemplation, rather than the idea of study. It is a subject which makes us feel at once that we must remove our shoes from our feet, for it is holy ground. How every right-thinking believer would see to it that the measured paces between him and the Ark are constantly maintained. For better that we should fall short of the full idea than exceed one hairbreadth beyond the limitations that God has placed upon us as keeping us within the confines of revelation. We dare not presume to force the lid of the Ark to gaze within. The ark, dear brethren, is a specific type of our Lord Jesus, and I would recall what He Himself states, "No one knows the Son but the Father" (@Matthew 11: 27). The inscrutability of the Person of our Lord Jesus must be cherished in every heart that knows Him. But this should not deter us in facing the true facts as set out in Scripture in regard to the sonship of our Lord. In coming to the Scriptures to look into this great matter, we must do so as not having been formed in our minds by teaching, however
{309}
orthodox, and by that teaching to so warp and bias our minds that we are unable to benefit from what the Lord Jesus would personally undertake to serve us in. That is, in opening out this truth to our hearts, as He Himself opens out the truth of the Father to us. For at the outset I would like to make it clear that Scripture, as I understand it, when it speaks of Jesus as the Son of God, speaks of a relationship which was not true of Him prior to incarnation.
Before I say more about that, let me add that at no moment in the history of the truth, since the days of recovery, at no stage, has the Deity of our Lord ever been questioned amongst those walking in the truth. There has never been a moment when there was the slightest misgiving in the minds of the brethren as to that, for He is "over all, God blessed for ever" (@Romans 9: 5). That is cherished, guarded, as it were, but when Scripture speaks of Jesus as coming into this scene, He is ushered into this world as a Babe, touching, as another has said, humanity at its weakest point. What a contemplation for our hearts! Jesus, a Babe in swaddling clothes, and Luke would give us to understand that "the holy thing" born of Mary, "shall be called Son of God" @Luke 1: 35. God says, "*I* this day have begotten thee" (@Psalm 2: 7). This expression can only refer to Christ subsequent to incarnation, and to carry the idea back prior to that, where the Godhead is seen subsisting in its own blessedness, and to speak of those Persons in relative terms of Father and Son, would mean confusion. Can you think of one of those divine Persons turning to the other, or thinking of the other as Father? Can you believe that one of those Persons would address the
{310}
other, or think of the other in the Godhead as Son? No, dear brethren, it may be orthodox to speak thus, but it is not divine teaching; it is not the truth as presented in the holy writings. When Jesus was seen here by John, and borne witness to as the Son of God, it was a relationship which had never been true of Jesus prior to His coming into flesh. It was a relationship in which He stood as the result of incarnation, a relationship entered into in time, which did not belong to the past eternity. If you will carefully read John's gospel you will find that the Lord Jesus when referring to His coming from heaven, speaks of what He does of His own volition; that is, He comes down from heaven, and He came forth from God.
I would like for the sake of the young to make that point clearer, because I believe all the difficulty relative to the subject on hand lies in a misapprehension of the difference between Christ as coming from heaven, and Christ as sent into the world. If you will read the passages in John's gospel referring to *Son*, you will not get one solitary instance where it speaks of Him being *sent* from heaven. You will get several instances where He speaks of *coming* from heaven. He comes down from heaven, and as having come here, the Word become flesh tabernacling amongst us, God manifest in flesh is seen. He says, "I came forth from God", which refers to the incarnation, and then He adds, "and am come". That is, now He is present amongst us as the result of incarnation, but with an added thought that He is now *appearing publicly amongst men* as the full expression of God, and He says, "for neither am I come of myself, but *he* has sent me".
{311}
Now, as to coming from heaven, I do not think He would say that, but as here in testimony. He would show us that He is here as having been sent *into* the world; that is, *sent* is subsequent to incarnation. I am delaying a little at this point, because I believe with many it is the real crux of the difficulty as to the apprehension and acceptance of the truth of our Lord's sonship being entered upon here in *time*. It has been concluded by many that, when Jesus speaks of Himself, as He so frequently does in John's gospel, as being sent by the Father, He is referring to the Father sending Him down from heaven. *That is a misconstruction* of the truth, and I believe it leads to confusion, and it obscures the apprehension of the sonship of Christ. The third passage from which I read would show how the Lord, in answer to the hostility of the crowd, particularly the Jewish leaders, meets the situation by referring to the way in which those to whom the word of God had come were spoken of as gods, and that the Scripture cannot be broken. Then He goes on to say, "do ye say of him whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the world" (@John 10: 36). You will notice the order "sanctified and sent", and I would like to dwell on that, because if you will take notice of this order it will, I believe, help to clear our vision. The light of God would shine upon our minds, and how ready the Holy Spirit is to serve us in this connection, so that we may have no misconception as to this great matter. The Spirit is waiting upon us to serve us, so that right ideas, right feelings, right affections, right regard, reverential regard indeed, may be formed in our hearts for Christ, the Son of God.
{312}
The Spirit has placed the word *sanctified* before the word *sent*. If the word *sent* referred to His being sent from heaven, you could not think of the idea of Christ being sanctified in the Godhead, therefore the Spirit has been careful to place this word sent as following upon the word *sanctified*, or set apart.
Although we may rightly regard our Lord Jesus, from the very moment He entered this scene as a Babe, as sanctified, or set apart, yet I believe the public position would relate to what John records, when the Holy Spirit came down publicly and sealed Him, and sanctified Him in that way, set Him apart. From that point, I believe, we get the idea of His being "sent into the world". From that point Jesus is sent forth by God, sent forth by the Father; and as thus sent He reveals the Father. He declares God in the most perfect way, and He reveals the Father, bringing to light every feeling that lay in the heart of the blessed God, manifesting here all those divine and heavenly features which came out in all their fulness and grandeur. The manifestation of the Father was so perfect in every detail, that in answer to Philip's question He would say, "Am I so long a time with you, and thou hast thou not known me, Philip? He that has seen me has seen the Father" (@John 14: 9). What they had seen in Him was identical with what the Father was. Every trait, every quality, all that came out in Jesus here, can be perfectly identified with the Father, that is, the Father is seen in Him.
May I add that I understand that we shall never see God in any other way than in this blessed Person, the Man Christ Jesus, a different order of man to Adam. Christ
{313}
Jesus is the Man *out of heaven*, the One in whom all the thoughts of God have been perfectly set forth. For He represented Him here, not as a messenger, but as One who was competent to make Him known in every moral quality. How He wrought day after day in order to make the Father known; for He had sent Him into the world, and in sending Him into the world He knew precisely what the result would be. He knew how perfect the declaration would be. He knew that nothing would remain incomplete. Then this blessed Person is seen at the close of His pathway here, lifting up His eyes to heaven and addressing the Father and asking that He may be taken out of those conditions of humiliation in which He was found here in flesh and blood. Asking that the Father might glorify Him -- "glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee" (@John 17: 1). That is, He would continue the glorification of the Father in the new conditions upon which He was about to enter, just as He had glorified Him here, and it says: "I have completed the work which thou gavest me that I should do it" (verse 4). He had left nothing unfinished; the Father had committed everything into His hand, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand" (@John 3: 35); knowing that nothing would be allowed to fall to the ground; knowing that He would carry everything through. Knowing that He would go all the way to death itself, for the securing of that will which He had come to give effect to. Every detail of it would be secured perfectly through His death, and finally His going up to the Father in all the glory and blessedness of His own Person, a risen, ascended Man. As about to go there He pours out His feelings to the Father in regard to His own, and speaks of
{314}
them from the divine point of view as the men given to Him out of the world, in whom He had confided. Men whom He loved. He loved His Father, but He loved those men.
Thank God, He still loves the men given Him out of the world, as continued in the assembly here. He speaks of them to the Father. They had believed as to His coming from the Father, showing how they had received His words which He had given them. The words which the Father had given Him, spoken to Him, "for the Father loves the Son and shews him all things which he himself does" (@John 5: 20). That is, the Son here was hearing from the Father, and speaking on account of the Father, not speaking on account of Himself, but speaking on account of the Father, who sent Him. His desire is that the world might know and believe that He came out from God, that He came forth from God the Father. This chapter brings us into the very sanctuary, as it were, to hear the outpouring of His own heart to the Father, and gives us something of His feelings of affection for us.
Do you believe that He came out from God? Do you believe that He came forth from the Father? Do you believe that, as having come forth, He was sent into this world? "When the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law, that he might redeem those under law, that we might receive sonship" (@Galatians 4: 4, 5).
There is not time to continue the thought, but the suggestion is that Jesus, in the relationship of Son, is the pattern of the vast family of sons God will have surrounding Him. As knowing and loving the Father, and
{315}
as knowing and loving Christ, the One who made Him known, and who has filled our hearts with the light and glory of that with which God will fill the universe eternally, through grace the assembly will be filled unto all the fulness of God as fully known. The assembly eventually will become the repository of the glory of God as the outcome of it; "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages" (@Ephesians 3: 21).
*From The Mystery, pages 98 - 110, Australia, 1939*.
{316}
{317}
GOD'S WORK IN US -- IN GRACE AND GOVERNMENT
G R Cowell
@Isaiah 8: 5 - 8, 11 - 18, 10: 11, 12, 24, 25; @Hebrews 2: 10 - 13; @Matthew 18: 2 - 5, 20
I believe, dear brethren, that what God has before Him at the present time is to work, not only in His grace in ministering to us spiritually, but also in His government in disciplining us. He has in view to bring about in us full correspondence with the Leader of our salvation -- Christ. If there is to be full correspondence in us with the Lord Jesus, it implies that we should not only know our status, and position before God as sons, but that we should be here in this world as true *children*. In @Hebrews 2, there are three quotations brought in and attributed to the Lord Jesus Christ, who is presented as the Leader of our salvation. God has appointed Him Leader to bring many sons to glory. That is the great end in view; and in the quotations which are attributed to Him, the highest thought is presented first: "I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". That implies that the saints are brought into accord with the Lord Jesus Christ as sons with Him in the presence of God. He can speak
{318}
of them as His brethren; we correspond with Him in that way. As His brethren we are able to take up the song that He sings and to join in it, so that He leads the praise in the midst of the assembly. That is the marvellous issue that is before God in providing us with the Leader of our salvation.
But then the next quotations immediately refer to the other side, the second one being, "I will trust in him". God would have us to correspond with our Leader in that. For many years now we have been privileged to take in and enjoy much ministry, bearing on our portion before God in the assembly, as associated with Christ. We have enjoyed having our part in the service Godward; but, dear brethren, what is the real substantial value of that if we do not *also* correspond with Christ in connection with these other quotations? I am not saying there is no value in it, but I would raise the challenge: what is the value of a people who can come together and praise God, but who in their practical life are out of accord with Christ, in their trust in God? Surely if we are to be ever with Christ before God, God has it before Him to bring us into accord with Christ in a practical, substantial way during this brief period while we are here. We cannot get this education in heaven. Christ is spoken of in this epistle, as One who, "though he were Son, he learned obedience from the things which he suffered" (@Hebrews 5: 8). Again, who "in the
{319}
days of his flesh, having offered up both supplications and entreaties to him who was able to save him out of death, with strong crying and tears; (and having been heard because of his piety)" (@Hebrews 5: 7), because He feared God. God would have us brought into accord with Christ in that. Think of what God has before Him today! He would have us, in our measure, trust Him like Christ did, and He would have us to be marked by piety like Christ's when here, and say, "Preserve me, O God: for in I trust in thee" (@Psalm 16: 1). God will bring this about. Surely this is attractive to our hearts that we should honour God by the same kind of trust as characterised His own blessed Son down here, in those days when He learned obedience from the things which He suffered!
Unless we learn that lesson of trust in God we shall not answer to the third quotation, which means that there is a people on earth to whom the Lord Jesus can point: "Behold, I and the children which God has given me". It is the heart of Christ delighting in having a people here on earth who are like Him, not only in assembly service, but like Him as He was down here in practical every day life. Walking as He walked, as John says in his epistle, righteous as He is righteous, pure as He is pure, loving as He loved. That is the idea of children -- true representation. We never grow out of being children in one sense; a son is ever a child, however old he may get. There is the
{320}
idea of true representation and likeness to the features of the parents continued in the children, whereas the thought of a son suggests image, status and dignity. We shall be conformed to the *image* of God's Son; but with children it is *likeness*. When God made man He said "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness" (@Genesis 1: 26). The Lord Jesus Christ looks for that. His heart requires that He should have those here like Himself in the practical day-today affairs of this life. He can point to these children as signs and wonders in Israel, as Isaiah says. The Lord is looking for signs and wonders; He requires to have those in testimony here to whom He can point in this way, those who trust God, in their measure, as He trusted Him, and who walk here as beloved children.
I would like to say a few words as to this matter of *children*, for I feel that we ought to give more attention to it. The book of Isaiah has a good deal to say about children. In chapter 1 Jehovah has to say, "I have nourished and brought up children; and they have rebelled against me" (verse 2). We see that the affections of the heart of God require children -- "beloved children". Paul says: "Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children" (@Ephesians 5: 1). How God's heart longs to have beloved children down here! From the point of view of substantial formation and likeness to God it is the highest truth. Sonship is a higher truth according to position and
{321}
status; but it is in Ephesians that we read this exhortation as to being beloved children, and @Philippians 2: 15 says, "That ye may be harmless and simple, irreproachable children of God in the midst of a crooked and perverted generation". God is looking for children like that. The flesh does not like to be simple, small, meek and gentle, but that is the kind of children for whom God is looking, shining as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life. It is in the *character of children* that we are in testimony.
Then, as you go on in the book of Isaiah, you get the thought of Jerusalem yearning for children. It is very touching. Jerusalem above is our mother; and God considers for the yearnings of Jerusalem, and sees to it that she has children. In @Isaiah 49: 20, 21 we read: "The children of thy bereavement shall yet say in thine ears, The place is too narrow for me: make room for me, that I may dwell. And thou shalt say in thy heart, Who hath borne me these, seeing I had lost my children and was desolate, an exile, and driven about? and who hath brought up these? behold, I was left alone; these, where were they?" This shows how God considers for the mother heart of Jerusalem. While Jerusalem is desolate, God secures these children for her, brings them up, as it were, and presents them to her. No doubt it has an application to the joy which the earthly Jerusalem will yet have in seeing the *church as begotten by the testimony which*
{322}
*emanated from that city*; but primarily it has in mind the earthly people which God will secure. But I read that scripture to show how the *heart of the assembly looks for children*. Surely we long for children, and God would love to satisfy that desire.
Then in @Isaiah 53: 8 we have Christ Himself brought before us: "Who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living". The heart of Christ requires children. It is the way the Lord views us as down here, taking character from Himself, begotten by His own service and testimony. It says, "Who shall declare his generation?" Could any of our hearts brook the thought that there should not be a generation here like Christ? that His life should not be continued in character here? It goes on to say, "He shall see a seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of Jehovah shall prosper in his hand". God will see to it -- and He is seeing to it -- that Christ has a seed. So how precious is this thought of children, -- God's heart desiring children, the heart of Jerusalem looking for children, and the heart of Christ requiring children! Divine affections require children, and *beloved children*. If we look at the New Testament we find the apostles Paul and John bringing out this side of the truth, as to children being like God and like Christ.
As I said at the outset, I believe God is working to secure this substantial formation in His people, so
{323}
that we might truly be such that the Lord can point to us in our practical lives here and say, "Behold, I and the children which God has given me". To bring this about discipline is necessary. Two things are always necessary to achieve God's end: firstly, the ministry of grace from His own heart; and secondly His ways in government, or discipline. The two sides come out in the epistle to the Hebrews. The early part of the book is full of the provision of God's grace. It speaks of all the grace resident in the Apostle and High Priest of our confession; it speaks of our place with Him within the veil, of the Minister of the sanctuary, and of our liberty of approach to God. God would minister that side to us continually; but then when we are exhorted to be here in practical faith, corresponding with Christ here, we get the thought of discipline brought in in chapter 12. In fact, in chapter 10 the apostle speaks of the way the saints were going through suffering, persecution and the spoiling of their goods. In chapter 12 he exhorts them to endure discipline, reminding them that the Father of spirits is over the whole matter. God's government and grace work to one great end, to achieve His purpose in us, that we might correspond with Christ in every sphere: in the assembly, in our place before God, and down here in testimony and in our practical lives. How patiently God works in His grace and government to
{324}
bring about this great end -- correspondence with Christ!
The early part of Isaiah bears on what we are passing through at the present time. Up to chapter 39 it is the Assyrian invasion which is largely in the prophet's mind, an invasion which occurred in Hezekiah's day, although it has a future bearing, alluding to the overflowing scourge which will again pass through the land in the near future. But this early part of the book had its immediate fulfilment in Hezekiah's day, and that section of the book closes with that, dealing with Hezekiah and the coming of Sennacherib king of Assyria. The latter part of the book deals more with the return from Babylon. The going to Babylon is foretold in chapter 39, and then immediately God says, "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people", and the latter part of the book speaks of the return from captivity.
So chapter 8, which speaks of the invasion, has its fulfilment in Hezekiah's reign. If you read the account of this invasion in @2 Chronicles 32, you will find that it occurred at a peculiar time, as we might think. We read in the chapters preceding, of the early years of his reign, and of the remarkable spiritual development in connection with the house of God and His service. It is remarkable to read how the service of God in His house was restored, the priests and the Levites set in their places, and then the song of the
{325}
Lord began. They were so enjoying the restoration of the service Godward, that Hezekiah sent to the ten tribes to gather others in to keep the feast of the passover in Jerusalem; he longed for more of the brethren to enjoy it. The people were giving so freely that great heaps accumulated, and Hezekiah asked what they were, and had to make special provision because of the way divine love was flowing in the hearts of the saints. You might say, That is a peculiar time for God to order this terrible invasion! It says in chapter 32: 1, "After these things and this faithfulness, Sennacherib king of Assyria came and entered into Judah". You will see an analogy between that day and our own day. We have had many years of ministry dealing with the assembly and our privileges in it. Possibly brethren are enjoying their part with Christ and in service Godward as they have not done, perhaps for centuries. It was so in Hezekiah's day; they enjoyed it, as they had not done since the days of Solomon. And now God has allowed discipline to come upon us. You may say, Why has He allowed it at such a time of spiritual prosperity? We often think that God brings in discipline when there is a low state; well, He does in His mercy; but God is concerned to help forward a good state, to make what is good really solid, to consolidate it in the souls of the saints.
{326}
So the Assyrian comes up, and Hezekiah says, "This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of reviling" (@Isaiah 37: 3); but, thank God, Hezekiah gets to the root of the matter. It is a great thing to get to the root of the matter. If we see the reason for the discipline, we can be with God in relation to it. Hezekiah puts on sackcloth -- it would be well for us today to put on sackcloth -- and he says, "This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of reviling". Then he gives the reason: "for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth;" as much as to say, We have had wonderful assembly privileges, we have enjoyed the service of God together, but there has not been a really practical state that answered to it!
Now, beloved brethren, if I search my heart I know that is true of me, and perhaps it is true of others. We have had wonderful privileges; we have enjoyed our place in the assembly; we have enjoyed the praises of God, and God has enjoyed them too, one might reverently say; times have been good. But have we not, many of us, perhaps all of us, felt that in our public lives we were hardly equal to our place in the assembly, that there was a kind of disparity, or discrepancy? Have we not often felt ashamed that we could enjoy the presence of God when together, and outside our faith in God was so small, our trust so little, not like the trust which marked the Lord Jesus
{327}
Christ? Have we not enjoyed divine things in our spirits among the brethren? Yet outside our spirits have been so unlike the spirit of Christ, that He could hardly point to us and say, "Behold, I and the children which God has given me". We have not really been representing Him in our spirits, ways and words outside? To represent Christ in our spirits and words and ways outside involves having *that* as our one aim in life, and making everything else secondary; otherwise we shall never really be children who represent Christ as He was here, acting like God, speaking God's words, doing God's works. He filled out His place in testimony perfectly, and if we are true children in the sense in which I am speaking, it implies that we are like Him in that way, marked by His spirit, His acts and His words. You remember how in John's gospel, which speaks so much of the children of God, the Lord as the great example in testimony says, "I cannot do anything of myself" (@John 5: 30). Again, "I have not spoken from myself, but the Father who sent me has himself given me commandment what I should say and what I should speak ... What therefore I speak, as the Father has said to me, so I speak" (@John 12: 49, 50). Perfect dependence marked the Lord. We cannot speak of the Lord as a child, in the way I am speaking of it, but what a beloved One He was in the humble dependence in which He trod His way, not speaking
{328}
from Himself, but as the Father commanded Him so He spoke. What dependence, humility and lovability marked Christ, before the Father's heart as He moved with one object, to represent His Father in this world! If we know our place with Christ in assembly, what a great thing it is that God has before Him that we should go out from that sphere and really represent Christ in this world, in our measure acting like Him. To be marked by His spirit, speaking His words, doing His works -- may be in a feeble measure, but moving in such a way that He can regard us as beloved children, and God can view us in that way, and the heart of the saints -- "Jerusalem above" -- is rejoiced.
So Hezekiah touched the point; he realised that was where the weakness lay. Conception was there: the children had come to the birth. We have often found ourselves in that condition; we have conceived the idea of being here to represent Christ: all our desires are that way, but there is no strength to bring forth. When a little test comes, it is self that is seen, and not Christ. God says, I will help you as to that! The ministry of grace alone will not work it. God says, I will bring in something to help you. God moves in a way which we might think most drastic: He brings up the king of Assyria, the waters of the river overflowing all his channels and all his banks, reaching up even to the neck. I take it to mean that
{329}
when the king of Assyria came up, he reached right to the walls of Jerusalem -- to the very neck. He brought home to the people of Jerusalem their helplessness, for if a man is in water up to the neck, he cannot help himself. In some measure we have seen something like it: a scourge which has reached a very long way. In coming to this point, I would like to make clear that when God brings up an instrument of this kind He effects many things at the same time, though His foremost concern is His people walking in the truth. That is what God is doing today. He is chastising many nations at the same time, as we read in Isaiah. Isaiah speaks of what happened to many nations. God deals with matters between nation and nation, between man and man, in His perfect over-ruling government. He deals with persons who profess His name, represented by Samaria and Judah. But what He had mainly before Him in Hezekiah's day, was to perform "his whole work upon mount Zion and upon Jerusalem". After that He had in mind to "punish the fruit of the stoutness of heart of the king of Assyria" (@Isaiah 10: 12). So God is doing many things today; His ways in government are past finding out. We can thank Him whenever we can see what He is doing. If He is cleansing those who profess His name from the pleasure-loving spirit that has taken hold of them, and if He is cleansing the beaches from all the indecencies which marked them, we can thank God for all He is
{330}
doing. But what is specially before Him is what answers to that remnant in Jerusalem.
You might say, Well, the work seemed complete before God began to bring in this discipline: Mount Zion was inhabited, and the service of God was going on in Jerusalem. But there was no strength to bring forth, and God had before Him to perform His whole work, that there might be a practical answer to the truth, and strength to bring forth. Strength to bring forth lies in the knowledge of God in a practical way, and we need to get into difficult circumstances to know Him thus. I am not suggesting that the Lord Jesus needed to know God at all in the way in which we do, but it does say that He *learned* obedience through the things which He suffered. It is as passing through affliction that we learn God. When God brought up this great river it affected the whole profession, but His great end was to perform His whole work on mount Zion and upon Jerusalem; after which He would punish the king of Assyria. While this was going on He exhorts them not to be afraid. He says in @Isaiah 10: 24: "O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian". If we are dwelling in Zion, if we are truly set for the truth of the assembly -- Zion representing the privilege and praise side of it -- we need not fear the Assyrian. The whole work will be performed. It may be very painful, but we need not be afraid, for God says, "For
{331}
yet a very little while, and the indignation shall be accomplished, and mine anger, in their destruction". It is very encouraging that this kind of work on God's part, the work of discipline, is always short, it is always but for "a little while". God says of Jerusalem, "For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee" (@Isaiah 54: 7). Even the final tribulation is only for a little while, three-and-a-half years, or forty-two months. It is never God's way to prolong affliction of this kind. The point is to get the gain of it during the little while. So the writer in @Hebrews 10: 37 says, "For yet a very little while he that comes will come, and will not delay".
I wanted to show the bearing of this on the great thought of Immanuel, God with us. It is in knowing that God is with us that we find strength to bring forth. I cannot go out and face the world for Christ if I do not know that God is with me, nor can we do it collectively. So in connection with this discipline the thought of Immanuel is brought in: "The stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel!" If God is with us we are under *His* wings. We have come to trust under the wings of Jehovah; but it is because those who profess to trust in the shadow of His wings have given up confidence in Him, that He allows alien wings to come over them. He allows these other wings to cover the land because they did not know the reality of "God with
{332}
us". It was Immanuel's land, but the profession had no practical experience of it. If God was to give them to know the blessedness of Immanuel's land, they must know it as in contrast to the other wings being stretched over them. I suppose in a way we can regard christendom as Immanuel's land. It is not heaven, of course; it is down here in the presence of the fiercest opposition. That is the idea of Immanuel, God with us. Christendom is really divine territory, like Samaria and Judah were at this time, but God would give that remnant at Jerusalem to know what Immanuel really meant -- that the Holy One of Israel was in the midst of them. How can that come about? Only as the work of the ministry goes on and we are formed by it; so it is that God is with us. We may say, Where two or three are gathered, the Lord will be in the midst! Not at all, dear friends: it is "Where two or three are gathered together *unto my name*, there am I in the midst of them" (@Matthew 18: 20). It implies this state of which I am speaking -- that we are truly formed as children whom the Lord can own.
In this actual invasion Immanuel became an immense reality to this remnant. They found strength to bring forth. In that emergency, in crying to God they learnt the full meaning of, "I will trust in Him", and in that emergency they learned the reality of God with them, and the enemy was overthrown.
{333}
I alluded to @Matthew 18, because it brings in the moral features of these children. We do not get in that chapter the thought exactly of children in the way I have been speaking of it, but we get the moral features of a child. If we are to be true children of Christ in the way I have been speaking of it, and true children of God, it can only come about by a moral process, by putting on the moral features that belong to a child, simple trust, and harmlessness. The Lord says, "Unless ye are converted and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into the kingdom of the heavens" (verse 3). Then He says, "Whoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, *he* is the greatest in the kingdom of the heavens" (verse 4). When we come to the public testimony it is this that makes a person great, that he is able to humble himself as a little child. We shall never really represent Christ unless we have learned that. Think of moving among men like that -- humble, small, simple, and restful as a little child, so that men who meet us say, Well, he does not trust in himself but in God! It is only in that spirit that we can represent God. So the Lord goes on to say, "Whosoever shall receive one such little child in my name, receives me" (verse 5). That is the idea of representation: in receiving such an one you are receiving Christ. This chapter begins with the Lord Jesus taking a little child and setting it *in the midst* of the disciples, and the verse with which I
{334}
ended says, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I *in the midst of them*". I think it helps to connect those two verses in our minds. I would suggest, dear brethren, that it means this: If we want to know the Lord's presence in our midst, we must put the little child in the midst first. If there is the spirit of the little child in the midst of us, we shall have the Lord in the midst. It is the kind of spirit with which He can link Himself, and that indicates how we reach this great thought of Immanuel, God with us. It is no longer a matter of alien wings being stretched over us; we do not need their protection; but we are under the wings of the Lord Jesus Christ. There is a spirit now among the saints, as having been brought into practical accord with the Lord, by reason of which we can have the Lord with us.
May the Lord help us in these matters that we may have the gain of what has been before us, both individually and collectively, for His name's sake!
*Weston-super-mare, August, 1940*.
{335}
THE GLORIES OF CHRIST AS GOD'S KING, SON AND PRIEST
G R Cowell
@Acts 2: 32 - 34; @Psalm 45: 1 - 16; @Psalm 110: 1 - 5
I desire, dear brethren, to speak of the glories of Christ, particularly His kingly glories: feeling that this is a day when we need to apprehend His glories, because antichrist is near. John tells us that "even now there have come many antichrists" (@1 John 2: 18), but the day when the man of sin himself will appear is near, and his working will be with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in those that perish. People will be deceived by the fancied glories that mark that man, for he will come here in a kingly way, according to man's ideal of a king. In Daniel it refers to him as "the king:" "And the king shall do according to his will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and speak monstrous things against the God of gods" (@Daniel 11: 36). We need Christ Himself as the Object of our hearts in order to be fortified against even the beginning of the deceivableness of unrighteousness. We need to be versed in the glories of Christ, not only His personal and moral glories, but also His official glories, His greatness as King. The title King is not a prominent
{336}
one in the New Testament; nevertheless Scripture does apply this title to Christ. He is spoken of as the King of kings; the title not only conveying that when He comes forth He will be over all, but that of all kings He is THE KING! All that God values, as truly kingly, is set forth in Him, the "King of kings, and Lord of lords" (@Revelation 19: 16).
The titles used normally in the New Testament are Lord, and Christ, both of which bear on kingship, the title Christ especially so. The word 'Christ' means the Anointed, and anointing is essential for a king. Jesus is the anointed One. The title Christ covers other glories, but one glory is certainly His glory as King. The New Testament opens with "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ". It tells us who the King is! He is Jesus Christ -- Jesus, the Anointed. Peter in @Acts 2: 36 announces that, "God has made him, this Jesus whom *ye* have crucified, both Lord and Christ". When a king comes to the throne, the first thing that has to be done is to proclaim the accession. What a wonderful privilege Peter had at Pentecost in announcing the accession of God's King! I have no doubt *the coronation has also taken place*, for when the Lord comes out of heaven it says, "upon his head many diadems" (@Revelation 19: 12). In @Hebrews 2: 9 it says, "we see Jesus, who was made some little inferior to angels on account of the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour".
{337}
While lordship, in its bearing on us, is akin to kingship, in itself it is a wider thought, for it implies that Jesus has absolute authority. It is a wonderful thing to grasp that Jesus is Lord of all! His authority extends to heavenly, earthly and infernal beings. Every being in the universe, even the wicked, will have to own that Jesus is Lord. We need to know Him as Lord in order to have courage here in the presence of what is adverse. He is Lord of Satan and his angels; He can at any time curtail their power. Sooner or later they will have to own Him Lord, but we have the privilege of owning Him thus now, and coming under His protection.
The title 'Christ' is in some respects more limited, involving a sphere where He is Head, where everyone owns Him, and is willing-hearted. It is thus closely allied with kingship; for the idea of a king, according to God, is that he is a beloved person, ruling over subjects who give him their willing obedience; ruling with affection as well as authority, the beloved of his people.
Now I want to speak of the way we grow in the apprehension of Christ's glories. First, as learning to value Him in His authority and support in *our* circumstances, in view of our salvation. Then, as set free, to delight in His glories as with Him in *His* circumstances which @Psalm 45 has in mind. Finally to
{338}
see from @Psalm 110 that the King is the Priest, in view of God having His portion.
I am sure all of us here would desire to know more of Christ in our circumstances. It is a great thing to apprehend that God has made Jesus, both Lord and Christ, in view of our salvation. Peter reassures their hearts in this respect for he says, "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God ... he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear". They had crucified Him and crowned Him with thorns, but He was now exalted at the right hand of God. What would He do? Would He take vengeance on His enemies? Peter says "having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this". Then he announces formally the accession of Christ to the throne, and brings home to them that what He had poured out was for *them*, provided that they would own and enthrone Him in the way that God had done. All hope for man lies in that. Jesus is there, *a Man for men*, having received the promise of the Father. What a wonderful preaching! Peter says, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit". I wonder if every one of us here has come into practical salvation? -- it is in that exercise that your link with Christ will be really formed. As you learn what He can be to you in your soul need, and in practical
{339}
everyday matters in your pathway, you will find practical salvation. The more you know Him thus, the more you will exult in Him as Lord. That is the teaching of Romans, -- you own Jesus as Lord; you give Him the place God has given Him, and by so doing, come into all the blessing connected with Him as Christ, including justification, acceptance and the gift of the Holy Spirit.
As Lord, He has all power and authority to protect the believer. Peter says, "whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved" (@Acts 2: 21). That becomes a daily matter. We learn to call upon Him moment by moment, hour by hour, and He never fails us. "The same Lord of all is rich towards all that call upon him" (@Romans 10: 12). He is rich, and there is no need that He cannot meet. Further, as owning His authority, we are brought into the practical salvation of the assembly. That was in mind in Peter's preaching. They were to repent and be baptised, and would receive the gift of the Holy Spirit, and thus find their place in *the assembly*, *the sphere of practical salvation down here*.
@Psalm 45 is a song of the Beloved. All His service to us is in view of His becoming the Beloved of our hearts. I would like to stress that the King is the Beloved. David means 'beloved;' Solomon's name Jedidiah, means 'beloved of Jehovah'. It is wonderful to think of that! So the psalmist goes over
{340}
His varied glories. The Psalm is divided into sections. Verse 2 is occupied with the moral glories of Christ, for they form the basis of everything. Official glories must be based on *moral glories*. Kingship, apart from Christ, always breaks down because there are not the necessary moral qualities underlying it. But of God's King it says, "Thou art fairer than the sons of men; grace is poured into thy lips: therefore God hath blessed thee for ever". The Lord, having met our need, would draw us over to His own side, that we might be free to contemplate Himself in His moral beauty. Think of a king like that! grace poured into His lips! There would be no harsh words, no ruthlessness there! "Therefore God hath blessed thee for ever". That is the King in His moral perfection.
Verses 3 to 5 speak of His military greatness. Every king needs to be a warrior. The idea of a kingdom supposes that there are enemies to be met, and that what is precious is to be protected. What a wonderful warrior Christ is! "Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O mighty one, in thy majesty and thy splendour. And in thy splendour ride prosperously, because of truth and meekness and righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Thine arrows are sharp ... in the heart of the king's enemies". Men are greatly occupied at the present time with martial prowess: they are looking for skilled warriors; but the Lord Jesus, the great warrior
{341}
King, stands out unique before our hearts. In @Exodus 15: 3 it says, "Jehovah is a man of war; Jehovah, his name". Think of Christ coming into manhood to meet all the forces that invaded mankind. Satan came into the garden and brought in darkness and the lie. As a result of that, sin came in, and death, "By one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death" (@Romans 5: 12). What an invasion! Where was a warrior great enough to roll back those forces? There can never be peace on earth until they are defeated. True peace can only be based on victory. The Lord is shortly to come forth publicly in majesty and splendour as we see in @Revelation 19, as King of kings and Lord of lords, and He will actually remove by His power those terrible invaders from the earth. Satan will be bound, and sin and death will be held in check, for a thousand years. What a reign it will be! Finally death will be destroyed; "The last enemy that is annulled is death" (@1 Corinthians 15: 26). What a Warrior the Lord Jesus is! Where was the victory really won? On the cross, as we sing, 
<blockquote>'His be the Victor's name, Who fought the fight alone' (`24:1).</blockquote>
Think of the Lord Jesus in the way He met the foe, with what divine strategy He moved. We love to contemplate His military greatness, the One Man great enough to meet that tremendous invasion of sin and death and woe. It was a wonderful military plan -- a plan which Satan could not foresee. The Lord took all his armour
{342}
away, by which he kept men in bondage through fear of death. As Goliath was slain by his own sword, so the Lord took Satan's weapon out of his hand and in principle slew him with it. "Through death he might annul him who has the might of death" (@Hebrews 2: 14).
The psalmist looks on to the future, and we too need the day of glory shining in our hearts. Nevertheless, we can see these qualities in the Lord, when here in humiliation. He knew how to gird on His sword; He knew how to handle God's word, how to silence men, and yet in what grace He brought it to bear, having in view their repentance, if only they would listen. What majesty and dignity marked Him as He moved on to the cross, facing it alone, saying "if therefore ye seek me, let these go away" (@John 18: 8) -- dying for His own, not asking them to die for Him. How kingly He was! -- "a king, against whom none can rise up" (@Proverbs 30: 31). Even here in His path of humiliation, who could stand before Him? None! Sin and death could not stand before Him; going into death He "annulled death, and brought to light life and incorruptibility by the glad tidings" (@2 Timothy 1: 10). What a warrior He was! "In thy splendour ride prosperously, because of truth and meekness and righteousness". Meekness and righteousness marked the Lord Jesus right through to the cross; and all that marked Him in kingly grace and dignity then, is soon to shine out in Him publicly as He comes out of heaven, sitting on a white horse, with many diadems upon His head. In those closing moments at the Supper, in Gethsemane, at the trial before the high priest, and before Pilate, in His acceptance of the
{343}
crown of thorns, and the purple robe -- what unsurpassed glories shine in Him! To have His glories in our hearts would surely eclipse all the official glories of men here.
Verses 6 and 7 deal with another side of kingship, the throne and the sceptre. How great He is in this connection. The war is over, so to speak, and the King is seated on His throne -- "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever". Think of the majesty of that throne! The psalmist worships before it, owning Him as God, as the hymn says, 
<blockquote>'God ever blest! we bow the knee, <br>And own all fulness dwells in Thee' (`328:2).</blockquote>
God's King is, in Himself, a Divine Person! Think of the greatness of His throne! At present He is on the Father's throne, "Who ... having made by himself the purification of sins, set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high" (@Hebrews 1: 3). But we can anticipate the day when He will take His own throne, and delight to salute Him as God: "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever". Righteousness and justice are the foundation of the throne. There the King sits in majesty, and dispenses justice and righteousness. No oppressed one need fear to come to that throne. There is protection for the weak, and support for the widow. But there is also the sceptre, "a sceptre of uprightness is the sceptre of thy kingdom". This refers to the rule of Christ, which extends to the uttermost parts of His kingdom -- a rule of righteous grace. The whole realm, too, is filled with gladness, in which the King Himself is pre-
{344}
eminent. "God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions". What a joyous kingdom! What a glorious King!
The next section refers to the king's glories *inside* the palace. We are passing from glory to glory -- the glory is increasing. You may see a king at the head of his army in the human sphere; you may see him in connection with the throne and sceptre; but what about inside the palace? Only privileged persons can see him there. The section begins with the idea of nearness to the king, sufficient nearness to smell the odour of his garments. "Myrrh and aloes, cassia, are all thy garments". The song of the Beloved is working up to this point. We have been engaged with *His moral and military glories, with His greatness* in connection with *the throne and sceptre*, but now as in the palace, we are near enough to Him to breathe the odour of His garments. In the Song of Songs the Beloved is the King. The fact that He is King enhances His love. Think of being loved by One so great! He is the King, and yet He loves us! What will stimulate bridal affections like that, dear brethren? The more we apprehend the greatness of Christ, the more we shall marvel that He could set His love upon us. It suggests nearness here, as in the @Song of Songs 1: 3 -- "Thine ointments savour sweetly; Thy name is an ointment poured forth". She is near enough to him to get the odour of his ointments. Then in verse 12 it
{345}
says, "While the king is at his table, My spikenard sendeth forth its fragrance". It brings in what is mutual. The bride is near enough to the king to detect the sweetness of his ointments, but then there is the response from her: "*My* spikenard", that which gratifies the king's heart. Mutual expressions of affection and appreciation between the Bridegroom and the bride follow, until she says, "His left hand is under my head, And his right hand doth embrace me" (@Song of Songs 2: 6) -- the setting of all that, is within the palace. So in @Psalm 45 we have the palace, and the queen at his right hand in gold of Ophir. What glory belongs to her as inside the palace with the king, the object of his heart! It is wonderful to think that He desires to be everything to us in our circumstances, in order that we should be drawn over into His circumstances, to be available to His heart, to be engaged with His glory. She is not unsuitable to be there, for "All glorious is the king's daughter within" (i.e. in the royal apartments see note *d*). She is fitted to be there as companion to the king. But if we are *not subject to the Lord in our circumstances, we shall never be free to pass over into His*. There is no insubject will in the palace of the king. If we are to enter into the blessedness of our part there, it implies complete subjection to the Lord in our circumstances here. If this subjection exists we shall experience the joy and gladness in verse 15. "With joy and gladness
{346}
shall they be brought; they shall enter into the king's palace". It is in that glorious setting that bridal affections -- the affections of the Bridegroom and the bride are satisfied; the Beloved is the King.
Now just a word as to @Psalm 110. It is necessary to say before speaking of this Psalm, that Hebrews, which particularly develops the glory of Christ as the anti-type of Melchisedec, emphasises that God's King is God's Son. We have spoken of the Lord's moral glories and of His official glories as King, as Warrior, in connection with the throne and sceptre, and lastly, within the palace. What He is *personally* enters into all that. What underlies all is His personal glory in manhood as Son. God's King is no less than God's Son.
Another truth stressed in Hebrews is that God's King is God's Priest. The kingly and priestly thoughts are not separated, even as regards the saints, for in @Revelation 1: 6, we read "and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father". What a wonderful contemplation, that God's King is God's Priest! It ensures that God will get His portion. So that everything the King does in a military way, and all that He does as occupying the throne and wielding the sceptre, is in view of God getting His portion. We are told that at the end "he gives up the kingdom to him who is God and Father ... that God may be all in all" (@1 Corinthians 15: 24 - 28). That is what you would expect
{347}
Him to do, because the King is the Son, and the Son ever considers for the Father. Everything the King secures is for God's pleasure. He always has that in mind. It says in @Hebrews 1: 5, "*I* will be to him for father, and *he* shall be to me for son". How wonderful for God to have His Son as King and Priest upon the throne!
The Lord Jesus, in securing us down here under His authority, and then bringing us into His circumstances, into the glory and blessedness of the palace, has always in view that God should have His portion. The opening verse of this Psalm particularly applies to the present time. "Jehovah said unto my Lord, Sit at my right hand, until I put thine enemies as footstool of thy feet". The Lord has not yet taken His own throne, but is sitting at God's right hand. Hebrews views Him there and shows that His great occupation is to lead a priestly company in to God. He secures us in our affections as worshippers of Himself, for "he is thy Lord, and worship thou him" (@Psalm 45: 11), with a view to leading us in to God. This Psalm brings out the attractiveness of the position in this respect.
"Thy people shall be willing [or 'voluntary-offerings' see note *d*] in the day of thy power, in holy splendour: from the womb of the morning shall come to thee the dew of thy youth". We anticipate the day of His power, as He secures our affections wholly for
{348}
Himself, and it is His delight then to turn our hearts Godward, so that we become 'voluntary-offerings' in the day of His power, in holy splendour. What a conception! Christ leading His own in to God, in holy splendour! The whole scene is marked by perennial freshness "from the womb of the morning shall come to thee the dew of thy youth". It speaks primarily of Christ Himself as coming out of death, for *His death is the womb of the morning*. He goes in to God with the dew of perennial youth upon His brow, as leading all those who are the fruit of His death. "Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit" (@John 12: 24). So the whole scene is marked by youthful freshness. As Christ's brethren we never grow old; the dew of perennial youth is on His brow and on ours, as in holy splendour He leads us in to God. So the Psalm goes on, "Jehovah hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek". The One who can lead a company in is "constituted ... according to the power of indissoluble life" (@Hebrews 7: 16). I think we need to give attention to Christ as of the Melchisedek order of priesthood. Melchisedek is the first priest mentioned in Scripture. In the chapter where he is introduced, kings are mentioned for the first time -- four kings against five (@Genesis 14). But God brings forward His King -- King of righteousness and
{349}
King of peace -- Priest of the most high God. *He is the summing up of what we have had tonight*.
@Luke 1: 32 says, "*He* shall be great, and shall be called Son of the Highest". The Lord Jesus is the Son of the Most High, of whom Melchisedek was a type, and at the end of Luke He leaves a priestly company praising and blessing God.
May the Lord help us to see His glory.
*Streatham, London, September 1941*.
{350}
{351}
THE GREATNESS OF CHRIST SECURING RESPONSE TO GOD IN THE ASSEMBLY
G R Cowell
@Colossians 1: 15 - 20 (first clause); @Colossians 2: 9, 10; @John 1: 1 - 4, 14, 18; @Hebrews 1: 1 - 3
I desire, as the Lord may help, to speak of a feature of Christ's glory in each of the three passages read, which bears on our position as belonging to the assembly. These chapters portray the greatness of Christ more fully than any other passages of Scripture. They are each unique; but there are certain features of correspondence about them. Each of the chapters stress that, in Person, He is *God*, none less than God; although each refers to His Deity in a different way. Each also makes it clear that He is the Person of the Godhead who brought this world into being -- indeed the whole universe. Each refers to His sonship as in manhood; and finally each refers to the universal bearing of His vicarious death. Colossians says, "In him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell, and by him to reconcile all things to itself". John speaks of Him as "the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world". In Hebrews we have, "having made by himself the purification of
{352}
sins", -- not simply our sins, but the whole question of sins.
But while the chapters have features in common, I wish to bring before you tonight the particular feature stressed in each passage. In the first passage we are told, "*He* is the head of the body, the assembly". This glorious Person is the Head of the body, the assembly; and, for a type, we must go back to Adam. Christ, in @Colossians 1, is presented as One who entirely supersedes Adam, for He is "firstborn of all creation", in virtue of His being the Creator, and as such He is presented as Head. In the second passage, @John 1, He is presented as the Word, and what is in view as in John's gospel generally, is dwelling conditions for Divine Persons, -- home conditions. So He is introduced as the Word, the One who is the expression of all that is *suitable to Divine Persons*, the whole mind of God. For typical teaching we have to turn to Exodus. All types fall very far short, and a great deal has to be learnt by contrast, as in @John 1: 17 "For the law was given by Moses: grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ". Nevertheless Moses secured dwelling conditions for God by bringing in the mind of God -- God's word -- so far as it could be known at that time. But in Jesus, "*the* Word", we have the mind of God in a perfect way. All that came in previously pales into insignificance beside Him, yet it is valuable as a type.
{353}
@Hebrews 1 particularly stresses that He is the Son, "God ... has spoken to us in the person of the Son". All the early part of the chapter emphasises that: "For to which of the angels said he ever, *Thou* art my Son: this day have *I* begotten thee? and again, *I* will be to him for father, and *he* shall be to me for son?" What is specially in view in this epistle is to secure the service of praise; what we might speak of as public, priestly service worthy of God, worthy of the One who has spoken "in Son". So that Hebrews stresses that God's King, and God's Priest is God's Son. Put those three thoughts together, the priestly and kingly offices now held by the Son, and you can be sure that public priestly service will be secured. For a type we must go to Solomon.
I believe the first passage is basic, having to do with the relation between Christ and the assembly; and unless that relation is entered into by the saints, dwelling conditions will not be secured for God, nor conditions for priestly service. It is a great thing to see, dear brethren, that in securing and establishing the relations between Christ and the assembly, God secures all He is seeking for Himself. So that, at the end, when John "saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband" (@Revelation 21: 2), he heard a loud voice saying "Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men". In that vessel "prepared as a bride adorned
{354}
for her husband", and thus presented as primarily for Christ, God has secured dwelling conditions for Himself. Then when the city is presented in its glory as "the bride, the Lamb's wife" (verse 9), we are told "His [i.e. God's] servants shall serve him, and they shall see his face; and his name is on their foreheads" (@Revelation 22: 3, 4). It refers to priestly service worthy of God's great name. It shows how important it is that we should understand, in some measure, the greatness of Christ as Head of the body, the assembly.
The Spirit of God has in mind in @Colossians 1 to bring the greatness of Christ before our hearts in such a way as to exclude every other object. If we are to know the blessedness of the relationship between Christ and the assembly, He Himself in His greatness must be before our hearts, so as to exclude every rival. In @Luke 22: 19, He says, "This is my body which is given for you" -- a presentation calculated to secure the church wholly for Himself. If we entered into it we should never look to any other source for wisdom, light, food or for anything we need spiritually. That is one great point in Colossians, to save christians from looking anywhere else for the satisfaction of their souls, or for the meeting of their spiritual needs.
Christ is presented as the "image of the invisible God". Adam was created in God's image, and after His likeness, but here we have the One of whom
{355}
Adam was but a figure. God is perfectly expressed in this blessed One who is the "image of the invisible God, firstborn of all creation". Christ is firstborn in rank, far exceeding any other man who ever has been, or will be, born into this world, and for this reason, that "all things have been created by him and for him". Think of the marvel of it! The One in whom all things were created. 'In him' (see note *k* to verse 16), suggests that they not only exist by Him, but that He maintains them. One so great as that coming into the creation, must necessarily be firstborn, "because by him were created all things, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth, the visible and invisible". I want you to contemplate the greatness of Christ as Creator. The creation came into being by His act, and only subsists by His power. *To secure His assembly He stepped into His own creation*, and He must be firstborn of it. It is not only material thrones or lordships, or principalities or authorities. All things have been created by him and for him. Great positions of authority are occupied by men, and by angels, but Christ created those offices and positions. Christ created kingship: He created every form of authority. It is wonderful to think that there are lordships, principalities and authorities created by Christ and for Him. And He will yet fill them out as the Head of all principality and authority. He only can fill them according to God.
{356}
Another marvellous thing is that, since sin came into the creation and marred, not only the visible things, but the invisible also, the Lord Jesus, of whom it says, "in him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell", went into death, that *by the blood of His cross everything that He had created might be reconciled to God*. He effects reconciliation in order that He might fill the whole scene, and every office Himself. What a marvellous Person! Reconciliation has been made by Him, in accordance with all the fulness of the Godhead, which dwelt in Him. Public reconciliation is still to come, but *we* have already received the reconciliation: "And you ... now has it reconciled". He is, even now, "head of the body, the assembly", and He is Head of all principality and authority, although He has not yet taken up that headship publicly. The great truth of the moment is that "he is the head of the body". There is a company on this earth who *already* know Him as Head. They know Him, as no other company ever will, or can do, because they are His body.
Now, as I said earlier, in Adam we get a type of this. God created him in his image, and in one sense, he was firstborn of all creation. He was given dominion over every form of life, but he was head of Eve in a peculiar way for, as the woman, she was really his body. "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman,
{357}
because this was taken out of a man" (@Genesis 2: 23). His headship of the woman was different from his headship of any other part of creation, because she was *his body*. The presentation of Christ as Head of the body, the assembly, is intended to exclude from our minds every other object. I am not referring to the objects of our natural affection, but to any object which might dominate our affections, or to which we might look as a source of supply. Having Christ as Head, the assembly is independent of every other source of spiritual supply. In @Colossians 2: 9 we read, "For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily; and ye are complete [or 'filled full'] in him". Saints in the gain of that *could* not turn to any other source, for they would be full. This is *normal* christianity. The assembly is filled full in Him, so that there is room for nothing else.
Eve is a warning to us. She was complete in Adam; her safety lay in not going outside of Adam for advice or counsel, or anything else, but she turned aside to listen to Satan's advice, which was, in principle, "philosophy and vain deceit". She did not hold fast her head, and the result was the fall. In christendom a similar thing has happened; the church has departed from the "simplicity as to the Christ" (@2 Corinthians 11: 3), and has relied on human ability and turned to great men and their counsel. What a disaster has come into christendom! What an
{358}
awful state of things it is! That which professedly has Christ as head, has come to such a point that, in general, Christ is the last Person they turn to. It speaks of being deluded by "persuasive speech" (verse 4); indeed all the things mentioned in this chapter, by way of warning, are rampant around us today and Christ is displaced. Men have become vainly puffed up by the mind of their flesh as a result of not holding fast the head. We have to guard that nothing outside of Christ should have place in the minds and affections of the saints in our localities. This presentation of Christ should so fill us with Himself and His glory, that we could not tolerate the thought of going outside of Him for anything. What could we need, or desire, that cannot be found in Him in whom dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily? And we are filled full in Him. This is a vital point in our assembly relations. It involves the truth of the mystery. It is mysterious to nature; man in the flesh cannot understand it at all. *It is the mystery* "in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge" (verse 3).
The relations between Christ and the assembly are foundational and continuous. As we yield to Him, and He becomes exclusively our resource as Head, we may be sure God will secure His portion. As it says in @Ephesians 3: 19, "to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God". And the result is
{359}
glory to God in the assembly, "unto all generations of the age of ages!" God secures His end.
In the gospel of John the Lord Jesus is presented as "the Word", and the whole setting is fraught with the most tender affections. What we might almost call the 'home-life' of Divine Persons is brought into view, God having in mind that we should come into it, and that He would thus secure dwelling conditions down here. If these dwelling conditions are to be secured, we need to appreciate the Lord Jesus as the Word, that is, as the One in whom all that is precious to God, the whole divine mind about man, is seen. If He is to have dwelling conditions amongst His own, it must be in conditions suited to Him, and we see that which delights His heart set out livingly in Christ. The greatness of the Person is brought before us: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". This presentation is intended to impress upon us His perfect ability to declare all the mind of God, for He was *with* God, and was God. He makes the disclosure from the place of infinite affections into which He has come as Man, from the bosom of the Father; "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". The apostles beheld his glory, "a glory as of an only-begotten with a father", with a view to their coming into the circle of divine affections in their measure. His place, of course, is ever unique.
{360}
In connection with His work, the chapter speaks of "the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world", an expression intended to call out our tenderest affection. It corresponds with what we get in Exodus -- a lamb for a father's house. The passover lamb had dwelling conditions for God in view, and God had His house, the Father's house in view, in giving His Lamb. As the two disciples of John followed Him (verse 38) they say, "Where abidest thou?" He says, "Come and see". "The Word" in John's gospel implies that every feature delightful to God is to be *seen* in Him. He would invite us to come and see where He abides; to see Him in His relations with the Father, so that we might ourselves be brought into accord with the dwelling place of Divine love.
To refer again to Moses, in the measure in which God could be known at that time, Moses had declared Him and revealed His mind, not only in the covenant, but also in communicating the pattern which he had seen on the mount. He had seen expressed typically, conditions suitable for divine dwelling, and he communicated what he had seen to the people, in order that those conditions might be found amongst them; and that God might dwell with them. Now the Lord Jesus has come *Himself*, He is Himself the great pattern of all that is delightful to God. What is in mind in this gospel is that what is expressed in Himself should take effect in us. It
{361}
says in @1 John 2: 8, "which thing is true in him and in you", so that God might dwell with us now, having in view the final state of which it is said "the tabernacle of God is with men".
To pass on to @Hebrews 1 and 2, these chapters have in view our serving God in great and glorious conditions. It says of the Son -- "having made by himself the purification of sins, set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high". Colossians speaks of "fulness" -- that which can fill our hearts, -- which will fill a universe; but here it is the "greatness", another expression relating to Deity, suggesting the majesty and glory connected with it. The Lord Jesus is presented in chapter 2 as the Leader, bringing many sons to glory. It is not so much sonship in the home circle -- dwelling conditions, -- but what sons are to God *in their ability to serve Him*, according to His greatness as God. A human illustration of the two sides is seen in an earthly royal family. There is what the son is to his father in the home circle. That is the private side, and the more it is entered into, the more the son would desire in public conditions to serve his father worthily, according to his greatness as king; to bring him the honour due to him. I believe that is the way it would work out with us. The more we know of home conditions, knowing God as Father, the more we would desire ability, as true sons, to bring to Him all
{362}
that is due to Him as God. Our Father is *God* -- the God who inhabits eternity; and the more we know Him in the inside place, the more we shall desire to serve Him acceptably in public priestly service. @Revelation 21: 3 says, "the tabernacle of God is with men", yet it goes on to say, "I will be to him God, and he shall be to me son" (verse 7). Revelation, as a whole, has in view that the saints are to God as kings and priests. Even an earthly father desires his son to be worthy of him in the public position. He loves him in the secret affections of the home, and desires to see a corresponding answer publicly. So in the spiritual sphere there is the family side, but there is also what is due to God in public priestly service; the one underlies the other. Hebrews does not mention the name of Father, yet it is implied in that a Son is the Speaker. The point in Hebrews is that *God* is speaking in Son; *God* has such a Son as this. What satisfaction God must have in that *His King and His Priest is His Son*! It is as such He brings many sons to glory, saying, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" (@Hebrews 2: 12). I understand the singing of praise to imply public priestly service. It is meant to be heard: "Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me" (@Psalm 50: 23). Solomon is the son, in type. He built the house, and established the public service of God, and when the trumpeters and singers were as one in
{363}
praising Jehovah, the glory of Jehovah filled the house of God (@2 Chronicles 5: 13, 14).
While the service Godward in its highest character belongs to the assembly as convened, yet we are exhorted to offer the sacrifice of praise to God *continually* (@Hebrews 13: 15). The more we know of home conditions, the more we shall desire to give to God, as God, the honour due to His Name, morning, noon and night, in prayer, praise and thanksgiving, as a holy priesthood: and in speaking to men of His excellencies, as a royal priesthood. All this was in view when the Lord Jesus "set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high". He has secured for God sons serving Him as kingly priests, both in assembly service and "continually". We have had brought before us of late the importance in our priestly service, of holding in our affections *every name by which God is known*. That enters into this matter. Those who truly love Him will desire to give Him what is due in every respect. It says, "God having spoken ... formerly ... in the prophets". What was spoken "formerly" is not ignored, but is gathered up now in the Son, who is "the effulgence [or outshining] of his glory and the expression of his substance". The *outshining of God's glory, and the expression of His substance in the Son fills out the names* by which He made Himself known in the past, in a marvellous way. The outshining of His glory is
{364}
more connected with His attributes. *Glory enlightens*; it makes everything plain. His righteousness, mercy and grace, as also His power, came to light in the Son, who is the outshining of His glory. But then He is "the expression of his substance", the expression of what He is in His essential Being, and that is *love*, for God *is* love. I commend that to you, that He is the expression of His substance. The name Jehovah means the eternally unchanging One, the "I AM THAT I AM" (@Exodus 3: 14); but He did not tell them *what* He was. But now that the Son has come, who is the expression of His substance, Jehovah, for us, means One who is eternal, unchanging love. Similarly the name Almighty now conveys Almighty love. So if we think of Elohim, the Creator, or the Most High -- what might be termed God's political title, the expression of His substance in the Son gives these names a fulness which they could not possess in earlier times. Whatever way He spoke in time past, is now filled out by the coming in of the Son, and God looks to us who are brought into relationship with Him through the Son, to give Him His due in every way in which He has made Himself known. The more we enjoy sonship, the more we shall desire to do it. May the Lord help us for His name's sake!
*Streatham, London, September 1941*.
{365}
FOUR PILLARS
A E Myles
@Acts 9: 20 - 28; @Acts 10: 9 - 15; @1 Peter 2: 3 - 5; @1 John 2: 12, 13; @Ephesians 1: 22, 23; @Ephesians 2: 22
In reading the New Testament one notices that there are four conspicuous persons; conspicuous because they were privileged to see the Lord -- either on the holy mount or in the third heaven -- apart from the conditions of humiliation in which He appeared to other men. Around the ministry of these men the structure of the New Testament is built. All scripture has a structure, a design; it is not a compilation of words thrown together. There is not a feature that you could call accidental in all the word of God. Everything is spoken by design, and things are left out by design. One writer contributes to another, so that a spiritual person -- one educated in the ways of God -- can so put the Scriptures together that the great intent of all scripture may become manifest. The divine design behind all Scripture is that God would make Christ great. God has not only set Him in a position of greatness, but His thought is to give a right impression and appreciation of that greatness to all who love Him.
Peter, James, John and Paul are the four conspicuous men to whom I refer as being pillars. The first three are seen with the Lord on the holy mount, and in the garden of Gethsemane. They are thus in a special position of great privilege and intimacy, which was not shared by the
{366}
others. Paul was caught up to the third heaven and heard unspeakable things.
I speak first about James, because he represents the great element of sacrifice. He was martyred. He does not take any active part in ministry with the others, but he disappeared in suffering. The history of James would give us the impression that the precious things of God cannot be secured apart from sacrifice; it is this which makes things real. Christianity brings in spiritual wealth, but it makes demands which can only be met by sacrifice. The fact that James is martyred does not bring things to an end, they are to go on; the element of sacrifice balancing the features of light and privilege. We do well to consider this thought, for it is important to accept it.
Concerning Peter, John and Paul, we are not told in Scripture of the actual death of any one of them. We know that the Lord had told Peter that he was to glorify God by his death; we know that Paul was near to the end of his course; but actually the divine historical record leaves them still alive -- Peter warning the saints, and Paul a prisoner of Rome. There he dwelt in his hired lodging, receiving all who came to him, "preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, with all freedom unhinderedly" (@Acts 28: 31). That is how Paul is left; no longer going out to men, that is, he had receded from the public eye, but there were those who were coming to him. Then John is left on the isle of Patmos, for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus. That is how the scriptural history leaves these men, and that is how we are to think of them. We are to regard them
{367}
as living persons in those circumstances, and their ministry is to have a bearing on our souls in accord with that.
We all know that the ministry of the kingdom was committed to Peter. The Lord Himself went away to heaven, and He entrusted the keys of the kingdom to Peter. He had confidence in him. In the ministry of Peter you will find kingdom thoughts. He brings in what is preparatory; what has an application to the saints as living in a world of evil; as having the flesh within them, and as surrounded by enemies. The intent of Peter's ministry is to prepare the saints for Paul, as the scriptures before us will show.
To Paul was committed the unfolding of the mystery. He received his commission from a glorified Christ. He came in late, as one who had never seen Christ after the flesh; as one whose links with Him were only in resurrection. The other apostles, who had been with Jesus here, had links which were broken in death, connected with the life the Lord laid down; but Paul received his commission from Christ in heaven. There is divine teaching in that, for the great bulk of the persons who form the assembly have never known Christ after the flesh. Paul is representative of that company, whose only link with Christ is connected with the glory. Having received his commission from the glory, the mystery hidden throughout the ages in God is given to him to unfold.
Now to John, the brother of James the martyr, was given the ministry connected with the family of God. He brings in the idea of family links, and speaks in family terms. Furthermore, John is the last of the New Testament writers, and his ministry is to have distinctive force to the end: "If I will that he abide until I come, what is that to
{368}
thee?" (@John 21: 22). In other words, John was given a living ministry for the last days; days in which both Peter and Paul would be publicly set aside. Both Peter and Paul are left as captives of the world system; Peter just about to be carried out, and Paul about to be poured out. That is, both are about to die, and the teaching of Peter and Paul is utterly discredited. Its existence is acknowledged, but it is not recognised as controlling the situation. You could not have the religious systems around unless Peter and Paul, especially Paul, had been pushed into the background and discredited. How could you recognise Paul as authoritative, and allow clericalism? Paul would say, "*We* have all been baptised into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bondmen or free;" and again, "the eye cannot say to the hand, I have not need of thee" (@1 Corinthians 12: 13, 21). If you bring Paul to the front, clericalism and many other things welcomed in christendom, would have to go. So, in order to make these man-made systems workable, both Peter and Paul are pushed into the background, and the public position is that they are just about to die. Look into the religious mind today, and you will find they are just on the point of putting Paul out altogether. That is how the matter stands publicly today, and the present position in the religious world confirms the prophetic scripture.
But John is not in prison and not a captive. He is on a lonely island. No crowd of inquirers surround him, and if you would find him, you must go to him; but if you do you will find a living ministry, given by the Lord for a day in which Peter and Paul are discredited. You will find too, that John is getting visions and revelations, showing how
{369}
the Lord is going to deal with the great false system of profession -- with Babylon the harlot; and with every other power that has exalted itself against God. Thus we see how these men are left in Scripture, and how their final position is a prophetic indication of the way their teachings would he regarded in our day.
Turning now to the import of their ministry, as it bears upon us, I would show from the way things are introduced in the Acts, that Peter's work is first with the Jew. Between the testimony to the Jew, and the opening of the door to the gentiles, Paul is introduced. This new movement on the Lord's part is reached in chapter 9, and the new vessel is brought in. The Lord always has something in reserve. It is dangerous to think otherwise. He has power to make movements that brethren have never anticipated or thought of. He has the power to bring in persons, and with those persons new things and features. The Lord always holds that power. We are in a poor state if we think that we know all that the Lord is going to do, and may even rebel against His movements. Our proper attitude is to be always expectant, that out of His great power and the vast resources of His hand, the Lord would bring in what is fresh and new. These movements are evidences that the Lord is alive, that He loves His people, and that though unseen and in heaven, He directs everything connected with His saints. Here, then, the Lord makes a new movement. He brings in another vessel. No one had thought there was a vessel in reserve. The twelve, the apostles, were complete. One had been chosen by the Spirit to fill the place of Judas. The Lord had gone to the right hand of God, but what comes out is that from heaven
{370}
the Lord is going to bring in a glorious addition in Paul, the chosen vessel, one set apart, as he says, from his mother's womb. The Lord has His eye upon him. He allowed him to go his own way, hostile to what God was building up, but when the moment came, He called, and Saul of Tarsus bowed before the power of Him who quickens whom He will. It is of interest to see that Peter is not allowed to open the door of the kingdom to the gentiles until Paul, this new vessel, is brought to light, and the brethren have *received* him. When the disciples show that they are prepared to treasure his life, letting him over the wall in a basket, and giving him liberty to move in and out amongst them, the Lord uses Peter to open the door to the gentiles. There is much instruction in this, because the kingdom of God does not of itself reach the divine goal. Even today we may preach the gospel and in that way give men the light of the kingdom. They may be relieved and protected from enemies, but if they are not consciously brought into the assembly, they do not reach God's present goal. Forgiveness is a preparation for being near to God. Eternal security is an outflowing of a far greater thought, and that is to live in the love of God. The safest place in the universe is the love of God. The divine intent is that all who come under the protection of the kingdom should reach the assembly, and learn what their place is there. So that Peter is not liberated for his great work, the work committed to him, until Paul, the one through whom the Lord was going to bring in the light of the mystery, had been received by the brethren. Here then is the position: Paul is welcomed and recognised as a vessel chosen of the Lord. Thus the way is open, and the brethren are ready for
{371}
the next movement. Now Peter opens the door through which most of those who form the assembly are to pass, for the gentiles, not the Jews, are going to fill the kingdom in its present aspect. The Jews were brought in at the beginning, but in the subsequent history the work of God was to be amongst the gentiles.
Well, Peter is now again in the centre of the Lord's ways, but he has to be prepared for the great development which was about to definitely set aside the Jew, and portray the sovereign movements of God. He is prepared by a vision, and the vision gives the import of his ministry in opening the door to the gentile. I do not dwell on the detail, but just on the form of the vessel let down from heaven. It bears the similitude of a sheet. It is a vessel, that is the point; but at present it is as it were a sheet. It is reserved for Paul to give us the form and outline of the vessel, but so far as Peter carries us, it is a sheet. Now a sheet is a shapeless sort of thing, but has great capacity for holding things together. It has no symmetry, no form, nor beauty; no idea of design, but it has very great capacity to keep things together. In this sheet are all manner of creeping things, beasts of the field and fowl of the air. There are no fishes in it, but only what is connected with the earth and the air. In these two spheres the way had been opened for Satan to operate by the fall of man. Adam never took up headship over the sea, therefore this sphere was not opened to the power of evil, and hence the great resources of God are connected with the sea.
So the kingdom, according to the vision, has first gathered persons in one great mass, and having features brought about by the ways of sin. Externally they appear
{372}
unclean, as creeping things and reptiles, showing to what depths man has descended, and that though the persons represented are in the great sheet, they still bear that same external appearance. But God had cleansed them, and they are no longer unclean. However, there are features of self-will, pride and insubjection seen there, and as yet they are only in a mass. God does not leave matters in this condition. He will have myriads to praise Him, but every individual will be an example of the perfect work of God. Now as in such a condition they are given over to Peter, to the subduing power of the kingdom of God. When Peter, so to speak, hands them over to Paul, they have lost the indistinguishable features of an unsubdued mass, and each has taken on the appearance of a living stone. A stone is a piece of constructional material that is shaped in view of a building. Looking at the stone itself you do not know what place it is to fill, but as having the features of flesh set aside, and as having the features of life, the stone can be placed in any part of the structure that the builder desires. These living stones are persons who have come under the power of the kingdom. Their wills have been subdued, the flesh has been judged in the light of the death of Christ, and, as having moral features formed by the sway of grace in their souls, they can be placed alongside other persons, other living stones, without fear of conflict. That is how the kingdom would work in us, in view of coming under Paul's teaching with a view to our taking up assembly relation with the Lord, and with one another.
Paul now comes before us as a wise master-builder. Indeed he is an architect, knowing just how those stones are to be fitted together to form that marvellous structure,
{373}
the house of God -- the place where He would dwell. Not that Paul built the house, Christ built it, and the Spirit came down at Pentecost so that God might dwell; but Paul's teaching is to make the saints intelligent as to what has been effected by divine Persons. The house is to be an expression of the things God loves. Even in a man's house you can see what the man is like. He will surround himself with what is congenial, with what expresses himself. So God has marvellous thoughts of the building in which He would dwell! Every part of it, both in design and structure, must be a delight to God; it must be congenial to Him, it must raise no moral questions; thus every feature is to speak of Christ. God, being what He is, could not dwell in any other surroundings; and one feature of Paul's ministry is that the features of Christ formed by the Holy Spirit should be intelligently discerned, so that when put together it would present no feature which would cause divine unrest.
I now refer to another feature of Paul's ministry, which comes before us in @Ephesians 1: 23. There we find the assembly referred to as, "his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". Two definite features of Paul's ministry are before our minds: one, of the assembly as a habitation of God by the Spirit; the other, what the assembly is to Christ as His body.
When the Lord was here on earth, the body in which men saw Him was not meant to display what was in Him. The features of His glory were in obscurity. He took a body in which to accomplish the will of God; but it is God's thought that He should be displayed, and the assembly is the chosen vessel, as His body, to display the
{374}
fulness of Him who fills all things. He indeed fills all things, but the assembly is His fulness. Every feature of Christ in its fulness is to be displayed in a living vessel, His body. The Spirit of God would give us, in the words of @Ephesians 1, the sense of the incomparable greatness of Christ. Amongst principalities, authorities, powers, dominions, and every name that is named, He is pre-eminent; all are under His feet. What distinction! But it is as Head of the assembly, which is His body, the fulness of Him who fills all in all, that He shines in the greatest pre-eminence of all. It is His chief distinction in that glorious display!
I turn now to John. He brings in the family side. He is the last writer in the Scriptures, and his writings are in view of the day when all that Paul set up in testimony on earth has broken down. John brings in what is vital. This remark does not discredit what God set up at the beginning; but great as that was, its failure does not impair God's eternal thoughts. It is essential in these days of brokenness and departure to have what is vital. It is good to have the light of the public order of the assembly, as it is developed in 1 Corinthians. It is essential that, though in brokenness, we should observe it as by divine commandment; but if we have not what is vital, and have only a correct outward form, we shall decay. Meetings cannot be sustained on truths handed on from one generation to another, unless they are held in the vitality of life. A meeting cannot be carried on by cold formalities. If it is to provide opportunities for the interchange of spiritual thoughts, and an outlet for the spiritual emotions of the saints, it must be a living system. John brings in a
{375}
living system; not in a public setting, but as the incorruptible work of God, in the energy of a life that is eternal in character. Hence it cannot be destroyed by any enemy operating only in time. This life centres in divine Persons. It is supported in divine Persons. The system of living, unchanging things is not supported by man in responsibility. God is everything -- the Giver, the Seeker, the Worker. That is what John presents, and it is presented that disciples might believe.
To be a believer, according to John, you must be in the light of the glory. The movements of divine Persons are not here to show the compassions of God, but the love of God, and the glory of the One who came to make God known. This is very vital teaching, and if entered into would make the meetings pulsate with life, and all who come in contact with the saints would gather an impression that life is there: a life that is not supported by the world's system, but by what is beyond death. How important it is that we should apprehend that we stand in family relationship to God, and to one another; that the saints bear family features; whether they live in India or Scotland; that they take character from God, and they love one another. There are fathers, young men and children, various stages of growth, but all in a family setting. They are drawn from every circumstance of life here; they have all borne the image of the earthy; but God has wrought in them what is new, and of Himself, and has set them together in family links. There is community of thought, and like affections, and but one interest in this family. Every one loves to see the children grow up, delights in the strength of a young man, and honours the experience of a father.
{376}
I trust I have conveyed a suggestion as to how these great ministries work together to support us in the last days. We all need support today, but if the precious features of truth connected with the work of Peter, John and Paul are known to our souls, as having grace to walk together in self-judgment, we shall find that God has triumphed, even in these last days. We shall find Paul's ministry has power and is just as workable as ever; that it is not a vision of a glorious past, but a present workable system.
I should like to impress all with the need of studying Scripture as a whole. Study subjects, rather than verses, and you will find that thoughts begin to take definite shape in the mind. You have the Holy Spirit, and having the Spirit you can become spiritual. It is not a question of the mind, or of worldly education; any one of us can become spiritual, as having the Spirit. All the thoughts of God are open to us. The Scriptures will give you comfort, they will confirm you in every circumstance, but they also contain the great thoughts of God -- thoughts related to what He does for Himself.
*Place and date unknown*.
{377}
THE NEARNESS OF CHRIST'S HUMANITY
A E Myles
@1 John 1:1; @Luke 2: 6, 7, 25 - 33; @John 13: 23 - 35
I have read these passages to refer to the important idea of *handling*. It is expressed in the first chapter of 1 John, "our hands handled, concerning the word of life". I am speaking without premeditation, but it occurred to me that it is of the first importance to understand how *near* the Lord Jesus has come to men. One of the great matters which occupied God, in connection with His purpose concerning Christ, must have been how to come near to man. If we do not give thought to it, it may seem a very simple matter, but I believe it is most profound. Doubtless all the details of the humanity of the Lord Jesus, the body He was to take, the conditions of life in which He would live, and all the circumstances of His reception, were considered in view of nearness to man. They were a part of the counsels of God, which necessarily involve all the Persons of the Godhead. In those counsels a divine arrangement was entered into, of which the great matters were necessarily the incarnation, and the death of Christ, and the resurrection. But another matter, yet one of first importance, was how to get *near* to men. How to so present Him, that men could see Him, and touch Him. Yet that they should understand that a divine Person was there, and that nothing pertaining to His essential deity had been given up; only, what might be called the external surroundings had been changed (@John 17: 5), and these were, later, to be resumed.
{378}
I am looking for help from the Lord to emphasise this thought of *nearness*, of the reality of the humanity of Christ. Thus our faith does not rest on what is imaginary, or visionary, but on what is substantial according to man's thoughts, as well as according to God's. You will understand, of course, that I am alluding especially to the Lord's body, to the form which He took.
To call attention first to the passage in 1 John, it reads, "that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life; ... we have seen, and bear witness, and report to you". The apostles actually saw and handled the Lord Jesus, and this report is given so that, by faith, we might come into the same nearness as they.
There is a certain progressive order in these statements, heading up in the thought of *handling*. It begins with hearing, which involves the gospel. The gospel comes by report, and so does faith, according to @Romans 10: 16, 17. So that in the gospel God approaches men as bringing to them, and supplying, all that is needed to establish a link of faith with Christ. God's power is attached to the gospel, as Paul says, "I am not ashamed of the glad tidings; for it is God's power to salvation, to every one that believes" (@Romans 1: 16). Christ was presented to man in responsibility and was rejected; fallen man thus showing his complete incapability to receive Christ. Hence the need of new birth and of the gift of faith, the former a sovereign act on God's part, the latter to be made use of by men. But this link having been established by *faith*, there is another aspect presented in the thought of *seeing*. Seeing involves a certain faculty which God established as an
{379}
integral part of manhood, so that when Christ came men should see Him. Seeing involves that Christ is near, for man's vision is limited. Whatever else man's eyes may take account of, whether the glories of creation, or the works of man, his eyes were given him in view of seeing Christ; that is what sight was given for, just as man's ears were given primarily in view of hearing God's word. All the faculties of manhood are in view of Christ's incoming, so that as He is received in faith, there should be an apprehension of His greatness and moral worth and of His varied glories. All this would be to men as substance, and it is nothing less, for God was manifested in flesh; and yet throughout the Scriptures the inscrutability of the Person of Christ is asserted. There is that which pertains to Him as a divine Person that we have no capacity to take in, nor have we any license to pry into; but we know it is there, and we *must* know that it is there. No one could be a christian at all, if he did not believe in the deity of Christ; nor could anyone be a christian, if he did not believe in the real substantial manhood of Christ. These two thoughts are involved in the great basic doctrines of christianity.
Thus God has made a most gracious provision in His approach to men that they might become really alive to the greatest Person they will ever see; and that they might be able to discern what is for them, and what is not for them, though known to be there. This faculty of seeing is a most important one, involving that Christ is before you and near. His manhood was so real, that all man's faculties were involved in knowing Him; He was heard, seen and handled. I am using the natural faculty by way of illustration, but you will understand I have the spiritual
{380}
thought in mind for us -- that we should not only have a link with Christ on the basis of the gospel report, which we believe by faith, but that we should *see*. How much John insists on this idea of seeing! If you read his gospel you will find that the idea is there in a very large way. John the baptist says, "I have seen" (@John 1: 34); and other people are also made to see -- as the man in @John 9. Something comes before the vision of their souls, which has the reality of substance. We are not only awaiting the day when we shall actually see, for our glorified bodies will have the faculty of sight in the fullest way: "We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is" (@1 John 3: 2). Spiritually we have this faculty of sight *now* through the work of God in us. The apostles could say, "that ... which we have seen with our eyes", but for us as yet it is a spiritual faculty, involving the eyes of the heart (@Ephesians 1: 18).
Then the third idea is "that which we *contemplated*". I am stressing these points, because there are persons who have faith in Christ and have assurance as to eternal blessedness, but do they not *see*. I think I could say that fewer still *contemplate*. Contemplation is an essential feature in the apprehension of Christ. It does not suggest something you can analyse and dissect. Contemplation of Christ involves having before you the great majestic idea that a divine Person is there. He is there in manhood for men, but you can never approach Him in the sense in which you would study anything of nature. You approach with reverence, and your soul is full, every spiritual faculty responding. Contemplation does not involve any great activity of mind. Some have approached divine truths as they would study some earthly subject, but they get
{381}
nowhere. Whatever you may know in a mental way about Christ, if it does not fill your soul and make you a worshipper, it is not right. There is something wrong with the process, and instead of making you a spiritual man it will make you into an abnormality; that is, a man able to speak on the things of God, without the spiritual feelings and affections enabling him to respond to God in a living way. I would urge on the younger brethren this great idea of contemplation. The apostles "contemplated" that Person. In @John 1: 14 it says, they "contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". Here it is the Person, as amongst men, heard, seen and handled. The One who is called the Word of life came so closely within the range of men, that He was seen and contemplated by them. It is a thing that enters into the maturity of your moral being, the ability to have Christ before you in some definite way. Not by mere activity of mind, not by searching, but in the power of the Spirit to hold some great thought of Christ in your mind, that it might affect your soul and move your affections.
After the reference to contemplation it says, "And our hands handled". You notice the handling is the last on this list. It would be unholy to introduce the thought of handling without contemplation, without seeing, and without hearing. Wicked hands were laid on the Lord Jesus, nailing Him to a cross. Those whose hands moved in that unholy way saw nothing; felt nothing; they had no sense that the most glorious Person who was ever on this earth, the most glorious Person that our eyes shall ever see, had been in their hands, and that they had done wickedly to Him. "When ye shall have lifted up the Son of man,
{382}
then ye shall know that I am he" (@John 8: 28). I believe it is essential to understand the handling, which perhaps more than anything else, stresses the reality of the humanity of Jesus, and the nearness with which He came to men. They actually handled Him.
Now to go back to the passage read in Luke, it refers to the birth of Jesus. It says of Mary His mother that "she brought forth her first-born son, and wrapped him up in swaddling-clothes and laid him in the manger, because there was no room for them in the inn". What a holy vessel Mary was. One of the most distinguished persons in the Scriptures. The Holy Spirit came upon her. I do not doubt that mother-love entered into the matter, the natural side, which later the Lord had to adjust, but it is a normal thing that what is natural has to be adjusted to make way for what is spiritual. That is because God has such an understanding of us, that He has left room in His ordering in relation to Christ and the assembly, for certain natural relationships connected with families. A man is to love his wife, but he is always to have before him the thought of Christ and the assembly. But as one reads this account of the first person who handled the Lord, one can see what a great spiritual vessel she was. She "wrapped him up", it says, "in swaddling-clothes and laid him in the manger". She was a bondmaid of the Lord, a selected bondmaid of Jehovah. But though only a bondmaid, she stood in relation to this great matter, and the greatness of the Person who came thus into manhood. She was a vessel of the Spirit, filled with the Holy Spirit, so that holy hands and holy feelings entered into the first handling of the Lord Jesus. You might say that thousands of mothers have
{383}
borne sons, thousands of mothers have done likewise. That is so. But think of it, that God was committing Christ as a Babe to this woman, as an Infant dependent on care, dependent on affection and on holy hands. He was committing all that to Mary, and to Joseph, her husband. They were selected persons. I think I can say, I should like to be a selected person in connection with the great operations of God. Especially as to bringing Christ in; because what is set out in Mary is to show us the need of the Spirit's power, and of holy hands and divine sensibilities, in bringing Christ in, bringing Him into hearts and souls. As He came under the notice of men in that small way, He is prepared similarly to come into our hearts, bringing out feelings of tenderness and interest. He is prepared to come like that. I do not mean that He is ever a Babe again. He was a Babe once, but we know Christ, not as after the flesh, but as risen from the dead. I am speaking of apprehension, of the skill in caring for what is small, and yet of Christ in us; very small but wrapped up, cared for, ministered to. You have noticed how the Scripture emphasises that He grew. He comes into our hearts in a small way, but the divine idea is that He is to grow in our apprehension, and to grow in such a manner that He displaces everything else, until He has His own great and supreme place in our hearts. Just as God chose selected vessels in that day for all this, so today He would choose vessels -- vessels of the Spirit -- that are ready to serve on these lines. Those that can bring in motherhood and fatherhood, and protection, until the work of God in us has taken definite formation, and we can stand up, so to speak, in the assembly. That is the climax of the work of
{384}
God -- that we stand up in the assembly, on our own feet, as entering livingly into all that pertains to its privileges.
Now the next person that handled the Lord is Simeon. We read that, "it was divinely communicated to him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not see death before he should see the Lord's Christ ... . And as the parents brought in the child Jesus that they might do for him according to the custom of the law, *he* received him into his arms, and blessed God, and said, Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go, according to thy word, in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation". In reading this section I am thinking of the ideas of seeing and handling. This man Simeon represents those, whose great expectancy is to see the Lord's Christ. It is to be the climax of his life. Evidently he had served long, and he is ready to close his days here when his eyes have seen the Lord's Christ; and as he received the Child Jesus into his arms, he blessed God. Notice the holy manners of this aged man. "He blessed God". He did not bless the Child; he did not bless the mother; he blessed God. He is in the light of the great and majestic operations of God. The Lord's Christ is before him, and yet he is holding the little Child in his arms. Just think of that! I do not know that Scripture ever speaks of the Lord in infancy as a Babe on His mother's knee. That is how religious pictures represent the matter, but all these persons, Mary, Joseph, Elizabeth, Zacharias, Simeon and Anna, understand that while having before them a Child, a divine Person is there. Oh, the inscrutable majesty of this thought, that a divine Person should come amongst men and women like that, depending upon them to be cared for, carried! If Scripture had told us that this Infant of days
{385}
walked about and did miracles, how abnormal that would have been. We should have said, That is a kind of manhood that we know nothing about. But the manhood of Jesus is normal; it is substantial; and yet it is manhood such as a divine Person could come into -- holy manhood. *He* is there, He who, when His days are fulfilled, is going to take on Himself all the burden of man's guilt, and carry out a transaction of such magnitude that only God and He can enter into it. He was here first to be served, cared for, and carried; but Simeon, with priestly sensibilities, as he held the Child Jesus in his arms, received *Him* and blessed God. His eyes saw "the Lord's Christ". I hope, dear brethren, you are following what I am suggesting. I am presenting examples of persons who handled the Lord in exceptional circumstances; but as they handled Him their whole moral beings were made alive with spiritual emotions and affections, and they handled Him as no angel could have done. They were handling a Man, a Man-child, and yet all the time they were in the spirit of worshippers. Simeon in saying "Lord" uses the word that means 'Despot' to a bond-servant of God; He is before him in that lordly way, that despotic way. Simeon is in the line of these divine movements, his heart filled with joy and restfulness, his days, so to speak, ready to be numbered and closed. He had seen the Lord's Christ; he had handled Him; that is, he had touched the Lord substantially in His manhood. He was not to him but a spirit or a vision; He was real. Simeon had entered into it and he says, "Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go ... in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation".
{386}
Now I want to read a passage in @Luke 24: 39, 40, to establish the thought that what we have considered as to handling in connection with the Lord in the flesh and blood conditions in which He died, is carried over into resurrection. While one marvels at the inscrutable mystery and greatness of a divine Person coming by way of a woman, a mother, and entering into infancy and smallness, I think what is here is equally great. For here you have what had never been seen before, and never could have been -- a Man out of death. He says, "Handle me and see;" as it were, Satisfy yourselves that it is I. It was of all importance in the christian economy that the links between Christ in heaven, and His disciples on earth, should be substantial links, not visionary; and so He says, "Handle me and see". You might say, I would not hesitate to handle a little child. As you take a little infant into your arms you feel big and strong, and able to care for it. But here we have the Lord in His full manhood. I am not speaking of His years, or of His stature; His full manhood rests on the idea of a Man out of death, later to be glorified. That is God's great thought of manhood. It never could be seen in any other but Christ. It never could be accomplished in any other. It could be seen typically in Adam's coming out of the deep sleep, and in others; but here we have the actual thing, a living Man having flesh and bones -- not blood -- and inviting His disciples to handle Him. That indeed calmed all their fears, and well it might, for there is nothing more wonderful than a living Man out of death, yet in Person the same. We who are still in flesh and blood condition, can go on from day to day linked with a Man out of death and in the glory. And the links are real. The
{387}
Lord is to us, I trust, substantially a known Man, and in that sense we have handled Him. The apostles actually handled His flesh, but we must handle Him spiritually. Yet that means no distance, we are not looking on a picture. You might have a painting that looked very real, but still it would be only a picture; we must have more than that. Christ must be more to us than that. Hence we have these stages in development of apprehension according to @1 John 1. We move first by report, but it leads up to this near and substantial idea of handling: "Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having". Oh, what a thought! I would, from the depths of my soul, that I could convey to you that christianity is based on this intimate, yet worshipful knowledge of Christ. If it is not based on this then it is something inferior, and we should not go on with anything inferior. Every one of us is entitled, as having faith in Christ and having the gift of the Holy Spirit, to move forward in spiritual affections to this substantial kind of link with the Lord, as a Man out of death.
Those who handled Him during the days of His flesh, such as Mary the mother of Jesus, and Mary of Magdala, went through great sorrow when He died, and the links with Christ had to be renewed on a different basis. They were renewed in resurrection, and resurrection links can only be maintained and enjoyed in the assembly. I have no hesitation in saying that a person who lives in isolation from the meetings and the brethren, who does not move in the spiritual life of the meetings, cannot possibly maintain resurrection links. The tendency with such is to go back to the days of the Lord's flesh here, to what He was here. But
{388}
it is better to carry all that He was as here into the realm in which He now is in resurrection and glory. He is not any less gracious, any less attractive. He is just as morally beautiful as He ever was, though He has taken on new conditions of manhood. But He says, as it were, You can come just as near to Me as you were before; you can be just as free with Me as you were before. The Lord must have that, He must have nearness and response.
Before closing, I should like to make a brief reference to the passage in @John 13, for there we have the thought of support. John is the disciple whom Jesus loved. He is leaning on His breast, receiving support. The breast is support, the bosom is comfort and love. He is receiving support. Now John does not speak in his gospel of Jesus as a little Child, as Luke does. That is Luke's side. John is speaking of Christ from the exalted viewpoint that "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth" (@John 1: 14). That is John's viewpoint, and hence in his presentation you find the breast and the bosom of Jesus. I want you to notice this, that a man, an adult man, John, is leaning on the breast of a Man. It is not the idea of a little child being carried, comforted and nursed; it is manhood in John drawing from the strength of the manhood of Jesus, a wonderful thought! There is nothing infantile about it, nothing small, nothing sentimental. I have heard people enthuse sentimentally on the idea of John leaning on the bosom of Jesus, but John is drawing strength from the *breast* of Jesus; he is drawing spiritual energy from the breast of Jesus that he might be a support to others. That is
{389}
what is in view. The Lord tells them at the beginning of the chapter that He is going away to the Father.
He knew that His hour had come that He should depart out of the world to the Father, and He is leaving men, responsible persons, not children, immature and infantile in their thoughts and ways, but men. Thus John is an example of his own gospel. It is a great principle, that if you set out certain truths, which are denied in your own life, your words are lacking in power, though they may be correct. But John is the example of his own gospel. He presents a glorious divine Person, who was in the beginning with God, and who was God, but who is here in flesh. He became flesh, and John is entering into this thought of His humanity, into the blessedness of it; he is deriving from it, from the breast of Jesus, the strength of His manhood. John is leaning on it and he is able to ask the question that Peter could not ask. Peter was at a distance, he was not on the breast, or in the bosom, of Jesus, and hence you will find the adjustments of Peter's early life are more or less violent. People that walk at a measure of distance from the Lord require more violent adjustments. That was so with Peter at the outset, he needed much breaking down to bring him nearer, and make him lean, to make him rest in the bosom of Jesus.
Now we all know in some way where we stand in our souls in relation to Christ. I would ask all of us, myself included. Do we know this kind of nearness to Him? It is not, in @John 13, something that is to be done away with or annulled because He is going through death. @Luke 24 shows us that the same thoughts were carried through, and John's gospel shows that what is spiritual does not change.
{390}
If we are going to be in the assembly, with assembly liberty to take part in the meetings -- for the idea of an assembly man is that he is there every time and ready every time -- we must not only spiritually handle the Lord to be assured of the substance of His manhood, but we must derive from it; we must lean on it. Some of the young men have to go before Tribunals and answer questions, and their faith is being tested. Well, the One of whom I have spoken, our Lord Jesus, has witnessed a good confession before Pontius Pilate. He went that way. We can follow. We can note what He said, how He said it. We can note His words in relation to matters that press heavily on some: "My kingdom is not of this world" (@John 18: 36). Then as we may be called upon to face great trials, we can lean on the breast of Jesus. His manhood is tested manhood. There is not a circumstance of life that we can be found in, in which He was not tested. His manhood is proved, and we can lean on Him; and as we need comfort and need to have our affections stimulated, we can lie in the bosom of Jesus. The bosom is an abiding place. It is said of the Lord, "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him" (@John 1: 18). From that place the Lord was, as it were, drawing what He would make known to men: the declaration of God. He declares Him from the bosom of the Father.
I believe it is an essential feature if we are to get on in the assembly, that we have these substantial links with Christ; that we not only have a link by report, but that we see, contemplate and handle this great Person.
*Winnipeg, November 1942*.
{391}
SPIRITUAL VISION
G R Cowell
@John 9: 1 - 7, 35 - 38; @Revelation 3: 18 (last clause), 19; @Revelation 4: 6 - 8.
I wish to speak, dear brethren, on the subject of *spiritual vision*. Firstly, as bearing on the glory of Christ, and the revelation of God and His purpose. Secondly, as bearing upon the state of the assembly, and our state at the present time. Thirdly, as bearing upon the public ways and dealings of God, this last being connected with the beasts or living creatures, who were full of eyes, before and behind, around and within. I need not say that the matter of spiritual vision is a very important one. Without it there can be no spiritual history at all, for if we are to have a spiritual history, we must have our eyes opened to see the Son of God. John, as a writer, makes a great deal of spiritual vision. In chapter 1 he says, "we have contemplated his glory", and the Lord Himself says to the two disciples of John, "Come and *see*", and to Nicodemus, "except any one be born anew he cannot *see* the kingdom of God" (chapter 3: 3). Again, the woman in chapter 4 says, "Come, *see* a man". All these statements emphasise the necessity of vision.
Chapter 9 records this great sign wrought by the Lord Jesus. Each sign is great in its place, but this is a remarkable one, for the Lord speaks of the *works of God* being manifest in the man; and He also says, "I must work the works of him that has sent me while it is day". So that
{392}
in connection with the man born blind, He stresses His own works and the works of God. You will notice the initiative is entirely from His own side. It says, "as he passed on, *he* saw a man blind from birth". Then further down it says, "Having said these things, he spat on the ground and made mud of the spittle, and put the mud, as ointment, on his eyes". As long as He was in the world, He was the light of the world, and He would open this man's eyes in order that he might see the light of day in Himself, and He operates from His own side. This is the way of divine operations. Everyone here who has spiritual vision is a monument of the works of God -- they are manifest in him, and also of the works of Christ, who still works, though it may be through His servants here. He is no longer in the world, but He is in a greater place; the Lord Jesus is now in the place given to Him in purpose; as Man He has reached that place. The full light shines, and the full truth is expressed in His Person where He is, so that it is an even greater matter today to have our eyes opened, than when the Lord was here.
This incident is to teach us, that we are all *born* blind. Our state by nature is such that we have no power to see anything spiritually at all, and that state has to be met if we are ever to have vision. Two operations are involved: firstly, the Lord Jesus makes the mud and anoints the man's eyes; then He tells the man to go and wash in the pool of Siloam, and he goes and washes and comes seeing. These two operations have to take place. In figure, the Lord Jesus applies the truth of His Person to the man's eyes -- that is His side of the matter; but then the man would never have seen if he had not washed, because it is
{393}
*our state* that renders us *blind*. Unless we are prepared to go and wash, that is, to own our need of, and accept, the gospel, we shall never see. The mud on the man's eyes would make the man more blind, if that were possible, but in washing he came seeing. In this sign the Lord Jesus illustrates the truth of the previous chapter, where He was faced with self-righteous men who would not admit the need of washing, and, though blind, claimed that they could see. In His ministry to them He emphasised the need of washing, going so far as to say that they were children of the devil. They had proved themselves so, because murder was in their hearts towards Him. The Lord did not call people "children of the devil" until they came out in the devil's likeness. They had murder in their hearts towards Him, so He tells them plainly, "Ye are of the devil, as your father ... He was a murderer from the beginning" (@John 8: 44). He would bring home to them that the essential thing was to wash, to cleanse themselves from that generation, for the whole state of man is wrong. Then at the end of the chapter He applies, in principle, the mud to their eyes, for He says, "Before Abraham was, I am" (verse 58). He brings before them the truth of His Person, the great truth of the incarnation, and it is *this* that the mud represents.
Here is a man born blind, representative of us all, and the Lord, it says, spat on the ground and made mud of the spittle -- referring to His Deity, but as coming into manhood. It is a wonderful symbol. The spittle speaks of His essence -- His essential Deity -- for He is God over all, blessed for ever! Yet He has "come in flesh", as symbolised in His making mud of the spittle. The mud
{394}
therefore represents the wonderful character of His manhood, a unique manhood of a new order. That is the kind of ministry which the Lord presented to His enemies in John's gospel! "Before Abraham was, I am", and "I and my Father are one", referring to Himself here in manhood. He puts the highest truth before them. It is an example for us today. We should not hesitate to put the highest truth before men, the truth of the Lord's Person, His Deity and the unique character of His manhood. Let us present it to men, because if they will go and wash they will see. Sight is given to this man to enable him to see the Lord Jesus. It is one thing to have the greatness of His Person presented in ministry, but it is another thing to see *Himself*. There is a process to go through until the wonderful moment comes when he is in the presence of the Son of God, and the Lord says, "thou hast both *seen* him, and he that speaks with thee is he". His eyes had been opened in view of the great moment when he actually saw the Son of God for himself. "And he said, I believe, Lord: and he did him homage". This is what we might call normal spiritual vision. Our eyes are opened to see the Lord Jesus, as appreciating the greatness of His Person. It is a wonderful thing to apprehend in any measure the greatness of His Person, His essential Deity, yet His perfect and unique manhood. That is what makes a person unshakable in this world: "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" (@1 John 5: 5). You apprehend who the Person is. The title Son of God, as applied to Christ, implies that One possessed of absolute Deity has come into manhood, as a Man of a new order, Jesus the Son of God!
{395}
But this book shows that from this point the believer's vision develops, for the Lord Jesus says, in @John 14: 9, "he that has seen me has seen the Father". You have had your eyes opened to see the Son of God, but it is with a view to your seeing the Father. That is a wonderful thing! Philip says, "Shew us the Father and it suffices us". I wonder if we have all seen the Father! Our eyes have been opened in order that we might see the Father in the Son. "He that has seen me has seen the Father". It is a distinct apprehension in the soul of the Father, revealed in the Son; the Father is a distinct Person. It is one thing to apprehend the Person of Christ and His greatness, as the Son. It is another matter to apprehend the Father, though He is revealed in the Son; and the Lord says, "he that has seen me has seen the Father; and how sayest thou, Shew us the Father?" It is a wonderful thing that God has given us spiritual sight that we might see the Father!
Then in that chapter the Lord seems to indicate, by implication, that we see the Spirit, because lower down it says, "whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him". Of course, the Spirit is not incarnate; one would not suggest that we can see the Spirit personally, but I judge the Lord has in mind that we learn to recognise His movements, and to discern the manifestations of the Spirit. The Spirit is here as the Comforter, taking charge of God's family, and we have been given spiritual sight in order that we might discern, and become acquainted with, His movements as abiding with and in the saints.
Then the Lord goes on to speak of seeing Him in resurrection. "The world sees me no longer; but ye see me;
{396}
because I live ye also shall live" (@John 14: 19). It is a wonderful thing to see the Lord risen, triumphant over death. It means that we have life in Him: "because I live ye also shall live". Finally He speaks of vision in His prayer to His Father in @John 17: 24 saying, "Father ... I desire that where I am they also may be with me, that they may *behold* my glory which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world". What a wonderful climax that is! Our eyes have been opened in order that, as with Him where He is, we may behold His glory; that we might arrive at a full appreciation of Christ as He is, and where He is. That, of course, involves apprehending our own place *with* Him! He is ever unique, but how blessed that we have a place *with* Him! This links up with what the apostle speaks of in @Ephesians 1: 18, 19, the eyes of your heart being enlightened; that ye should know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of "the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe". We have the eyes of our hearts enlightened to see all these things. So that vision in John's gospel is normal spiritual vision, and has normal development in view in the apprehension of the Father and the Son, and the place the saints have in relation to divine Persons; and you can understand that it will result in formation. We shall be formed in spiritual manhood and affection.
Now I pass on to @Revelation 3. The Lord says there, "I counsel thee to buy of me". He counsels us to buy three things, the third being "eye-salve to anoint thine eyes, that thou mayest see". I do not think that this suggests a normal condition such as we have had before us up till now. The
{397}
suggestion seems to be that eyesight has become defective, so that eye-salve is needed -- something to heal and to put matters right. It does not speak here of the Lord doing it for us, although we are to get the eye-salve from Him. We are to do the anointing, "anoint thine eyes, that thou mayest see". I feel that this is a word for us at the present time. While we have been helped greatly on the line to which I have been referring, it seems to me we have suffered from defective vision, in regard to a sober view of ourselves and the present state of christendom. So the Lord here speaks of what implies exercise, that we are to *buy* of Him eye-salve. I suggest that it needs exercise to get it, so that the eyesight might be put right. I think our experiences in the last few years have indicated that our outlook upon ourselves, as part of the responsible profession, and our outlook upon the profession generally, has hardly been in accord with the Lord's own outlook. So that we have been taken by surprise by many things which the Lord has allowed. It may be that the Lord would raise an exercise with us as to getting our sight thoroughly adjusted. We have had adjustment; we have been adjusted in many ways, but one would raise the question as to whether the adjustment has been sufficiently thorough, whether we are *thoroughly* adjusted in this matter.
What caused the blindness in Laodicea was self-satisfaction and complacency. The Lord describes their state. They were saying, "I am rich, and am grown rich, and have need of nothing". That was not *His* outlook upon them, it was their outlook upon themselves. The Lord says, You do not know what you are really like -- they were blind, in that sense, they had never seen themselves aright.
{398}
"Thou ... knowest not that *thou* art the wretched and the miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked". The passage seems to indicate that what will cause blindness, in the sense in which we are speaking of it, is self-satisfaction and complacency. We are all liable to be coloured by the outlook of the part of the world in which we live, and complacency has been the outlook of the Anglo-Saxon world in their own affairs -- rich and increased with goods and needing nothing -- and it has almost brought them to ruin. The question is as to whether, in measure, we have been coloured by that outlook in *our* affairs, as those who have had much to be thankful for in the way of ministry and light. For the ministry and the light, and many privileges of the past few years have been great. I am not in any way desiring to impute a Laodicean state, but to point out the danger and touch upon the principles involved -- the tendency to be satisfied with what we have in the way of light, and perhaps to attach it to ourselves, assuming that it has been formed in us in a far greater measure than it has. Coupled with this is the danger of connecting our blessings with earth, because we enjoy them here on earth, whereas our blessings are heavenly and our outlook needs to be heavenly. Any measure of *self-satisfaction, or earthly-mindedness will cause defective vision*.
There has been surprise that the war should come while we are still here, surprise that the brethren should suffer in their homes and in their bodies. But why were we surprised? We all feel now that the outlook we had was not a right one, and would suggest that the Lord would help us to go into the matter thoroughly with Him, so as to be
{399}
really adjusted. Not to accept adjustment in a grudging kind of way, coming to it slowly by force of circumstances, but that we should get into His presence in order to learn the underlying principles which caused the blindness. So that with sight restored we might see things as He sees them, for that is what is in view in this address to Laodicea. The Lord desires to bring us into intimacy with Himself. Friendship is in mind -- "as many as I love" -- "love" there is the love of friendship. He wants us wholly in His confidence, and sharing His outlook. "*I* rebuke and discipline as many as I love; be zealous therefore and repent". We need *zeal* in repenting, not a grudging repentance and admission. You say, you do not think we need repentance? If we do not need repentance, we are putting ourselves either in Smyrna or Philadelphia, the only two churches where the Lord does not call for repentance; and if we put ourselves in Philadelphia we are very much in danger of Laodicea. We need to be in continual repentance, and to be zealous in it. We need adjustment of vision to discern our own state, and the state of christendom, and to discern the Lord's active judicial dealings in christendom which are going on all the time. We are not living in a kind of gap, when the Lord is inactive in this regard. There is a tendency to relegate some things to the past, and to put other things off to the future. But the Lord's dealings with Jezebel and those who commit fornication with her are going on all the time. Similarly His dealings with Protestantism, as to which He says, "I will come upon thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know at what hour I shall come upon thee". Well, He says to Laodicea, "*I* rebuke and discipline as many as I love".
{400}
These movements are going on *now*; the Lord is doing these things now. To suggest that no upheavals will come while we are here, is to suggest that the Lord is *not* doing these things. But the Lord *is* doing these things all the time, and surely *we* need the discipline as well as others, perhaps more than others, because we have more light. How we need to be with the Lord in these matters! He desires friendship, true friendship and confidence. Certain things were tending to blind us, but the Lord would bring us into closest intimacy with Himself, "I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me", suggests a meal where all secrets are shared. What a wonderful end the Lord has in view as we accept adjustment!
Now I pass on to chapter 4, and here it is a question of being, as to outlook, in accord with the throne and with God in His public dealings. I am assuming now that we are clear in our outlook as to our own state, and the state of christendom -- clear, too, that our blessings are heavenly, so that we are not surprised at discipline on earth. As adjusted and at rest on our side, we are at leisure now to share the outlook of the throne, to be with God as to His public dealings. So we have here, "in the midst of the throne, and around the throne, four living creatures, full of eyes, before and behind". Lower down, in verse 8, it also says that "round and within they are full of eyes". The elders and the living creatures both refer to the saints; no doubt others are included as well as the saints of the assembly, but they certainly include those who form the assembly. These things are not simply written to tell us that at some future time, we shall be in accord with the throne. They are intended to have a present bearing upon
{401}
us, so that we may be in accord with it now, surrounding the throne now in mind and affection, and so with God in what He is doing. @Ephesians 2: 6, referring to the work of God, says that we are already raised up together and made to sit down together in heavenly places; it is regarded as a present thing. So God would have us in spirit already with Him, able to see things as He sees them, and to be with Him in what He is doing. This is brought out in a remarkable way in these living creatures, *full* of eyes before and behind, round and within. One would desire to be something like that -- to be full of eyes in regard to God and His ways and His movements.
"Before and behind", that is, there is the forward look and there is the backward look. In both there is *full* discernment as to God's ways. Their note of worship is "Lord God Almighty, who was" -- that would refer to the backward look, we can look back upon the ways of God. God intends the saints of this dispensation to be fully intelligent in regard to His ways in past dispensations. "And who is to come" -- that is like the forward look. Surely God has in mind too, that we should be intelligent, full of discernment, as to all that God has before Him, all that lies ahead. Then it says, "round and within" they were full of eyes. One would link that with the God "who is". God ever *is*, and if we are to walk before the God, who is, we need to be full of eyes round and within. All those principles which we discern in God's ways in the past, and in the future, are to be brought to bear on the present and are to be judged in our own souls. We are to be full of eyes *within* as walking before God, and also to have a present judgment before God as to all that is *around*. This book
{402}
develops the way the elders and living creatures are with God in all that is happening; they are linked together, and I think one can see that they must be linked together, because unless we have this discernment, how can we gain experience? The elders are those who have experience, and worship God as the result of experience; so that both the elders and the living creatures represent the saints.
This book shows that the elders and living creatures are able to worship God, as entering into His ways and thoughts, as Ruler, Creator, Redeemer and Judge. As regards God in each of these characters they are worshippers. One feels, dear brethren, that the Lord would help us to have a greater appreciation of God, as Paul speaks of Him, "the blessed and only *Ruler*". That is how Paul regarded God; to Paul there was only one Ruler and He was blessed! He looked beyond the immediate instruments -- there was *one* Ruler. It would help us in our outlook on the general state of affairs at the present time, God's public dealings, if we see *Him* as the blessed and only Ruler. He is blessed in what He allows, and in what He orders. Whatever happens we trace it back to Him.
Then these eyes, this discernment, would help us to value Him as *Creator*. We find in this chapter the elders are profoundly affected by God as Creator. They fall down before the throne, they are prostrate, they do homage to Him who lives for ever and ever, and they say, "Thou art worthy ... to receive glory and honour and power; for *thou* hast created all things". You see, having this kind of spiritual vision will make us worshippers of God, not only as the blessed and only Ruler, but also as Creator. It involves the forward and backward look, taking us right
{403}
back to original creation and right on to the new creation. The physical creation is the great framework in which His purpose is carried out. He has not left His creation to function, as it were, by itself, but He sustains it and operates in it continually. "In him we live and move and exist" (@Acts 17: 28).
Then we are worshippers of Him as *Redeemer*, and we discern that all His ways have in view the securing of His rights in redemption. If He permits upheavals in His overruling government of this world, one great object in view is to bring to light the elect, to secure the redeemed company. After the first six seals are broken, a great company comes into view that no one can number, out of every tribe and kingdom and people and nation. But God is acting on that principle now.
Finally, the most extensive note of worship in this book is in chapter 19, and is addressed to God as *Judge*. The word is, "true and righteous are his judgments", and the living creatures and elders fall down and worship. God would have us as worshippers of Himself in that character. We need to be *full* of eyes, to be with God in His judgments, to be so with Him in His judgments, so fully on His side, that we are worshippers of Him as Judge. We have come "to God the Judge of all", Hebrews says. That is what marks a true elder, that he is thoroughly with God in His judgments; he is a worshipper of God as Judge; but how can that come about unless we are full of eyes, before and behind, round and within? Dear brethren, that is what will qualify us. It is a necessity to qualify us as worshippers of God in these four aspects which I have mentioned: as Sovereign Ruler, as Creator, as Redeemer
{404}
and as Judge. We need to be "full of eyes" to discern His outlook on things, His judgments and His ways.
May the Lord help us in these three matters which I have sought to bring before you, feebly though it be. Firstly, normal spiritual vision to enable us to behold Christ's glory, and the purpose of God which centres in Him. Secondly, adjusted vision as to our position here in responsibility, and the position of the profession generally -- a sober outlook. Lastly, discernment as to God's ways and activities in the four characters to which I have referred, so as to be with Him in a worshipful spirit in whatever He is doing. May He help us, for His name's sake!
*Croydon, February, 1943*.
{405}
UNITY OF THE BODY AND ONENESS
G R Cowell
@1 Corinthians 12: 12, 13, 27; @1 Corinthians 14: 1; @Ephesians 5: 30 - 32; @John 17: 17 - 24.
G.R.C. I trust the Lord may help us together in considering three thoughts of *oneness*. Firstly, the unity of the body, secondly, union with Christ, as it says in Ephesians, "the two shall be one flesh", and thirdly, what the Lord speaks of in @John 17 as being "one in us" -- our unity in the Father and in the Son. One has felt that the Lord has been stressing the thought of union with Himself, the assembly's union with Him, but it seems to me if that is to be realised, it raises the question first of all of unity amongst ourselves. In other words it bears in a very practical way on our local conditions, and relations with each other, because unity precedes union, that is, the unity of the vessel to which Christ is united. It is true there is the individual thought of union -- "he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit". That is a blessed thing; but the full thought of union is that of Christ and the assembly, as it says, "we are members of his body; we are of his flesh, and of his bones. Because of this a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall be united to his wife". In the individual setting it says, "he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit", but in the assembly setting it does not put it that way; it speaks of *Christ being united to the assembly*. The assembly is attractive to Christ, and He leaves other things to be united to the assembly.
{406}
So all that raises a practical question as to unity in our localities, whether there are the features attractive to Christ, which result from that unity. @John 17 has *persons* in view, the men given to Christ out of the world, and appears to be the highest thought of oneness. Both @Ephesians 5 and @John 17 indicate the importance the Lord attaches to these two sides of the truth. In @Ephesians 5 it says, "Because of this a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall be united to his wife". That is, you have the idea of the Lord leaving other interests for the sake of the assembly; and in @John 17: 19 you have a similar thought, "And I sanctify myself for them, that they also may be sanctified by truth". That is, He sets Himself apart. I suppose @John 17 brings out the truth of what man is before God in Christ. That is the full thought of the truth. So manhood is in view in that chapter. One felt that @Ephesians 5 and @John 17, both exalted lines of truth, have a great bearing on our local relations. First, in relation to the truth of the one body, and then as to our personal relations as brethren, in following after love, which would enable the truth of the one body to work out.
I.R. Would @Psalm 133 suggest the conditions in which it would work out? "How good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!"
G.R.C. I think so.
W.S. The precious ointment referred to there, is reflected in the Song of Songs where the bride is attractive because of her perfumes. Throughout that Song the bridegroom is drawn by the perfumery.
{407}
G.R.C. That is, as we learn to follow after love in our localities, and walk in love, the perfume goes up from the assembly.
W.S. It says that "Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart; and the sweetness of one's friend is the fruit of hearty counsel" (@Proverbs 27: 9), connecting the very perfume with friendship. I think that supports your point.
G.R.C. Yes. So it seems that in our local setting there are two practical lines of exercise -- one is to be right in our relations as brethren, in our personal relations with one another, and the other is to function in the organism, the one body. The organism exists as a great spiritual reality, whether we enter into it or not. "In the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body". We have not to work up to it. It is an existing reality; but if we are to move in the light of it and get the gain of it, we must be right in our relations with one another as brethren, both in and out of the meeting -- able to face things together in love. So that manhood comes into 1 Corinthians. The apostle ends his epistle by saying, "be vigilant; stand fast in the faith; quit yourselves like men; be strong" (@1 Corinthians 16: 13). Also in chapter 14: 20 he says, "in your minds be grown men". So that our personal relations with one another are intended to develop spiritual manhood, and personality as formed in love, and the more that develops the more we shall be able to function in this great organism which exists.
E.C.M. Is that why the apostle connects a brother with him in the first epistle?
G.R.C. Yes. So in @John 17 it is a question of persons; the Father and the Son are presented in Their own
{408}
Personalities, and the Lord prays, "that they also may be one in *us*". The line of exercise connected with our personal relations as brethren finds its culmination in @John 17. The line connected with the organism, the body, culminates in @Ephesians 5 -- union with Christ. Both lines work out in our local setting as regards our practical enjoyment.
P.B.D. Is there any connection between this and the rings and boards in Exodus? The boards were joined together beneath and linked together by one ring at the top. Our relationship together, as joined together beneath, is to correspond with the fact that we are joined together in one ring at the top.
G.R.C. You mean there is the lower and the upper.
P.B.D. So that the tabernacle is one whole as bound together by a golden bar going right round the whole.
G.R.C. That is helpful. So the boards would suggest how we become indispensable to one another practically, each board being a cubit and a half. But it leads on in Corinthians to the practical working out of this great truth of the body.
H.F.R. Why did you read verse 27 of chapter 12?
G.R.C. Because of the change in the pronoun. In verse 13 it is "*we*", and it is emphatic: "in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body". But in verse 27 there is the emphatic pronoun "*ye*:" "now *ye* are Christ's body". The saints were that in character, "and members in particular". That is the test in working it out. Is it not important to see that the body is a great universal
{409}
whole? "In the power of one Spirit *we*", that is the universal "we", all the saints on earth, "have all been baptised into one body". But then it has to be *worked out in our local setting*, so it says, "*ye* are Christ's body".
H.F.R. That is very suggestive, so that we work out what is local in the light of the universal, and that is a great stimulus.
G.R.C. That is a most important point to lay hold of. We do not work up from the local to the universal. God has made us members of the universal body of Christ, and *we bring* the light of the universal *into* the local. It is the opposite way to which men work; men form local branches, and then a federation of local branches; but the only membership scripture speaks of is the membership of the body of Christ -- not membership of a local church. Having the light of that we are governed in our local setting by it.
W.S. So that to be a good Corinthian you must be a good Ephesian. It must flow down from the top.
G.R.C. God starts at the top, so He makes us members of the universal organism.
C.L. The pattern was shown from the top: "see that thou make them according to their pattern, which hath been shewn to thee in the mountain" (@Exodus 25: 40).
H.F.R. So in chapter 11 the apostle says, "if any one think to be contentious, *we* have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God" (@1 Corinthians 11: 16), putting it in the light of the whole universal position.
G.R.C. Quite so. I think the thread runs through Scripture. The Levites had to encamp *around the tabernacle*, whereas the others encamped according to
{410}
their tribes. While we all have a local setting, corresponding with the tribal one, from another angle we are *all* Levites and are all encamping around the tabernacle, that is the great universal whole. Unless we are true Levites encamping around the tabernacle, we shall not be right in our tribal setting.
H.F.R. If we leave out the universal setting we get cramped, and petty things come in; but having a universal outlook frees us from that.
G.R.C. The truth of the body helps us on two lines of truth: it gives a right balance between the universal and the local, and it enables us to reconcile sovereignty and mutuality. Sometimes, in seeking to work out the truth of the body, we are apt to become too local, in the sense of thinking that our meetings are so much to develop what is local, that we do not welcome a visitor coming in. I think the universal and the local would balance that; the body is universal and the gifts, especially ministerial gifts as set in the assembly, are in the universal setting. So the truth of the body would enable us to make room for a brother coming in, and not to be so occupied with the idea of developing what is local that we cannot make room.
H.F.N. Would the visitor on his side, however great and gifted he may be, learn in the light of what you are saying, to merge with the brethren?
G.R.C. I am sure of that, so there is the balancing in both directions.
H.F.N. The questions of sovereignty and mutuality are very real tests.
P.B.D. Would you open that out a little?
{411}
G.R.C. The human body is the figure used in @1 Corinthians 12, and we could not find a better illustration of sovereignty and mutuality. "God has set the members, each one of them in the body, *according as it has pleased him*" -- that is sovereignty. It is God doing what pleased *Him* -- He has not consulted us, and what He does is always best. So in the human body He has put in it a member called the eye, and has given that member the power of vision; but it cannot speak. He has put in the body a member called the tongue, but it cannot hear. But He has done it just as it pleased Him. On the other hand there is true mutuality, because instinctively every member goes to the aid of the other. If the eye has work to do which it alone can do, the hands and the feet and every member will assist the eye; and the same with each member. All unselfishly assist each other to function -- that is mutuality.
P.B.D. So the question of sovereignty involves that we are subject.
G.R.C. That is the great point in @1 Corinthians 12; the Lord is over everything. So you have an organism in the sensitiveness of the Spirit. If we are really in the gain of the body, there may be a pause in a reading, which will make room for some member to function who would not function without a pause.
P.B.D. Is that the activity of divine love working inwardly?
G.R.C. That is how it works out; love is the great motive power.
H.W.E. Would the thought of the Spirit help in regard to the universal and local aspect of which you have
{412}
been speaking? The Spirit is set in direction to the body; there is one body and one Spirit. The Spirit can be taken account of universally, it always is; but then, He comes to our aid locally, in working things out in the light of the universal position.
G.R.C. That is right. One main point in the first epistle to the Corinthians is to teach us to get the gain of the Spirit *collectively, in our local companies*. In Romans we learn the gain of the Spirit individually. We shall not get the gain of the Spirit collectively unless we are governed by the truth of the body.
H.F.R. Is your thought that following after love is a very practical thing? It might work out in many ways -- perhaps a pause in the reading, as you suggest, and spiritual manifestations may result from it.
G.R.C. To get the gain of the body, in practice, we need sensitive restfulness; our wills judged as subject to the Lord, and then the sensitiveness of the Spirit, because there is one body and one Spirit. The one Spirit knows the members through whom He would manifest Himself. Men may say, 'it is impossible, you must have someone in charge'. But the Spirit is present.
P.B.D. So this is a tremendous matter; everything hangs upon it.
G.R.C. It really underlies every meeting, and also our relations with each other in and out of the meetings. Take the ministry meeting: the truth of the body underlies it; are we able to wait in sensitive restfulness? Sometimes there is a brother with a word who, without a pause, would never get up. You have to guard against the forwardness of the flesh, always trying to 'keep the ball rolling', as we
{413}
say, and backwardness on the other hand -- like Saul, who at one time was hiding behind the baggage, and another time he could not wait.
H.F.R. Are these two things represented in Sihon and Og?
G.R.C. You mean self-importance and laziness?
H.F.R. Yes, forwardness and backwardness. They are two great enemies to overcome if we are to enter into this thought of the body.
J.A.P. Is the great thing to drink into the Spirit -- the enjoyment of things together?
G.R.C. Yes, it suggests that on this line there is satisfaction; we are all in it. If we have had a reading where the truth of the body has been realised, we go away with a sense of satisfaction, we have all been made to drink into one Spirit. Then of course, it underlies the Supper, which in itself is the greatest expression of unity. In the Supper symbolically, we show our unity: "we, being many, are one loaf, one body;" and then we all drink into one cup. Without the body we cannot have collective response to Christ.
W.S. That lies at the basis of some of our exercises as to our morning meetings not being quite what we have expected.
G.R.C. So that at the Supper, we do not come together to bring about a kind of unity, we are there to express a unity which is always true from the divine side, and should be always true throughout the week. Christ's portion depends upon this unity being maintained.
H.F.N. In @Acts 20 it says they assembled on the first day of the week to break bread. Does that involve that
{414}
we have been together in heart and mind and affection through the week?
G.R.C. Quite. It is a beautiful expression, "we being assembled".
H.F.N. In the feeding of the multitude it says they were satisfied. We cannot get any true assembly relationship, or any true functioning in the assembly apart from the consciousness of that realm of divine satisfaction.
G.R.C. And does that not indicate why the cup must come in if the Lord is to have His portion? The cup suggests the satisfaction side.
H.F.N. And that is our side of it; we are baptised by one Spirit, so we have part in this great organism. But you are challenging us as to whether we do really drink into one Spirit.
G.R.C. Do we drink into this cup *really* -- not merely symbolically? Then there is another point which it is good to keep in mind, and that is that the truth of the body is to govern us out of the meetings as well as in them. All the spontaneous services carried on by sisters, as well as brothers, need to be governed by the light of this. In our service to one another out of the meeting, we may be governed by the self-importance of Sihon, or the laziness of Og. We may think we must have a hand in everything, or things may drop into the hands of a few; but the sensitiveness of the body should govern all these matters. Then the most suitable member will do the most suitable job. One has often thought that when someone has grown cold, the most suitable person to visit them may be one newly converted, one with fresh affection for Christ. It is not *necessarily* the most established brother in the
{415}
meeting. Our desire should be that each member should function in the most efficient way for the good of the whole.
H.W.E. @Romans 12 speaks of our being members one of another; the saints in their responsible history are set in relation to one another as one body in Christ -- unity is still maintained there.
G.R.C. So the Roman side deals with practical matters. "He that gives, in simplicity ... he that shews mercy, with cheerfulness" (@Romans 12: 8) -- that is not in the meeting, necessarily.
F.G.H. There needs to be co-operation with one another.
I.R. If we knew what it is to follow after love, we would understand all this.
G.R.C. So spiritual manhood comes in. The apostle does not put activity first, or gift of service, but "follow after love", and then, "be emulous of spiritual manifestations".
P.B.D. It is a question of being of one mind in the Lord, as the apostle had to exhort Euodia and Syntyche. (@Philippians 4: 2).
S.S. In order to function more in this way at the right moment, we need to know more of what it is to live in the Spirit, to have right discernment.
G.R.C. You feel we are often concerned about getting the gain of the Spirit individually, according to @Romans 8, but I think we should be more concerned as to getting the gain of the Spirit collectively, which is the burden of this epistle.
{416}
H.F.N. We have been in danger of looking at the commencement of this epistle, in regard to the truth of the cross and the Spirit, and taking it up on individual lines. Whereas it is the exclusion of the first man in relation to the assembly, and the saints being in the living gain of the Spirit.
G.R.C. That is most important. It is really the brazen serpent -- the word of the cross -- but shown as standing at the doorway of the assembly. @Romans 7 is the brazen serpent as applied to the individual. So @1 Corinthians 2: 10 brings in the Spirit in its collective setting: "the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God". It is like @Numbers 21: 16, "*Assemble the people*, and I will give them water". It is what the Spirit is in the assembly. But in connection with our scripture in Ephesians, all this underlies the enjoyment of the truth of union. That is what the apostle had before him, for he says in the second epistle, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ" (@2 Corinthians 11: 2).
H.F.R. Your thought is that these features will all make us attractive to Christ.
G.R.C. I thought so. "*Ye* are Christ's body". The Lord begins to see Himself, in a practical sense in the saints. He could own the saints at the outset when He said to Saul of Tarsus, "Why dost thou persecute me?" You feel how delightful the saints are to Christ, as in the unity of the body, what precious features mark them as they move together, so that they are delightful to Christ. The assembly is so delightful to Christ, that the scripture says as to Him, "because of this a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall be united to his wife".
{417}
H.F.R. I have often wondered why it is put that way round.
G.R.C. It stresses how precious the assembly is to Christ. He leaves other interests to be united to the assembly.
H.F.R. Do you think the two different aspects of the assembly are involved? While there is the Eve side, yet there are the other features of the assembly such as Rebecca, who sets forth its attractiveness and grace and beauty.
G.R.C. I think Rebecca links with Corinthians; she represents particularly the local company moving in the truth of the body.
P.B.D. You mean she is being prepared to "follow the man".
G.R.C. It is a question of making room for the Spirit in the local company. Are we prepared to be wholly available to the Spirit? The Spirit is referred to in that chapter as typified in the well, and the ten camels, and the man. All has reference to the availability of the Spirit to the local company, and Rebecca as moving is made delightful to Isaac. The Spirit -- the man -- puts the ornaments on her.
C.L. So he seals the suitability which is seen in Rebecca by the tokens put upon her.
G.R.C. Rebecca is the answer in us to Christ's movements. On His side He leaves father and mother to be united to the assembly, and Rebecca on her side leaves her father's house. We do not get that in @Genesis 2, where the woman is brought to the man; but Rebecca is our side; it is
{418}
the way it works out in localities now. We are prepared to leave our natural setting.
H.F.N. Would it not be confirmed by what the apostle says in @2 Corinthians 11: 2? "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ". That would be what we get in Rebecca.
G.R.C. I think so. There were other men, great at Corinth, but he says, "I have espoused you unto *one man*", and the truth of the body brings that about. It disposes of clericalism and makes room for 'one Man'. One would link Rebecca with the local setting, because it is provisional -- he took her into his mother Sarah's tent, which could only apply to the present time, when the assembly is in local companies.
F.G.H. You would allow for this thought following the Supper? The Lord has been helping us lately to see that there is something for Him personally as following the Supper. This would help us.
G.R.C. It would, and what would affect our hearts is "Because of this a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall be united to his wife". That would profoundly affect our hearts, if we let it in, and help us to forsake our kindred and father's house to be wholly available to Christ.
E.C.M. It is in line with @Psalm 45, "And the king will desire thy beauty".
G.R.C. Think of the great interests which Christ has left for the time being, that which attaches to Him as Son of David, Son of Abraham and Son of man. He has left these things, for the moment, to be united to the assembly.
{419}
E.C.M. How does @Matthew 13: 46 fit in, "and having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had?"
G.R.C. It seems to be a correlative line.
E.C.M. The Lord, for the moment, laying aside all that He legitimately had.
G.R.C. Yes, it is "all whatever he had".
W.G.C. So in @John 17: 9 it says, "I do not demand concerning the world, but concerning those whom thou hast given me".
G.R.C. Yes. It is a similar thought in @John 17, although a different line. It indicates how much it means to the Lord that we should answer to the truth of our place before God in Him. He set Himself apart for this purpose; it is another reason why He has left other interests, He has set Himself apart that we might be set apart by the truth.
W.G.C. Is it the truth as to His place in heaven in glory?
G.R.C. I think so. The great truth of man before God as in Christ, the eternal purpose of God for man.
H.F.N. In @John 17 the first reference to the thought of unity, oneness, flows out of the mutuality of divine affections which exist between the Father and the Son.
G.R.C. How does that work out?
H.F.N. The spring of the oneness in @John 17 is the holy mutual relations which exist between divine Persons. When we think of the mutuality of affection existing between the Father and the Son, it is productive of unity, whether in testimony or glory.
{420}
G.R.C. Is that illustrated in what the Lord says, "All that is mine is thine, and all that is thine mine", as though They had no exclusive property?
H.F.N. You were saying, in connection with @Ephesians 5, that it is a great thing to see that the Lord has no other interest than the assembly. Is that seen in the thought of a man having a whole year in which to be entirely devoted to his wife?
G.R.C. You mean that the year is applied to the present time?
H.F.N. Yes. His affection is such that He is wholly devoted to the assembly today.
G.R.C. That would make us long to give Him what His heart seeks; and what a lever that would be in facing exercises amongst ourselves -- practical matters!
H.F.R. You said something earlier about it being '*persons*' in John.
G.R.C. You get divine Persons Themselves, "that they also may be one in us". "All that is mine is thine, and all that is thine mine". I wondered whether it had in view the saints as persons relative to Them. It brings in the fullest thought of God's purpose, that is, His eternal purpose for men in Christ.
H.F.N. It all culminates in the heavenly -- those united. This oneness culminates in the city as coming down out of heaven from God.
G.R.C. I think so, "that they may be perfected into one".
W.S. The idea of the family rather emphasises the individual members.
{421}
G.R.C. Yes. The assembly as a corporate body is an eternal thought. It is seen in the eternal setting prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. But there are also the *persons* who compose it. So there is the line of our spiritual history as *persons*, involving our *personal* relations with the Father and the Son, and our *personal* relations with one another. It runs alongside this thought of the organism, but it seems that we begin with these personal relations, and end with them. We begin our history with God by a personal touch with Himself and with Christ, and in our personal relations with one another, we have to learn to be brethren.
E.C.M. Would chapters 1 - 9 of this gospel develop that line of truth -- the woman in chapter 4, and the man in chapter 9, having to do with Christ personally?
G.R.C. Yes. The whole of John's gospel has this personal side in mind, personal relations with Christ, with the Father and the Son, and with one another; and it all culminates in this wonderful thought "that they also may be one in us".
W.S. The sheep are known by name.
G.R.C. Yes.
F.G.H. This thought of "one in us" seems to bear on the testimony, for following that the Lord says, "that the world may believe that thou hast sent me".
G.R.C. After all, the world cannot enter into the idea of the body, the organism -- it is a mystery; it is involved in the truth called "the mystery". We are initiated into it, but what the world can see is unity in practical personal relations.
{422}
F.G.H. Which makes the matter one of vital importance.
A.L. So the testimony would be from this side in John's gospel.
H.F.N. I suppose we get a wonderful exhibition of unity in testimony in the early part of Acts. We get the thought of men illustrated in Peter and John going up to the temple. Would that be a figure of manhood?
G.R.C. It would. You mean the beauty of their personal relations. All this line culminates in our being before God for His pleasure. Christ is not ashamed to call us brethren; this leads on to the highest truth. But then, in a practical way, if we are to enjoy our place with Christ as His brethren in the presence of God, we must be brethren amongst ourselves. Just as on the other line, we must be in the unity of the body to enjoy union, so we must be *together* as brethren, if we are to enjoy practically what it is for Christ to call us *His* brethren, and to be one in the Father and the Son.
H.F.N. So @John 17 is the highest thought of unity.
G.R.C. It would help us to lay hold of the greatness of the "truth" as referred to in this chapter. "I sanctify myself for them, that they also may be sanctified by truth".
H.F.N. It must be immeasurable. The Lord is the divine standard.
W.S. Is not the sanctification referring to the fact that He has gone to the Father? He has left this scene and gone into the holiness of all that is there.
G.R.C. And He has set Himself apart from other interests that we might be brought into the *truth* in its
{423}
fulness -- "as the truth is in Jesus". The Lord wants us to come fully into that, into the enjoyment of the place that man has now before the Father in the Son.
W.S. To come into all these heavenly relationships, which are eternal in character, in time. All else will for ever pass away.
G.R.C. I believe we shall get help in meditating upon the truth -- Jesus now in the Father's presence. The truth is there in all its fulness, and the Lord has set Himself apart in order that we may be brought into it.
E.C.M. Christ is found as Man now before God, and we are associated with Him in that position.
G.R.C. So He goes on to say, "I desire that where I am they also may be with me". First "that they also may be one in us", united, and then that we may be with Him where He is in fullest association.
W.S. I suppose there has to be education that we may apprehend Him in His place there, spiritually.
G.R.C. Ephesians implies the need of instruction. "*Ye* have not thus learnt the Christ, if ye have heard him and been instructed in him according as the truth is in Jesus" (@Ephesians 4: 20, 21).
W.S. Sanctified through the truth. I take it that is subjection?
G.R.C. I think so.
J.A.P. So the Spirit is not mentioned in the chapter but lies behind it in regard to sanctification.
G.R.C. I am sure it does.
*Croydon, February, 1943*.
{424}
{425}
THE TRIUMPH OF CHRIST'S DEATH AND RESURRECTION
A E Myles
@Matthew 28: 1 - 7; @Mark 16: 1 - 6; @Luke 24: 1 - 6; @John 20: 11 - 13
The thought in mind is to notice what is portrayed in the angels who appear in or near the sepulchre, and to see that the features set out in them are to be taken on by men as they enter into the triumph of the death and resurrection of Christ. These angels are attending at a difficult part of the unfolding of God's ways. They are very prominent and in key positions, necessarily so, because men are not yet ready to take over these positions. As men and women are qualified to represent heaven, to speak with heaven's words and portray heaven's feelings, the angels disappear; they have done their part. Now having this in mind, I wish to draw attention to certain distinctive references in each gospel. It is a beautiful feature of scriptural instruction that no one person attempts to tell everything. I am assured it is a great mistake to try to say even all that we know. For one thing, it might be confusing to the hearers, and also we have to soberly consider the fact that most of us can take in very little. Hence thoughts have to be selected with due regard to causing some particular feature of the glory of Christ to stand out in prominence.
Matthew's gospel takes account of the public position. What is said in the verses read gives the proper public outlook of the believer. For the time being it is expressed
{426}
in an angel. It says that he, "descending out of heaven, came and rolled away the stone and sat upon it. And his look was as lightning, and his clothing white as snow. And for fear of him the guards trembled and became as dead men". *We* are to sit on that stone. I am speaking morally. And *we* are to look out on all that opposes with a look like lightning. We are to understand what has taken place in the tomb. The world does not understand, but we should. In measure, we are to enter into the mighty triumphs of Christ and it will give us this outlook. The guards represent the forces that, under Satan's leadership, appear to be in control. They represent his public authority over the tomb, but they became as dead men -- *dead* men. We are to have this outlook, like lightening, as understanding what has taken place in the tomb; but we are not to think that this attitude is to give any liberty for flesh and unrighteousness, for it says this angel has clothing white as snow. The whiteness of snow is a heavenly whiteness, it must come out of heaven. This angel descended out of heaven, and the earthly position is to be held in victory. Resurrection is connected with the earthly position; it is on the way to ascension and to heaven, but it is to be held in the light of resurrection. As yet, it is held by a representative angel, who descends out of heaven and rolls the stone away. Rolling away the stone implies that the tomb is now ours to look into. The women came to see the sepulchre. The tomb is not a mystery; it is now open.
In each of the accounts I have read we get, in some form, the invitation to come and see. In Matthew it is, "Come, see the place where the Lord lay". Matthew records where *He lay*, implying that He lay there
{427}
voluntarily. Mark says, "Behold the place where they had put him". This is what others did to Him. Luke's way of referring to the Lord is to be noted. He does not say, 'Jesus, the crucified one', nor, 'Jesus, the Nazarene, the crucified one', but he says, "they found not the body of the *Lord Jesus*". In these refined distinctions we are to learn how to speak about this mighty triumph so as to bring out some distinctive feature of it, and how to hold the position which Christ has won. It is an impregnable position. The guards are but as dead men. The angel answering said to the women, "Fear not *ye*". We are not to tremble in the vicinity of the tomb, with its mysteries and wonders, though they cause amazement. All that would frighten us is removed, as we understand the meaning of the death of Christ. But the other men fear. I sometimes wonder what the powers of darkness felt, when they saw that open tomb, for in crucifying the Lord the enemy had gone as far as he could. It was the limit of his power -- a very great power -- but now he could go no further. And if instead of a dead man in a tomb, it is a living Man out of the tomb -- what does that mean? It means the complete defeat of Satan's forces, the annulment of him who through fear of death had kept men all their lifetime in bondage. What a triumph! The One of whom this angel speaks is Jesus, the crucified One. The triumph does not alter that position. The crucified One is to be kept in evidence by the saints. Paul could say, "I am crucified with Christ" (@Galatians 2: 20). The position of outward humiliation, reproach and apparent defeat is to be maintained; but inwardly, in the spirit of our minds and in our outlook toward the powers
{428}
of darkness, we are to be in the triumph of that great victory.
Now I will pass on to Mark, where we are told that certain women "bought aromatic spices that they might come and embalm him. And very early on the first day of the week they come to the sepulchre, the sun having risen. And they said to one another, Who shall roll us away the stone out of the door of the sepulchre? And when they looked, they see that the stone has been rolled away, for it was very great". Now it is interesting to notice what was in the mind of these women to do. They came to embalm Him. They were going to perpetuate the condition of death, to make it as permanent as they could. But on the way they speak together. There is great value in speaking about difficult things that are ahead of us. I know persons who cannot be helped; no one can help them. They obviously have a great obstacle in front of them, and no one can help them. Why? Because they will not speak. There is great gain in two women speaking together, not about current matters, nor a multitude of small things such as ordinarily occupy women, but about a great matter like this: "Who shall roll us away the stone?" They wanted to go into the sepulchre to do something for Him. I suggest, dear brethren, that it is essential for us to go into the sepulchre; not to add anything, not to perpetuate the appearance of death, nor, in our thoughts, to hold Christ there, but to see how wonderfully He has overcome the mighty power of death. When they looked they saw that the stone was rolled away. I say, dear brethren, with much confidence, that if you have a difficulty -- a very hard matter ahead of you -- and will face it and be prepared to
{429}
speak about it, you will find when you look, that the stone is rolled away. We do not need to halt for years at some obstacle, which may indeed be largely imaginary; we may think it is there, as these women did. They thought the stone was there, but it was not. When they arrived at the sepulchre and looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away.
And then it says, "And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right, clothed in a white robe, and they were amazed and alarmed". Doubtless the young man was an angel, because angels can take on the form of men, and they do so when the divine thought is to specially portray what belongs to manhood. This is a young *man*. He is sitting on the right, the place of power, of triumph. The Lord is now sitting on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens (@Hebrews 8: 1), indicating that all that He undertook to do is done. This young man is sitting on the right in the sepulchre. It is a fine thing to see young men and young women in this position. Young men are needed, because there is a lot of service to do, to teach the saints and to show them the gain there is in looking into the death of Jesus. To do this you need to be young. You might be eighty as to years, but if you are to serve the brethren you must be a young man in your spirit. The service is never to take on the appearance of decrepitude; it is always to be maintained in the energy and freshness of youth, so that the brethren would be sensible that the ministry is in power. Mark, of course, in view of his own history, would especially have that in mind. So the young man says to the women, "Ye seek Jesus, the Nazarene, the crucified one".
{430}
Notice the words, "the Nazarene". This word "Nazarene" adds to the thoughts of public weakness and humiliation, and that of reproach. "The Nazarene" is a term of reproach. Think of youthful freshness and power for victory in the service hidden under this name of reproach, "Jesus, the Nazarene"! Many who might benefit from that service turn away from the reproach; they are not prepared that God's triumph, and glorious victory in Christ, should be maintained down here in an outward condition of reproach and shame. But that is where God has hidden His power. We have to be helped to overcome this natural diffidence to attach ourselves to anything that is outwardly small and not accredited. We, all of us, have had to overcome the reproach of going to a little meeting room, rather than to a gorgeous edifice; and if you have not a spiritual ear, the singing of the brethren is very poor compared to the instrumental music of a public church. We have to overcome all that. The way into the triumph is through the tomb, as seeking Jesus the Nazarene, the crucified One. It is not a tomb filled with corruption, for the Lord saw no corruption. Martha could say about her brother, "he stinks already" (@John 11: 39). As regards ourselves we have to face the dreadful fact of corruption, but not so with the Lord. He saw no corruption. This tomb is filled with the fragrance of love's victory and love's sacrifice.
So the young man says, "Behold the place where they had put him. But go, tell his disciples ..". And then it says, "And they went out, and fled from the sepulchre. And trembling and excessive amazement possessed them, and they said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid". They
{431}
did not carry from the tomb all the precious blessings they might have had; they were full of fear. How often fearfulness interferes with our spiritual progress! We have to be on our guard against it. These women did not get the gain of this ministry at the moment, because of excessive fear, but they are moving towards it.
In Luke's gospel we have added features. As the women were in perplexity because they found not the body of the Lord Jesus "two men suddenly stood by them in shining raiment". Luke's gospel -- and John's too -- is based on the idea that you would seek first of all to *work things out yourself*. No angels are in evidence until the women are in perplexity; then, suddenly, there are two men in shining raiment standing by them. The shining raiment is an added thought to the white raiment; it has taken on the reflection of the glory. As we study these accounts you will see how priestly and glorious Luke's narration is, and that there are two men, an assembly idea. The women are not helped until they are in perplexity, but when they get to that point there is help, and it is not just one "young man", it is "two men". It does not say 'young', but 'men' -- matured men -- and obviously from their garments they have in their souls the sense of the glory attached to the death of Christ. They say to the women, "Why seek ye the living one among the dead?" Notice the usefulness of a question. "Why?" We were speaking this afternoon about the mind. The fact of the matter is that very few people think anything out for themselves. The moment they meet anything difficult, they stop thinking and ask somebody. It is good to ask, but it is much better to think it out yourself, and then get confirmation, or
{432}
enlargement, by asking. It will develop the spiritual faculty of thinking, for it is a basic part of the believer's position that we have the mind of Christ (@1 Corinthians 2: 16), His thinking faculty. There is not a matter in christianity that is beyond the understanding of those who have the Holy Spirit, to enable them to think things out with the renewed mind. Nothing of the revealed things is beyond them. What is outside of, and beyond, the believer as having the Holy Spirit is inscrutable; and there is indeed much connected with God and with Christ that is inscrutable. None of us can move into the realm of Deity in our thoughts, other than to know it exists, but there is a great realm of blessedness for which God would make us capable in mind and affections. A priest would always prompt people by questions to work things out for themselves. "Why seek ye the living one among the dead?" What a question! "The living one" -- take that and work it out. The living One, what does that mean? Have their thoughts of Christ been so small? Have they so little apprehended His glory and greatness, that it has never even entered their minds that He might be alive, and not in the tomb at all? How such a question would prompt this faculty of thinking!
"And", it says, "they remembered his words" -- the words of Jesus -- "and, returning from the sepulchre, related all these things to the eleven and to all the rest ... . And their words appeared in their eyes as an idle tale, and they disbelieved them". We can see here that people whose first reaction to ministry is to disbelieve, are always spiritually late, out of time and out of date. Their first reaction was to disbelieve, and why? Because it was too
{433}
wonderful. God has to give us an outlook that is equal to wonderful things. What Jesus has done is really going to fill the universe with wonder. In the gospel accounts the matter is so concentrated, and so great, that it has to be broken down for us, so to speak, so that we take in one thought at a time; but we must have this outlook. We are to be capable of wonderful things. Is this how we come to a meeting, having the expectation of wonderful things? The more you expect, and the more you ask from God, the more you will get. The Lord says, "Ask, and it shall be given to you" (@Matthew 7: 7). He puts no limit on the asking. If we ask little, we get little. Why not ask for more? I have accustomed my mind to listen at a prayer meeting for what the brethren ask; and sometimes the asking is so little, and the information that we give God is so much! Sometimes there is hardly any asking at all. Now we want to be in this attitude of expecting wonders and asking for wonders. Many a father will tell you he has deep exercise about his son. I have one case in mind, where the father prays for his son, tells God all about him, and asks for nothing. God loves us to be specific. You have a husband to save -- why not cry, God save my husband! You have a son to save -- why not cry to God to save him? We should be specific and definite, and count upon His power, and not say, 'What a hard case this is! You don't know how hard it is'. "Is there anything too hard for me?" (@Jeremiah 32: 27). This outlook of triumph in the complete victory of Christ over all the powers of evil and darkness would give us a large horizon and a more hopeful viewpoint.
Now let me comment briefly on @John 20. It is to be noted that the angels are not spoken of here until well
{434}
down in the account. John's account tests our *spirituality*. Peter went into the sepulchre, as you will remember, and he saw the linen cloths lying and the handkerchief; and then John entered in and it says that he saw and believed. He did not need an angel. He did not need questioning or prompting. He saw the body cloths lying, and the handkerchief folded in a distinct place by itself, and *he worked that matter out in his mind*. He worked it out. He believed. I hope you see what I am trying to point out, dear brethren. The Lord would teach us to get help from what appear to be small and unimportant matters. The more spiritual you are, the less explanation you need. A word to the wise is enough, just a word, but a rod for a fool's back. The fool needs very energetic treatment, because he is a fool. God would help fools, but the way He helps them is to beat them, and I will tell you from experience that the path of a fool means you will have a sore back. As long as you go on in folly, you will have a sore back -- that is God's treatment for a fool. But only a word to the wise!
Now look at the advantage John had. It does not say that Peter believed, but they went home together, the two of them. It was Peter who saw the linen cloths. This is an assembly matter, there are two of them, one helping the other; John ran faster than Peter, but he did not go into the tomb; he waited until Peter came, and Peter went in first, then John. You see the mutual help and encouragement of two; they are two men, and there are no angels visible. They are exploring the matter themselves, going into the mighty triumph of Christ. The handkerchief folded in a distinct place by itself tells the wondrous story that the Lord Jesus is risen from the dead. It had been folded, it
{435}
does not tell us by whom, but it is an action that involves life, not death. And all is orderly, implying that the Lord is not only risen, He is going forward into something. Great things lie ahead. John believed.
Now Mary, though first at the tomb, had not entered into this at all. It says, "But Mary stood at the tomb weeping without. As therefore she wept, she stooped down into the tomb, and beholds two angels sitting in white garments, one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain. And they say to her, Woman, why dost thou weep? She says to them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him". Now notice that in verse 2, where she tells Peter and the other disciples she says, "They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we know not where they have laid him". In verse 13 she is getting more personal and isolated. Two of the brethren have seen the linen cloths in the tomb; one, at all events, has believed; but Mary says, "they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him". When Mary went to the tomb she saw the stone rolled away, and she began to think wrongly -- she began to think badly; and she maintains that kind of thinking right down to this point, although she is alone now. She says, "I know not where they have laid him". It is bad thinking. "They have taken away my Lord". What does that mean? That there is somebody stronger in her eyes, somebody with more power than her Lord, and they have taken Him away, and it is an unknown matter. That is bad thinking. We have to learn, dear brethren, to make spiritual deductions, honouring to Christ. I am not belittling Mary, you understand, but it is the teaching I
{436}
want to get at. If Mary had been equal to this, she would have thought when she saw that stone rolled away, The Lord has come out! That would have been good thinking. But because she is thinking so badly, these two angels appear. They were not seen there before, but apparently they are now needed. Something stronger than the linen cloths and the handkerchief is required. Be assured the Lord will not turn away if we are poor learners. If we need more and stronger help, He will give it. Thomas says, Unless I may do certain things I will not believe. The Lord allows Thomas to do what he demanded. Wonderful grace! But it was not to his honour, though it magnifies the grace of Christ. He wants His people, every one of them. He must have them. I would say to everyone here, the Lord wants you, and He must have you, and if you will hold back from Him, then He will cause others to serve you. He will use all the power that He has in His hands to serve you. Such is His love! But why make Him work so hard? Why make the brethren work so hard? Why make them shed so many tears over you? Why not surrender? Everything is made attractive in surrendering, all heaven's wealth is available, and no upbraiding. When the Lord gets you on His own terms, He is satisfied. What a Lord we have!
But now these angels come into evidence. Mary sees them sitting, "one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain". They are sitting, they are restful; they are not walking about. They are in a meditative, reposeful attitude. They understand that nobody can add anything to the work of Christ; they understand the folly of bringing spices to embalm Him and
{437}
to hold Him there in death. They are sitting at the head and the feet where the body of Jesus had lain, not in fear, but restful. The way through death has been opened up, the way for every lover of Christ. But even that does not help Mary, and so they say to her, "Woman, why dost thou weep?" as though they would call attention to themselves as heaven's representatives. They were not weeping. Heaven was not weeping. It was a time of triumph and victory and gladness, but Mary was weeping and she must be brought into the triumph. She *must* be. She is one for whom Jesus had died, and one whom He loved, and she loves Him; and whatever service is necessary, He must have her. He must! But she does not respond to the angels; she is still thinking badly. And so the angels have to disappear out of the picture. She needs stronger help. She needs the personal attention of Jesus Himself, and she gets it. A wonderful thing that she gets it! And so would you get it, as would every one here, if needs be. But why demand the personal attention of Jesus? Why delay all the brethren? Why make it evening before this great matter can begin, when Jesus comes in amongst His disciples. Why do that? Why let the years go by, and all you will be able to say about them is, Delay -- lost time? But Jesus comes, and as you all remember, He finally says, "Mary", And she turned herself and said, "Rabboni". The Lord was able to do what these two angels could not do. He was able to do what the linen handkerchief could not do, and what the stone rolled away could not do, and He did it. He secured her for Himself, for the realms beyond death.
*Cranford, N. J., U.S.A., November 1943*.
{438}
{439}
DIVINE WORK IN MEN
A E Myles
@2 Samuel 23: 8 - 10; @2 Chronicles 2: 13, 14; @Judges 4: 4, 5; @John 12: 3
I want to speak about products; not products of manufacture such as are advertised today, but divine products of persons, of men and women that pass through God's workshop and come out as finished products. I wish to refer not only to ability, or skill that comes out in what they do, but also to the personalities, for as I understand it, God's great work is to produce or form personalities. Scripture presents the Godhead in three Persons, and it is a far greater thing to know God the Father, Himself, than to know what He has done. It is also a greater thing to know Christ, to know that Person, than to know what He has done in His mighty works. Each divine Person has distinguishing features. These features, as known, make Them very attractive to us. What divine Persons are is inherent; it is not formation, it is not growth, it is not a creation. But what any one of us may be, or may become, is a formation or a growth; that is to say, what we are to be as finished products of God's workshop is all divine, it is all God's doing. It is a very great comfort to my own soul to think that God can take on persons such as we are. We may seem to be ill-equipped at the outset to be called to the exalted dignity of our christian position, but actually the less we have in the way of fleshly refinement, the less we have in social position or in natural attractiveness, the
{440}
better. For what God is going to form in us is wholly new, it is of Himself. It is not an outgrowth, it is not an addition, it is not built on to anything we have or are after the flesh. Even our personality has to be formed so as to fit in with this system of love and glory, where in result God will surround Himself with myriads of happy creatures, every one of them delightful to His eye, every one capable of responding to His affections, and every one a divine product.
Now I say all that to introduce what I have before me, which is to call attention to four persons, distinguished in the Scriptures, two men and two women, the product of God's workshop. I use the expression 'workshop' as one which I think you will understand. That is, all that these persons were, whether in moral beauty or in usefulness, is wholly of God. God would take us all in hand in a similar way, that is His intention. The fact that He has called us by the gospel, and given us power to repent, and attached us to Christ by faith, is a clear indication that He has in mind to pass us through His workshop, and to turn us out as finished products of His own skilful hand.
Now before I go further, I might say this, that it is possible for any of us to hinder God. I am speaking now from our side. We can hinder Him. Some of us at the end of our days may be filled with sorrow as we view a wasted life, or if not wholly wasted, partly wasted. That may be. That is very sad. But it is possible for us all to be like Paul, as he refers to himself in 2 Timothy, that he has finished his course, he was ready to be offered; he was a finished product. He is reviewing his life from his side, and he is not looking back over a wasted lifetime, although his early
{441}
years were spent in opposition to God. But from the time that the Lord took him on he went forward steadily, he completed his course and he kept the faith, and that is how he passed into the presence of his Master, as one who was ready. He was one who kept short accounts with God and at the end of his life he is ready.
Now to come back to my subject: I read a few verses from that well known chapter in @2 Samuel 23, where we are given a list of distinguished names, the names of David's mighty men, thirty-seven in all. Not a great many from one viewpoint, but if one of them could slay eight hundred Philistines at one time, then thirty-seven mighty men represent a great source of power and strength that God can call upon. They were all the product of having to do with David. All they knew they learned from David, that is from Christ. They are like the twelve disciples we read of this afternoon who companied with Jesus, and observed how He worked, how He used power and authority beneficially for men. They are formally named and commissioned, twelve most distinguished names. But David has thirty-seven. I do not want to say much about them, I just read two verses concerning one of them, not the greatest, but the one who comes *next*. I think it is a delightful matter to see how God has outstandingly great men, but when you look at the *next* you find moral greatness too. That is, it is not one man alone, and no one else to stand with him; this one who comes next, second, is worth looking at too. He stood with David when the men of Israel left him, and fought the Philistines until his hand was weary, indeed until his hand clave unto the sword. He wrought a great deliverance in Israel, and the people
{442}
moved after him only to take spoil, not to fight, but to spoil.
Now I am thinking of the chief man as perhaps linking up with what is inaugural; and I am thinking of this second man as a reserve man. He came in at a crisis when there was a failure on the part of others, just like the position today. You look around in the professing church and what you notice is that most of those who profess to know Christ have turned away from Him, they have found other lords, they have found other lovers. Christ is not to them the hidden Man of the heart. The mass of professing christians have turned away. Now what would the Lord do at such a time? He would bring out reserves, distinguished reserves. Everybody in fellowship today is potentially a noble, a prince. To be happily in fellowship today is not a commonplace matter, it is a distinguished matter. Those who are such are all princes, all noble persons; and why? Because the position calls for nobles; without princeliness, without nobility, without true moral worth the position would be insupportable. We should soon walk out of fellowship and go somewhere else. To remain involves that you fight the Philistines until your hand is weary, until your hand cleaves to the sword. What does that mean? That the man and the sword are inseparable, that is, grown together; so intense is the conflict, so arduous and so long. But if you see the matter through -- as you can if you desire it, for God can qualify you and He will -- if you see the matter through you will be of great benefit in Israel and the people will follow you only to spoil. Now you may say, You are presenting a very lovely picture, but this was a very distinguished man. But why should you not be
{443}
distinguished? Why should you come behind? You may say, You don't know my shortcomings, my incapacity, my inability to learn, etc. But what about God? Think of yourself as having nothing at all, only the beginnings of personality, that is, you have a link with Christ, hence an identity. Think of yourself like that and let God take you into His workshop. Let His skilful hand get to work and see what He will make of you. He can make you like this man, so that you would come no whit behind him. God can do that, and He will do it for you, if you are ready for it, as He will for any one of us. He does not work with what we are according to nature, God's workmanship involves what is wholly of Himself, and the finished product will present something in which the will of the flesh has had no part. It has all been of God.
Now this man in devotion, in military skill, is outstanding, but the next man that I want to speak about is not a soldier, his skill is not with weapons. Weapons are needed, a soldier is needed; be assured that without conflict the enemy would soon take all that we have, every bit of it. Alas, how few there are amongst the saints that know that there is any conflict going on! They do not know it. If I were to tell you about somebody in this country who did not know there was a war on, you would say, How is it possible? But alas, there are people in fellowship, filling out their routine in their own localities, who do not know there is any conflict going on; and yet without such as David's mighty men the enemy would soon take all that we have from us.
This second man is a worker. The workman properly follows the soldier. Conflict and love are developed under
{444}
David, skill and wisdom in workmanship are developed under Solomon. Solomon is a man of peace, David was a man of war. There could have been no Solomon had there not been a David. Now this most interesting man spoken of in 2 Chronicles whom Solomon asks to have sent to him is a workman. He is one of God's workmen. He is not a specialist, he is just as skilful in fabrics as he is in metals and in timbers; just as skilful in engraving as in designing. He is one of God's workmen. I think perhaps he is a foreshadowing of Paul the apostle, the master-workman of the New Testament, skilful in all that pertained to dealing with evil, but skilful too in love, skilful in guile, one who became all things to all men, if by any means he might save some. What a workman he was! Why should we not be like him? You may say, You are talking on a very high line. But allowing for Paul's unique position as an apostle, allowing that he is a special vessel, why should we not be like him? He says, Be imitators of me as I also am of Christ. If you cannot be a Paul, you can be an imitator of him; I mean imitation in a right way, a replica of him, not something put on. Why not be like him inside? Why not let God take over our organs, the organs of manhood through which our feelings and affections and souls are nourished and strengthened? Why not let God take this matter over, that we might become skilled workmen in gold, and in silver, in iron and in bronze, in timber, in stone, in crimson, in blue and in byssus? What are all these things? They all represent glories of Christ, qualities of Christ, the varied and expansive stores of Christ. God would put them into our hands to work with. Why not show the brethren a little bit of gold? For this is an idea
{445}
that underlies ministry, that you show something; and the saints begin to covet it and long for it, and then they find out that what they are longing for, God is waiting to give them and form in them.
The fact is that ministry sets up longings and desires that are right in the current of God's movements. If you want to know Christ like this -- not just as a Person who has died for your sins -- if you want to know the details of His glory and moral excellence, and to see it spread out so that the saints desire to take it on, God will take you on as a workman. He surely will. The Lord told His disciples to pray the Master of the harvest to send out workmen into the harvest field. That prayer is not fully answered yet. Some have gone into it, many indeed, but there are more required. It still remains true that the harvest is great and the labourers are few; and if any of us is filled with desire to have a part in this great matter, I have no hesitation in saying that God will take you on and He will qualify you. Do not think you have any qualifications of your own, do not think a good memory, or facility in using words, is going to qualify you to be a workman. A workman has to learn his trade. Think of a workman who knows every spiritual trade, who is just as skilful in metals as in timber and in fabrics, just as skilful in engraving what is outside as in inventing every cunning device: what a magnificent idea! But it is a practical idea, and any one of us can have a part in it if we want it, if we are prepared for the workshop. The workshop is a rough place. It is a place where there is much rubbish, much cutting, forming and chipping. If you go into God's workshop you will have to be prepared for rough words. Even the Lord spoke rough
{446}
words. You have to be prepared for it; He speaks those rough words in the workshop, but when the workshop period is over there will be no more rough words. That is, God will have a finished product. I would like to encourage the young brothers and sisters particularly to go in for this. You may have to alter your lives a bit, you may have to alter your mode of life, to become more like John the baptist, with his garment of camel's hair, his leathern girdle and his food of locusts and wild honey. You might have to be more like that; but what a privilege to have a real, substantial part in this and to be able to help the brethren, to see them take on these features of Christ! You could not do anything better with your life than that.
Now I have these two women to speak about. They are both most distinguished women, but distinctions differ. Deborah was a prophetess. I would say to each of the dear sisters here, Why should you not be a prophetess? You may say, Well, prophesying is a gift. Yes, indeed, but why not covet it? Why not desire it? How few women desire to prophesy! Many, of course, disqualify themselves both for prayer and prophesying, but why should they do this? Why not give your life over to God? Why not let Him make you beautiful with a moral beauty that all heaven would delight in? Why fritter away the years in vanity, the pursuit of something you never get? Why not let God have your early years? They are the best. He will do wonders with them. He might cause you to become a prophetess, one who could bring the mind of God to bear on persons. Deborah was such. She was a wife too, and it says she judged Israel. This is a remarkable matter, a woman judging Israel! Why did she judge Israel? Because she was
{447}
the best qualified person in Israel to judge, that is why. If God has a woman in a locality that is qualified in prophecy, in judgment, will He not use her? Surely He will. Be assured that God will use whatever He has formed. It is delightful to Himself to use this woman, whether the men of Israel liked it or not; they would have to admit, as brethren have often had to admit, that the woman was the most spiritual person in the meeting, that she had the greatest discernment and judgment as to where the Lord was in matters. I have known such. God delights to take women in hand and to make something out of them. Do you think God is pleased that women should be nonentities spiritually, without any ability to talk about the truth, without concern, without judgment without prayer and prophecy? That is not God's thought. He would enlarge the meetings, He would fill them with spiritual power through the women; I am assured of that. Why should not all the sisters put themselves in the way of it? Why not come to the Lord and say, Lord, what can you make out of me? Well, He will do wonders. He could pour His grace into your soul, He could enlarge your mind, He could fill you with what is heavenly. He could make you beautiful in heaven's eyes. The Lord could do that and He would, but you have to come to the workshop. It is a workman's job. Some rubbish to go, perhaps a good deal. The workshop is the place where things are formed, shaped and finished and made beautiful. I commend this idea to the beloved sisters, whom I hold in honour, that you should submit yourselves, indeed invite divine attention to yourselves. Invite it, ask for it, that you might be taken over and become an asset in the meeting, a real
{448}
spiritual asset, so that the brethren might come to you for help in what is spiritual. They will do it. If you are the most spiritual person in the meeting, be assured that God will see that the brethren come to you to get help.
Now bear with me just a moment while I refer to Mary of Bethany. She is a finished product too, and she has great skill, but not like Deborah in prophesying, in judging Israel, in stirring the men up to do their part and to be men. Mary is all for Christ, all for Him. The saints are not in her eye directly, although they benefit. The house was filled with the odour of the ointment, but as the Spirit of God puts her forward, she is all for Christ. This is a very valuable feature, someone given over entirely to be for the heart of Christ, to anoint Him as Mary did. How valuable that is! One woman in a place like that would have the most profound effect upon a meeting. The woman in @Luke 7 is a choice woman too, but she represents the repenting side. Mary represents the adoration side, what Jesus was to her, His glorious personality, the grace of it, the greatness of it. He was going to death, and she anoints Him in preparation, as the Lord says, for His burial. The Lord Jesus went into the grave with the fragrance of Mary's ointment on Him. She was all for Him, a most valuable feature. I do not mean that such a person would in any way ignore the saints, I am only bringing forward a particular feature of divine workmanship. Who made her what she was? Christ made her what she was. She was not only His possessively in proprietorship, but she was His workmanship, the product of His love, the answer of His love, a feminine counterpart of Himself; for just as He was for her, she was for Him. Mary is a valuable asset in a
{449}
meeting. Why should there not be more Marys? Why should not the women here be Marys? Can the Lord not do with you what He did with her? Surely He can. It is all a question of the skill of His hand, it is all a question of submitting to the workshop conditions. It may mean tears, sorrow, it may mean much discipline, but the finished product is something that is all for Christ. You remember what the Lord said to the disciples, "Me ye have not always" (@John 12: 8). That is what was in Mary's mind and heart, just Himself.
Now the time is gone and I think I have partly indicated what I set out to do. Perhaps the Lord will help us to fill it in and to gather this great thought. We are not to look at the outward appearance of the person with whom He is working, but at the skill of the Workman, the skill of the divine hand. *He* takes on persons, *He* can make them useful, *He* can make them beautiful. All beautiful things in God's world are useful; nothing is only ornamental. Beneath every surface engraving of beauty and artistry is moral excellence. It is just like Christ; it is the same all the way through. This is what God does. He does it with persons such as we are, and He is willing and ready to take us in hand. If not already in His hand He is ready to take you on for this exalted and delightful idea so that you too might become finished products of the skilful hand of our God.
*Berkely, California, U.S.A., July 1944*.
{450}
{451}
THE ASSEMBLY AS A TRUSTWORTHY VESSEL
G R Cowell
@Genesis 24: 67; @1 Samuel 25: 25, 32, 33, 41, 42; @Proverbs 31: 10 - 12, 23, 27, 28; @Matthew 16: 18.
I desire, dear brethren, to say a word on the trustworthiness of the assembly. In considering such a subject we have, of course, to take an abstract view of the assembly; but I hope such a view will stimulate our desires to be marked by the feature of trustworthiness proper to the assembly. Each of the passages we have read in the Old Testament bring the assembly before us, in type, in its wifely character. In the first case, Isaac led Rebecca into his mother Sarah's tent, and, it says, he took her and she became his wife and he loved her and he was comforted after his mother's death. I think the reference to Sarah's tent indicates that the Lord relies upon the assembly to carry through, in spiritual power, every feature of the testimony that was once committed to Israel. To carry it through with heavenly lustre -- to carry it through on a level to which Israel could never rise. In Samuel, Abigail comes forward as marked by discernment; she had discernment to meet the crisis in such a way that David's name was not dishonoured. It says, David sent ten young men to greet Nabal *in his name*, and his name and Jehovah's name would have been dishonoured had not Abigail come forward to meet the situation. David says, "Blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou". I think the chapter brings before us the trustworthiness of the
{452}
assembly in that respect. The Lord counts upon the assembly to be trustworthy in meeting conditions of crisis by the exercise of true discernment and in doing what is required to maintain the glory of His name. Then in Proverbs, both the wifely and motherly features come into evidence in connection with the virtuous woman; and it says, "The heart of her husband confideth in her". It is evidently a matter of trustworthiness particularly in regard to the household. It is a very important matter that the household should be cared for, so that, in the ultimate issue, her children rise up and call her blessed. Surely the Lord counts upon the assembly to fill out that role, so that there should be children who rise up and call the assembly blessed as having proved the maternal care that is found in it. I read the passage in @Matthew 16 because it shows that the trustworthiness of the assembly is on account of the material of which it is composed, and the rock upon which it is built. "*Thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly, and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". We should be exercised to be characteristically that kind of material, because if we are not true 'Peters', that is, true living stones, we shall not be reliable in the settings to which I have already referred.
Now in connection with Rebecca, the secret underlying her fitness for the position in Sarah's tent was the service of Abraham's servant, who is a type of the Spirit; and the fact that room was made for him and his service. One would raise the exercise with us, dear brethren, as to how far we make way for the Spirit's service in our local gatherings. We would all desire that the Rebecca character should mark the local companies,
{453}
and I think it helps to see that this type peculiarly fits in with local settings, because Rebecca is a type of the assembly at the present time. Eve, as a type, includes the assembly as a whole -- the church complete. But Rebecca applies to the present time, as Paul says to the Corinthians, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ" (@2 Corinthians 11: 2). The provisional position in Sarah's tent has to be filled out now. It will not apply when we are with the Lord. Sarah's tent has no application when the Lord comes, for Israel will again take up her place on the earth. But it is a question of filling out a provisional position *now* and thereby being a comfort to the heart of Christ. It must, therefore, have a peculiar application to local companies, because that is the *present form* in which the assembly exists. The Rebecca feature was, no doubt, seen in a special way in the Pentecostal church at Jerusalem, but it continues throughout the dispensation.
So Paul says to a local company, "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ". And one great point in the Spirit's service at the present time is to bring about in every locality what answers to "a chaste virgin to Christ". So that in every city where the saints of God are, there should be a company with chaste affections set upon one Man; the saints in unity in the matter. Rebecca is a type of the saints moving in unity to Christ with chaste affections. What a precious thought, that in the cities of men this character of things should exist. In cities, men run after this man and that, but how much it means to the heart of Christ and of God that
{454}
there should be those whose hearts are set upon Christ alone. The Spirit's service and leading has this in view.
The Spirit is seen typically in @Genesis 24 in three ways: as *the well, the man, and the camels*. If we avail ourselves of the well, all our meetings will be in freshness. But we also need to make room for the Spirit's *personal* service, as seen typically in the man. The man raises the questions "Is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge?" Do *we* make room for the Spirit? Do we make way for His personal service in our meetings? As the Lord says, "He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and shall announce it to you" (@John 16: 14). We need to see to it that there is room for the Spirit to unfold the glories of Christ. What potentialities there are in the ministry meeting, and in the reading meeting! Making room for the Spirit involves making room for one another in love, making way for the manifestations of the Spirit through whomsoever they may come. With what holy restfulness we can sit down together if we recognise that *He* is present to take of Christ's things and show them to us.
And then Laban says that there is room for the camels. The ten camels suggest the full recognition of responsibility to care for the assembly of God. We are to be available to the Spirit in this service. The camel is a beast of burden, and the word is, "Bear one another's burdens, and thus fulfil the law of the Christ" (@Galatians 6: 2). When Isaac lifted up his eyes "behold, camels were coming". The camels ensured that Rebecca would arrive at the meeting-place fresh, wholly available for the heart of Isaac, not in any way jaded by the journey. The journey only becomes an occasion to prove what love can do for
{455}
one another, and in result we arrive at the meeting-place wholly available for Christ. The end in view in the ministry, and in care, is that the saints might arrive in unity, fresh and unjaded for the heart of Christ. So Rebecca sprang off the camel. It is in that spirit of buoyancy and response to Christ that we can take up the responsibilities of Sarah's tent together. How much it means to the heart of Christ, that Sarah's tent should be filled -- and to the heart of God. Think of what God committed to Israel -- "whose is the adoption". Has the adoption lapsed? It has not lapsed at all; neither have "the glory, and the covenants, and the law-giving, and the service, and the promises" (@Romans 9: 4). The assembly carries through these features in a heavenly and spiritual way. In fact, Israel only had the shadow; the assembly has the substance. Think of the *service* going through, the service set up under Moses, under David and under Solomon. Has it lapsed? Not at all. It is carried through in the assembly in heavenly and spiritual power. Think of the temple: has it lapsed? It has not. Scripture says, "Ye are the temple of God". God has His temple here where the oracles are and the light of God is. Nothing has lapsed, all is carried through in the assembly on a level to which Israel could never rise. We can understand what a comfort this is to the heart of Christ. Trustworthiness lies in carrying out what love requires, namely, that not one feature of the divine mind should be allowed to lapse, but that all should go through in heavenly and spiritual power.
Now I pass on to Samuel. As I said a moment ago, what is stressed with Abigail is discernment -- "Blessed be thy discernment". And how much we need discernment in
{456}
assembly matters! We are continually being faced with questions of good and evil that call for discernment if evil is to be overcome with good. It is easy enough to meet evil with evil, but it needs discernment to know how to overcome evil with good, so that the Lord's name might be honoured, and the true character of the dispensation maintained. The previous part of the chapter refers to a very difficult situation. We have to view David, not as a type of Christ, but as an offended spiritual brother, and the question is how to help him to meet the situation in a right spirit. The most spiritual man may become offended. And the more spiritual a man is, the more dishonour he will bring upon the name of Christ if he acts in a fleshly way. David was going to meet evil with evil, although, as we should say, a spiritual man. True the man he had to deal with was most difficult, an ungodly man who proved himself to be irreconcilable. But it is Abigail who meets the situation. One of Abigail's young men went and told her. It answers somewhat to @Matthew 18 -- "tell it to the assembly", the vessel which the Lord trusts with the glory of His name here.
Abigail does not go directly to the offender. Her concern is to save the spiritual man. Think of the preparation she makes to break down his anger. What abundance of grace she brings with her, what abundance of provision! And then her own attitude. She falls down at his feet and she says, "upon me, my lord, upon me let the iniquity be". What could David do in such circumstances? She takes all the blame upon herself.
What is the secret behind the feature of assembly trustworthiness seen in Abigail? I think it is that we learn
{457}
individually to judge ourselves; learning in the secret of our own soul history with God, what good and evil is. The truth of @Romans 7 is involved in this. Abigail was Nabal's wife and @Romans 7 brings out the truth of having had one husband, and now being to Another. We all have to learn, if we are to be of any value in this respect, what Paul says, "I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, good does not dwell" (@Romans 7: 18). We are linked closely with the flesh; in one sense it is *me* -- "I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, good does not dwell". Paul came to a thorough judgment of good and evil in himself. That is why Paul could be relied upon to have a sound judgment in assembly matters. In such matters, it is not only a question of discerning evil. We are apt to think that to discern evil and talk about it is spirituality. But the test lies in discerning the good which will overcome the evil, the way to meet the situation in keeping with the character of the dispensation. That is how Paul met the situation in Corinth. Think of the food he brought in, glad to spend and be spent for them, and the discernment with which he handled every matter that was troubling them. And so you see Abigail had come to a definite judgment of Nabal. "Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this man of Belial, Nabal; for as his name is, so is he: Nabal is his name, and folly is with him". Applied to us, it means that I have come to that judgment of man in the flesh, as having learned what the flesh is in myself. It is not an easy thing for us to come to this judgment about ourselves. Yet it is the secret that lies behind this feature of assembly trustworthiness. It will enable us to take up the attitude of Abigail, as she says in verse 28, "I pray thee, forgive the transgression of thy
{458}
handmaid". She takes the iniquity upon herself, and, in doing so, cuts the ground from under David's feet as regards the course he was intending to pursue. She meets the offended brother first. It is often the brother who is offended who is the most difficult to handle. She puts him right, as having a right judgment of the whole matter herself. She was not defending Nabal, she pronounced her judgment clearly, but takes the guilt upon herself. And David is recovered and becomes a worshipper straight away. Where these difficult matters are handled in the spirit of true discernment, proper to the assembly, they will end in worship. Think of the offended brother becoming a worshipper! He says, "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel" -- he who, a few minutes before, was an angry man going to avenge himself. "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me. And blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou". It is a great thing, dear brethren, to have this feature of discernment in our localities. It is a great thing also to rely upon the assembly and not to act on our own judgment; so that, like David, we can bless God that there is such a vessel here.
Having first dealt with the offended brother, Abigail goes to Nabal. She fearlessly approaches the offender, as it says in verse 36, "And Abigail came to Nabal;" and in verse 37, "And it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, that his wife told him these things; and his heart died within him and he became as a stone". She told him these things; it was a last appeal to Nabal. There was nothing in what she told him that was calculated to be other than for his blessing. But, typically, he would not hear the assembly. What was there in "these
{459}
things" to harm Nabal? But it says, "His heart died within him ..". He represents one who would not listen to the assembly and, if a man will not hear the assembly, *God* deals with him governmentally. There was no need for David to avenge himself. Nabal was told, and, failing to listen, God takes the matter up and, it says, "Jehovah smote Nabal, and he died". What follows is that Abigail becomes David's wife, stressing this point of trustworthiness.
Now I pass on to the last chapter of Proverbs, a chapter which brings in the maternal feature of the assembly as well as the wifely. The wife and mother go together in Scripture. Jerusalem above is our mother. I have no doubt maternal rule and influence will mark the holy city Jerusalem in the world to come, when she comes down out of the heaven from God, in which setting she is called "the bride, the Lamb's wife", and it characterises the assembly now. "The heart of her husband confideth in her, and he shall have no lack of spoil". It is another side of the assembly's present responsibility. *She fills Sarah's tent, she meets every crisis* in a manner which maintains the honour of the Lord's name and the true character of the dispensation; but, in addition, she sees to it that *her husband has no lack of spoil*. It is a question of securing new material and also ensuring the building up and spiritual progress of those already entrusted to us. So the passage brings out the diligence of the virtuous woman in her household duties. "She doeth him good, and not evil, all the days of her life". She provides food for her household: "She bringeth her food from afar". We need to consider that side. We need to see that the saints are fed,
{460}
even if it means bringing the food from afar. Also she provides warmth and clothing. And then she is concerned as to those without, and as to acquiring new territory; anything, in fact, that will bring spoil to her husband. She expresses the character of God in this poor and needy world. Upon her tongue is the law of kindness. In result "her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land".
"She is not afraid of the snow for her household ... she laugheth at the coming day". She makes such provision that she is not afraid of what is ahead. We should seek to make such provision in our care meetings, that we are not afraid of eventualities. How much oversight is really needed -- "She surveyeth the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness. Her children rise up and call her blessed". We should be concerned that children are born to the testimony, and that they should rise up and call the assembly blessed -- respect it. "Her husband also, and he praiseth her". What more could we wish than to have the Lord's approval in this way!
Well, I trust these few words may give us a desire to be marked by the trustworthiness proper to the assembly. Matthew indicates the trustworthy material of which the assembly is made. In all the matters of which I have been speaking we are called upon to consider for Christ and His interests. To be free for this, it is necessary that we should be in soul salvation. We need to be exercised to be true Peters, as I said before, marked by life and durability, our vision filled with the Christ, the Son of the living God. Peter himself is a sample living stone. You have only to read the Acts to see that no circumstance could overcome
{461}
him. He was in complete victory, in present soul salvation. He is representative of the trustworthy material of which the assembly is built.
May the Lord help us, for His name's sake!
*Croydon, January 1945*.
{462}
{463}
GREATNESS
G R Cowell
@Hebrews 1: 1 - 3; @Hebrews 8: 1, 2; @Ephesians 2: 4 - 6; @Acts 2: 1, 2; @2 Samuel 7: 18 - 24
I desire to say a word on greatness, because God would have us become accustomed to greatness. Our own destiny is great, for we shall move and serve ultimately in the presence of greatness in the fullest sense of the word. These passages bring greatness before us; the greatness of Christ, the greatness of God, and also the greatness of the saints as God's workmanship.
@Hebrews 1 and 8 refer to the greatness of Christ in a striking way, particularly the former. It is essentially the chapter of greatness as regards Christ. It brings Him before us as the One in whom God has spoken, and is speaking, because the speaking goes on. God has spoken in Son, and the speaking is now from the place where Jesus is. It is not simply an historical matter; the scripture brings before us the place from which the present speaking comes. As it says, "having made by himself the purification of sins, set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high". In this chapter the Scriptures, particularly the Psalms, are quoted extensively to bring out the greatness of Christ. The chapter brings out who He is in His Person. As it says, "*Thou* in the beginning, Lord, hast founded the earth, and works of thy hands are the heavens. *They* shall perish, but *thou* continuest still; and they all shall grow old as a garment, and as a covering shalt thou roll them up, and
{464}
they shall be changed; but *thou* art the Same" (verses 10 - 12). That is a title of Deity -- "*Thou* art the Same", although applied to the Lord in manhood. "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come" (@Hebrews 13: 8). In His Person the Lord Jesus has never changed. He is the same, whatever may be the circumstances into which He has come. He Himself is unchangeable in His unspeakable greatness, whether on earth, or going into death, or risen and ascended. His condition has changed, but He in His Person has never changed. Though, truly, in His perfect manhood here He learned obedience from the things which He suffered (@Hebrews 5: 8), yet that does not affect the truth that in His Person He is unchanging and unchangeable. It is a great thing to get that into the soul. And yet He is truly Man. He has come into manhood in order that the whole mind and will of God as to man might be expressed, including God's disposition towards man, and the speaking involves these things.
The Son is said to be "the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance;" thus the One in whom God speaks is entirely in accord with the speaking. He could say when here, I am "Altogether that which I also say to you" (@John 8: 25). The expression, "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all" (@1 John 1: 5), implies that God is always what He purports to be; His word is a true expression of Himself. And so this blessed Person, in whom God has spoken, is the full expression and outshining of God; and, at the same time, the expression of His pleasure in man. He is the Man who can fill out everything for God. What a delight to God to have such a One, the One who is going to take up all things as the true
{465}
Heir. But redemption was a necessity, and so it says, "having made by himself the purification of sins, set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high".
I would like to commend that expression to you, because the Lord Himself is ineffably great, and yet as Man He has set Himself down on the right hand of *the* greatness. That word "the greatness" is the supreme expression of greatness in Scripture. The right hand is the most important seat. How great Christ must be, to be able, without presumption, to set Himself down at the *right hand* of the greatness on high. We cannot measure what is involved in that expression "the greatness". It involves, no doubt, essential Deity, but how it magnifies the Lord Jesus that, as Man He has gone in and set Himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high. That is the blessed place He has taken as Man, and it is from that point that the speaking comes at the present time. It comes from the very presence of the greatness on high.
Before I pass on I would just say this: love enters into the whole matter. "Taking a place by so much better than the angels". No angel could ever have that place, no angel could set himself down there. That was reserved for man, but only one Man. He is more than man, of course -- He is the Same. He Himself has part in Deity, and yet this is intended to magnify to us the great fact that a *Man* has sat down there. Only One who Himself had part in "the greatness" could do it, but how wonderful it is that a divine Person has taken manhood, and *as Man* has taken a place that an angel could never take! But that Man is the Son. "To which of the angels said he ever, *Thou* art my Son?" We must not think that the thought of greatness
{466}
shuts out affection. Love marks the whole position. "*Thou* art my Son: this day have *I* begotten thee? and again, *I* will be to him for father, and *he* shall be to me for son". That is how God regards this One who has set Himself down on the right hand of the greatness. He is the object of the Father's love.
But now in chapter 8 it is Christ on our side. In chapter 1 we see Christ on God's side, the One through whom God speaks. In that respect He must be alone in all His greatness. But in chapter 8 the apostle says, "Now a summary of the things of which we are speaking is, We have such a one high priest, who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens". It is what *we* have. In chapter 1 it is what God has -- His Son, through whom He can speak. Chapter 8 is what we have. "We have such a one high priest, who has sat down [see J.N.D.¬s note *e*] on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens; minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man". He is there as our High Priest, our Representative. He is there as the true Aaron. We are in the position of Aaron's sons who were with him in the service. But how great it is that the Lord Jesus, as the High Priest has sat Himself down as our Representative; He has sat Himself down on the *right hand of the throne* of the greatness in the heavens. What a wonderful contemplation! The Man, speaking reverently, who is our Representative has, without any presumption, sat Himself down in the seat of the greatest honour and *power*, at the right hand of *the throne* of the greatness in the heavens.
{467}
We are part of the true tabernacle which the Lord has pitched and not man; we are in immediate proximity to the throne. We must not be geographical in our thoughts. The true tabernacle has its present application to the assembly here on earth, and as belonging to the assembly we belong to the most holy place. In fact we form it, like the boards that surrounded the ark. At the same time we are also like Aaron's sons, who could go in with him to serve in the holy place. Not that they could go in in the fullest sense -- the way into the holy of holies was not then made manifest (@Hebrews 9: 8). But now it is fully manifested, for the very Person in whom God has made known Himself and His mind and thoughts, is the One who has gone in as High Priest, and who is over the whole service, and who links His brethren with Him in the service, in the presence of God Himself. As I said, I believe God would help us to become more accustomed to being in the presence of greatness -- the greatness of Christ. Then -- what is even more wonderful -- in the presence of *the* greatness; that which is beyond us to comprehend, and yet as in the presence of God we have a sense of it. We know God as revealed and yet we are in the presence of One who, though known as revealed, is in His own Being beyond our comprehension. We know Him revealed as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, His Father and our Father, His God and our God. Yet there is always that which is beyond us, but it is the very sense of that, *the* greatness, that gives the highest note to our worship. We are in the presence of "the King of the ages". Paul says, to him be "honour and glory to the ages of ages" (@1 Timothy 1: 17). We are before Him as sons. The more we enter into the
{468}
relationship of sons, the more we shall cherish the thought of greatness, the greatness of the One we know as Father, His ineffable greatness as God.
But now there is the question of the greatness of the saints. In thinking of the greatness of the saints we need to be very careful always to maintain that Christ's greatness is outstanding. In a way there is no comparison. I love to make that clear for the joy of my own heart. Think of the ark, and then think of one of those boards. Yet the board was made of the same material as the ark, and the boards put together made a fit setting for the ark, they made the shrine where the ark was. In that sense the saints are great, although Christ's greatness is unique. Even the church complete cannot compare with Christ in the greatness of His Person, although as regards His manhood she is His fulness. The saints are great because they form an adequate setting for Him. We sing,
<blockquote>'For of Thy body, Lord, are we' (`199:4).</blockquote>
We are a necessity to Christ, not only for His heart's affections, but for the display of His glory and to be a fit setting for Him. We are a necessity to God, too, for His habitation, because it is where Christ is enshrined, and all is in keeping with Him, that God can dwell complacently. It is a great thing to see that the assembly is a necessity to Christ and to God. God will never dwell with angels in that sense. God dwells with *men*. Man is the order of being that alone can satisfy the affections of the heart of God, and provide Him with a habitation according to His own thoughts. His eternal purpose is in regard to *man* -- Christ, indeed, supremely, and yet -- I speak reverently -- the saints are a necessity to Christ in connection with the setting in which He is to be
{469}
seen eternally, and the saints similarly are a necessity to God. Divine Persons are always self-sufficient, of course, but divine love and glory require the saints. It makes the assembly great in our minds, it makes the saints great, and yet Christ is ever outstanding. Yet in whatever setting we see Christ, in their measure, the saints correspond with it. If we see Christ as the ark, the saints are the boards, of the same material. If we see Christ as the veil, the saints are the curtains, the same material. We think of Aaron -- we are the sons, clothed with garments for glory and ornament, though not so resplendent as Aaron's, associated with him in the service of God. "He that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one" (@Hebrews 2: 11). It is a wonderful thing to see that the saints correspond with Christ. In whatever setting Christ is seen, the saints, in their measure, correspond with it. "As *he* is, *we* also are in this world" (@1 John 4: 17).
So when you come to the thought of sitting in heavenly places, Ephesians shows that the saints are brought into correspondence with Christ in their measure. "God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love wherewith he loved us, (we too being dead in offences,) has quickened us with the Christ ... and has raised us up together" -- that refers to elevation -- "and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". The Lord Jesus *sat Himself* down on the right hand. I love to think of Jesus going thus into the presence of the greatness. The Lord Jesus could go in and take the highest seat without presumption. He sat Himself down -- it was His right place. We could not sit ourselves down, but it says that God has made us sit down. If we found ourselves in the
{470}
presence of earthly greatness, in the palace of the king, we should stand, and if the king made us sit down how honoured we should feel! But that is what God does with the saints, it is what divine love does, It is "because of his great love". Love enters into this whole matter. We must not separate love and greatness. Because God loved us, He wanted us in the most exalted place, and He has made us sit down there. Love would not have been satisfied otherwise. We could not have sat ourselves down there. But God has raised us up together and made us sit down together. A most touching thing! It would not satisfy Him if we were not perfectly at home there. There is no sense of discrepancy. God makes us sit down. We are brought into correspondence with Christ, and unless it were so, we could not provide a fit setting for Christ. We are the very shrine where God is, where Christ is. How could we have been the shrine, the temple of God, if we were not able to sit down? The Lord Jesus has set Himself down, and God *makes* us sit down in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus, and it is in this sense of restfulness that the service proceeds. In the Old Testament no priest ever sat down, and when the glory filled the house they could not even stand to minister. In christianity our High Priest, the Minister of the sanctuary, has sat Himself down at the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens. God has raised us up and made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus, to provide a setting for that blessed Person.
@Acts 2 refers to the public position down here, corresponding with our place above. The saints were together with one accord in one place, and Christ was enshrined in their hearts. Some of them had seen Him go
{471}
up, His hands uplifted in blessing. It was a company gathered in the light of Christ having gone up. Then it says, "There came suddenly a sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house where they were sitting". It was *the glory* coming in. Just as when the tabernacle was set up of old, the glory came in and filled it, so now. Who was coming in? A divine Person, the Holy Spirit. One feels how little we apprehend that we are in the presence of the Holy Spirit, that He is with us and in us; that a christian in that sense is always in the immediate presence of God. They were perfectly at home in the presence of a divine Person, they were sitting. Their actual position on earth, where they could be seen by men, corresponded with Christ's position above. He was in the presence of the greatness on high; they were in the presence of the Holy Spirit. He was sitting, and they were sitting. I only mention these things to show the greatness of the saints. As I say, not to belittle the outstanding greatness of Christ, but to show the greatness of the place that God has given to the saints -- how great is His workmanship! It is no credit to us. It is because we are God's workmanship, and all in view of providing an adequate setting for Christ.
I read the passage in Samuel as encouragement to us to be like David, and to go in and sit before the Lord. One feels for oneself that one has hardly done this at all, and yet it is open to us. I know we do it to some extent collectively and there are wonderful manifestations. We hear His voice and we respond. But one would desire to encourage one's own heart and the brethren to come into this personally. David went in and sat before the Lord. It is
{472}
the attitude of sitting. He was beyond his dispensation. It is really the christian position, to go in and sit before the Lord. We should be concerned that the atmosphere of the holiest should mark all our meetings, but it is a wonderful thing that it is open to the individual too. As we sit there we become impressed with a sense of greatness, we are in the presence of greatness, and so David says, "For thy word's sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all this greatness, to make thy servant know it. Wherefore thou art great, Jehovah Elohim; for there is none like thee, neither is there any God beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears". He had taken in divine speaking. There was all this greatness that God had made known. He says, "Wherefore thou art great ... there is none like thee". Then he goes on to speak of the greatness of God's people, "And who is like thy people, like Israel, the one nation in the earth that God went to redeem to be a people to himself, and to make himself a name, and to do for them great things and terrible?" So that in this interview that David had with God, as sitting before Him, he made way in his soul for impressions of greatness. May we spend more time in the presence of divine Persons; in the presence of the ark, as it were; and in the presence of the God who dwells between the cherubim. Let impressions of greatness of God come into our souls, -- "there is none like thee" -- the greatness of Christ and all that He has done, and the greatness of the saints as God's workmanship.
May God help us in it, for His name's sake!
*Weston-super-Mare, July 1945*.
