{#Living Bread}
{20}
THE LIVING BREAD
@John 6: 35 - 38, 48 - 58, 61 - 63, 67 - 71; @Revelation 22: 1 - 2.
We were engaged yesterday afternoon with the living water, and I trust the Lord will help us this afternoon as to the living bread. We need bread and water for the sustenance of life, both naturally and spiritually; and if a person is famishing, he needs water first. We all, if we have to do with God, first experience the blessing of the living water. "Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely". But then we need sustaining in the path of God's will, and for that we need the living bread as well as the living water. We connect the living water with the Spirit, and rightly so, because scripture does, but it would link especially with the Spirit as bringing the love of God into our souls and the blessing of God in an ever fresh way. The living bread connects with the Lord Himself, and He is it. While the living water brings into our souls what God is as revealed, the living bread refers to the Lord Jesus as Man. He is the One in whom God has been expressed, but then He is the One who perfectly carried out God's will, and He becomes the food of our souls thus.
I think there are three aspects of food brought before us in @John 6. It is a comprehensive chapter. The first is what would correspond with the manna of old. He says, "I came down from heaven not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me". The manna came down from heaven, and Jesus came down from heaven to tread a path that was different
{21}
from that which any man had ever trod. That is, He came not to do His own will, but the will of Him who sent Him. Then secondly you get the thought of eating His flesh and drinking His blood, which refers to our feeding upon Christ in death; and thirdly, "if then ye shall see the Son of man ascending up where he was before". This is a question of feeding upon Him as the Man of God's counsels, as having ascended to fill out the place that was given Him in those counsels. In each aspect it is food for our souls.
D.V.W. So that the gospels are very important, because they depict for us the pathway of Jesus, and this is food for our souls as the manna was; is that what is in your mind?
G.R.C. Yes, indeed. And then it is the bringing of impressions of Christ, as depicted in scripture, into our souls livingly day by day. The manna fell on the dew and then had to be gathered. From God's side, it falls on the dew, but from our side it has to be gathered. So the Lord says, "Work not for the food which perishes, but for the food which abides unto life eternal, which the Son of man shall give to you". It is a gift from the divine side, but we labour much for other things which perish. The thing is to use energy in securing and appropriating the living bread which abides to life eternal, because the manna builds up a constitution which goes through.
D.V.W. Does this involve the Spirit working in the believer? You spoke of the manna being on the dew. Would the dew speak of the Spirit, and is the Spirit essential to give us this living food as we feed on Christ?
{22}
G.R.C. Yes, I thought so. The Spirit in us would prepare the way for the manna.
R.S.C. Would the introduction of the manna in this chapter and how it was to be gathered be helpful as to the way in which we appropriate Christ as we feed upon Him. It was to be gathered every day, and nothing was to be left over from one day's portion. You spoke of energy just now; there is a need for a continuous fresh gathering of impressions of Christ.
G.R.C. Yes. Each had to gather for his house, and they gathered according to the eating, but then all were supposed to have in a way the same kind of appetite. It says, "Gather of it every man according to what he can eat, an omer a poll". (@Exodus 16: 16). The normal eating would be an omer, the tenth part of an ephah.
S.W.H.R. The Lord emphasises a great deal His having come down out of heaven, and as to the manna emphasis was also made in the same way. Would you say something about that? It speaks about the corn of heaven and the food of the mighty.
G.R.C. The food of the mighty seems to me to be a very beautiful description of the manna, because those who have been mighty in spiritual acts and power have fed upon that. It was the food of Paul and Peter and the other apostles. They were mighty men, and it was the food of J.N.D., we might say. In fact the manna no doubt has been the food of all those who would be called mighty in the path of faith. Is that so?
S.W.H.R. Yes, I would think so. You reminded me immediately of what was said of Gideon, "Go in this thy might". His strength lay in the admittance
{23}
of his own smallness. I wondered if that was the idea, it was a small thing. As far as what we are here, the manna would reduce us. I am very impressed with this repetition of "out of heaven;" are these three foods you have referred to progressive?
G.R.C. Yes, except that of course we have to begin with the second (eating His flesh and drinking His blood) do we not? The manna was not available to anybody who had not already eaten the passover. So that the first thing was that they had to appropriate Christ in death, and feed on the lamb roast with fire. The light of Christ here would not be food for our souls if we have not first appropriated His death.
S.W.H.R. What impressed me this morning at the supper was that I felt how little one knew and appreciated Christ in death. I had a feeling that perhaps it depended on one's measure of appreciating Him in glory -- "I live on account of the Father", He says afterwards, and that is something further?
G.R.C. I think it may be important to enquire more into what you are saying, because after all, in the history of the children of Israel, they increased in the appreciation of the death of Christ typically as they went on. So even though we say the second food comes first, and it does initially, still, as we are treading the wilderness path, appropriating the manna, we enter into the death of Christ more and more fully as we go along. The passover gave them strength to pass through the Red Sea, but they needed the manna to continue to learn what the death of Christ meant in the wilderness. And finally it would enter into their ability to cross the Jordan, although they had other food; and in the finality of things after they had crossed the Jordan they kept the passover
{24}
and ate the manna and the old corn of the land all on the same day. They merge then and, of course, the passover being repeated annually meant a continual increase in the appreciation of it. In Egypt they would be mainly concerned with an escape from judgment, but in going over the passover again in the wilderness it would assume more a contemplative character relative to the experiences they passed through. Whereas the passover in the land would have still more depth of meaning, after further experiences like the brazen serpent and the Jordan. The passover would continually take on a deeper meaning, I believe, so that each year normally -- I am speaking spiritually now -- the appropriation of the lamb roast with fire would be a deeper experience.
R.W. Is this now what the Lord is substantially to us? "I am the bread of life;" Christ before us, the living bread. Joseph said, "Be not angry with yourselves, ... for God sent me before you to preserve life". The matter on hand is life. "Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and died". But this is something that is substantially sufficient to preserve the whole being in the joy of life. And it is remarkable that you do not get bread mentioned at all until @Genesis 3, do you?
G.R.C. That is very remarkable.
R.W. In the garden of Eden there was no bread. Bread came in after the question of sin came in, and they were to eat bread with the sweat of the face.
That is the first mention, I think, of bread in scripture.
But this is all in contrast to what man can do. It is available, substantially so, in Christ to sustain life according to God.
G.R.C. So that it really sustains life in the wilderness
{25}
like the manna; and then the old corn of the land would sustain life in the land. I take it that is implied in "If then ye shall see the Son of man ascending up where he was before", and then you get the tree of life, sustaining life in the paradise of God in the place of God's pleasure and delight.
R.W. Does it not challenge us as to how much we enter into the joys of what is really life?
G.R.C. And the one index of the amount we have entered into them is *.satisfaction*. "He that comes to me shall never hunger and he that believes on me shall never thirst". The living water brings life into the soul, and the Lord says it springs up into eternal life. But there is a sort of road to eternal life, in which the Spirit leads us, and we need strength for the road; strength to be sustained in it and strength as we touch eternal life from time to time in measure  -- strength to be sustained in that. And for that we *need bread*. Water alone is not sufficient. We need Christ substantially as Man, as bread for our souls.
R.W. We ponder much on the death of Christ. I realise it is essential; but I do feel that we should feed more upon the Man where He is, so that glory might fill our souls continually. Do you think so?
G.R.C. Well, I think that is right; the three sides perhaps should go on in a commensurate kind of way. You mean we are apt to leave out the third.
R.W. Yes, and I wonder whether we dwell too much on the side of the death of Christ. It is most essential that we should begin there, but do you think that we should move over to His side of things and get the joy of life where Christ really is at the present time?
G.R.C. Well, it seems to me that the more we do
{26}
that, the more we shall appreciate His death. We stay at the death of Christ from the standpoint of our need and the elementary truth of it as meeting the need of a sinner. But you see, as they went on feeding on the manna, so they appropriated the passover in the wilderness in, no doubt, a way that they did not understand at all in Egypt. Then finally they had the passover in the land. At all stages of their history in the land they kept the passover. So I would say that the further we go in the appreciation of the manna and of the old corn of the land, the more we shall appreciate the death of Christ, so that there is depth with us, increasing depth, as well as increasing apprehension of God's purpose. What do you think?
R.W. Yes, I suppose the old corn is the previous year's gleanings; the thing is there, is it not? It is something that is ripe and matured and would create life, and sustain life. I think what you say is very helpful because we are all feeding on something; and I believe it is most essential, especially as we read John's gospel, because John's gospel is progressive, is it not? It arrives at fulness.
G.R.C. And then, you see, the Lord says, "He that comes to me". There is that proviso. You cannot get the manna simply by reading scripture, although the Holy Spirit may sovereignty give us impressions at any time as we read. But it is *coming to the Person*. "He that comes to me". That is not a thing done once at conversion, it becomes the habit of soul, that whenever you are hungry, you go to Jesus. Like a child, whenever it is hungry it goes to its mother and asks for more. We need three meals a day physically, so we probably need that
{27}
spiritually -- at least that. The Lord says, "He that comes to me shall never hunger". (@John 6: 35). You will never get hungry if you keep on going to Jesus. Similarly, He says about rest in @Matthew 11:28 "Come to me ... and I will give you rest". The thing is to come more than once a day. As burdens crowd in, we are apt to try to carry them ourselves and then when we get hungry spiritually, we are apt to cast about to find food ourselves and perhaps we think 'I'd better read a chapter'. But we do not always get the food we are after when we do read the chapter. The Lord says, "He that comes to me;" it is a question of a living transaction with Christ glorified. The *only way* we can come to Jesus now is to Jesus glorified. The thing is to get to Him where He is and He will provide what we need. He will give us impressions of Himself come down from heaven. But we begin *where He is*. I think that is what you had in mind?
R.W. Yes, indeed.
D.V.W. I was thinking of the type. They were told to go to Joseph. Joseph is the one who is the sustainer of life, and the Lord is the One who really sustains life amongst His people.
G.R.C. It is a great thing to get that into the soul, I feel. How slow one is to learn that life is in the Person, not in reading about Him, valuable though that is; but life is in the Person, and it is a question of getting to Him. And then, it is what He hands out. It says, "Go to Joseph", and it is what Joseph hands out that becomes available to them as food. So what is the Lord going to give me if I come to Him? It will be something *in accord with scripture*  -- perhaps something from scripture. But it is a
{28}
question of what comes from Him, the living One. "I am the living bread".
S.W.H.R. I think that is very helpful, what you have said about coming to Christ in glory. It must be so, because that is where He is. The manna is that Person come down here. In coming down here, He did not alter His personality, and He has not altered it on going back. We occasionally say things about believers in a general way, that they just want Christ down here. The question is, do we want Christ at all, because if it is the manna or if it is the glorified Man, it is the same Person. Do you not think that the manna, "the bread out of heaven", is so essential to us if we are to get on together? I have often thought that it connects with @Philippians 2, "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus". He came down and that mind is what we need; and we get that from Him as we feed on the One who came down out of heaven to do His Father's will.
G.R.C. So the manna fell around the camp, because it is in camp relations and the frictions that are liable to come into camp relations and camp movements that you need the manna. It involves our relations with one another. We need the Spirit of Christ with one another under all circumstances. Some of us may remember camp life in the army when we were so close to each other. It tests our brotherly relations in a special way when we eat and sleep together in very small surroundings. Friction can easily come in. And now we are in small surroundings in local meetings, but if we were in the gain of the manna, if the manna were our daily food, then we would never irritate one another.
{29}
Small and round and sweet, no hard corners.
S.W.H.R. Following up what has been said about that I wondered whether if we really fed on the One that came down out of heaven, it would give us a desire to know Him in His own sphere. We could understand better what a wonderful thing it is for Him to be in a sphere not of any straightening, no restriction in His Father's presence. Living on account of the Father. Would you say that?
G.R.C. Yes, He lived on account of the Father even down here. All that He did sprang from that.
S.W.H.R. Is this connected with the third phase -- seeing the Son of man ascending up where He was before?
G.R.C. "I live on account of the Father". I would think it covers all the phases, that whatever phase He was in, it was on account of the Father, even in going into death it was "on this account has my Father loved me". It was His Father's, will. That was the spring. J.B.S. said, 'if I want to be like Jesus where He was, I must know Him where He is'. It is as I know Jesus where He is, I have power to be like Him where He was. So that, "He that comes to me" -- it seems to me that we have to come to Him where He is, because that is the only place we can come to Him now. And if we are in touch with Him where He is, we long to be like Him where He was. His path becomes our measure, and He will see to it that we get the impressions of the manna that are needed. The manna in that way still comes down from heaven. It comes from the One who is there, who gives us impressions of what He was here. Of course the gospels set them out, but we need living impressions day by day from Him.
{30}
R.W. And when He was here, He was also there. He refers to Himself as the Son of man who is in heaven.
G.R.C. Yes, so you cannot separate things too much. What He was here took colour in His pathway, from the fact that He was always there. You mean?
R.W. Just so. He never ceased, did He, to display all that is heavenly. He came out of heaven, but that is where He lived really. I do feel the need of appropriating rightly eating His flesh and drinking His blood. I do feel that formation is in mind, and the more that we appropriate the flesh of Christ and drink His blood, the more we shall be divinely formed in what is wholly of God. Life, that life, was demonstrated here on the earth by Jesus Himself, and will reflect in persons who drink His blood. It is appropriating His death in order that out of it life should appear. Is that so?
G.R.C. Yes, He laid down His life for us and we ought for the brethren to lay down our lives, so that a similar spirit appears in us.
R.S.C. Paul's epistles link us with Him, we might say, in all phases. We have died with Him, we are buried with Him in baptism, we are risen with Him, our life is hid with Christ in God, and then we have been raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus. We may speak of these things in a kind of theoretical way, but how do you think we are really maintained in the full gain of what we have, as having part with Christ in all these different settings?
G.R.C. That is what I want help on. This chapter is intended surely to answer that question. It is by
{31}
feeding on Him that we are enabled to be with Him in all these circumstances. I think.
R.W. Is not verse 36 interesting, "He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him". So that in these bodies there should be a portrayal of all that Jesus is, should there not?
G.R.C. Quite so, and all begins in appropriating Him in death. He gave His flesh for the life of the world, so that eating His flesh and drinking His blood, brings before the soul the great reality of Jesus going into death and what He expressed in His death, the expression of His own love and perfection in death and the expression of the love of God. "Hereby we have known love because he has laid down his life for us". It evidently provides the way for us to dwell in Him and for Him to dwell in us.
R.W. Does it in any way establish a relationship with the Father? It is an interesting section, because it says, "As the living Father has sent me and I live on account of the Father, he also who eats me shall live also on account of me", and so on. It seems to establish a relationship with the Father which is challenged in @John 8.
G.R.C. In actual fact the truth of the Father underlies this chapter, because it says, "Everyone that has heard from the Father himself and has learned of him comes to me;" and He calls Himself the bread of God. That is, He is God's food; He is the Man of the Father's pleasure and delight.
B.D. Did He not say, "No one comes unto me except the Father draw him"?
G.R.C. That is right, so the Father would teach us to value His own food as it were. The Father's own food becomes our food. "This is my beloved
{32}
Son in whom I have found my delight". We find our delight in Him, and we eat the food of the mighty. Well, what food! We can say reverently. He is God's food in that connection, and our food. Then in death, what there was for God in His death! There is what there is for us in it, and our need. But what there was for God in His death and what went up from the altar! From God's point of view the death of Christ provided what we might call the altar food. The manna did not involve death but the altar food went up as a sweet odour on the altar.
R.W. It is interesting because every creature of God has to be sustained by food. If everything can be divinely regulated by such food to control such a sphere, what about Jesus, as the bread of God? It ought to have a controlling and regulating and a satisfying effect on each one of us.
G.R.C. What satisfies God, should satisfy us.
H.H. Is the prophet Isaiah's challenge interesting in that respect? He asks, "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and labour for that which satisfieth not?" (@Isaiah 55: 2).
G.R.C. Yes, quite so. The Lord says, "Work not for the food which perishes but for the food which abides unto life eternal". The great point here is satisfaction, just as we had yesterday, the living water is in view of satisfaction. Living water brings satisfaction in its own way, bringing to us the light and love of God; but then we need satisfaction, in the sense of being sustained in the joy of things.
H.H. So that it could be said of certain disciples, "They recognised them that they were with Jesus". Should that mark us too?
G.R.C. It should. Physically, we need both the
{33}
drink and the food. We could not be satisfied with one without the other. The living water prepares the way for us to appreciate and to assimilate food, something solid, which builds us up.
D.V.W. Is it the Spirit that is in the believer that makes him appreciate Jesus? Naturally we do not appreciate Him, do we?
G.R.C. That is the point at the end of the chapter. The Lord says, "It is the Spirit that quickens". It is He that brings every living impression of Christ with quickening power into the soul. "The words which I speak to you", He says, "they are spirit, and they are life", and I think that is how these living impressions, which become food to our souls, come to us; they are spirit and life, and they come in the power of the Spirit. That is like the manna on the dew again.
E.E. Would it be right to draw a parallel in the case of the woman in @John 4? The question of the thirst is there first; but, towards the end of the chapter, she is recorded as saying, "Come, see a man". Do you think she had found the Person by then, and was feeding on the Person?
G.R.C. That is good, her soul was feeding on that Man.
E.E. According to the 1st verse you read, it says, "He that believes on me shall never thirst". There may be a distance in believing, but in coming to the Lord, there is no distance, is there?
G.R.C. Very good. Think how Paul said, "The Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me". That is appropriating His death. But then, how he fed upon Him in every way. "For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain".
{34}
R.J.M. You spoke earlier of constitution. Do all these things we have been speaking of help to build a spiritual constitution?
G.R.C. They do.
R.J.M. So it is not only that you do not labour for the bread that perishes, but there may be a time to refuse it. I was thinking of how Daniel had to refuse the king's dainties, for he was one who had a real spiritual constitution.
G.R.C. Well, I hope this reading will help me, if it does not anybody else, to limit myself to this kind of food, not to go on with the food that perishes, but to appropriate Christ in every way in which He is presented as food. We need an 'all round' diet, you see. We were speaking of the camp just now. In its normal spiritual setting the manna fell around the camp to help us in camp relations with one another and with God, to sustain us in those testing relations. But if you look at the other view of the camp, we have to go forth to Him without the camp; yet the manna still fell around the camp in that sense. God supplies manna to all Christians, whatever their associations, or systems -- manna in His faithfulness. "If we are unfaithful, he abides faithful" (@2 Timothy 2: 13). And so the mama never ceased from the camp, and the water from the rock did not cease. Otherwise the camp as a whole would have perished, when the tent of meeting was pitched outside. Some brethren have been so surprised to find manna in the camp, they think the camp must be right, and they have gone back into the camp. They find certain believers in the camp, in ministerial positions, who can supply manna, and they think this is wonderful. They never thought there was anything in the camp, but it does
{35}
not surprise me at all. I knew it was there all the time, because God is faithful and He does not withdraw the manna. That is why believers in the systems around are sustained in their measure in the path of *individual* devotedness. They still have manna which should strengthen us in the path of *personal* devotedness to Christ, but *they have no more*. It you look around Christendom for the food of the altar you will not find it there. There was an abundance of food of various kinds at the altar. And if you want to find the old corn of the land, you do not find it there. There is nothing in the ministry of those who remain in sectarian positions which touch those things at all, as far as I have experienced it. Not at all. You come to the manna and it stops short; I am not belittling the manna. It was the food of the mighty. Some of those men in Christendom, who are real believers, are mighty men in *their way*. And they have the manna. But as going forth to the Lord without the camp, every kind of food becomes available. *Altar food*, not only the passover, but the death of Christ in all its varied aspects as seen in the altar food, as well as His life here in the meat offering, and then the old corn of the land, and then even the tree of life, which is in the paradise of God.
S.W.H.R. I was wondering at the way the Lord speaks here. He has a mixed audience, and when He comes to the matter of what is flesh and blood, He makes this very emphatic. He says, "Unless ye shall have eaten the flesh of the Son of man and drunk his blood, ye have no life in yourselves". I wondered if that might be prophetic of the 2 Timothy state of affairs, where things are taken up professionally as
{36}
to eating His mesh, the One come down out of heaven, well known as such, without doing the other.
G.R.C. Yes. You see if the flesh and blood of the Son of man are not appropriated, people try to imitate Him in the flesh, and they never get the manna; they cannot appreciate the One who came down from heaven to do the will of God. They just think of Him, the Man down here, a wonderful Model; but the spring of the matter is missing in their souls. What made the Lord as Man what He was in one sense, was that He lived on account of the Father. That was the spring of His life. It is not until we come to feel our need of His death to meet what we are as sinners and appropriate the passover, that we have any life in ourselves to appropriate the manna in its true meaning, which is not just the effort of the flesh to imitate Christ. So that is the necessity to begin with. We cannot even start unless we have eaten the flesh of the Son of man and drunk His blood.
R.W. Does it suggest in any way that the persons who are feeding on Christ in that way are going through, "Hun will I raise up in the last day". It is essential for us to be feeding aright if things are to go through. We are going through; but what is going through? It is that order of man, is it not?
G.R.C. So John says in his epistle, "He that does the will of God abides for eternity". This kind of food keeps us on the path of the will of God.
R.W. So the Lord raises a challenge, "Does this offend you?" I think we need to be searched over matters like this as to whether we are really taking on the truth, as it is in the mind of God for us. Are we being offended by it?
{37}
G.R.C. Well, that is what bears on what was in my mind as to the walk. You see, they walked no more with Him, and He says to the twelve, "Will ye also go away?" Simon Peter answers. It was a question of walking with Him. In Revelation, where the tree of life is mentioned there are also the river and the street; I wonder whether the test for the moment is as to whether we are prepared to walk with Jesus in the path that He marked out so clearly and that others have followed, like Paul -- to walk in the light of the street of the city!
E.E. What did you have in your mind about the street of the city particularly?
G.R.C. Well, it says, it was of pure gold, as transparent glass. I thought it was really what we would speak of as the path of fellowship or communion, just as it was here. In @John 6 the circle of fellowship becomes very narrow. There were many not prepared to walk with Him. One feels that what we need is this bread from heaven, which builds up a constitution so that we are prepared to walk in the path of God's will. It is the test of the moment. "Will ye also go away?"
R.W. If we are feeding rightly it would call for transparency.
G.R.C. Yes, it would. That is what the street was, a street of gold as transparent glass.
R.W. I do feel that we lack in the knowledge of the *truth of the body* and the *truth of the house of God*. I feel that if we could become educated, if we could feed rightly, all that is due to the body would be carried through by us, and every feature proper to the house of God would be ever with us at all times.
{38}
G.R.C. That is what the walk is. Our walk should be in accord with the truth of the one body and the truth of the house of God. That is the test of the moment. The point is, "will ye also go away". We are thankful when we find that some, whom we thought might go away, are not going away. But it seems to me that those scriptures on food, both here and in Revelation, indicate that one element in the food is to give us power to walk in the right way, power here to walk with Jesus, and power to walk the golden street. There is the tree of life, "In the midst of its street, and of the river, on this side and on that side, the tree of life producing twelve fruits, in each month yielding its fruit; and the leaves of the tree for healing of the nations". We are still in the place where the diseases of the nations can affect us, and so there is not only food, but there is healing available, in order that our feet might be kept in the street. The street of the city is the place where God walks with men. In the beginning God came into the garden; He walked in the garden in the cool of the day.
Here you have paradise secured at the end of Revelation beyond the reach of breakdown. 'Where deceiver ne'er can enter'. It is a paradise which cannot be intruded upon, and there you have the tree of life and the river -- the water of life clear as crystal. And the throne of God and of the Lamb, from which it comes, is sure and stable. Nothing can intrude into that paradise. There is a street there where God will walk with men, in unclouded communion for ever. But the point is to bring that into the present by the Spirit's help.
B.D. So we really ought to live in the purpose of
{39}
God more? We sometimes live in His mercies.
G.R.C. Yes; I am sure we do.
R.W. I think we do well to digest @Ephesians 1 and see what the Spirit of God has recorded in the seven '*accordings*' that are recorded in that chapter. I think there is fulness in it. We should see who the great Operator is in the way of purpose, the Father, and live in the purposes of God.
G.R.C. The tree of life would sustain us in that.
B.D. Is not that where many in Christendom fall short? They have little idea as to purpose.
G.R.C. Quite so; if we have an impression and know more as to what it is to live in the purpose of God, sustained by the tree of life, our feet will be steady in the responsible path down here. We shall value the manna and be preserved in the responsible path down her. Walking with Jesus and in spirit as we come together, we shall touch the golden street.
S.W.H.R. It says, "in whom we have redemption through his blood". But here we have the clarity and transparency which is connected with the measure in which I have eaten the flesh and drunk the blood of the Son of man. Is this connected at all with the fellowship of His blood? I was only thinking of the sad amount of self-assertion going on 'what I think', and that sort of thing. But the man of flesh and blood is gone forever. "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God", says Paul. This truth of eating and drinking is a matter of getting it into our soul. I was interested in the reference to @Ephesians 1, that Colossians does not mention the blood, but in Ephesians it does.
G.R.C. Does not that confirm that the appreciation of Christ's death grows? The greatest presentation
{40}
of the blood to our affection is the blood of the Beloved. "He has taken us into favour in the Beloved; in whom we have redemption through his blood" (@Ephesians 1: 6). It is what @Acts 20 speaks of as, "the blood of his own". It is the most precious view of the blood. So the nearer we get to God, the more precious the view we have of the blood.
S.W.H.R. Yes, and the tremendous price that has been paid. Why should I hang on to what is according to my law, that is what it comes to, my present life here. Flesh and blood is finished really, is it not?
G.R.C. I think what you say is important. Eating the flesh of the Son of Man and drinking His blood is the end of flesh and blood conditions, and all that men boast in relative to themselves. I believe eating would mean that I accept that, and that I accept the end of the man of flesh and blood. Paul says he knew no one after the flesh. He had finished with that.
R.W. Does this passage in @Revelation 22 suggest that the millennium is in view? There is only one tree there that God has in mind, and that is the tree of life.
G.R.C. I would like to know more about the tree of life. It seems the very acme of food.
R.W. In the midst of the river on this side and that side, but it is only one tree.
G.R.C. What abundance of fruit, to sustain you in that path walking on that street! There is water too, living water, and living food, to keep your feet in the street.
R.W. It is interesting that the whole universe in the world to come will be sustained by one Man and that can be our portion now?
{41}
S.W.H.R. It is not only sustained by His power but what He is in Himself. The whole universe will be characterised by that. That is the beauty of it.
G.R.C. So that we are completely satisfied in one Man.
