{#Notes of readings in connection with the new [1932] hymnbook}
{1}
NOTES OF READINGS IN CONNECTION WITH THE NEW [1932] HYMNBOOK
Jottings of a reading at Paignton with reference to the revision of the hymnbook, at which C.A.C. was present, November 13, 1931
Scriptures read - @Colossians 3:16,17; @Ephesians 5:18 - 21
The service of song is primarily the service of Divine Persons, therefore the affections should be engaged in it. The singing is to the Lord in Ephesians and to God in Colossians, so it should be an exercise with us as to how far the word of the Christ dwells in us and we are filled with the Spirit, because the singing, should be in keeping with these conditions. Then "Speaking to yourselves" shows that what we sing has also the character of edification of the saints. This is subordinate to the service of Divine Persons but nevertheless essential. Singing is stimulating to our affections. A whole meeting may be elevated by the singing of a hymn. We are comforted and elevated, and the saints get something; it would not be like Divine Persons to retain all for themselves. Teaching and admonishing one another is based on "the word of Christ dwelling in you richly". The ministry forms the melody. We cannot sing beyond the depth and power of the ministry that comes to us, but our exercise is to be up to it. The effect of the word of the Christ dwelling in us richly would be that the mind of Christ would be known by the saints in intelligent affection. In Colossians prominence is given to the Head; everything should be attuned in the mind of the saints from the Head; in Ephesians prominence is given rather to the Spirit. It is suggested in @1 Corinthians 14 that the saints sing with intelligence, and this necessitates that we should carefully consider what we sing; that is one great gain of the revision of the hymnbook. A great point in considering any proposed alteration is to inquire whether any spiritual gain accrues by it; therefore the matter becomes educational for the saints. Singing may be either individual or collective; in Colossians and Ephesians it is collective.
The hymnbook should provide hymns of Assembly character suitable for all meetings of saints. In some hymns the thought of sin or sins has been deleted because when in Assembly, and in the enjoyment of its privileges, we do not speak to the Father of what is offensive to Him. As in sonship we do not talk about what has been totally and eternally removed from His presence. The son in the Father's house wearing the best robe would have been unhappy to have spoken of
{2}
the far country and the swine. It is a matter of spiritual intuition. The question of sin and judgment are most essential in their place, but assuredly not to be brought into the worship of Divine Persons. The basis of everything is that divine righteousness has judged with authority in the death of His Son everything contrary to God, but in the Father's presence we dwell on the positive. Sin and sins have been removed by Christ. But why? In order that they might be replaced by what is positively delightful to God. As we know, He took away the first - the whole legal system - that He might establish the second - the whole pleasure of God.
@Romans 15: 6 supposes a collective ascription of glory to God and is dependent on our being in unity and peace with one another "according to Christ Jesus". We cannot sing together if these conditions are not present. How can I sing if I am thinking of the way a brother has annoyed me? The instrument would not be tuned. We come in assembly in festive robes. Thank God, I am entitled according to His grace to think of each one according to Christ Jesus. He declares the Father's name to His brethren, a sanctified company; He declares the name of God; He declares God in the blessed name of revelation, of Father, and takes His place delightedly in the assembly to hymn God.
We sing because we are on the ground of what has been brought in for God's pleasure; everything offensive has been removed, we have not therefore to consider that. In connection with the supper we read in @1 Corinthians 11:24 "This is my body which is for you". In that body He has brought in everything for God's delight. It is strange that in such a connection we should give thanks for what He removed. Is not what He brought in infinitely greater than what He removed? He has brought in every detail for the perfect pleasure of God. This puts us on a positive ground of joy, we have Christ before us instead of self. There is no need even to think of what we were in Adam because we are in the presence of One who has brought in what is for the pleasure of God, and in the cup we have before us the blessed love of God in contrast with the whole world system which shuts Him out.
Such a hymn as 227 would not be out of place at the beginning of the meeting as we come together, for we come together as those who know the Lord and who are in the common confession of His blessed Name. Thus all start together. It is not very happy if the meeting starts on such a high level that it leaves half the saints behind. We must keep rank. But then, we do not want to stop at a low level.
{3}
It would be well if we could keep in mind the three thoughts: first, the mind of the Head (Colossians); second, the Holy Spirit filling the vessel (Ephesians); third, perfect accord amongst the brethren "according to Christ Jesus" (Romans). These are three dominant notes.
Giving out hymns suitably is a matter of spirituality, of being in touch with the mind of the Head and having thoughts and affections subordinate to the Spirit. It is not a matter of precedents, for each occasion is a new occasion, something more will have been acquired than we had last Lord's Day if we are moving on with the Spirit and the brethren. A hymn should give tone and fibre and character to our praises. We need spiritual sensibility as to what suits each occasion. What suited a previous occasion may be unsuitable at a following one.
The word of the Christ suggests the mind of the Head and then what a wonderful thing it would be to be "*filled*" with the Spirit - most marvellous expression! No room for a thought or feeling or impulse that is not the direct result of the Spirit of God.
None of us would do anything to belittle the thought of the blood. It is the great divine basis of all blessing. Everything rests on the blood. But Scripture speaks of the blood in certain specific relations, and we must pay heed to the particular setting in which Scripture puts it. In some hymns mention of it is introduced in a way that is not supported by Scripture. For example, Scripture does not appear ever to connect the thought of salvation with the blood, and while every statement in Scripture concerning the blood is part of the subject matter of faith it does not seem to be presented in Scripture quite as an object of faith. @Romans 3: 24 - 25 may appear to be an exception but the better rendering is "Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth a mercy-seat in the power of His blood through faith"; that is, Christ Jesus Himself is the Mercy Seat to be laid hold of by faith, we trust in Him. Scripture suggests that we trust the Person who did the work. @1 John 2: 2 does not say that He made propitiation (although that is true) but that "He *is* the propitiation for our sins". All the value of the work resides in the Person who did it and this changes the outlook of the believer. Certain facts may be accepted, and the work of Christ rested upon and the heart be left practically without an object, whereas the Person should get the supreme place in our affections. The value of what He did resides in Himself. What He did has infinite and everlasting value, but the value resides in Him.
A good reason exists for deleting the 4th verse of hymn 393. Does He bring a poor vile sinner into His House of Wine? The reference is to the "Song of Songs" (Chapter 11: 4), where He has brought His loved one into all
{4}
that delights His own heart, so that she can sit undistractedly in suitability as being graced in all the grace of the Beloved. How could we talk about being poor vile sinners in such surroundings? It is morally impossible.
Anything, which is not according to God's mind brings in a discordant note. Suppose the Prodigal robed and ringed and sandaled were to persist in talking about rags and husks, could you imagine anything more incongruous? As regards thanking God for what He has delivered us from, opportunity to do that occurs every day; under all circumstances we can thank the Divine Saviour for all that He has saved us from, but as assembled with the saints we are on another platform altogether. We have this glorious Person before us. He has come in in His unique glory as God's Anointed to effectuate and establish everything for God's pleasure and glory. The contemplation of Him changes the whole character of praise. We do not come together as poor vile sinners but as devoted lovers of the Lord Jesus. The Supper is a Feast for lovers, it repels everything incongruous. Referring to this great Festival for lovers of the Lord Jesus we read that "the Lord Jesus took bread". He rises before us in the supremacy of His love and glory; He absorbs our heart. His death indeed comes before us, but it is the supreme proof of His love. Thinking of sins after all relates to self. The Lord says "This do for the calling *me* to mind", not to remember this done for you. The communion service of the Church of England puts it "Christ died for thee" but that is not the point at all. "This do in remembrance of *me*"; He would absorb the thoughts of everyone who participates.
Scripture never speaks of drinking the wine, mention being always of the Cup. The Cup speaks of communion; there is one Cup, whereas wine might be in many cups. The word wine has been used in hymns purely for metrical purposes or easy rhyme, but it would be far better to maintain the scriptural thought of the Cup.
@2 Timothy 2: 11 - 13 appears to be an example of the way in which early Christians spoke to themselves in hymns, because in the original the passage is written metrically. We could do with more hymns like it.
{5}
Notes of meetings on the new hymnbook, Redland, Bristol
Afternoon Meeting, March 5, 1932
A.E.M. There has been for some time a desire that our hymnbook should be brought into line with the present truth, and that there should be additional hymns included to provide an outlet for the emotions of the saints at the present moment. In pursuance of that desire it was generally felt that Mr. Coates should undertake the work, but he did not feel physically equal to it, and in the end five or six brothers undertook the responsibility of the revision. Many brethren were brought together at times for consultation; much correspondence was received from all over the world; and over two thousand new hymns were submitted for examination; several thousand old ones were also examined, the work running into practically eighteen months of constant labour and finally some four weeks were spent by the brothers responsible in coming to final decisions. I only mention that because there has been much prayer and expression of sympathy from the saints and throughout the work of revision there was a feeling of support from the Lord in every way.
Coming to the actual work itself, brethren felt that it was incumbent on them to follow the lines laid down by Mr. Wigram, and more fully by Mr. Darby, so that the first thing was to examine the doctrine of the hymns.
F.H.B. That was necessary, I suppose, because a good many of our old hymns were written by men who had much piety and devotion but comparatively little light.
A.E.M. Some that had to be altered were written by brethren with us; so there was a real need for revision of doctrine. I believe it is right to say that many of the saints take their doctrine from hymns much more than from the Scriptures. Hymns are easy to remember, and they are often sung, and the very expressions seem to become a part of our make-up; so in that way the hymns mould our thoughts. That is clearly contemplated in Scripture when the idea of singing is linked up with *teaching*; that is to say, a hymn must not only be a vehicle for the expression of united praise, but in its teaching it must be according to the truth. So that hymn-writing is one of the most difficult and most precious services that can be rendered to the church.
In pursuance of this examination of doctrine practically every feature of the truth came under scrutiny. As a result many of the older hymns will be found
{6}
slightly altered, just a word here and there in some of them, and others more radically altered; but it was felt that those which required much alteration should be omitted.
I may also say as regards the omission of hymns that wherever it seemed evident that hymns were not in general use, this was taken as an indication that they should be omitted from the new book; but we found that in some districts certain hymns were well used, and in others quite unknown; but the counsel and help we had from all over the world helped to balance that feature, so that brethren will find generally that hymns not sung fairly regularly have been left out, and others put in their places.
F.H.B. I suppose it was necessary to leave out some hymns to make room for newer hymns more clearly expressing the truth of the present time.
A.E.M. Of course we might have made the book larger, but actually it is smaller. But hymns not used are no good to the book at all.
Another feature which we may go into more fully in the evening meeting, if the brethren think well, is the question of making hymns serviceable for meetings; that is to say, a hymnbook is not merely a compilation of good hymns without regard to serving us for certain meetings. The right of any hymn to be in the hymnbook is that it provides definite service for the saints on some occasion when we are together. So following those lines, there are many hymns which are suitable for individual singing, and many that are quite suitable for household singing, which have been left out; but in the tune-book, an appendix has been added, by the brother responsible, to provide hymns suitable for children and also for general household use. It is hoped that that book will fill this need; but as the hymnbook stands, it is primarily intended for use in the meetings.
HYMN 2
The first altered hymn we find is No. 2.
F.H.B. That hymn gives a good idea of one of the reasons for altering a hymn where it is not exactly a question of bad doctrine, but a mixture of thoughts which are not quite consistent.
A.E.M. That is so. The first verse in the old No. 2 begins with an address to the Father and refers to divine purpose, the affections of the Father before the earths foundation, and the constraining love that drew
{7}
us to Jesus, and then concludes with the thought of being kept -- salvation. That verse confuses what is proper to divine purpose with what is necessary because of the conditions in which we are found in the world. Both parts of the verse are true, but I think the Lord has shown us in recent years that when we come together for certain occasions we are not at liberty to roam through all the thoughts of Scripture; He has shown us that a certain meeting is governed by a certain light. Of necessity Scripture breaks up things into various aspects because of our smallness; hence we learn the governing light of any particular moment, and we cannot be as to our consciousness both in "the land" and in "the wilderness" at one moment. The two thoughts go on concurrently, but we cannot be conscious of them both at one time. When we are in the conscious enjoyment of what belongs to purpose, we are not in "the wilderness"; and when conscious of the need for salvation we are not in our consciousness in the sphere of divine purpose. So this is an example of a hymn which is not altered because it is wrong, but because, owing to a mixture of thoughts, it is unserviceable to the brethren. You will note how the first verse has been altered, preserving the thought of worship and sons; and the second verse (which has been gathered from another source) continues the theme of worship. No. 2 will now make a serviceable hymn for the latter part of the morning meeting.
F.H.B. One has often been inclined to give it out from the first clause of the hymn, and yet held back on account of the mixture of ideas.
A.E.M. That reminds me that there is another feature about a hymn which I should have mentioned at the beginning; that is that many of our old hymns are deceptive in that the first line is not a true indication of where the hymn is going to lead. Many unsuitable hymns are given out because they have a good opening which seems to promise a high note, and, generally speaking, many brethren only have the first line in their minds, and we wander through all sorts of paths not at all on the same line. Now the Psalms are all marked by this feature that the opening expression intelligently conveys to us the setting of the psalm. It is a scriptural principle that the first line should be a true indication of what is to follow.
HYMN 3
This is part of the old No. 212 which is another example of a mixture. Verses 3 and 4 of the old hymn are within the sphere of worship and they are a very nice vehicle of praise, whereas verses 1 and 2 are in the sphere of pilgrimage, which again is the wilderness. The first line of the old verse 1 has a doctrinal error.
{8}
"Called from above, and heavenly men by birth" is not doctrinally correct, and in result the first two verses were altered and set together with verse 7. to form a separate hymn (212 in the new book) in a wilderness setting, suitable for a prayer meeting, a reading or an address. Verses 2 and 3 form the new Hymn 3.
F.H.B. Why is the expression "heavenly men by birth" not scriptural?
A.E.M. We become heavenly men as we put on the features of Christ, the "Man out of heaven". Our birth is connected with a divine operation, a movement of God, whereas "heavenly" is rather the character we are to bear. "Jerusalem ... above, which is our mother" brings in more the idea of character: the mother gives character to the children. We have the thought of "As the heavenly One, such also the heavenly ones" (@1 Corinthians 15:48, Darby Translation) The expression has been looked into carefully, together with all the Scriptures that bear upon it, and the conclusion was that it could not stand.
F.H.B. We are heavenly by our calling.
A.E.M. I believe the saints at the present time have a much greater consciousness of the necessity of right expressions than formerly. At one time we did not mind so much about words as long as they were emotionally expressed, but the Lord has helped His people, and the saints in general have become aware of the necessity for right words and right expressions, and we are learning that many features of the truth were obscured by wrong expressions.
F.H.B. I believe the division of the old No. 212 will make it much more useful.
A.E.M. Yes, it makes the new No. 3 a good hymn.
HYMNS 25 AND 26
There are several examples of the same thing: if you turn to hymns Nos. 25 and 26, you will note that these hymns have been formed by dividing the old No. 25 (written by J.N.D.) with the addition of three verses (by the same author) which are found at the beginning of the new No. 26. No. 25 in the new book is a wilderness hymn which brings in the thought of *children* in relationship to the Father, but not the thought of *sons*. That hymn speaks of us as "absent" and "resting in hope, treading the desert path" and concludes with a prayer that we might be kept. It is now a beautiful wilderness hymn, but those verses linked up with the verses of the next hymn (as in the old No. 25) made it unsuitable for a morning meeting unless we omitted certain verses, to
{9}
which procedure we became habituated. The revisers have tried wherever possible in the main to make a hymn suitable as it stands. So No. 26 speaks of our place as sons like Christ, and brings in divine purpose, and makes a very choice hymn.
HYMN 30
We find here an example of grouped verses which go to make up a very beautiful hymn; each verse is by a different author. Verse 2 is by Charles Wesley, and is in the old hymnbook (No. 364 verse 3); verse 1 is culled from the hymns written by Sir E. Denny; verses 3 and 4 are by two living authors with us.
HYMN 31
This is part of the old No. 365 by Mrs. Trench. Two verses of that hymn were really gospel verses and they have been carried over into the gospel section of the book which begins at No. 301, whereas the two verses gathered together in the new No. 31, are worship verses, and would serve excellently in singing to God the Father.
HYMN 37 (FORMERLY HYMN 357)
This is a hymn which provoked much discussion.
F.H.B. Rightly so.
A.E.M. But the brethren thought that with the addition of the new verse at the end the hymn would be made serviceable. The objection to the hymn was that it presented the aspect of "asleep through Jesus" as a kind of unconsciousness. Verse 4 brings in the thought that "in the consciousness of love, The spirit lives with Christ above", and with the introduction of this thought there should now be no difficulty about giving out this hymn.
HYMN 42 (FORMERLY HYMN 36)
A slight alteration has been made in the first line. It was felt that the old line rather suggested that we had just come together. Any hymn which defines a point of time is only serviceable for that particular time, and we tried to alter hymns so that we should not have to give them out according to the clock. Now with this alteration it might be used at any time during the first part of the morning meeting. The thought of "assembling" is not a very good thought to convey in a hymn, so the word "recalling" is substituted. We come
{10}
together to recall the Lord at the morning meeting.
J.H.B. That is a more scriptural way of expressing what we are doing than, "Saviour, unto Thee assembling", which does not exactly describe the first part of the morning meeting. That is a point which I believe is not very clear with some of us.
A.E.M. The purpose of our coming together is to break bread. I do not think in the light of the present moment the old explanation of the morning meeting will stand, namely, that we come together to meet the Lord, unless it is that we have that in view. Our purpose is to break bread; if the Lord comes in we meet Him, but that is His movement, not ours. It is not that, we having come together, automatically He comes in. He comes in as Head, and headship suggests a movement on His part. When we come together He is not here, He is absent from the scene. In His absence we come together to recall Him.
J.H.B. So that this hymn as modified is brought into line with that thought.
A.E.M. It is brought very much into line. That reminds me of that other hymn, Hymn 233, which we might look at while we are on this point.
HYMN 233 (NUMBER UNCHANGED)
This was one of the most difficult hymns to correct, the reason being that as it was written it confused the idea of "closed doors" as in @John 20 and the breaking of bread in the Corinthian aspect. "In Thy presence break the bread". The two thoughts are interwoven in one, and bring about a confusion of thoughts, so that the hymn has been altered to keep it in one setting, that is: we are recalling the Lord in the emblems. It is a hymn that would be used before we partake of the Supper.
Rem. It has been the custom to connect our coming together to break bread with @Matthew 18:20: "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". (Darby Translation)
A.E.M. Yes, I think we have had to learn that we cannot so definitely link that verse up with the morning meeting. The setting in which we come to the Supper is that the Lord is absent, He is not present; that there are foes around us for the world around is that which crucified Christ. The hymn is now in that setting; it preserves the difference between the Lord being absent and our doing something, and the Lord coming in as Head and doing everything. The second part of the morning meeting is more governed by what the Lord does as Head (that is, if
{11}
He does come in) whereas *we* break bread; it is our action.
Rem. Is the expression "wine" unscriptural?
A.E.M. Scripture never speaks of drinking the *wine*, it is always the *Cup* that we are said to drink. The expression "drink the wine" has been introduced into hymns largely because of the matter of rhyming; there are far more words which rhyme with "wine" than with "cup". The expression "drink the wine" has now been eliminated from the book.
J.H.B. The thought of meeting around the Lord appeared also in the old No. 251 verse 5:
<blockquote>"We praise, we worship, we adore, As round Thyself we meet".</blockquote>
That verse has been omitted in the new book, has it not, and the rest of the hymn is much the same?
A.E.M. Yes. No. 233 is now a very choice hymn.
Mr. Champney helped very substantially in the reconstruction of that hymn.
Ques. Does not the last verse suggest that the Lord is present? "Sweet it is to sit before Thee"?
A.E.M. But we may sit *before* the Lord while conscious He is in heaven; whereas the expression "around Him" suggests that He is in the midst. We are sitting before the Lord now.
J.H. What about the word "recall" in verse 3? Does not that mean the same as the expression used by others "calling Him into conscious presence"?
A.E.M. It is our action to remember or recall Him, or call Him to mind. Calling Him to mind does not bring Him into presence; it brings Him into our minds.
J.H. He is very real to us in that moment.
A.E.M. I am not weakening the preciousness or the reality of it in any way, but I desire just to distinguish between the Lord being present and being absent.
Rem. We want our minds properly balanced in connection with these things do we not?
A.E.M. It is most essential. I think what would help us is to lay hold of the distinction between *lordship* and *headship*. As *Lord* He never leaves us nor forsakes us, but that introduces the idea of His support and care. Paul says, "The Lord stood by me". Whereas, the Lord's presence as Head is more a personal thing.
{12}
F.H.B. "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". (@Hebrews 2:12, Darby Translation) Is that headship?
A.E.M. I think so. As far as I understand it, *lordship* regards the Lord as on the throne, and He does not move from it; from the throne He controls and directs everything. But *headship* is more connected with the movements of His affections: "I am coming to you". (@John 14:18 Darby Translation)
F.H.B. Do you connect that verse with headship? Is it as Head that He comes?
A.E.M. Yes, if conditions are agreeable to Him. But it is not our coming together that brings Him; it is His own movement; He comes Himself if affections call for Him, if there is that longing desire for Him. As *Lord* He never leaves us; that is not dependent on our state; but then He can exercise power from the throne, the place of power and authority, without exactly leaving it.
L.D.M. Would you say that the recalling would quicken the affections of the saints and pave the way for the Lord to come in as Head?
A.E.M. It is in the breaking of bread that we express the sense that we miss Him. He is not in the scene in which we find ourselves, and affections that miss Him make room for Him to come in.
J.H. Is the second part of the meeting where the Lord takes His place as Head; where He sings and leads us to the Father?
A.E.M. That is so, normally.
C.H.H. One finds very often that the Lord is addressed as on the throne at the right hand of God after the breaking of bread.
A.E.M. We would address Him in a personal way. Paul got the light of the Supper from a glorified Lord, so that when Paul presents the Supper in @1 Corinthians 11 he presents it as a *command*; as it is introduced in Luke's gospel it is more a *request*; but it is hardly a request according to Paul's teaching, it is a command. "Let him recognise the thing that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment". (@1 Corinthians 14:39, Darby Translation)
F.H.B. I think that is useful.
A.E.M. What comes to us in the Supper is an appeal to affections, and if we are in a proper condition we should always respond to it, but if we are not in that condition
{13}
we are under commandment, under the authority of the Lord and would be pulled up.
HYMN 8
F.H.B. Will you explain why the last two lines of the first verse of hymn 8 are altered to "Thy love's wondrous story We read in Thy blood"?
A.E.M. Our "title to glory" is that the will of God puts us there. There will be saints on earth who will come under the protection and virtue of the blood who are not taken to heaven. The distribution of the families in the Father's house according to whether they are heavenly or earthly is entirely a matter of the will of God.
F.H.B. Yet, of course, apart from the blood we could not have that calling.
A.E.M. No, but that does not entitle us to say that the blood is our title to heaven; the blood is the witness of redemption, and of how God has come in; He has secured a people for Himself on the basis of the blood; but movement from earth to heaven is more a matter of our calling; that is, God's pleasure puts one family in heaven and another on earth.
F.H.B. Then you would say our title to heaven would be the sovereign call of God.
A.E.M. Yes.
HYMN 11 (FORMERLY HYMN 401)
This hymn and No. 181 were the two most difficult hymns to be revised. We might take them together because they deal with expressions relating to the Lord's place in Deity.
 "Thou art the everlasting Word" was the original first line of this hymn (No. 11); the difficulty there was the same as applies to the expression "Eternal Son". Both expressions imply that our Lord's place in Godhead in the past eternity was that of a Son, and that of the word, that these were His eternal Names, whereas "Son" is a term that is relative to "The Father" and we now understand that it is connected with revelation and not with the eternal relations of the Godhead. What our Lord's Name in the Godhead was no one knows; it says in @Revelation 19: 13 (Darby Translation) "His name is called The Word of God", and it also says, "having a name written which no one knows but himself" (verse 12) I think if we consider the meaning of "the Word" it will become at once apparent that it also is a term connected with revelation.
{14}
F.H.B. Does not the very thought of a *name* suppose revelation, so that when we speak of divine Persons as Father, Son and Holy Spirit, it is God in revelation?
A.E.M. I think so; and the Word is the expression of God, the expression of the mind of God, and that must involve creatures being in view, because if our minds were capable (which they are not) of going back to the past eternity we should find that there were only divine Persons there; everyone, outside of divine Persons, is a created being; angels are created beings. Therefore the expression "the Word" involves men, because the mind of God is not expressed to angels but to men. Therefore the expression "the Word" would have no force till men came to light, and so you could not apply that expression to our Lord as in Deity.
Ques. Would @John 1:1 emphasize that, "The Word was God"? The term "Son" is not used there? It was taught by Mr. Raven that the title "Word" was a name given to the Lord by the early disciples; it is not one of His divinely given mediatorial names. "Jesus Christ" was divinely given to Him, and "the Son" was divinely given; many of His titles are so, but "the Word" is not.
F.H.B. Do you gather that "the Word" was a title given to Him by His disciples from @Luke 1:2, which according to the Darby Translation contains the expression: "eye witnesses and attendants on *the Word*"?
A.E.M. It is a name of apprehension; the disciples apprehended Christ to be the expression of the mind of God, and so they spoke about Him as "the Word".
F.H.B. Really that title supposes incarnation; if He is to be the expression of God's mind there must be incarnation.
A.E.M. So the first line is altered to read: "Thou art the blest incarnate Word". I do not suggest that it is perfect, but it was the best suggestion we could get.
F.H.B. It is now correct, it seems to me.
A.E.M. The difficulty is that we do not want to use expressions in a way that would imply that they were true of the Lord in eternity, in a period that goes back before any man existed.
F.H.B. That would apply to the expression "eternal Son". "Son" is a name inherited is it not?
A.E.M. Yes.
{15}
F.H.B. All these names to which we have alluded can be applied to Him in incarnation, but as you said there is no name that could describe Him as in the Godhead.
A.E.M. Only the name of "God".
F.H.B. And that would apply equally to the three Persons, would it not?
A.E.M. Yes. Another alteration is found in verse 2 line 3; the reason for that is that the original line has been reinstated with a slight alteration. Dr. Conder's line read "Of the full Deity possessed" which would not do because it excludes other Divine Persona. So it has been changed to "Thou of full Deity possessed" which is nearly scriptural: "in Him all the fullness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell". (@Colossians 1:19, Darby Translation) There is also the reinstatement of the original line in verse 4, line 3.
"The Father only (glorious claim!) The Son can comprehend". Lines 3 and 4 in verse 4 in the old book are hardly correct: "The Father only that bleat name of Son can comprehend". *We* know the *name*, but it is the Person that only the father knows, not His name. Whereas the original lines are scriptural: "No one knows the Son but the Father". (@Matthew 11:27, Darby Translation)
This hymn should be much used now, the Lord having called attention to His Person in a marked way of late. Many brethren will know that this hymn was written by a Unitarian clergyman who was converted and wrote this hymn as the confession of his faith in the Son of God. It is a magnificent hymn.
F.H.B. That incident you have mentioned makes it all the more striking.
H.T. Why does it come twice in the book?
A.E.M. The repetition of "Worthy O Lamb of God art Thou" etc., at the and of each verse as in Hymn No. 150 is the original form of the hymn, and many brethren wished to have both forms retained.
HYMN 181 (NUMBER UNCHANGED)
The great difficulty in connection with No. 181 in the old book is that it makes the glory of the Son the greatest glory of Christ.
F.H.B. Another difficulty in my opinion was that in the last verse it made His glory the only light that shines in heaven.
{16}
A.E.M. Then in verse 2 you get the expression "veiled Thy glory", which is incorrect. We were saying last night that there are different glories referred to in connection with the Lord's Person: there is the glory that He left according to @John 17:5, and to which as glorified He returns; that is a glory connected with a *position* -- "Along with Thyself" (Darby Translation) is a position, and the Lord *left* that glory. We are not said to see or share that.
Then there is a glory that was seen and contemplated by the disciples; that is a personal glory but as in a mediatorial position, i.e., in the bosom of the Father.
F.H.B. Would the disciples see that?
A.E.M. They saw it in a way. I do not mean that it is specifically the subject of revelation, but wherever that Person is there is a radiation of glory for men that all who have eyes to see may take account of. It filled the disciples with wonder; they saw it on the holy mount.
F.H.B. Why were they afraid on the holy mount?
A.E.M. Think of the magnitude of the proposal that men, such frail creatures as we are, should be there in the presence of the effulgent glory! It is a profound thing; no wonder they were afraid! But the glory was not veiled; His face shone as the sun, and that glory fills John's gospel. John does not give you an account of the holy mount, but his whole gospel is full of that glory; he says, "(and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth". (@John 1:14, Darby Translation)
Then there is another glory -- that which the Lord has acquired in manhood; it is a given glory -- what He has won, the glory of His fame, sacrifice and conquest. Now, *that* we shall see and share, but there is no glory that is presented as deliberately "veiled".
In this connection Dr. Conder's hymn had a line: "Whose essence is concealed". In the discussion relating to this matter this point was touched on, and it is also referred to in a short pamphlet by Mr. James Taylor (which the saints will soon get) giving an explanation of various points of doctrine which called for alterations in some of the hymns. We have to distinguish between what is deliberately concealed and what is unknowable. The essence is unknowable. If you say a thing is "concealed" you imply that if it were uncovered it would be seen. That is the difficulty of the expression "veiled Thy glory".
{17}
F.H.B. What about @2 Corinthians 3 which speaks of a veil?
A.E.M. I do not think there is any veil for the church. He came here and all who had eyes to see saw a unique glory, the like of which had never been known; and they contemplated it. It is not exactly the subject of revelation, but it fills the soul with wonder. I think it is seen when the soldiers came to take the Lord. He said to them, "Whom seek ye?" They said "Jesus of Nazareth". He replied, "I AM", and they all went backward and fell to the ground. "I AM" is not a name of position, but a name that indicates what that glorious Person is inherently; it is the essence, the One who lives of Himself.
C.H.H. In @John 8:58, He says, "Before Abraham was, I AM":
A.E.M. In @Hebrews 1 you get a parallel idea where it says that the Lord is "the expression of His (God's) substance" or "essential being" (Darby Translation). The essential being of God is not revealed, no creature can know it, but there is the expression of it. Now wherever that expression is, there is a radiation of glory that will give one the sense that one is standing in the presence of a Person so great that one's soul is filled with wonder. It is not exactly a glory shining in the sphere of revelation, but there is something about that blessed Person wherever He is, and in whatever form He is, that fills men with wonder.
L.D.M. Do you connect that with Hebrews?
A.E.M. Yes.
F.H.B. And the whole gospel of John.
A.E.M. Yes, that is what fills out the gospel of John.
F.H.B. The gospel of John was written after they had received the Spirit; so it presents what they could say (in reviewing what had come before them) after receiving the Spirit.
W.B.H. In Mark's gospel we find constantly mention of wonder and astonishment.
A.E.M. Yes; there was the expression of His Person. While you have the most supreme intimacy, as suggested by John leaning on the bosom of Jesus, you have a sense of the glory of His Person, and that would always keep you filled with reverence, although in that most intimate place.
F.H.B. So that in that way He would always be "anointed with the oil of gladness above His companions"; He would always have the pre-eminent place.
{18}
A.E.M. So the last verse of this hymn instead of "This the greatness of Thy glory -- Ever blest -- Thou art the Son", now finishes with "Thee -- the great I AM -- we worship, Mighty God, Eternal one!"
F.H.B. And the third and fourth lines of that verse have been altered to: "But Thy glory, all transcending, Is the light that shines in Heav'n". I think the alteration in the last two lines of the hymn really brings out the thought of the writer in what he had before him.
A.E.M. I am sure they do. In the light of present ministry we shall have to elevate our eulogistic expressions as to the Lord; we shall have to bring in more what He is as God. At one time some actually raised questions as to whether we could worship the Lord or not; what a low level we were on! How little we appreciated the greatness of His Person!
F.H.B. It is remarkable that it should have been possible to think in that way, knowing that He is God in Person.
HYMN 24 (NUMBER UNCHANGED)
A.E.M. The last line of the old hymn "For thee, His church, for thee" has been altered because it was a stranger to the rest of the hymn, perhaps a "padding" introduced to make up the hymn, a line to complete the poetry. (In the work of revision we got to a point of testing poetry by looking at the last lines of a hymn, for that is where the weakness is frequently see). So the last line is altered to: "In glorious majesty". It may be said that that line is no better then the other, but it does not take you into another sphere. The hymn deals with the Lord's conflict, with His meeting Satan and what He is as Conqueror; it does not deal with Christ and the church.
T.L. What about the first line of verse 2 - "Through weakness and *defeat*"?
A.E.M. I can tell you what the chief reviser said about it, and that was that "*By* weakness and defeat" (as it used to be) suggests the agency by which He won the crown, whereas "*Through* weakness and defeat" (as it now stands in the new book) suggests the circumstances in which He won the crown. The thought of defeat being the agency has been removed from the verse by the alteration of "by" to "through"; it is the external *circumstances* that come before us now. That thought was put forward, and what carried the idea through was that all the external evidences of the cross indicated weakness and defeat. That is the *public position*, and the crown is on the same line. We are in the light of God, and know that what appeared defeat
{19}
is victory, but in the eyes of the world it was defeat, and the crown is the answer to it.
HYMN 227 (NUMBER UNCHANGED)
There is an alteration in verse 3. That hymn is a translation from the French, and it was rather a poor translation. The meaning of the original French is more the idea of the storm that "burst"; it never had any suggestion that His head was bowed; that idea was imported into the English translation. It now reads: "The storm that burst o'er Thy blest head".
F.H.B. That alteration makes it much more acceptable. The storm did not bow His head, He bowed it Himself: "Having bowed his head, he delivered up his spirit" (@John 19:30, Darby Translation).
HYMN 128 (FORMERLY HYMN 316)
F.H.B. Here is an important point on which I should like some light: I should like to hear what the revisers said about verse 2, lines 3 and 4: "Christ our precious dust will take and freshly mould"; what was the objection to that expression?
A.E.M. It goes beyond Scripture; it conveys the thought that the present body, or its dust, is freshly moulded for new creation.
F.H.B. Does that not agree with the thought of the body being changed?
A.F.M. I did not think that the idea of changing means that the same substance which has been used to form a body of humiliation will be used for the fashioning of a body of glory, but that He *changes* the body. Resurrection involves identity of *person*, without necessitating complete identity of all *substance*.
F.H.B. Only it is very important to maintain the link between what is sown and what is raised: "It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruptibility ... It is sown in weakness; it is raised in power", etc. (@1 Corinthians 15:42 - 44, Darby Translation)
A.E.M. That is an impersonal "it", not a definitive "it". It is very hard to say whether the body or the person is referred to. Some time ago there was a brother who said that it would be simply a matter of new creation, that we should have new creation bodies; but that would set aside
{20}
the truth of resurrection. Resurrection comes before new creation. Resurrection preserves the identity of personality. New creation is what is wholly new, that which has no prior history at all, but the words of Scripture will not support these lines in verse 2; they go too far, they are too material. When you come to resurrection you have to say, "God ..." The man who raised the question in @1 Corinthians 15:35 as to *how* it should be done is called a fool.
J.H.B. Is there not in that same passage a very strong contrast between what is earthy and what is heavenly? Our present condition is characterised by what is earthy, that is, made of dust. We are told that "As we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly" (verse 49) relegating the thought of "earthy" or "dust" (Darby Translation) to the past, and describing what is new as characteristically heavenly.
A.E.M. How could you say that the glorified body is made of *dust*?
Ques. How do you understand: "He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth in you"? (@Romans 8:11.)
A.E.M. The work of God comes in and quickens our mortal bodies. That does not directly refer only to resurrection. Quickening includes resurrection, but it includes a great deal more -- the whole work of God. These lines of the hymn that we are discussing refer to those who die, but @Romans 8 does not refer only to those who die, but to those who have mortal bodies. It shows the relation between our mortal bodies and the quickening work of God. It is on account of His Spirit which dwells in you (verse 11, Darby Translation).
Ques. Does @2 Corinthians 5:l (Darby Translation) bear on this: "For we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens"?
A.E.M. That gives you another aspect in which it is another house altogether that you get. One is dissolving and the other is reserved for you for the new conditions into which you enter. Of course this subject has been a controversy throughout all the history of the church, and brethren have even gone so far as to say that if the Lord were to come, not a coffin nor a grave would be opened. That loses the thought of resurrection. But to say that Christ takes our precious dust and remoulds it loses the thought of new creation.
Rem. But there must be substance to be raised.
{21}
A.E.M. Resurrection applies to persons.
W.D.P. Do you mean the personality would be in the grave?
A.F.M. The spirit is with Christ, but the personality is a different idea from the spirit, body or soul. Personality is really the *man*; a man can get another body. We shall have other bodies -- glorified bodies. It is the persons who are raised. In one sense you can say, Stephen is in his grave. You find that what is recorded of all the old testament saints is that *they* died and *they* were buried, not their bodies; and *they* will be raised. @Acts 8:2 tells us that "devout men carried *Stephen* to his burial" - not his *body* but *Stephen*. The conditions of "absent from the body, present with the Lord", are defined as to our spirits; the spirit is with the Lord. Now suppose a saint was buried yesterday, and the body was put in the grave; suppose the Lord comes today; the grave would be opened and the coffin would be opened, and I believe not a vestige of the body would be left behind, but how would you describe it? What would happen? You could not say what would happen. I do not think a vestige of the body would be found in the grave, and yet I do not think there would be anything in the glorified condition that can be described as dust.
F.H.B. Quite.
A.E.M. But how that is brought about, who is to tell? When the matter is referred to in @1 Corinthians 15 someone says, "How?" Paul says, "Fool!" You cannot explain *how*; you can only say "God ... !"
Ques. What would you say as to the reference "bare grain" (@1 Corinthians 15:37.)?
A.E.M. I judge that is more connected with the person than with the dust.
H.J.S. "This corruption must put on incorruptibility, and this mortal put on immortality".
A.E.M. We leave the side of mortality and corruption and are taken into other conditions, but it is presented as something that must be done. We are to leave one condition and enter into another condition. The difficulty is that we either tend to become too material and want to have the "previous dust" remoulded, or else we lose the idea of resurrection altogether. We want to preserve the balance between the two thoughts.
P.B. We need to accept it simply without trying to explain how.
{22}
A.E.M. Anyone who studies @1 Corinthians 15 carefully will get the impression that the power of God is going to come in in a miraculous way, and we are going to leave conditions in which we are now, connected with corruption and mortality, and we are going into conditions suited to the work of God in us. The present body can be dissolved and can be changed, but the work of God is imperishable.
J.H. "It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body" (@1 Corinthians 15:44).
A.E.M. Spiritual substance could not be "dust"; you could not say "dust" is what will form a spiritual body. "Thou sowest not the body that shall be" (verse 37).
J.H.B. The point as to personality is important; personality may be identified with the body fallen asleep. One of the strongest Scriptures in that connection is at the end of @John 19: "There laid they *Jesus*!"
A.E.M. Quite so; it does not say "the body of Jesus", but "Jesus". I am sure you can speak of the Saints and say that they are lying in the graves; on the other hand you can explain that their spirits are with the Lord. But the spirit condition is not the complete condition; it is that which will maintain uninterrupted enjoyment until we reach the final condition.
F.H.B. As long as we are "absent from the body" we are "present with the Lord" and "to die is gain". Do not those scriptures connect personality with the spirit?
A.E.M. Yes; but it is not exclusively so; it depends how you are looking at it; we can either say, "Stephen is dead" or "Stephen is with the Lord".
{23}
Notes of meetings on the new hymnbook, Redland, Bristol
Evening Meeting, March 5, 1932
A.E.M. It occurred to me that we might look at some of the new hymns with a view to seeing what means exist for giving expression to the light of the moment, and that we might also dwell on the practical point of how to use the hymnbook intelligently.
F.H.B. I am sure that will be very helpful to us; it is very needful.
A.E.M. I would like just to make a remark as to accuracy of expression in the hymns. Accuracy itself is not the goal, but inaccurate expressions are something like the stopping up of the outlets of our spiritual emotions; that is, a wrong expression obscures so much, whereas the thought of the truth, together with the divine accuracy connected with it, is that we should have an unhindered view of every feature of the glory of Christ.
Coming, to new hymns, it might be well to remark that there were many excellent compositions sent in which had a high individual value, but which dealt with a theme or a feature of truth in connection with which we already had an ample supply. For instance, there were 22 hymns in the old book dealing with the Lord's coming -- quite a large percentage. At one time they were much used; they are not so much used now. So a new hymn on that subject stood no chance of getting in the new book unless it was super-excellent. Whereas, we had only about six or eight hymns at the most which were addressed to the Lord as Head, so a hymn of only moderate value poetically would have a good chance of being included, because of the need for hymns on that theme. Then in the whole of the old book we have not one hymn dealing with the new covenant, showing how that feature of the truth was not prominently before the mind of hymnwriters when the book was prepared, but since then the adjustment regarding the use of one cup at the Supper has brought to light the great features of the new covenant, and now it is prominently before us in thanksgiving for the cup. Two or three hymns of that character have been included in the new hymnbook.
F.H.B. Would what you have said about hymns relating to the Lord's coming apply to hymns addressed to the Father?
A.F.M. We have not many hymns addressed to the Father in privilege; there are many addressed to the Father in relation to wilderness experience, but not many addressed to "the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ", which is the title which stands in relation to our sonship. Hymns
{24}
on that theme were most welcome as enriching our morning meeting.
The whole hymnbook was completely analysed to see how many hymns we had suitable for the different occasions on which we meet, so that we should have some idea as to what was needed to balance it.
HYMN 1
I think we might begin with this hymn. The old No. 1 has been transferred to the gospel section. This new No. 1 has been somewhat altered from the original
form, but the writer's thoughts are here, and it comes in in a peculiar way as adding to the hymnbook in connection with all our exercises as to the Person of the Lord.
F.H.H. In that way it makes a beautiful introduction to the book.
(Hymn read aloud)
A.E.N. I think the brethren will agree that that will be a very suitable vehicle of praise at certain times when the greatness of God, and the glory of Christ are before us. It is a worship hymn, containing no reference to the saints at all.
J.H.H. The three verses are not all addressed to the same Person, are they? The first verse is addressed to God as God. The distinctions between the passages in @1 Timothy 1 and @Isaiah 9 are to be noted, are they not?
A.R.M. Yes, they are often confused, it is God who is "the Eternal King" (@1 Timothy 1:17) and the Lord who is spoken of as "the Father of Eternity". (@Isaiah 9:6, Darby Translation). The first verse of the hymn speaks of God in the absolute, in which the Lord would have His part, and the second verse refers to His personal part in Deity, that He was in the form of God, "But *now* as Man ...". The third verse is speaking of His greatness in manhood, that He is the Son; He has His place upon the throne as the Heir; He is the Redeemer, Saviour; those are titles of His manhood that are referred to.
F.A.H. Do you consider that a suitable hymn for the latter part of the morning meeting?
A.E.M. Well, if the moment is suitable for it. It is a hymn that would call for a very worshipful spirit on the part of the saints, especially as regards the sense of *greatness*. We might have a very great sense of the love of God and of Christ, but that is not the theme of this hymn. What this hymn presents is the magnitude of the
{25}
stoop to the form of man, and Christ's greatness as Man. Intelligence would discern. We greatly lack variety in praising God; we are very stinted in our praises and confined to one theme. This is a new side that has almost been absent from our praises. Many of us are only just beginning to apprehend the greatness of God.
F.H.B. I was rather struck by a brother's comment after the Conference here; he said it greatly impressed him as to the greatness of God.
A.E.M. I think this is a hymn which in measure summarizes what came out at the Bristol Conference.
HYMN 4
This is a hymn written by a sister. I refer to this hymn because it seems to express the proper spirit and attitude of mind in which we should approach the Lord's Supper; that is, it does not dwell on the thought of our sins having been put away, nor of our unworthiness, but it refers to the saints as under the marvellous influence of the love of Christ, and throughout the week we have been finding delight in the Lord, and the result is that our spirits are freighted with treasure. That is the proper attitude in which to come to the Supper.
F.H.B. It is the kind of hymn of which we were much in need.
A.E.M. Very much so. It is a very sweet hymn indeed.
(Hymn read aloud)
HYMN 75
This has a more general bearing; it is not primarily a Supper hymn, although it might be used there.
HYMN 93
This hymn appeared in the old book, but now an extra verse (verse 2) by the same author (Sir Edward Denny) has been introduced and verse 3 is changed back to its original form. Whenever an extra verse could be added from the same author we have done it, when it improved the hymn.
HYMN 119
This is another new hymn of a high order, by a sister. It is addressed to the Father in privilege, and is very suitable for the second part of the morning meeting.
(Hymn read aloud)
{26}
HYMN 152
This also is a hymn of a high order as to its theme, extolling the Lord. It will be very useful.
(Hymn read aloud)
HYMN 171
This is an adaptation of some old lines which Mr. H. P. Wells
put together.
(Hymn read aloud)
HYMN 172
I would like to draw your attention to a change in this hymn as we are passing it. It is a much used hymn. In verse 3 the words terminating the second and fourth lines have been transposed.
F.H.B. That is a good change.
HYMN 183
This is a new hymn by a sister, suitable for the opening part of the morning meeting.
F.H.B. Yes, it is a good hymn for the early part of the meeting.
HYMN 207
This is another example of an old verse wedded to three new ones. The first verse of this hymn is verse 2 of the old No. 245.
(Hymn read aloud)
F.H.B. It is a very good hymn.
HYMN 223 AND HYMN 249
These hymns were made up out of a poem; both are very good. Hymn No. 249 is 
particularly suitable for the Supper.
HYMN 254
This is one of Mr. Darby's. I think about six new hymns of Mr. Darby's have been put together, some of them being from the poem, "The Man of Sorrows". This one is a very choice hymn.
{27}
HYMN 258
This hymn was written by a young sister on the occasion of Miss Newlands burial. The writer was much impressed with the thought that one who had filled a great place in the service of the Lord had been called home, and she wrote this hymn after the burial.
(Hymn read aloud)
F.H.B. It is a good hymn for a burial.
A.E.M. Yes, if it is a *good* burial -- if you were burying anyone in the highest places of the sepulchres of the kings!
HYMN 293
Mr. Coates is the author of this hymn, which is new to the book.
HYMN 296
This is also a new hymn.
(Hymn read aloud)
HYMN 300
Several one-verse hymns have been included such as hymn No. 300 which is the last verse of the old hymn 98. The rest of that hymn was on a different theme altogether. We have often had this verse by itself.
HYMN 301
Hymn No. 301 begins the gospel hymns. There is no formal division at all, but from this point onwards the hymns are in alphabetical order.
C.O.B. Why is there no division?
A.E.M. The ministry of the church and the ministry of the gospel is one whole; they can be distinguished, but not separated. For convenience of finding them the gospel hymns are put together and are in alphabetical order.
HYMN 356
F.H.B. You were saying just now that the old hymn No. 1 has been transposed to the gospel section. It is now hymn No. 356. There are alterations in the first two verses, the last line of verse 1 is now: "*Than Jesus and His* blood", and verse 2 begins with "Faith, too that trusts *in Him* through grace". There was a reason for those alterations I expect?
{28}
A.E.M. Some of the revisers felt that the teaching of Scripture is that faith is in the *Person*. The thought of "faith in the blood" is within the truth, though not all the truth; but those who remember a controversy that went on in F.E.R.s time when the way the gospel was preached by many tended to direct persons to either a verse of Scripture or to some material feature, rather than seeking to bring about a living link with the Person of Christ.
F.H.B. Are there any Scriptures where the blood is spoken of as an object of faith?
A.E.M. @Romans 3:25, both in J.N.D.s version and the authorised, seems to link up faith with the blood, but Greek scholars are divided as to the translation of that verse. There are many who maintain that it should carry this sense: "Whom God has set forth a mercy seat in His blood through faith", meaning that the mercy-seat is established on the basis of the blood, and faith appropriates not only the blood, but the whole basis -- the whole thing.
F.H.B. There is a similar passage in Galatians: "Sons of God *by faith* in Christ Jesus" (@Galatians 3:26).
HYMN 309
J.A.P. Is No. 309 the only hymn with a chorus you have left us?
A.E.M. There are a few others. I think the brethren will realise that the gospel hymns were an even greater cause for concern than the others because there was a real desire not to lower the dignity of the high level of assembly singing by the inclusion of a lower grade of hymns representing our compassions toward men, and it was very difficult to steer a middle course between the extremists who wanted everything and had no limitations at all, and others who would have swept away everything of an appealing character; but what was before the revisers was to go so far as to satisfy every proper desire of the gospel preacher. The evangelists amongst us were therefore freely consulted (though I do not say everything that they wanted was put in!) I think there is enough in the book to satisfy everyone who wants to preach the gospel. There should be no need to use other books for gospel preachings. That is a real exercise, for at present we have five or six gospel books in use in different meetings, and a person may go to one meeting and then on to another in a different district, and find different books in use at each place. The aim of this book is to provide the brethren with all that is needed for every occasion.
HYMN 365
L.D.M. I see that No. 365 has gone back to its original form.
{29}
A.E.M. Yes, several of our old hymns have been reinstated in their original forms, such as "Just as I am" and "Rock of Ages". Twenty-five per cent are hymns of an appealing character, making an appeal to men; fifty per cent are plain statements of the truth, and the balance is made up with hymns of experience, etc., such as "Just as I am". One or two old hymns which have been revived are worth looking at.
HYMN 369
(Hymn read aloud)
HYMN 374
This is an old hymn by Thomas Kelly -- a magnificent gospel hymn. The two lines at the beginning of the first verse have been altered.
HYMN 376
This is another good hymn by Lord Adalbert Cecil. It was in Mr. Darby's edition of the hymnbook, but taken out of the last edition.
<hr>
I thought we might now have a few minutes on the use of the hymnbook.
F.H.B. That is, that we may know how to use it on special occasions, and what might be suitable for the early part and for the latter part of the morning meeting on the first day of the week. Will you distinguish between what should characterise the first part and the second part normally, without laying down any hard and fast lines, of course, because we might not always be equal to what should characterise the latter part.
A.E.M. The first thing to lay hold of is that there are 382 hymns in the book, and we need to learn them all in order to introduce the element of variety. Most brothers have a working range of about twelve hymns; some only have a working range of one; and that destroys the freshness of the expression of spiritual emotion. It is possible for me to cultivate a habit of giving out the same hymn Lord's Day after Lord's Day; I may not know it, but the brethren do. That is where one gets the gain of asking someone occasionally whether what one does in the meetings is finding approval. The test of my activity in the meeting is not that I enjoy it, because I might enjoy what I say, and the brethren be very wearied with it. We want to realise that the hymnbook has a very great part
{30}
in the expressed service of God, and we need to get to know the hymnbook. Do you agree with that?
F.H.B. Quite; it is not a question of what I enjoy, but of what would give expression to the emotions of the saints generally, so that all would be able to sing and say Amen.
A.E.M. You cannot look up a hymn at home and give it out in the meeting, nor can you look up a scripture before coming to the morning meeting, and then read it and enlarge upon it when there. The thought is that you come to the meeting prepared to do whatever is given you to do; you do not know what will be given to you. The idea of a singer as in Chronicles is a person who has come under the instruction of Chenaniah, the instructor in music (@1 Chronicles 15:22) and under the spiritual instruction of David. Chenaniah would teach them music, harmony and rhythm, so that all can move together; so that your emotions correspond to those of the brother or sister sitting next you; not only are you singing the same words, but your hearts are passing through the same experiences while you sing the words. That is what you get from Chenaniah. David is presented as the one who gives the psalms. You do not know what psalms may be delivered, but the singers are prepared to learn any song which the Lord may give; they have the capacity to sing any song the Lord may give. He would give to you a psalm that you know. That emphasises the desirability of *knowing* the hymnbook. The Spirit is limited in connection with this matter to what you know; if you only know three hymns, that is your limit.
F.H.B. If a hymn comes into my mind it does not necessarily follow that it is a suitable hymn to give out. It is well to refer to the Lord for a moment before I give it out, then I should be confirmed as to whether it is right to give it out.
A.E.M. Giving out a hymn tests us in two ways; Firstly, as to whether we are near the Lord; and secondly, as to our intelligence. Giving out a hymn involves intelligence. Intelligence is what is connected with the "understanding" of the person. Persons in the assembly are to be Intelligent. Supposing a hymn comes into your mind, you do not know what put it there; you would not rush forward to commit the saints to sing a hymn just because it came into your mind. You are an intelligent person; you have to discern whether you are near the Lord, and test the thing by your intelligence. For instance, you could not think of the Lord giving you a totally unsuitable hymn. So you measure hymns by your intelligence, as to what is suitable for the moment. That is really where we want help, for
we have prayer meetings, reading meetings, addresses and the Lords Supper. The light governing the Lord's Supper
{31}
changes. There are differing moments; the covering light is not the same throughout the meeting and we are to understand that, and be regulated by it. When we come together at the Supper it is the Lord we have before us, and what we are conscious of is that He is absent from this scene, but our hearts are warm with affection for Him, and we would speak highly of Him in the scene where He was humiliated and put to shame. You would not give out a hymn to God the Father at such a moment; it is the Lord that is before us. But then it is not the Lord so much in His vicarious suffering, though that cannot be excluded, but the Lord in the character of the One who gave Himself that He might win our affections. What the Lord wants at the Supper, I am sure, is not so much praise that He has dealt with the question of our sins, but evidences of affection. The woman in @Luke 7 is an example of one in the good of the new covenant. She is not saying anything about herself, but everything she does draws attention to the Lord. That is the governing light of that moment.
But then if the emblems have been dispensed we look for the Lord to come in as *Head*. Where conditions are right He will do so, but we have to discern the moment when He comes in, and when He comes in the whole character of the meeting changes. It is a question then of the Father -- worship and praise going up to God the Father. The one who is Head to the assembly is Son to God, and He will gather up all the worship and praise that is in the hearts of the saints and present it intelligently to the Father. The saints are the instruments on which He would play, and we want to respond to the emotions that fill *His* heart. It is not only a question of what is filling *my* heart, but what are the feelings in the heart of Christ. He is in the midst of His own as singing praise to the Father. That is the light of the latter part of the morning meeting, and our hymns should be governed by that.
W.H.H. Should we not be very exercised to discern when the Lord comes in?
A.F.M. It is a question of spirituality, but we should be able to discern when the Lord comes in.
C.O.B. Is a hymn of worship to the Lord suitable in the early part of the morning meeting, or rather a hymn of praise?
A.E.M. As thinking of the One who gave Himself in all His love and worthiness we sing His praise; we have to distinguish between His worth and features that call for worship. Worship is called for by greatness.
J.A.P. A brother might feel unable to express himself to God at such a time; should he then give out a hymn if he cannot express himself on his feet?
{32}
A.E.M. No. A hymn is not a secondary sort of service for those who are not prepared to stand upon their feet. I have no hesitation in saying that a brother who has not established his priestly position before God is not in order in giving out a hymn. Giving out a hymn is a Levitical service; it is Levites who sing, but then you must establish your position; a Levite is a known person in the testimony -- one who is bearing the burden of things not a person out at elbows with his brethren.
F.E.B. Is it not really easier to stand up to praise God than to give out a hymn?
A.E.M. I think it is easier in the sense that it will cause you less exercise, for you may give out ten verses of a hymn and the brethren have to sing it whether they want to or not; whereas if you stand up to praise God and finish with five words you can sit down. In the working out of things we are in great danger of developing abnormally. The greatest service a brother can render me or anyone else is to correct abnormal developments. As being in a local company of brethren I should come under that service of correction; I should not be allowed to develop into a freak -- something quite abnormal. We should be able to go from our own local meeting and sit down in another place and join in perfectly. We should be able to go anywhere and join in the service of God. But if I develop certain peculiarities, they know them in my local meeting, and they make room for them; but I go to another meeting that does not know them, and I become a trial. We want to grow up normal and straight. We get normality by listening to our brethren. We should not find a brother only giving out hymns; we would rather hear five words from him on his feet. If a brother never takes any part beyond giving out hymns it is the duty, of his brethren to help him. They can help him by showing him what is the proper normal service of the house of God.
Rem. I have noticed that if a brother, very tremblingly it may be, gives expression to but five words he always gets hearty support from the brethren.
L.D.M. In @1 Chronicles 15:16 - 24 it says, "David spoke to the chief of the Levites to appoint their brethren, the singers, with instruments" etc.
A.E.M. That shows that before you are warranted to give out a hymn you must come under the scrutiny of the brethren and secure their confidence.
W.H.M. (Question as to helping a brother to take part acceptably.)
A.E.M. I think it is an individual matter. Much can be done in the spirit of Christ. The marvellous thing is
{33}
that among the saints people can be told truths of the bitterest kind without their wanting to go away and stay home. The basis on which we are together is not that we ignore things we find in one another, but we take them up in a divine way with a view to helping one another. The world comes together on the basis of ignoring defects. How much can be done with a young brother especially! If he does not show a disposition to take part in the meetings he should come under special shepherd care till he does; it may be that a sister will take a young brother up in her prayers, and wait upon God that that outlet for the assembly may be opened.
Ques. What is the bearing of @1 Corinthians 14 on this?
A.E.M. "Understanding" has part not only with regard to your movement in spirit Godward and in your emotions Godward, but your understanding comes as to how, when and in what form to express yourself.
J.H.B. Could you, before we close, give us a word about the question of the selection of a tune for a hymn, and the question of starting tunes? What should govern anyone who had it before him to start a tune to a hymn given out?
A.E.M. What should govern him is the thought of serving the brethren; it is a service to the brethren when you start a tune, and like every other service to the brethren it must be subject to their approval. If I take the place of being a servant of the saints I must be prepared to be told when my service is not right. I think that is the ground of it, and if one finds he has some ability to start tunes he cannot fulfil his service without waiting on the Lord. Natural ability, while it enters into the matter, is not the whole qualification. Every service that we do amongst the saints we must wait on the Lord about.
F.H.B. Would you expect such a one to be a functioning priest?
A.E.M. To do it properly he should be. Of course in the assembly the lowest services are all given character to by the highest.
F.H.B. The Lord would help us in that way so that the tune would be in suitability to the hymn.
A.E.M. Those who have worked on the new tunebook have sought to suggest for each hymn in the hymnbook a tune that is suited in measure and rhythm and to the character of the hymn. All the words of the hymns are being printed in the book so that the hymns can be sung from it. I
{34}
believe F.E.R. advocated the idea of a tune wedded to a hymn.
J.H.B. If a brother has given out a hymn should opportunity be given that brother to start the tune if he felt free?
A.E.M. I think so.
L.D.M. Is it not happier for another brother to start the tune as a matter of fellowship?
A.E.M. I do not think the idea of fellowship is involved; I think the starting of tunes is simply a question of those who are able serving the brethren, but you do not want an official tune-starter. If four or five brothers have the ability to do it, it is nice to let things spread round a bit.
F.H.B. Things should be done without hurry.
J.M.H. Would not another important consideration in starting a tune be that one should seek to start a tune that we believe is generally well-known in the company? Is it not rather contrary to fellowship to start a tune which generally is not known? I refer to all meetings when we are together.
A.E.M. We do not want to introduce novelties. I may learn a new tune and spring it on the brethren, and be constantly doing it, but what is the point? The tune is only the vehicle for singing words metrically and uniformly; we need to bear that in mind in starting a tune. Actually many of us are limited to starting the first tune that comes into our heads, but that is due to not waiting upon God in our service. That is where the advantage of the idea of a tune being wedded to a hymn is seen, for the brethren can sing the hymn without self-consciousness, whereas if some new tune is raised they are concerned about fitting the words and tune together.
F.H.B. I think what we want is, as you say, to be able to sing a hymn *without self-consciousness*.
A.E.M. Yes, if you do not know a tune, you are self-conscious; you cannot enter into the hymn properly. I quite admit that there is a need to learn tunes some time or other.
J.A.P. What about harmony? You are distracted if a hymn is not sung well.
A.E.M. I do not think the point of singing is to enjoy the music; we should be almost unconscious of the tune in our enjoyment of the hymn.
{35}
F.H.B. That is important for us.
Ques. You would give full liberty to a brother to start a different tune from the one apportioned in the tunebook to the hymn given out?
F.H.B. We are not to be tied by the new tunebook.
A.E.M. I hope I have not said anything to give that impression. I was quoting what Mr. Raven said; he felt that for the sake of simplicity it was a good thing for a tune to be wedded to a hymn, so that if a brother goes about from place to place he is able to sing the tunes that are raised. The whole exercise about the tune is that in connection with our expression of praise it is a vehicle of which we are not conscious at all.
W.H. (Question as to a tune being started in a wrong key)
A.E.M. That is where the question of waiting on the Lord about our service comes in. If I undertake to do a service for the saints, and I fail in it I have to get to God about the matter and get help to do it rightly. A brother may be the best singer in the meeting, but if he is not right with the Lord he will not be in the spirit of singing, and he cannot start the tunes rightly. What we want to lay hold of is that naturally we have no ability to serve in the assembly; it is a question of having to do with God about it; if it is a matter even of giving out the hymnbooks at the door, or arranging the seats; there is no service connected with the saints with regard to which we can say: We do not need any help to do this. Otherwise we shall introduce something that will obscure what is proper to the assembly. It is a matter of waiting on God.
Ques. If a hymn is given out which is quite out of line with what is before us, is there an exercise about singing it?
F.H.B. I know what Mr. Darby is reported to have said about it, but I do not know how it can be carried out; he said, "If a hymn is not given out in the Spirit, sing it in the Spirit". I have known times when a hymn is so definitely out of order that saints could not sing it.
A.E.M. Someone will sing it, and that time is going to be lost. I think you might just as well sing it as not, unless it is very manifestly out of order.
J.H.B. Does the question of fellowship come in in connection with singing? Should we not all sing together, and all sing the same if we sing at all?
{36}
A.E.M. Of course, when a hymn is given out a brother may have made a mistake, but if some sing I think we might as well all sing, and get it over with.
J.H.B. But is it not so that even when a suitable hymn is given out sometimes we are very slack about taking it up; only twenty-five per cent of the company seems to be singing at all?
A.E.M. I am glad you raised that point because it brings this feature before us. We are talking together now with a view to helping one another to do things rightly, but when you come to the actual meeting you do not want to be critical. If you are discussing with a brother what is right before the Lord, you tell him all you know; but if that brother gives out a hymn that is not right, you do not criticise in the actual meeting; you drop your criticisms. It would be very sad if we developed the idea that one-half of those in the meeting room should not sing a hymn because they do not like it. It is much better, I think, for the saints to sing it if it is given out.
J.H.B. Even apart from not singing for a reason of that sort, there may be sometimes a lack of joining in in the singing of a hymn.
A.E.M. There is a great lack. I think we lack energy. I am sure we want to see that the service of song is on a very high level. Some treat the singing of a hymn as an interval in the meeting.
H.T. All should be exercised if a tune goes wrong should they not, and not only the brother who started it?
A.E.M. Quite so, but the brother himself especially so. We cannot lay down rules, but there are things that are comely to which we should pay attention.
