{#Hymn Book Revision, 1962}
{1}
HYMN BOOK REVISION, 1962
On February 21st, 1961, a meeting was held in the Central Hall, Westminster, primarily to seek the Lord's mind as to the desirability of a further revision of the Hymn Book. The gathering took place at the request of the trustees of the Stow Hill Depot, not only because of their responsibility as publishers of any new book, but having in mind that such a meeting would also afford opportunity to consider the general work of the Depot. It was arranged during a brief visit of Mr. J. Taylor, Jr. to Great Britain, and was attended by a very large number of representative brethren from all parts of the British Isles, and included some specially invited from the Continental countries.
It was realised that only ten years had elapsed since the last revision of the book, and that it was an appreciably shorter time since our brethren on the Continent had had their books, but it was evident that there was a growing feeling with many that further adjustments were called for. In particular, there was felt to be a shortage of hymns suitable for responding at the Supper, to the light which had come to the saints as to the Lord's distinctive place and glory as having come in on God's side, and the appropriateness of worship being rendered to Him at that time.
The conclusion reached at that meeting (notes of which were circulated at the time) was that the Lord was indicating a further revision, and four brothers agreed to accept responsibility for the work.
The examination of all the existing hymns and the many new hymns submitted was started at once, various brethren being asked to help from time to
{2}
time, particularly in assessing the spiritual value of the new compositions. In July 1961, the opportunity was taken of the presence again in London of several esteemed brethren from different parts of the world, to seek their counsel on a number of points connected with the revision. Much helpful advice was received at that time, and the work continued until it was practically finished by November. During that month, those responsible for the revision were able to go through all their tentative conclusions, involving alterations, additions or deletions, in a final series of meetings at which Mr. J. Taylor, Jr. and Mr. P. Lyon were present.
It has been felt that in a certain sense the 1951 Revision could be looked upon as one of Mr. James Taylor's final services to the assembly. He departed to be with Christ in March, 1953, but had taken a very active part in the work of the revision during the early months of 1951, as he had done in the previous revision, nearly twenty years earlier. For this reason, the present revisers have been slow to make extensive changes, save such as might be called for by the forward movements of the testimony during the intervening years. Furthermore, their knowledge of Mr. Taylor's thoughts on many matters connected with the hymns and their authors (as preserved in notes made in 1951) has had great weight with those responsible for making changes now. It has also frequently helped in considering changes suggested by others.
In the light of the above, the current revision may perhaps be looked upon as an extension of the last one, thus affording even more scope for the fruit of Mr. Taylor's ministry to appear by the Spirit in the service of song in the assembly. This is in accordance with the remarks in the Prefatory Note to the 1962 Revision which appears in the new book.
A few remarks on detail may be added, viz:
{3}
(a) In connection with hymns addressed to the Father, it has been felt that fuller consideration needs to be given to the word "yet to us there is one God, the Father", @1 Corinthians 8: 6. While therefore rejoicing in the knowledge of God, known by the name of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, it must not be assumed that all hymns addressed to God have the Trinity in mind. It is for this reason that no alteration has been made to several hymns clearly addressed to the Father, but in which expressions such as 'O God' are used, e.g., 143, 157, 314. On the other hand, a few hymns previously addressed to the Father, but in which were expressions which Scripture connects with God in the Fulness have been changed, e.g., 96, 312.
(b) The use of the word 'Calvary' in many of the hymns has been questioned, because the word does not appear in Mr. Darby's translation of the Scriptures, and only once in the Authorised Version. Furthermore, it is a word which lends itself to sentimental usage, and in that setting is frequently connected with popular evangelism. Such use is completely contrary to the meaning of the word, which is 'skull'. There appeared to be some basis therefore, for deleting the word, and it would not have been difficult to find alternative scriptural expressions, such as 'the tree'. However, after full consideration, and taking counsel with several, it has been decided to leave the word in. If it were deleted from the book, it was realised that those who preach might be put in unnecessary bondage, feeling they must avoid the use of the word when speaking. The exercise, however, is mentioned here, believing it will be good for all to be reminded that 'Golgotha' (of which 'Calvary' is the Latin equivalent) means 'a skull'. This would seem to be an important part of the teaching of the cross, and shows how out of keeping with it is anything that plays on the human emotions.
{4}
(c) The light which has come to the saints recently as to worship being rendered to the Lord as soon as He is apprehended as coming in at the Supper, has led to a review of all the hymns containing expressions of worship to Christ. While it could not be said to be wrong to worship Him at any time, and provision must be made for worship to Him in the wilderness setting, it has been felt that the full import of worship to Him in the service of God will be emphasised if other more appropriate expressions were used in hymns to the Lord intended for use at other times in the service.
It is for this reason that the reference to worship has been deleted from the last verse of No. 4 which is clearly a hymn for use *before* the Supper. Similarly, when the assembly's link with Christ in the marital setting, which particularly connects with His manhood, is being enjoyed *after* the Supper, expressions of praise seem more applicable; hence the small change in the last verse of No. 283.
(d) In Hymns 74, 84, 201, 235 and 293 the original order of the verses has been restored. Hymn 277 is now restored to its original form as one hymn of six verses, and hymn 291, reduced by one verse and somewhat altered in wording, is now re-combined in one hymn.
In the current revision, it has been felt right to exclude hymns written by those no longer walking in fellowship with us. This has resulted in over thirty hymns being deleted from the book, but beyond these, it was felt that the contributions of some earlier authors (even those who had died many years ago) needed to be reviewed. The conclusion reached has been that the hymns of those authors known to have been active in opposing the truth as it was being ministered by the leading servants of their time have been deleted. This has led to the loss of a further ten hymns, including
{5}
several well-loved and often used, and it may be appropriate to refer to certain remarks which bear upon it in Volume 176 of J.T.¬s ministry, page 47.
The question may arise in the minds of some as to why such hymns should not be regarded as among the "dedicated things", and if not, why they have remained in use so long. In this connection, it is interesting to note that whereas in @1 Chronicles 26: 28 Saul, Joab and others are included in the list of those whose dedicated things were preserved; in @2 Chronicles 5: 1, only the dedicated things of David are brought in and put among the treasures of the house of God.
It is realised that the new book still contains hymns by those now with the Lord who left us at one or other of the earlier divisions, but it has been felt that we should be justified in distinguishing those who led from those who were led, and this explains any apparent inconsistency.
A few more hymns have been deleted not necessarily because of any concern as to them or their authors, but to make way for new hymns and in view of the desire expressed at the meeting at which the revision was decided upon, to reduce the total number in the book. Similarly, for the sake of brevity, several long hymns have had one or even two verses deleted. It has been felt that this will make them more generally acceptable and suitable for singing in the assembly.
Careful consideration was given to the exercise to have somewhat fewer hymns in the book, but it has not been found practicable to reduce the total as much as was originally thought, nor was it felt that too drastic a reduction would be acceptable to the brethren. The outcome is that the new book contains only about twenty hymns less than the previous one.
During the early stages of the revision, it was noted and confirmed by records which various brethren had kept, that a good many hymns were very rarely if ever
{6}
used, and there seemed therefore some justification for dropping them from the book. It became clear, however, that a hymn needed to be judged on its individual quality rather than by its frequency of use. In this connection, it is felt to be appropriate to quote the following paragraph from the booklet published at the time of the 1932 Revision:
<blockquote>"The importance of saints becoming conversant with the contents of the hymn book may be urged. This will result in individual comfort and edification, and it will assure more variety and freshness in the use of hymns in the assembly. It has been noticed by those who move about among the gatherings that comparatively *very few* hymns are in current usage. This makes for flatness and staleness in the meetings, whereas if the hymn book were well known, a much more extensive variety would be introduced so as to be sung by the saints as gathered together".</blockquote>
This revision has brought in about fifty new hymns, most of which have been selected from the large number (well over 600) submitted in view of the revision. In one or two cases, a new hymn has been formed by dividing up an existing hymn and adding fresh material by the same author. A few others are translations of hymns in current use by our brethren in other countries. The one verse by Mr. Stoney, No. 7, will be particularly noted. As far as is known, it is the only hymn of his, and was written before he was twenty. He said it was composed at the time when he was the constant companion of J.N.D., about 1833, and adds: 'You may see from it how very clearly was brought out the fact that our place is heaven, and that Christ is our Head there'.
It might be well to mention that a very large number of suggested changes to existing hymns was received from brethren in all parts of the world. This clearly
{7}
indicated the body of genuine interest and exercise in the book, and the suggestions were valued on that account. All were carefully considered, but relatively few have been adopted. In many cases, some improvement might have been effected in the mode of expression, but unless the proposed changes bore directly on the truth or were considered essential for some other reason, they have not been made. Mr. Wigram's first rule in compiling the 1856 Hymn Book, namely, to 're-touch as little as possible, and with as light a hand as possible' has been in mind throughout. At the same time, it is hoped that his other rules, as given in his account of the revision which is still printed in the beginning of the new book, have also been acted upon.
In this edition, the two first line Indexes (previously separated by one being at the beginning of the book and the other at the end) have been combined into one. It is hoped that this will make for easier and quicker finding of any specific hymn. The first line of every first verse has been marked with an asterisk, and given in full. The first lines of all subsequent verses have frequently been abbreviated, thus saving space, yet permitting a larger type than has hitherto been used.
Where several verses *within the same hymn* begin with the same words, e.g., 85, 100, 446, only one entry is given.
While checking the Author Index to ensure accuracy, the dates of many of the earlier authors came to light. It is thought that some of this information will be of general interest, as well as helping the brethren to distinguish between two or more authors of the same name. The dates of the birth and death of many of the earlier authors have therefore been included in the Author Index. Where several hymns have been written by the same author, the dates are only given
{8}
against the first of these hymns. Generally speaking, these dates are limited to those authors who died before, or during the early years of the present century.
The reason for the increased page width of the new book is mainly to avoid so many long lines having to be 'folded over', thus spoiling the appearance and occupying unnecessary space. Compare, for example, Hymn 113 in the old and new books. It has also permitted the use of double column in the first-line Index.
As far as practicable hymns have retained their existing numbers, especially those whose numbers have remained the same through several revisions. A few changes have, however, been made to try and avoid, as far as possible, the splitting of verses or the need of turning over the page in the middle of a hymn. In several of these cases, and where other changes have been made, it will often be found that a hymn has been restored to a number with which it had been associated prior to 1951.
A. J. Gardiner.
W. Henderson. 
G. H. S. Price. 
R. Stott.
