{1}
THE ABIDING CONDITIONS IN WHICH LIFE CONSISTS
@1 John 4: 5 - 21
F.E.R. It appears to me that chapters 3 and 4 show us the abiding conditions in which life consists, and which cannot be set aside.
D.L.H. Do you refer on the one hand to freedom from sin and death and on the other to the love of God?
F.E.R. Yes. Freedom from sin hangs upon the fact that we abide in Christ in whom is no sin, and you are out of death because you are in the christian circle where the love of Christ gives impulse. Then chapter 4 brings out all the conditions in which we live.
W.J. The fatness of the house of God?
F.E.R. It is that as far as it goes, but I mean more conditions which are essential to our living; human life is subject to certain conditions into which one is born, and it is in principle the same with eternal life. The difference between the gospel of John and the epistle, is that the gospel is essentially subjective, and refers to the work of God in the believer but the epistle gives us the conditions in which eternal life consists, which are abiding. No one of us is abiding, we are all liable to be removed in death, but eternal life abides continually by the very fact of its being eternal. People may come and go in this world, but the conditions of life never change. The sun never changes, the atmosphere and the light never change.
Ques. Your thought of eternal life is connected with environment then?
F.E.R. Yes. It is the conditions in which you live, and those conditions are unchanging. That is what you get in this epistle.
Ques. Then in this chapter do you get what is objective?
F.E.R. Yes. And so too in the previous chapter. The great point in the previous chapter is the place of Christ,
{2}
what you may call the sun. I use it in the way of a figure and then you get another thing, that is, the christian circle, the brethren, where the love of Christ gives impulse. There is a circle down here which is affected by the love of Christ. It is a great thing to apprehend the divinely appointed conditions which are permanent and unchanging -- which cannot be moved.
J.McK. They go on for ever, I suppose.
F.E.R. I think so.
J.McK. Why do you say you think so?
F.E.R. Because I do not want to attempt to limit God. God says in @Revelation 21: 5, "Behold, I make all things new" and God may see fit to change things -- for the better, of course. The new heavens and the new earth will be better than what is. I think the Revelation gives that idea.
Rem. You cannot have anything better than the love of God.
F.E.R. No, but the application of the love of God will be a little different, because things will be changed in regard to us -- we shall be past the judgment seat, and we shall be with God, in His own abode.
Ques. We shall not be held responsible to love one another then?
F.E.R. No. Again you certainly will not want boldness in the day of judgment in heaven. It seems to me to be very important for believers to apprehend what God has ordained, and which no power can change. To me it is a very great comfort to get to what is permanent and durable.
Ques. When it speaks in verse 17 of the "day of judgment", does it refer to the judgment resting on the world?
F.E.R. No. It refers to its application to us. The apostle did not care to be judged of man's day -- "do not judge anything before the time" @1 Corinthians 4: 5, he said, the time is coming.
Ques. You would say these things are unchanging because they flow from the very nature of God?
{3}
F.E.R. Yes, and because they are what God has ordained. For instance, God has set the sun in heaven, and nothing can change that, and so God has set the christian circle down here -- people pass out of it, but nothing can set it aside. Then the divine light which comes out in this chapter, that cannot be changed. It is all unchangeable, immutable. People may pass off the scene and others come on, but things into which we have properly come cannot be changed.
Ques. We are come into light and life?
F.E.R. We are come into things which God has ordained. We abide in Christ the Sun of righteousness, and He is always abiding and what hangs on that is that there is a circle down here, in which the love of Christ gives impulse. "We have passed from death into life, because we love the brethren" that is an abiding circle.
Ques. Do you exclude any subjective thought in the expression of eternal life?
F.E.R. Yes, because it is wholly objective, though it is intimately connected with our state. Take a new-born child. It is nourished with food, by which its constitution is built up, but there are certain conditions into which it is born, which are essential to its life -- I mean the sun, the atmosphere, and so on. These conditions are always existing.
Ques. So you speak of life and conditions of life?
F.E.R. Exactly.
Ques. Do you not draw a distinction between life and eternal life?
F.E.R. Yes. Eternal life refers to the conditions which are immutable and abiding. Life is connected with the believer in a general way. We have heard the voice of the Son of God, and having heard His voice, we live and then in a kind of way we are nourished with bread. That is what you get in chapters 5 and 6 of John.
Ques. You would speak of that as subjective state?
F.E.R. Yes. That is what comes out in the gospel.
D.L.H. I think there is a difficulty in some minds in regard of what you get in the gospel where eternal life is
{4}
mentioned -- such as @John 3: 16 and @John 5: 24. Will you say a word in regard to this?
F.E.R. In chapter 3 the Lord is speaking from the divine standpoint -- I mean as to what was in the thought and love of God. "God so loved the world" verse 16. It is a revelation -- it is light coming out, the divine thought in regard of the world.
D.L.H. So what we get there is the believer -- the person who has eternal life.
F.E.R. Yes. It is the "whosoever" -- the believing person, whoever he might be, Jew or gentile, was to come into it. So too in chapter 5, it is "he that hears my word, and believes him that has sent me", verse 24, that is the kind of person who has eternal life. The same thing runs throughout the gospel, it is the kind of person who is in view, and the gospel gives the subjective side.
Ques. Does the person get it by believing?
F.E.R. No. The Lord brings this out in chapter 4 of John. "The water that I shall give him ... everlasting life", verse 14. Until a man is a believer he would not get the living water, but then the well of water in the believer springs up into everlasting life. The great point in the epistle is that you might enter into it. You could not be conscious that you have it unless you have entered into it. I should not be conscious that I have entered into my house, unless I have entered into it. The apostle unfolds the conditions in which eternal life subsists, so that you may see what they are, and having entered in, you are conscious that you have eternal life.
Ques. Why is eternal life put in contrast to not perishing?
F.E.R. Because it is either one thing or the other. Certain conditions have come in in connection with the revelation of God in Christ, and it is either on the one hand the entering into eternal life, or on the other hand, being under death.
Ques. You said there was a difference between life and eternal life. Do you think it is life in the gospel?
{5}
F.E.R. Yes. It is not that the expression 'eternal life' does not occur, but the prevailing thought in the gospel is the state of the person and that is life. It is the fruit of a divine work. If I am a subject of God's work, which has brought about in me a certain state, it is life. "I am come that they might have life, and might have it abundantly", @John 10: 10.
Ques. Is life very abundantly eternal life?
F.E.R. No. I think it refers to the state of the believer. You get life in divine power -- in the power of the Holy Spirit.
Ques. Then eternal life is an expression which speaks of the conditions in which those who have life live?
F.E.R. Yes. I only judge that because you continually get the thought -- "springing up into everlasting life", "entering into it", "laying hold on it". It is the end unto which you endure. The man reaps it. It is continually presented in that way by all the writers -- Paul and John and others.
Ques. Do we not come into the good of it apart from the Spirit?
F.E.R. The Spirit springs up into eternal life -- "the water that I shall give ... springing up into eternal life". I think the work of the Spirit in the believer is to enable you to apprehend the divinely appointed conditions, because those conditions are not seen, they are not true to sight. The Spirit springs up in the believer, enabling him to enter into and appreciate the conditions which God has established and which are immutable.
Ques. How do we get eternal life?
F.E.R. The scripture tells you that the Spirit is a well of water springing up into everlasting life.
Ques. Is eternal life for down here?
F.E.R. I think so.
J.McK. In dealing sometimes with anxious souls, one is very apt to turn to @John 5: 24. Do you think it is right to do so?
F.E.R. I think you would be going on a little too
{6}
fast with the anxious soul. You must remember that no young convert can really be anything but a babe. I would not say it is not right to turn to a scripture of that sort. It is a question to me if it is wise. You will not get a person free from the thought of judgment until you come to @1 John 4. The only thing which will dispel the thought of judgment is the knowledge of the love of God (see verses 17, 18).
Ques. What is the great thing to be gained by the gospel?
F.E.R. I have no doubt that what a person is to get through the gospel is living water, and scripture closes with that -- "He that will, let him take the water of life freely". I think that is the great end and purpose of the gospel.
Ques. That is one of the ends?
F.E.R. I do not think there is any other end. The great thing is living water. It involves everything. You must get the foundations right first -- righteousness and salvation, but evidently the great object in preaching the gospel is that man may receive from Christ what Christ gives -- living water. Having got the Spirit, you reap eternal life.
Ques. Will you say a word in regard to boldness in the day of judgment?
F.E.R. It is boldness in regard to the day of judgment.
Rem. It does not give the idea that believers are coming into judgment.
F.E.R. No. I think you have boldness in regard to the day of judgment.
Ques. "As *he* is", verse 17. What is the force of that?
F.E.R. I always connect it with the end of @Romans 8: 38, where the apostle says, "For I am persuaded ..". You have got into the part of Romans where the purpose of God is brought into a new circle where all is of God, a circle which is in the full light of divine love, where the love of God rests. I am there -- "as *he* is, *we* also are in this world" and hence I am not terrified now by the
{7}
thought of the day of judgment.
Ques. But in the latter part of @Romans 8 things have been traced to their source, have they not?
F.E.R. Yes, and so they have in this fourth chapter of 1 John. "Herein as to us has been manifested the love of God ... that we might live through him", verse 9.
Ques. So that if there is life there is nothing to judge?
F.E.R. No. Yet there is our responsibility of course down here. We must all be manifested before the judgment seat of Christ, but then, in regard to that we have boldness "because as *he* is, *we* also are in this world", verse 17. The thought of the day of judgment may come before the mind of the believer, but then the great point is that that should not produce fear, because love is made perfect in us, for we are in the same love in which Christ is. Nothing can separate "us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord", @Romans 8: 39.
Ques. What is the force of the expression, "Herein has love been perfected with us"?
F.E.R. I think it is that there should be no ground for fear. It is the place in which God has set us in Christ.
Rem. We used to limit it to acceptance.
F.E.R. It goes beyond that. It is "the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them", @John 17: 26.
Ques. But this is learned experimentally, is it not?
F.E.R. I think so. I think the latter part of the chapter comes out and opens out the full blaze of divine love. The earlier part reads "as to us has been manifested the love of God ... that we might live through him", verse 9. Then it goes on to say, in verse 16 "*we* have known and have believed the love which God has to us". Then "Herein has love been perfected with us that we may have boldness in the day of judgment;" verse 17.
Ques. If it is judgment, it raises the question of righteousness, does it?
{8}
F.E.R. Yes, but the point is that the righteousness has so been established in regard to God, that He can put you in association with Christ, and the thought of being manifested before the judgment seat cannot alter that
Ques. "We might live through him", verse 9. Does the 'him' refer to Christ looked at as the second man?
F.E.R. Yes, the last Adam, a life-giving spirit, through whom we live.
Ques. What is the force of verse 14?
F.E.R. The apostle was in the full secret of divine love toward the world, and he had communion in the love of God for the world -- it is evangelical. If you come into the light of divine love, you must accept its application not only individually to you, but towards the whole world.
W.J. That shows the company should be evangelical.
Rem. This chapter, I suppose, contemplates the whole christian circle irrespective of growth.
F.E.R. I think it contemplates the light of God, into which all the christian circle should enter.
Rem. And in that sense the whole christian circle would have eternal life.
F.E.R. It is there for them. The point is that they should be in it so far as their consciousness is concerned.
Ques. What is the force of confessing Jesus as the Son of God?
F.E.R. There is the apprehension of Him as the Beginning and centre of a new order.
D.L.H. It is very clear that this epistle was written that we might know that we have eternal life.
F.E.R. The great point is to make clear to christians the conditions which God has appointed, and which subsist, and which nothing can move nor alter and in that way deliver them from the world. That is what I should seek to do. The object of all ministry is only to make clear to people what is subsisting -- what you may call, the unseen things. You want to make these things clear to people so that their souls may enter into them.
{9}
THE WITNESS WHICH GOD HAS SET HERE TO HIS SON
@1 John 5
F.E.R. I suppose this chapter is in a kind of way supplementary.
D.L.H. Would you mind giving just an outline in a few words of what has preceded, in order that we might know what it is supplementary to?
F.E.R. I think what has been mainly before the apostle in chapters 3 and 4, is the unfolding of the eternal life -- the connection in which we are blessed. This chapter is supplementary to the witness. That is, the Son of God is come and God has established a witness here to His Son. The fact that we have eternal life really becomes witness to the Son of God. "God hath given ... Son" (verse 11). The Son of God is come -- it is not that He is coming, but He has come.
D.L.H. Then the saints down here become a vessel in which this testimony is maintained?
F.E.R. I think so. Properly, eternal life abides in them and is in that sense a witness to the Son of God. All the conditions in which eternal life consists could not possibly come in except by the Son of God and the very fact of our being placed in this blessing is witness to the Son of God. You could not conceive anything more important than the thought of the witness which God has set here to His Son.
J.S.O. There are two thoughts connected with it -- the Spirit, the water and the blood in verse 8, and then in verse 10, "He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself".
F.E.R. Yes and then it also says, "This is the witness of God which he has witnessed concerning his Son" (verse 9).
J.S.O. Then you make it two witnesses?
F.E.R. Yes. They have their application to the believer, but the testimony is to the effect that the Son
{10}
of God is come. We are brought into eternal life and that life is in His Son -- hence there is of necessity a witness here to God's Son.
D.L.H. "Hath the witness in himself": is the idea of that in regard to testimony?
F.E.R. No, I do not think so. The witness there refers to the Spirit.
B. Do you connect that with profession?
F.E.R. Well, I think in a sense we have the Spirit.
D.L.H. Then the Spirit, water and blood (verse 8) are eternal witnesses and in verse 10 the Spirit is within -- an eternal witness, is it not?
F.E.R. It is very important to apprehend what the believer has in himself. He has the witness in himself, that is, the Spirit.
D.L.H. That has no particular reference to personal assurance has it?
F.E.R. That is not the point here. The point is that he has got the witness in himself that the Son of God is come. Then you get the other witnesses too -- the Spirit, water and blood. No one realises the water and blood except by the Spirit.
C. Is it the Spirit's presence here upon earth that is referred to in verse 8?
F.E.R. Yes, but of course you could not disconnect the thought of the Spirit from indwelling, because there must be a vessel for the Spirit, He has not become incarnate.
Ques. The fact that the Spirit is here is a witness?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. Would you say that this is giving effect here now to that which is spoken of by the Lord in @John 16?
F.E.R. I do not think it goes so far as that. It says, "He will shew you things to come" (@John 16: 13), and "All things that the Father has are mine" (@John 16: 15). I rather think this chapter does not go so far as that. The gospel is far greater than the epistle in its bearing.
Ques. I suppose it is true that eternal life waited for the Son of God -- it could not have been here before the
{11}
Son of God came?
F.E.R. No, it is the Son of God that brings it in.
Ques. The consciousness of the knowledge that He is come is eternal life?
F.E.R. Well, I think He has brought in all the conditions of eternal life which no one could do except the Son of God.
D.L.H. Would you say again what the conditions are -- I think it will help us?
F.E.R. I think you must get attachment and rule to begin with. The second condition is atmosphere, and thirdly light. These are what I should call the conditions of eternal life.
D.L.H. Do you say attachment and rule?
F.E.R. Yes. I do not mean in the sense of feeling, but as a bond, like the moon attached to the earth. You must get that, else you would have lawlessness. The first thing to overcome is lawlessness, the second thing to overcome is death; and the third thing is to bring the saints into the full light of God.
D.L.H. First you get the kingdom.
F.E.R. Not exactly. The kingdom is essential to it all, but the kingdom is not to my mind the thought of attachment or a bond.
D.L.H. But in the kingdom you get what you have been speaking of -- the Sun of righteousness.
F.E.R. I do not think that is the kingdom. The Sun of righteousness is normal, the kingdom recognises what is abnormal.
D.L.H. But I thought that the glory of His Person was the great point -- that He becomes the attractive object to attach hearts to Himself.
F.E.R. Yes, but that is all normal so far as I understand it. Christ will be the Sun and centre of the universe of bliss, when all kingdom has come to an end -- when there is no necessity for the kingdom.
D.L.H. But in a certain sense those two run side by side?
F.E.R. Yes.
{12}
J.S.O. Would you not say 'rule' is one of the conditions of eternal life?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.S.O. You are not looking at it subjectively in us?
F.E.R. No, you come under the influence of Christ, as you get in @Matthew 11 -- "Come unto me, all ye that labour". That is the only way we can escape lawlessness -- by coming under the rule of Christ. If we abide in Him we do not sin, as you get in chapter 3.
J.S.O. I thought you could not abide in Him apart from the Spirit.
F.E.R. No, but in a certain sense we are tested down here -- we prove ourselves by abiding, but we could not abide in Christ except by the Spirit, because the Spirit is the link which attaches us to Christ. John contemplates that people take that ground, but they are really tested by abiding.
D.L.H. The atmosphere I suppose is "love".
F.E.R. Yes, you come into the circle which is affected by the love of Christ (@1 John 3: 16). You get into that atmosphere.
D.L.H. What about "light"?
F.E.R. That comes out in chapter 4. You are brought into the full blaze of the light of the revelation of God in its application to us down here. The end of it is that we may have boldness in the day of judgment "because as he is, so are we in this world". Love is made perfect with us. The bond is something that is effectuated apart from the subjective work in the soul. I do not think anybody is attached to Christ except by the Spirit, but then, it is an extremely important point, because Christ is the Sun of righteousness and if we are attached to Him by the Spirit we have escaped from lawlessness. The proof of it is that you practise righteousness. He that doeth righteousness is righteous.
D.L.H. That is, that you have come into your orbit?
F.E.R. Yes, you are down here upon earth moving in the appointed orbit, and you carry out the will of God in that orbit, apart from the will of man.
{13}
H.C.A. In the first verse it says, "Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ" and in verse 5, "He that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God". What do you connect with those two?
F.E.R. I think the Christ is the expectation of all flesh, but I do not think the thought of the Christ represents the full height of the truth. I think the full height of the truth is that God has come in, Christ is the Son of God.
J.S.O. Would the latter go further than the Jewish faith -- "Thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel".
F.E.R. I do not think that comes up to the full height of it.
H.C.A. The second would be the power which sets aside the world system.
F.E.R. Yes -- God has come in to establish a system which is according to Himself.
J.S.O. The first is proof that he is born of God and the last is connected with victory over the world.
H.C.A. And the last would be a necessity for everyone who is to overcome the world.
Rem. The man in @John 9 was ready for that revelation.
F.E.R. Yes, in a certain sense I suppose he overcame the world, but he had been rather roughly handled by the world. I strongly suspect he was ready for chapter 19 of John.
H.C.A. Would the normal character of things be that you would reach the second by beginning with the first?
F.E.R. Yes. I think Christ is presented for faith. "Thus it behoved Christ to suffer" (@Luke 24: 46). You get the Christ presented for faith and forgiveness of sins preached in His name, but then, receiving the Spirit you are brought by the Spirit into the knowledge of the Son of God.
Rem. He is the Head of every man come in response to the desire of all nations.
{14}
F.E.R. I think there was expectation in a sense. Man did not exactly know what his want was, but it really was a head to set things right, and the point in this chapter is that God has come in, in the Son.
Ques. And if God has come in, it is to establish a new order?
F.E.R. Yes -- according to His love.
Rem. It is evident that the expectation of Christ was not limited to the Jew.
F.E.R. I do not think so. You get the expression, "the desire of all nations".
J.S.O. You would not limit the "anointed" Christ to Israel?
F.E.R. No. I think the Jew had altogether a too limited thought of Christ. No doubt He was to be the Son of Abraham and David, but the fact of His being Son of Abraham put Him outside of the Jew -- "in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed".
Rem. He was to be the "glory of thy people Israel".
F.E.R. Yes, but He was to be a light to the gentiles. Paul takes it up in @Acts 13: 47.
J.S.O. I suppose the "begotten" here goes beyond the idea of being born again and the kingdom?
F.E.R. I think so. The expression in the epistle conveys the idea that you are begotten into christianity -- begotten of God's testimony. You are according to God in nature.
J.S.O. From verse 1 to verse 5 we get christianity proper. He begins with "Jesus is the Christ" and ends with "Jesus is the Son of God".
Ques. What is the difference between the Son of God in @Psalm 2 and in this chapter?
F.E.R. In @Psalm 2 it does not go beyond the thought of His authority widening out over the nations -- "Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee". It is according to what you get in the beginning of Matthew and Luke -- born into the world 'incarnate', God claimed Him at once. He was miraculously born of the Holy Spirit and therefore the moment He was born God
{15}
claimed Him, but that does not come up to what you get in John's first epistle chapter 5, it would not fit in at all. Here it is the fact of His proper relation to the Father.
Ques. It is the same Person though?
F.E.R. Quite so, but looked at from a different point.
Ques. Is He not looked at here beyond death?
F.E.R. Yes, but not only so, He came to purge death -- He came to see to everything.
D.L.H. I should like to ask a question as to the second thought of the Son of God. Although that refers to the introduction of a divine Person into this world, does it not suppose His humanity?
F.E.R. I think so. It is always used in regard to Him in that way.
Ques. Is one right in saying that the confession of Jesus as the Son of God is the confession of Him where He is now -- the victorious One who has overcome the world?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.McK. Would Peter's confession come up to what we get in this chapter?
F.E.R. Yes, but I think the great point in the Son of God having come is that God has come in. You would not get that in @Psalm 2. In John the advent of the Son of God is really God coming in. That is the height of things now, and that I believe to be the true character of the first chapter of John's gospel. You also get much the same thought in Hebrews -- God has spoken unto us by His Son. The Spirit has come to bear witness to the Son of God. The Spirit could not witness to anybody short of a divine Person.
Ques. In verse 6, is there any reason why water comes before blood?
F.E.R. It seems to emphasise the blood -- expiation.
Ques. If the blood had not been included here, the question of expiation might have been raised in connection with what the apostle speaks of?
{16}
F.E.R. Yes. If you get things brought in according to God, you must get expiation. There must be a purging of sins if there is to be any blessing according to God.
Ques. What is in the thought of cleansing?
F.E.R. In the eye of God you want to be apart from defilement and in your own sense of things too you want to be apart from the defilement of the world. Take Naaman, he had to dip in Jordan seven times. He was defiled -- a leper -- and what he wanted was cleansing. Forgiveness of sins is preached in the name of the Lord Jesus but when a man turns to God by Christ, he has got cleansing. He goes down into the waters of Jordan in a sense. It is only by the death of Christ that you can get morally free of the world.
Ques. Is it not by the same thing that we get free from ourselves?
F.E.R. Quite so.
Ques. In the history of our souls we begin with the blood?
F.E.R. Yes, but what the blood really means is an announcement. An announcement goes out to man -- the forgiveness of sins -- but there is no announcement as to the cleansing, that comes in by faith in the death of Christ. A man receives the announcement and turns to God and turning to God by the death of Christ, he is cleansed.
Ques. What is the force of the expression, "the Spirit is truth"?
F.E.R. I think the two are equivalent. The truth is the Spirit or the Spirit is the truth. Christ is the truth objectively, but the Spirit is the truth in the believer. In having the Spirit you really have the truth.
D.L.H. And is it all bound up in the revelation of God?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so.
H.C.A. Does verse 5 set forth christian testimony?
F.E.R. I think the christian testimony is that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in His Son. I believe the proper connection of eternal life is with the
{17}
age to come. You will find that in all the synoptic gospels but the great point in the epistle of John is that eternal life has come in. Now God has given to us eternal life and this life is in His Son -- hence, properly speaking, christians are here a witness to the Son of God. We get eternal life really in faith, and in a way which is morally higher than the way in which millennial saints get it. I do not think it will be quite said of them that they have the Son as we have Him, yet the blessings must be established on the same principles on the part of God.
H.C.A. We have not very much of it in present enjoyment.
F.E.R. Well, I think the secret of that is that we are far too much accustomed to look inside, instead of to Christ. The great point is to apprehend what is in Christ. I believe it to be true that we are never called to believe anything about ourselves -- the great object of "faith" is Christ.
J.S.O. In the term "age to come" you include the idea of the heavenly part of it?
F.E.R. Yes, because all is put under Christ. The most important part is certainly the heavenly city.
J.S.O. And therefore our portion internally is a great deal more than ever could be eternally displayed?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so. I think we are undergoing an education at the present time for the function which the city is to fulfil in regard to the world to come.
Ques. I suppose the one begotten of God always does overcome the world and he increases in overcoming the world. The portions of it enlarge as we go on?
F.E.R. People have different notions of the world. The secret of it is, they fail to apprehend that the Son of God is come, and that in the fact of His having come, there is a new world. He has come as the beginning of another world -- that is what people need to apprehend.
D.L.H. But nobody starts with that.
F.E.R. No, I do not think there is the power for it; in the case of babes just converted, their ability to apprehend is extremely limited.
{18}
D.L.H. And in the nature of things they must be more occupied with themselves and what they have in Christ for themselves?
F.E.R. Yes, the first principle we apprehend is that, but it is a long time before we apprehend what Christ is for God, and I do not think any apprehend what Christ is for God until they get into the holiest.
M. Is that line of things in John's gospel -- that we may learn what Christ is for God?
F.E.R. Yes.
Rem. Verse 18 gives what is normal.
F.E.R. They are wonderful statements at the close of the chapter -- see verse 20. I take it "the true God" is what is genuine -- proved to be so by the very fact of revelation. Those who profess in a kind of way to be gods dare not reveal themselves, but the very fact that God has come out proves Him to be the true God.
Ques. Are the "idols" just the opposite?
F.E.R. Yes. If an idol were made manifest it would prove to be a demon, but the Son of God has come into the presence of man so that He has been seen and known.
D.L.H. Eternal life is presented in the Old Testament as a kind of sphere of things?
F.E.R. Yes. You may depend upon it, principles which prevail in the physical universe must prevail in the moral universe. The very first principle of blessing must be rule -- like the rule of the sun.
D.L.H. But in the order of creation, light comes first.
F.E.R. Yes, but in the order of apprehension light comes last. You begin by coming into righteousness, then you come into the christian circle, then you come into the light (chapter 4).
Ques. Will you say one word on, "We are in him that is true"?
F.E.R. It explains it immediately afterwards. We are in Christ -- abiding in Him.
Ques. It is not simply individual?
F.E.R. No, I think it takes in the whole company.
{19}
"In him" is the true place of the whole company. The great object of John's writing is to awaken people to the realisation of all that into which they are brought. Many christians find a great difficulty in putting all these things together, John points out that if a christian practises righteousness, he is abiding in Christ -- he is righteous as He is righteous. Then, when people are converted they are brought into the christian circle -- they love the brethren. Well now, John says they have passed out of death into life. He wakens the believer up to the reality of what he is brought into, then in chapter 4 he takes up the light of God. He says if you love, you know God. Then he unfolds all the full light of divine love. It is really proving what is practical in the christian, and starting from that point to awaken christians to a sense of the atmosphere into which they are brought.
H.C.A. It is like working from the known to the unknown.
F.E.R. Yes. The things are known in a certain sense, but not intelligently. John's point was to bring them into these things intelligently.
{20}
THE MOMENT YOU ARE IN CHRIST YOU ARE UNDER RULE
@1 John 5
D.L.H. Would you mind giving a little summary of the epistle, which I suppose is brought to a conclusion when he says "These things have I written unto you ..". (verse 13).
F.E.R. I think the Spirit of God has opened up the conditions in which eternal life consists. They were always there, but by the work of God in a believer, he becomes conscious of the conditions by which he is surrounded, and upon which he is dependent. In that way he became conscious that he has eternal life. God has established all the conditions of life in Christ and the point is for us to enter into them.
Ques. Does he not seem to give three very different reasons for writing this epistle? "That your joy may be full", (chapter 1: 4), "Because your sins are forgiven you", (chapter 2: 12) and "that ye may know that ye have eternal life" (chapter 5: 13).
F.E.R. The second one is because he writes -- the ground. I think in chapter 1 you get the great basis of fellowship and in chapter 2 the apostle addresses them according to the degree in which they were in accord with him. He takes them up in that way -- in different classes -- babes, young men, and fathers. That indicates the measure in which they were in accord with the apostle, and because they are in accord with him, he addresses them, I think. Chapters 3 and 4 give the elements of eternal life. They show the conditions which God has established in order that those conditions may be life to us. The first important condition is the rule of Christ. It is in that way we get salvation from sin and the wicked one. The next condition is the christian circle through which we get salvation from the world and the third is the full light of God. Chapter 4 is the full light of God coming in. God has said, "Let there be light"
{21}
and light has come to pass. It is very much like it was at the beginning, in @Genesis 1: 3.
Ques. Do you mean the revelation of what God is?
F.E.R. The revelation of what God is in its application to us. Not simply the abstract idea that God is love, but you get the love in its application to us down here from beginning to end. Light is one of the essential conditions of life, and if we love, we love in light.
Ques. And is the application of the love of God to us, light?
F.E.R. Quite so, and you get the bearing of it in regard to us -- it is that in which we love.
J.S.O. And the light is inseparable from the knowledge of God.
F.E.R. Quite so. If you had not the capability, the light would be useless, just as it would be if a new-born child were blind.
D.L.H. The light would be of no benefit to us. Does not that correspond with what Peter speaks of -- being brought to God -- brought into God's own circle, to His side of things?
F.E.R. Yes, "that ye might set forth the excellencies of him who has called you out of darkness to his wonderful light" @1 Peter 2: 9. His wonderful light is the revelation of Himself.
D.L.H. I suppose nobody begins there.
F.E.R. No, you do not begin there as to your consciousness of things but everything is there.
D.L.H. I suppose we all begin pretty much on our own side.
F.E.R. We must do. There is no capability otherwise. A man is convicted in conscience and brought to a sense of what he is in relation to God, and the only possible way that he can be met is on the ground of grace.
J.S.O. "The increase of God", @Colossians 2: 19. Would that give you the idea of growth in the knowledge of God?
F.E.R. Yes.
D.L.H. I suppose you get various expressions in
{22}
other parts of Scripture pretty much answering to what you get here like being "brought to God" in Peter?
F.E.R. Yes, because all the writers are presenting christianity. Each presents his own things in a particular point of view, but at the same time, they are all teaching christianity -- they are not adverse. You get three prominent thoughts in the Old Testament -- blessing, dwelling and ruling. Blessing in Abraham, dwelling in Israel, and ruling in David but you get all these three thoughts taken up, I have no doubt whatever, in Christ -- eternal life. They are all fulfilled in a way, only you get them in the converse order, because God begins with rule -- He establishes rule, consequent upon that you get God dwelling, then you get the blessing. I suppose it is referred to in @Psalm 133, "There hath Jehovah commanded the blessing, life for evermore" (verse 3). The point is that all things have come in now. You have got the dwelling, and so you get the ruling and blessing.
D.L.H. And that brings us to the witness?
F.E.R. Yes. It is because we are in the blessing that we get the witness -- in having the Son we are brought into blessing and hence it is, we are witness to the Son.
D.L.H. So that we anticipate what will come out fully in the world to come?
F.E.R. I think so -- what will be fulfilled publicly is really brought to pass spiritually now, because Christ is there.
D.L.H. And now the great question is having the Son.
F.E.R. Yes, of course, we have the Son and He has "given us an understanding that we should know him that [is] true; and we are in him that [is] true, in his Son Jesus Christ". @1 John 5: 20.
Rem. I suppose we get the advantage of that in the Spirit. The Spirit is the truth -- we have the Spirit.
F.E.R. Exactly. The Spirit is witness because the Spirit is the truth. I take it the connection is that the Spirit is witness to Christ as last Adam, as the Son of God. Of course, the Son of God is not here, but the
{23}
Spirit has become a witness of the Son of God. We have the triple witness -- the Spirit, the water and the blood -- all as witness to the Son, the last Adam.
D.L.H. Do you think that the conditions of eternal life which you have spoken of, come out in contrast with things that are opposite?
F.E.R. Yes, exactly, because rule comes in to do away with lawlessness. Christ is the "Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world" @John 1: 29. He brings rule in and in that way abolishes lawlessness.
Ques. Where is the rule found now?
F.E.R. In the hand of Christ. You are "married to another", @Romans 7.
Ques. Would you say it is found in @1 John 2?
F.E.R. I would say it is found in chapter 3. If you abide in Christ you do not sin, you have escaped from lawlessness -- that is the first great thing. People are like fragments flying about in space without any attachment -- they are lawless. Christ has been manifested to take away our sins and in Him is no sin, and if you abide in Christ you come under rule.
D.L.H. You were saying last time that rule is what is normal -- not necessarily the putting down of evil.
F.E.R. How do we stand on the earth? It is by the influence of rule. Why do we get rain? It is all by the influence of rule in the universe around us.
D.L.H. Now with regard to the idea of eternal life, about the "hope of eternal life which God, who cannot lie, promised before the ages of time" @Titus 1: 2. That, of course, carries us back to a period before any sin came in at all, before death came in.
F.E.R. Yes, but everything God has proposed in Christ.
H.C.A. Then would not eternal life be in view after all those things have passed away?
F.E.R. I do not think that is the idea. All God's purposes were centred in the last Adam, Christ. God set Adam, the innocent man, upon the scene first, but God had in His counsel the last Adam. You get the type
{24}
of Christ and the church in Adam and Eve before sin came in -- it was the last Adam that was in the mind of God.
H.C.A. If it existed in the mind of God before, does it not continue to exist after sin came in?
F.E.R. Other things come in I have no doubt, a new heaven and a new earth were in the mind of God, so far as that goes.
D.L.H. When you say other things come in, what do you have in your mind?
F.E.R. Changes come in. For instance, we are changed -- "we shall not all fall asleep, but we shall all be changed", @1 Corinthians 15: 51, and will go to heaven. Then again changes come in in regard to the earth -- there is to be a new heaven and a new earth. Things have been interfered with by the working of evil and I think Scripture brings before us the working out of God's ways and the bringing of the heaven and the earth into harmony. We really know very little about what is beyond. We have only just the bare statement of what is to be, and it does not occupy very many verses in Scripture.
J.S.O. You could hardly conceive of anything more wonderful than what you get in the epistle of John.
F.E.R. Morally, I do not think you could, but at the same time, looking at it from another point of view, you get a new heaven and new earth in which righteousness dwells, where evil is completely abolished and where there is no more death.
J.S.O. But when you get to the Person it seems to me you are beyond all dispensational ideas.
F.E.R. Yes, but He takes a place in regard to dispensations -- He is the One in whom all things are headed up.
J.S.O. It seems to me that the epistle of John carries you beyond the mere display of things to what must be moral.
F.E.R. I think all John's writings take the down line. They are in contrast to those of Paul -- who takes
{25}
the up line. The nature of all John's writings is the bringing in of the Son of God into the world.
J.S.O. That is true, but still, when we are transferred from the place into which God has been brought and where He has been revealed, you could hardly conceive that the blessing will be greater in the higher scene -- heaven.
F.E.R. No. But I do not think John takes you up there. I do not think anybody knows or can know what we will have in heaven. Paul was caught up into heaven, and he heard unspeakable words which it was not lawful for him to utter. Therefore there must be very wonderful things in heaven.
D.L.H. In order to understand a subject like eternal life you have to take notice of the mould in which it is cast, I mean all the surroundings in which it is often spoken of.
F.E.R. Yes, it is connected with the glory of God and the triumph of God over all that has come in. But the Son of God is the One by whom the glory of God is established and by whom all that is not of God is set aside.
Ques. Would you accept the last chapter of the epistle as the down line? Please explain it.
F.E.R. I think we are here as the witness. In a future day God will command the blessing in Zion, and the revelation of God and the vessel of blessing is all found in Christ, but meanwhile we are left here in witness to Him.
Ques. Would you say a word on being in Him on the down line?
F.E.R. We abide in Him. No one is safe unless he abides in Him. You cannot escape from lawlessness except by abiding in Christ. It is really the secret of deliverance from the lawlessness of the world and the power of the wicked one. I do not think people quite appreciate rule somehow.
D.L.H. Well, we ought to appreciate it, certainly.
F.E.R. It is the only thing in which you can possibly
{26}
escape from lawlessness. Everything in the universe can be classed under two heads -- rule or lawlessness. You are either in rule or lawlessness, and the only escape from lawlessness is by coming into rule. And the way of coming into rule is by being attached to Christ -- you have the Spirit of Christ. A man is in righteousness because he has come into rule, and in that way he has escaped lawlessness.
Ques. Would one under rule be marked by love to the brethren and the practice of righteousness?
F.E.R. The practice of righteousness. "He that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous". To put it in simple, plain language you are here simply to do the will of God.
Rem. The loving one another is really the practise of righteousness.
F.E.R. Well, it is, but the two things are put distinct in that chapter.
J.S.O. It is rather the result here of the fact that he is begotten of God.
F.E.R. Yes. You must have the child born into the conditions. All the conditions of love were established before ever the child came into them.
J.S.O. And you must have the nature which the conditions set forth?
F.E.R. Yes, the conditions and the one who is begotten into these conditions exactly correspond.
H.C.A. In reference to eternal life, would you say that Christ's coming down here was that it might be known in the present time?
F.E.R. I think it is that which God intended to establish before the world was for the blessing of man. He loved man, and it was His purpose to establish eternal life for the blessing of man, and I think God has done it. Of course, it is all spiritual in the present time. Our being subject to Christ is spiritual. You cannot be subject to Christ like you have subjection in this world -- it is all spiritual. Then again, our relations to one another in connection with God and dwelling in
{27}
the house of God are spiritual. We have passed from death unto life because we love the brethren, but our connection with the brethren is spiritual not as in a family.
D.L.H. So that we have got already the powers of the world to come?
F.E.R. Yes, all the elements are present only in a spiritual way. I do not think we can be worse off than they will be in the millennium, on the other hand, we are better off, because we have everything in a spiritual way.
D.L.H. What about the knowledge of the Father?
F.E.R. You get the revelation of divine love in its application to us -- as the apostle says, "*We* have seen, and testify, that the Father has sent the Son [as] Saviour of the world". You could not know the love of God apart from the Father and the Son. It is the revelation of God -- the Father and the Son -- which gives us the apprehension of the love of God.
J.S.O. Would not the Father's house give the idea of the consummation of the blessing of that?
F.E.R. I think that surpasses everything that we know down here.
J.S.O. You mean surpass in the way that the conditions are changed?
F.E.R. Quite so. So I think being with the Father in the Father's own house must surpass anything that one can know down here.
J.S.O. Would you sever the idea of that from eternal life at all?
F.E.R. I think all that is going on now is a kind of education to suit us for scenes above.
Ques. The revelation greater then, than now?
F.E.R. No. I think when God has got you into His own habitation, you must come into enjoyments which you could not come into down here in the scene of exercises. It is a scene where everything is ordered according to God's mind. 'There no stranger God shall meet thee'.
Rem. A great deal of the energy of the Spirit now is
{28}
spent in resisting the flesh.
F.E.R. Yes, then God is known to us a great deal in the present time in the way of discipline. Of course, that will not be the case above. Then you cannot have love made perfect with you in the day of judgment.
D.L.H. The Father's house is rather on the up line, is it not?
F.E.R. I think it is, yet it is almost the only allusion you get on the part of John to our place above.
J.S.O. That is what I meant. In regard to the down line one quite agrees, only does not the Father's house give you the enjoyment of the fulness and completeness of blessings which have been brought to you on the down line here?
F.E.R. I think it will be very different up there. The whole position of saints and everything will be so completely changed -- we shall reign in life through Him.
D.L.H. Would you carry that thought into eternity?
F.E.R. I do not think it is carried into eternity. It is all connected with the world to come.
J.S.O. You do not think the Father's house will be limited to the world to come?
F.E.R. No, the Father's house will take in the universe.
J.S.O. But for us?
F.E.R. Oh no. Because we come into what is final and eternal in the Father's house.
Ques. Would the many mansions bring in every family in the Father's house?
F.E.R. Yes. I suppose so.
D.L.H. With regard to the children in chapter 2 they are said to know the Father. How far ought we to carry that?
F.E.R. I think it is so to speak, the first principle of christianity; because christianity is faith in the Son of God. The glad tidings is concerning God's Son and the first principle of christianity is that you know the Father.
D.L.H. How do the children reach the circle that we have been speaking about?
{29}
F.E.R. I think John is writing to awaken them to it. The defect was they had not learned to put things together. So with people at the present day -- everything is there, but they have not learned to put things together.
D.L.H. And sometimes the teachers set to work to put them together, and mix up things in people's minds.
F.E.R. I do not think anybody but the Spirit of God can put things together. Take those three simple thoughts -- ruling, dwelling and blessing -- if they are put together in your own soul so that each one is available to you, then it is that you become conscious of them in eternal life. We had a very interesting reading in Manchester on the concurrence of eternal life and salvation -- the two are necessarily concurrent. If you come into all that of which eternal life consists, you come of necessity into salvation. If you come under rule you are saved from lawlessness. In the christian circle there is salvation from the world.
Ques. How do you account for things not being put together in our souls?
F.E.R. I do not know. It is a very great grace when it is done. I am sure I can thank God even for the little way in which these things have been put together. Things have been extremely difficult on account of that from which we have escaped. Everything that is of God really in the common thought of people is connected with the world.
J.S.O. There has been a way of applying mighty truths almost irrespective of the way in which people have been going on.
F.E.R. Yes, and it is damaging in the extreme. Objective and subjective must go together. A creature, being a creature cannot do without rule, nor without an atmosphere and cannot do without light.
Ques. So that attachment to Christ would be important, would it?
F.E.R. It is the first principle. The way of God is to present to you attraction in Christ, but the object of it is
{30}
to attract you to Christ that you may be attached to Christ by the Spirit so that you are in Christ and the moment you are in Christ you are under rule.
Rem. In that way things get put together.
F.E.R. Yes. You are under rule and you are no longer lawless, you are righteous as He is righteous.
J.S.O. When you speak of attachment to Christ, you do not mean reaching any great point?
F.E.R. No, it is only like the moon being attached to the earth.
J.S.O. It is really the proper normal order -- christianity on the subjective and objective side?
F.E.R. Yes, every believer is attached to Christ, and being attached you abide, and then you come under rule.
{31}
THE NECESSITY FOR VITALITY WHEN DECAY SETS IN
@2 Timothy 1
F.E.R. In connection with the thought of "life in Christ Jesus" salvation comes into view pretty much, both here and in Titus. You get the same principle in Revelation, in the addresses to the seven churches. In Ephesus, there is the defection of the church from its first estate, and in Smyrna the Lord speaks about life -- He was dead, and lives, and He promises the crown of life to the overcomer who "shall in no wise be injured of the second death".
D.L.H. Then what is vital, I suppose, comes into prominence in connection with the selection of the professing body.
F.E.R. Yes, because there is no hope, so far as the church as a light bearer is concerned, for restoration. It will never be restored from that point of view. I think in the early days of christianity what kept them pretty much was fellowship, service and that kind of thing -- all in fact which was connected with the presence of the Spirit. Their attention was taken up with that.
H.C.A. Would you say what your thought is about life here, before there is any question of death at all?
F.E.R. It was all bound up in the thought of God and Christ Jesus.
H.C.A. Then does christianity bring saints into the good of what was in the purpose of God before the world was?
F.E.R. Yes. When decay had set in with the professing body the Spirit of God seems to fall back upon what is vital. I do not think it is at all difficult to understand that in the early days of the church they were taken up pretty much with the presence of the Spirit, and all the mighty effects consequent upon it. You find that in the Acts.
D.L.H. I suppose the fact is, there was a good vital
{32}
condition at that time and the question as to vitality did not arise?
F.E.R. No, they were in the enjoyment of the truth and fellowship, the abundance of gift, and the powers of the world to come, all of which in a certain sense were connected with the energy of the Spirit. We have very little of that in the present state of the church and we cannot attempt to imitate it. We cannot go back to Pentecost, and restore the original state of the church.
H.C.A. What is the exact force of promise of life here in the first verse, and in Titus?
F.E.R. I think it is that to which God saw fit to engage Himself.
H.C.A. When would that be?
F.E.R. In eternal purpose.
H.C.A. Was it all before Him in Christ at that time?
F.E.R. No doubt about it.
H.C.A. Then if we go on to the future -- is the thought that of necessity everything must be established in Christ, so that saints come into the thought of God in consequence of their association with Christ?
F.E.R. I think now. The truth is that God has established everything in Christ now. Christ is there and God has established everything in Him so that it can all come to light; it has come to light.
Ques. I suppose you would say chosen in Christ is pretty much the same as what is here?
F.E.R. Yes, all was in connection with the eternal purpose.
Ques. Are the actings of the Spirit intended to make that promise effective in us?
F.E.R. It must be so. I think there are two lines of truth which are pretty distinct. One is what God has established in Christ, and the other is the work of God in the believer. I do not know that we keep them sufficiently distinct in our minds, but I think it is important.
Ques. In the first verse is it the apostleship or the will of God which is connected with the purpose of
{33}
eternal life?
F.E.R. I think the apostleship is on that line -- "according to ... Jesus".
H.L.A. When he says in Titus eternal life, does not that go on to the full display and good of it -- what it is in the thought of God?
F.E.R. There is not much difference of thought between eternal life in Christ Jesus and life in Christ Jesus. For instance in John's first epistle he says, "God has given to us eternal life; and this life is in his Son". They must be substantially the same thing. Here it is the "promise of life in Christ Jesus", which would convey pretty much the same thought. 'Eternal' gives its character to it, but the expression 'life' carries it.
H.C.A. God's thought of life is seen in the tree of life in the midst of the garden.
F.E.R. Yes, it was in the midst of men, but the truth of His life could not come out until Christ came.
S.L.O. Does life involve resurrection?
F.E.R. Well, I think it must on our part. It is the bringing in of the light of life and incorruptibility. You could not get that in any application to us except in resurrection; or at all events, a change equivalent to resurrection. "... this corruptible must needs put on incorruptibility", @1 Corinthians 15: 53.
Ques. Is that the force of what we get in Jude, "awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life", @Jude 21?
F.E.R. I suppose so.
M. In what sense is it the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ?
F.E.R. I think it is the same principle on which the apostle says, "The Lord grant to him to find mercy from the Lord in that day" (verse 18). There is a sovereign mercy of the Lord which comes to pass in that day, and you get the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
H.C.A. Is the thought of salvation to deliver from all the influence of death which has come in?
{34}
F.E.R. Yes; life in Christ Jesus on the one hand must of necessity involve salvation on the other, and salvation must be commensurate with the blessing. It runs concurrently with it -- salvation from what is contrary to the blessing.
H.C.A. What do you think is the order -- is it that life should be more entered into in order that salvation might be known?
F.E.R. I think salvation would be known. If a man entered into righteousness, he would be set free from lawlessness. By entering into life, you pass out of death. If you enter into light, you pass out of the region of the powers of darkness. If you abide in Christ you do not sin -- you are delivered from lawlessness. You get salvation in that way from sin. If you love the brethren, you are conscious that you have passed out of death into life -- you are free from death and the world. And so, as you come into light, you are delivered from the rulers of the darkness of this world.
H.C.A. So that the good of life really is the way of deliverance?
F.E.R. Life in another man (objective, in that way) must involve deliverance from all that came in by the first man. Sin and death and darkness all came in by the first man, but then, if we are led into the consciousness of blessing which subsists in the second Man we escape from all that.
Rem. I suppose it is practically that the soul is satisfied and happy, and does not lust for other things.
F.E.R. I think so. Salvation is involved. Life is not a theory -- life is life.
S.L.O. Adam did not have any of these blessings before he fell?
F.E.R. No, I do not think it was established in Adam or any other man.
Ques. He was only a figure of Him who was to come?
F.E.R. Yes. He could involve other people in his fall, and he did. Of course, if Adam had remained as God made him, they would have been like him. They
{35}
could not have entered into a blessing which did not properly belong to them. If we enter into that which is in Christ Jesus, we enter into what properly does not belong to us, but it is there for every man. God has established in Christ, the last Adam, life for every man. It is not that everyone gets it, but it is established there for everyone. I think the application of it is universal. "God so loved ... life" (@John 3: 16). I do not think it would be wrong to preach eternal life.
D.L.H. But then salvation goes along with that too?
F.E.R. Yes, but salvation is in Christ Jesus. Whatever God has established in Christ Jesus is available to every man.
D.L.H. So that in the testimony of the gospel both these things are really presented?
F.E.R. Yes, and I think you are right in presenting them. For instance, the apostle said to the Ephesians, "Having heard the word of the truth, the glad tidings of your salvation". In the gospel there was presented how God had found salvation for the gentiles. "The grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men" -- there is no limit there.
Ques. What is growing up into salvation?
F.E.R. It is virtually the same thing as growth into life. It is just in proportion as that goes on that you really grow up into salvation -- the two are bound to go together.
J.S.O. It is very much in the Acts. "Paul and Barnabas spoke boldly and said, It was necessary ..". (@Acts 13: 46, 47).
F.E.R. Exactly, that is what Christ was to be.
S.L.O. Then do both begin with the receiving of the Holy Spirit?
F.E.R. I think so, because I cannot possibly conceive of any salvation except in the power of the Spirit, and the Spirit is the well of water that springs up into everlasting life.
Ques. The Spirit is the one that brings life and maintains life?
{36}
F.E.R. If Christ be in you, the Spirit is life because of righteousness. I think that our tendency has been to be too ecclesiastical, as though we could restore the order of the church.
H.C.A. Mr. Darby used to say we could be a witness to the ruin.
F.E.R. I think brethren were disposed to present a kind of pattern of what the original was. You cannot go back upon the past. When the past has failed, you must go forward to the future.
D.L.H. I suppose the light of the past should regulate us?
F.E.R. I think you are actuated more by the light of what is coming. In the Old Testament the Spirit of God continually reproaches Israel with their defectiveness, but He leads them on to the future. He brings Christ and the kingdom out.
H.C.A. But here you do go back to the thought of God as to life.
F.E.R. But it all refers to what is coming. Life is all connected with the manifestation of the last Adam. It is hid for the moment but it carries you on to manifestation. Then again, another thing comes into view, namely, the heavenly city. I strongly suspect that if we were really affected by the truth of life in Christ Jesus and the heavenly city we should reproduce without effort so far the original order of the church.
S.L.O. Morally?
F.E.R. Yes, because really there could be nothing opposed between the order of the church and the heavenly city morally. I think all moral principles which came out in the church as God established it at first, really must come out in the heavenly city.
S.L.O. Only there is no evil to contend against.
F.E.R. No, but you get moral principles -- righteousness, holiness, unity.
H.C.A. I suppose the light is Christ?
F.E.R. Yes.
H.C.A. That would be the same as in the churches --
{37}
they were set here as light bearers.
F.E.R. Yes.
S.L.O. Then would you call the heavenly city the manifestation of life?
F.E.R. Every proper moral characteristic comes out in it -- righteousness, holiness, unity -- it has the glory of God and her light like unto a stone most precious.
D.L.H. So that just as we are under the power of the Spirit now, these moral elements are produced?
F.E.R. I think so; but the point is what will the Spirit engage our attention with, with the past or the future? I speak quite under correction; I think that when everything which God has set up externally has failed, the Spirit of God will not occupy you with the past, but with the future. That is a principle which runs through Scripture. No one can get any proper apprehension of Christ unless he sees what is going to mark Christ in glory.
Ques. I suppose you would say that "life in Christ" looks on. It would be something like you get in @Colossians 3 -- it is hid?
F.E.R. Yes -- when Christ who is our life is manifested.
S.L.J. Is quickened together with Christ, more than receiving the Spirit?
F.E.R. Yes, I think it indicates the effectual working of the Spirit in you, so that you are quickened together with Him. It is of immense importance to apprehend the vast system of blessing of which Christ is the centre and Head, in all the extent and vastness of it -- I do not care by what name you call it, that is not the point to my mind; then to understand the particular part which the church has in it.
S.L.O. Is that according to Ephesians?
F.E.R. Yes; in heading up all things in Christ in whom the church has obtained an inheritance.
H.C.A. Was not the death of Christ the closing up of the first order of things?
F.E.R. Yes.
{38}
H.C.A. God keeps us in the good of the death of Christ. Every Lord's day that is what comes before us, and as to the future it is the glory of Christ. The humiliation on the one side, and the glory on the other.
F.E.R. Yes. You get it here (see verses 9 and 10). It is a tremendous expression. He has annulled death and brought life and incorruptibility to light by the gospel.
H.C.A. Would that be what he refers to as the form of sound words?
F.E.R. I do not know. I have no doubt the truth was expressed in the form of sound words, but no form of words would convey the spirit of the thing. Christ has annulled death and brought life and incorruptibility to light. It means life and incorruptibility in regard to all that which comes under Christ, because life and incorruptibility will no doubt more or less characterise the whole universe of which Christ is the Head.
S.L.O. Is incorruptibility the impossibility of any sin or evil coming in?
F.E.R. I think it is the removal of the pressure of the corruption which everything is under. Christ will remove it -- the creation itself will be delivered from the bondage of corruption. Christ has annulled the rule of death, and it is exceedingly possible that some of us will never die at all.
Ques. I suppose incorruptibility has to say to the body chiefly?
F.E.R. I think it has to say to the whole creation. I do not think incorruptibility will mark the state of man when Christ is manifested as the last Adam. Sin will no longer reign by death. Life and incorruptibility will come to pass.
D.L.H. But then it is already brought to light by the gospel. That seems to me to be such an immensely important point in christianity -- you have the light of the world to come.
F.E.R. I will tell you a remarkable expression in Romans -- "the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to
{39}
the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest", @Romans 16: 25, 26. You have got to preach Jesus Christ in the gospel according to the revelation of the mystery -- make it known unto all nations for the obedience of faith.
D.L.H. Then you take the mystery not merely to be the church, but the mystery of Christ?
F.E.R. Yes; the mystery of God's will. See how the apostle goes into the ways of God and brings in the restoration of Israel. Then in the Revelation you get the mystery of God finished. When everything is manifested there is no longer mystery, but it is the preaching of Jesus Christ according to the mystery. He has made known unto us the mystery of His will ... to head up all things in Christ (@Ephesians 1). It is the preaching of Jesus Christ as the great Head.
Ques. As in @Colossians 2?
F.E.R. Yes; in Him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Christ has annulled death and brought life and incorruptibility to light, so that He might take the place of Head and in the system of which He is Head death should not be reckoned.
Ques. You do not find that in the Acts?
F.E.R. No; it is more after that transient state.
S.L.O. Not till the failure?
F.E.R. No.
Ques. What would be the testimony of our Lord in verse 8?
F.E.R. I think it is the testimony which the Lord had committed to them. I think the Lord had committed a certain testimony special to Paul.
Ques. Would you say it was confined to one truth, or a common statement?
F.E.R. I think it is very much more the testimony of life in Christ Jesus; that is, that He has annulled death and brought life and incorruptibility to light by the gospel. Christ is going to prevail. It is a wonderful thing -- you see everything established in Christ. To begin with, you get rule established in Christ -- that is the first
{40}
element of blessing; just like rule is established in the sun. You may depend upon it you will never get a universe set right until everything is brought under rule -- the rule is established in Christ.
Ques. In a few words, what is the testimony of our Lord?
F.E.R. I think it is what is spoken of here -- the annulling of death and the bringing to light life and incorruptibility.
Ques. Not quite the same as "my doctrine"?
F.E.R. Well, I think it was Paul's doctrine according to the revelation of the mystery. I think the twelve preached Christ more in relation to the Jew. For instance, in Acts we read Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins, and God opened a door to the gentiles, but I do not think you get them presenting Christ as the Sun and centre of a vast universe. That comes out by Paul.
Ques. Can the testimony of the Lord be preached apart from subjection to Him as Lord?
F.E.R. If you preach, you preach in fidelity to the Lord.
Ques. That brings His rule over you in preaching and will result in what Paul speaks of further on as to suffering for these things?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.McK. I suppose that kind of preaching will never be popular -- "me his prisoner".
F.E.R. The fact is, it is not popular because it is too unsubstantial. Some people would perhaps call it transcendental.
D.L.H. I think they want something that is connected with man that is, and I suppose that is the secret of what the apostle said, "Be not thou therefore ashamed", etc. (verse 8).
F.E.R. I think so. If you want to be successful, adapt christianity to this world. Man would applaud you for that.
H.C.A. Is not the testimony of the Lord the indication
{41}
of what is pleasing to God in another?
F.E.R. I think the passage shows us what it is. He says, 'It is made manifest' (verse 10). That is what I should call the testimony of our Lord. What is established in Christ is really what God intends for the universe. For instance, the power of God that wrought in the resurrection of Christ is the power of God to us-ward who believe, so we have faith in the operation of God who raised Him from the dead. It all begins in the church. Christ is the head, but then it does not end with the church.
D.L.H. But then we are in this singular position that we have the light of these things before they are actually made manifest.
F.E.R. Yes; but it is made manifest to us. The church is so instructed in every way of God that it must occupy a place which none else can occupy.
J.S.O. For instance, sonship. Would that be manifest in a future day elsewhere?
F.E.R. I think it will -- not at all in the same sense, but you get the word applied. For instance, all those who are raised, are the sons of the resurrection. So Israel is God's son. The word is used in a very indefinite way. Sonship in our case gets its character from our association with Christ, connected with heavenly places.
J.S.O. Yes; so with the bride and the body.
F.E.R. Yes. I think we make a fatal mistake if we neglect the present opportunity in the power of the Spirit. People may neglect every advantage and opportunity in the present world -- it will pay in the long run. The point of the heavenly Jerusalem is that it is the light of the universe. The nations shall walk in the light of it and the kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honour unto it.
Ques. Would that be moral and actual?
F.E.R. There is a great deal of what is actual but we have to take care of what is moral. I believe that in the thoughts of God the physical is dependent upon the moral.
{42}
Rem. The resurrection of the body will depend, I suppose, upon the moral.
F.E.R. Exactly. God is entirely governed by moral considerations, and the moral must govern the physical. The fall came in consequence of moral considerations, and I have no doubt future dealings of God with the earth will be governed by moral considerations. By faith we understand the worlds were framed by the word of God. Even in regard to the framing of the world God had what was moral in view. The word of God brings in the moral thought -- it brings in the intelligence of God. The world was created in that way to be, I should suppose, the scene of God's ways.
D.L.H. What holds good in the physical world holds good in the moral universe?
F.E.R. Yes, and I think you will find the best illustration of spiritual things is really found in the natural universe.
S.L.O. The natural universe was made for that very purpose, was it not?
F.E.R. Yes -- to illustrate in a way, the spiritual. I think the great point is that in everything that exists in nature -- the course of the world, the heavens and the earth -- you see moral intelligence, that is the idea of it. The worlds were framed by the word of God. Christ comes in as the true Sun of righteousness, who is to arise with healing in His wings. Then you get rule brought into the moral universe, every family kept in its proper orbit. The principle of rule brought in righteousness and that kind of thing.
{43}
CHRISTIANITY IN ITS TRUE CHARACTER
APOSTLESHIP AND PRIESTHOOD OF CHRIST
@Hebrews 3
The admonition at the beginning of the chapter must have been remarkable in the ears of the Jew. He was not accustomed to connect the idea of the apostle and high priest in one person. In the Jewish system these were distinguished; now they are one, the apostle is as good as the priest. Moses was faithful in God's house, but Aaron was not. Moses represented law, and Aaron infirmity; now we turn from that to grace and ability of which Christ is the expression. There is grace in Christ, and ability. He is able to save to the uttermost. Christ as the living bread came down from heaven. He is the embodiment of grace. Aaron could not help the people spiritually. He was himself encompassed with infirmity. Now in Christ we get *ability*. The apostle is connected with grace; we are not under law but under grace; the new system was established in grace. Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
Ques. Is not @Hebrews 4 grace coming in, in connection with the priest?
F.E.R. Yes, but that is detail. I was speaking of what characterises the system, which is inaugurated by the apostle. Christ is the Mediator of the new covenant, and what characterises the new covenant is grace.
Ques. What is the difference between apostle and mediator?
F.E.R. They are near akin; the mediator comes into establish. The great point is to see the application of these things to us, not merely to Israel. We get the value of it when we turn away from systematic christianity and turn to a *Person*; then we find liberty. There is in systematic religion what people like, but you never get into liberty, save in the consideration of a person. The
{44}
point in the apostle is to maintain the calling at its height; the function of the priest is to maintain *us* at the height of the calling. The calling is that we are to be conformed to Christ. God is "bringing many sons unto glory" (@Hebrews 2: 10). Sonship is conformity to Christ *where Christ is*. It is a great point to see the application of these things to us. The direct application of the chapter was to the Hebrews at that day. When we came out of the entanglements of christianity, from the state church, and dissenting places, we were not delivered from those things to come into another system. We are brought out to a *Person*, and then there is liberty. Peter left the boat to go to Christ. The great thing is to get to Christ, and to come under His influence. We are delivered from the law, not to be married to another law, but to *Him* who has been raised from the dead. All systematic religion is legal because it is made up of routine. Grace has taken the course with us of bringing us under the influence of a Person. "By *me* if any man enter in" (@John 10: 9); it is by a Person we enter in. So it is now, "one flock, one shepherd", no longer a fold. The great danger with us is to set up a fold, and get a lot of sheep into it; that is to falsify christianity. We may be in a way establishing a system even in right things -- we can have a breaking of bread on Sunday and a prayer meeting on Monday, reading on Wednesday without being under the influence of the Person, and if so it is all systematic. The great point is to come *under the influence of a Person*; then we get sunshine and rain, and that delivers from system. We want to "consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Jesus"; that should be a habit with us, and the effect of it would be to bring us under His influence. Many go on in a routine. When once we see that christianity is connected with a living Person, routine becomes irksome. The only remedy for it is for each one to see that he comes under the influence of Christ, and if under His influence we come under His affection. The husband is bidden to love the wife; when we understand that we are married to Christ we come
{45}
under the influence of His love. There is no hope of escaping routine, save as we are exercised individually.
Ques. Is "consider *him*" beholding the glory of the *Lord*?
F.E.R. Well, that is the *Apostle*. He comes out in that chapter in that way. It is to cultivate intimate relations with Christ. We must begin by knowing Christ as Apostle; we have no authority for the profession until we know the *Apostle*. Authority is not connected with Aaron. Moses carried authority; the thing must be divinely authorised. The Apostle maintains the calling at its height. He is that now; He is the perfect expression of the mind of God in regard to us; all is expressed in Him.
Ques. "Great salvation"?
F.E.R. That was the Apostle. It "began to be spoken by the Lord", that is the Apostle. When we look at Christ we learn what the calling is. We may talk of sonship, but how can we get any idea of it, except in Christ Himself? So, too, eternal life: it is set forth in Him. All that is in the mind of God for us is set forth in *our* Apostle. He is Himself the perfect exponent of all that is in the mind of God for us. This could not be said of Moses; he was faithful in all God's house, but he was only a type of what was to come. In our Apostle all God's thought for us is perfectly and divinely expressed. In the very nature of things there can be no diminution of the calling. All is maintained in Christ.
Hebrews is not an appeal to Hebrews like James, but it was addressed to them as having fled for refuge to the hope set before them.
Ques. Is apostleship and headship the same?
F.E.R. Well, they are akin, but different ideas. The apostle inaugurates a profession, and that we are called to hold fast. It is a great principle that the apostle and high priest are identical. The weakness of the Jewish system was that Aaron was not up to Moses. Moses as a rule was faithful. Aaron helped the people to make the golden calf. Now the high priest is commensurate with
{46}
the apostle; there can be no breach in the system. The legal system depended as much on the priest as on the apostle, and in effect it all broke down through the failure of the priest, as we see in the time of Eli. It was like priest, like people. The two being now commensurate, Christ maintains the saints at the height of the calling. If we are placed in emergency there is *intercession* for us, so that we may not break down. But then He also ministers to us, so that there may be no distance between us and Himself. The Lord prayed for Peter that his faith might not fail. That is intercession, but then in @John 21 you get the Lord removing the moral distance which had come in between Himself and Peter. The Lord was working in that way to maintain Peter at the height of the calling, and He does that for us now. He may find an accumulation of things come upon us, but Christ intercedes for us so that we may not be overwhelmed, but hold fast, and not give up. But then Christ goes a point further; He ministers in order to remove any moral distance between us and Himself. Peter failed, but his faith did not fail. Then in @John 21 the Lord works to remove distance between Himself and Peter; that is His work as Priest. There are the two functions of the priest -- intercession (that is chapter 7) and ministry (chapter 8). He is the minister of the holy places, which is another function of the priest. *Ministry* is man-ward.
Ques. What are the holy places?
F.E.R. The saints.
Ques. Is there no ministry towards God?
F.E.R. Yes. We have it in Christ appearing before the face of God; He is representative; He represents us. Ministry is in view of presentation. Christ's ministry is in view of offering up. Christ will present the church to Himself without spot, holy and without blemish, and His ministry is to that end. It removes all distance between Christ and me. Christ will present the church to Himself; that is what He will offer as Priest. Intercession goes on, on the part of Christ, probably without our knowing it. It is most wonderful that when a saint
{47}
fails here Christ intercedes, and the result is that the saint judges himself. Christ intercedes because He is High Priest. No one can say that we shall hold fast our profession. The devil might bring about a heap of circumstances to bear on me so that I might give up my profession; but Christ intercedes that I may not give up.
If we have not accepted Him as the Apostle we could not be said to be in christianity. The more we consider the Apostle, the greater sense we have of the calling.
Ques. Why had we the fuss about eternal life ten years ago?
F.E.R. Because people thought it was in themselves and not in Christ. There is *no* fear of the fidelity of Christ, but there *is* fear of *my* fidelity breaking down. The more we enter into the thought of God in regard of us, the more we feel -- how ever am I to *keep* in that? Then we find that the service of the Priest, is that we may be maintained at the height of it. Christ may intercede, and you may not know of it, but you will be conscious of His priestly ministry. The minister of the new covenant must be in the *mind* of the covenant.
Aaron had the charge of the vessels of the sanctuary. Christ has the charge of all the holy vessels; the holy vessels are the saints. The true tabernacle is what is pitched here, in the power of the Holy Spirit. The minister of the sanctuary has charge of the vessels, and He ministers to keep us in sunshine, that we may be maintained in intimacy, and that we may be in communion with Himself. A fog may come in, and the Lord ministers to remove all clouds. The test of people in the present day is what they are in the assembly.
Ques. How does Christ lead the praises?
F.E.R. Well, it does not say that He *leads*. It says there is a place where *Christ sings*; 'He leads' is what we have said, but we do not get that in the passage.
Ques. "In the midst" -- where is that?
F.E.R. It is Christ in the saints, and that gives character to all our praises. I wish we had more ability to "consider the Apostle and High Priest". We have not to
{48}
look at *two*, but *One*. That Person can express all that is on the part of God towards us, and at the same time, He can, on our side, take up all in regard to us God-ward. The great danger has been to establish a system. The church is not a system, never was, and there was nothing systematic established; all was set up in the power of the Holy Spirit.
If a man was to be an elder, he must be full of the Holy Spirit; so also a deacon, *he* must be full of the Holy Spirit. The 'vast universe of bliss' may be called a system, but I do not think that you could call the church a system.
{49}
THE PURGATION OF THE CONSCIENCE FOR THE SERVICE OF GOD
@Hebrews 9: 1 - 28
F.E.R. We had before us yesterday the service of Christ as high priest, both in regard to intercession and ministry; and ministry connected with His being minister of the holy places. In this chapter the point is the purgation of the conscience for the service of God. Christ is spoken of as being come a "high priest of good things to come ... having obtained eternal redemption ... who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God". The thought of the passage in its application to us, is the purgation of the conscience so that we may serve the living God. Christ is high priest of good things to come; we are in connection with good things to come; we are on that ground of the world to come; otherwise we should not be in accord with Christ. The Jew served God after the flesh, and that order of things. Now we serve God in connection with good things to come, which is another order of things.
The present time is peculiar; it does not belong to the past, but it anticipates what is to come. There is not a state of things which is recognised of God now. Christians are recognised of God, and that as on the ground of the good things to come. The life of the christian here is the life of the wilderness, but we anticipate what is future; we are on that ground, Christ being come an high priest of good things to come, but they are yet to come. Christ has entered in as the high priest of good things, but the good things have yet to come; though we in the Spirit have come to them now; that we get in chapter 12: 22, etc. The law had a shadow of good things to come -- Mount Zion is a "good thing" -- "the heavenly Jerusalem", etc. -- these are all "good things". Serving the living God is in the sense of worship -- it is priestly service, not levitical.
Ques. What of dead works?
{50}
F.E.R. They are connected with the old covenant. Christianity has been set up by the world, according to the pattern of Judaism; it is not according to God as it exists now. The buildings are all on that pattern; you get a nave and a chancel; they are not spiritual, they are all material. We cannot get purgation apart from a change of ground. The conscience has to be purged not merely from sins but from dead works. The service is priestly; it is worship.
Ques. Is it like "redeemed from your vain conversation received by tradition"? (@1 Peter 1: 18).
F.E.R. Yes; it is a great thing to apprehend what Christ is and the things which are connected with Him. There is a divinely appointed order, connected with Him -- a new moral order, "Come by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands -- that is to say, not of this building". The tabernacle must be all in accord with the priest. The first tabernacle was anointed with oil, not only the vessels. The "better and more perfect tabernacle" is that which is established in the power of the Spirit. The secret of going on with dead works is that Christ is not apprehended officially. If people did apprehend that, they would get an apprehension of the coming good things. The good things to come are all connected with the living God, for life will pervade all, so that all may be united to Him.
Rem. It is all, too, on the ground of the will of God, and not the responsibility of man.
F.E.R. Yes -- Christ has entered in.
Ques. What is the force of "worldly sanctuary"?
F.E.R. It was a place where all was ordered in a worldly way. It was all material, whatever it might point to. There was a good deal of beggarly elements in it, but still it was recognised, because God was taking account of man after the flesh, It was divine service, but after a *worldly* sanctuary, i.e., material, not *spiritual*. It was called worldly because of the ordering; it was in a kind of way after the world. It was all measured; it was according to the order of this world -- literally and
{51}
materially it was a worldly sanctuary.
Rem. It was in keeping with the way God was dealing with man.
F.E.R. The service did not require priests to be spiritual. The divine service was connected with a worldly sanctuary. The apostle shows what was the character of it, and then he goes on to show the contrast. Christ has entered into the holy place, having found eternal redemption. You find in that way a basis for the world to come. Christ came here to establish the will of God.
Ques. What is the force of *eternal* redemption?
F.E.R. It is in contrast to *temporal* deliverance. All has been discharged, every burden; every obligation and encumbrance under which man lay is discharged. Christ was both priest and victim. He has obtained eternal redemption. All that we do in connection with the service of God, must in mind be connected with the new order of things. Christ has entered into the holy place; the holy place is the love of God -- the holy place is the start of all.
Christ has entered into heaven itself. The thought is the contrast between the place into which Christ has gone, and where the high priest went once a year. We are connected with Christ as the high priest of good things to come. I could have no part in a christianity which takes account of this world; I would have no part with a state church, because Christ is not connected with that order of things, for He is a high priest of good things to come. Every dissenting system connects itself with the order of this world. Christ is the high priest of good things to come, and I have to recognise Him as such, and these good things have yet to come. Christ has gone in, and has taken that position in regard to man. It was natural and suitable that He should go in, but He has gone in as having taken up that position. In our minds we must be detached from what is connected with this world. That was not the case in the past, nor will it be in the future; but *now* if we are to be in connection with
{52}
Christ, our minds must be detached from the present course of things here. The service of Christ in the previous part of the epistle is to attach us to Him; but here He is the centre and pillar of a vast system of good things. Christianity, so-called, is set up in this world without Christ; you get christians in profession, and it really excludes Christ. I know no system which does not recognise this world. There is a rivalry amongst the systems as to which will be most conspicuous. The divinely appointed order of things is the good things to come. Christianity anticipates that, but professed christianity is brought down to judaism. What we anticipate we *hope* for.
Rem. It all involves another Man and another world.
F.E.R. Yes, that is just it. The Spirit is here to maintain for Christ, until He comes in again. The Spirit shows us "things to come". The solemn thing is that in the position which Christ has taken up, of High Priest of good things to come, He cannot connect Himself with *any* religious system here. Many may be in fellowship and yet come to the meetings as to a religious service. It is a serious consideration how far we may have drifted into the line of systematic religious services. We should take these things to heart.
Rem. There is danger of going back to things.
F.E.R. There is nothing of any value, save what is in the power of the Spirit.
Rem. In @Malachi 3 they spoke often one to another.
F.E.R. Well, if we come together, let it be as it was with those in Malachi's time -- to communicate one with another, as to the Lord's things. I would like us to come together to meet those who *pray*, and those whose desire is to enter into the mind of the Lord. I feel that we need to be exercised in regard to these things.
Rem. Exercise is to take the place of system.
F.E.R. Yes, that is it -- the light of good things to come would give character to everything. We are thus brought into the presence of another order of things. It is a wonderful thing to get the conscience purged from
{53}
dead works to serve the living God in connection with that order.
Ques. What is the thought in "things above"?
F.E.R. "Things above" are things connected with the place where Christ is. In the early days of the church they continued steadfastly ... in breaking of bread, and in *prayers*. We should not settle down to a kind of complacency with things as they are. The kingdom of heaven in the hands of man is a ruin. It is conspicuous, but it is a ruin; it has assumed a shape and form which is not according to God. Those who really feel the affliction of the ruin will come together for prayer. The tendency is to drift on, and to settle down into a regular system of things, instead of realising that we are connected with the high priest of good things to come, and are called to serve the living God in connection with that order; and for this it is necessary to be delivered from all the entanglements here. We should not be insensible as to our position as standing apart, and to the state of things within and without us.
Ques. What of the last clause of verse 15: "might receive the promise of eternal inheritance"?
F.E.R. Properly it refers to Israel. We have obtained an inheritance, but it is *in Christ*. Israel's inheritance will be eternal; it will not be forfeited, nor will it be taken from them, it is eternal. Forgiveness of sins and inheritance are preached in the gospel. The holiest is a moral thought. Christ has gone into a *place* -- into "heaven itself", an actual place. In the passage "The Son of man which is in heaven", heaven is *characteristic*. There are holy places here, where God dwells and walks, but the other side is that we enter the holiest, where we enter into and taste the holy love of God, and enter into the secret of His purposes as all centred in Christ.
The Spirit is the pledge of the inheritance.
{54}
FRUIT-BEARING
@John 15; @Luke 14: 25 - 35; @Romans 7: 4; @Hebrews 6: 7 - 9
It is evident that we are left here that we might bring forth that which is grateful to God. I want to speak of fruit-bearing in this connection. Fruit is brought forth *for* God, and *by* God, as to the source of it. The Lord contemplates that in this chapter, and He makes provision in this chapter for its continuity. There had been fruit in the disciples, and the Lord makes provision that their fruit should abide, that there should be a continuity of it.
I spoke last night of the new situation, and the conditions upon which it is established -- that is Christ on high, and the Comforter here, the effect to us being that we live because Christ lives, and then we *know* "that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you" (@John 14: 20). That verse explains the situation, and chapter 15 shows the principle upon which fruit-bearing is dependent. It is spontaneous; works are more or less artificial, but fruit is spontaneous. A healthy vigorous tree yields fruit. Until Christ came, there could not be much fruit. The fig-tree brought forth no fruit and the Lord cursed it. The vine brought forth wild grapes. Both these figures are employed in regard of Israel; they had become a degenerate vine. Now Christ comes, and He was the true Vine, and for the first time there was fruit for God. He says, "I am the vine, ye are the branches", and the condition of fruit-bearing was that they should abide in Him and He in them. Now in the present moment there is no vine; that makes the moment peculiar. Israel, the degenerate vine, is plucked up: they have been eaten up by the "boar out of the wood" (@Psalm 80: 13). Christ the true Vine is not here, and yet the Lord contemplates continuity of fruit-bearing. That marks the moment as peculiar. Christ the true Vine is not here, but there still was to be fruit. Now we have to take
{55}
that into account. The Lord will have continuity; that comes out in all His teaching. He made provision that all that came out when He was upon earth should be continued. Fruit was to be continued although the vine was no longer upon earth. We read in Revelation of the judgment of the spurious vine, but there *will* be a vine. Israel will yet bring forth fruit unto God, but when they do they will be in connection with Christ; it will be "From *me* is thy fruit found" (@Hosea 14: 8). Then they will bring forth fruit to God. But the point in this chapter is that although there was no vine, yet there was to be no cessation of fruit.
I call your attention to verses 7 - 8, "If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will and it shall be done unto you. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples". Then verse 16, "I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain". After verse 6, the figure of the vine is dropped, but then you get the principles or conditions under which fruit will be brought forth in us. The first condition is the *influence of Christ*, and the second is the christian circle, a circle where there can be the exercise of spiritual affection. If these conditions were not there, there could be no fruit for God. When Christ was here, there was the influence of Christ, and there was a circle of which Christ was the centre. No one can imagine what the influence of Christ was in that circle, of which He was the centre. There was unspeakable and inexpressible influence, and they were in a circle where they were under the obligation to love one another. The Lord contemplates His going away here. The most powerful thing here upon earth is the influence of Christ; we may not know much of it, but it is the greatest power on earth. It is the first and *most* important condition in fruit-bearing. If we abide in Him we come under His influence. I take an illustration -- the earth brings forth fruit. How? Under the influence of the sun -- its heat and warmth. Rain is dependent on the
{56}
sun, for without the sun you could not have evaporation. There are many rich people upon earth, but if there were no sun there would be no riches. The millions of acres in men's possession would be barren; there would be no fertility if there were no sun. If land did not yield, what would be the value of gold? Thus all is dependent upon the influence of sun and rain; there is no influence on earth so powerful as the sun. We have steam engines, but they get their power from coal, and coal is dependent on the sun. Therefore all wealth is dependent upon the sun. Now from a moral point of view, the greatest influence and power upon earth is Christ. The influence of Christ will effect things here, which no power upon earth could effect, and therefore the influence of Christ is the first and foremost condition of fruit-bearing.
You may say, What is the influence of Christ? Turn to @Luke 14: 25. I read there, "... there went great multitudes with him: and he turned, and said unto them -- whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple". Then the Lord continues as to building a house -- going against a king with twenty thousand, etc. Now to come under the influence of Christ is to be a disciple of Christ. If you are a disciple of Christ you can build a house, and you can go against a king with twenty thousand. The Lord perfectly knew His own worth. I cannot talk of *my* worth. What the Lord brings before His disciples is -- I am going to exercise an influence paramount to every influence on earth, so that if other influences are contrary to the influence of Christ you must be prepared to revolt against them. I trust that we all here *are* prepared for that; if we are not, we are not worthy to be His disciples.
His influence must be paramount. He is entitled to it, for "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends" (@John 15: 13). I give a few instances. Abraham was called to leave country, kindred, and father's house. Who called him out from all these things? The One who had capability of blessing him. He was to leave all to come under the influence of God,
{57}
who could bless; and that necessitated a breach with the natural ties. God knew what was in His thought for Abraham and so He called him to leave all. Take another ease, Ruth and Orpah. Ruth determined to go with Naomi; she was prepared to turn her back upon her country. What justified it? The influence of Naomi; and she represented the true God -- the God of Israel. Orpah remained, but Ruth clave unto her. She left country and kindred to go with Naomi. Take another case -- Jonathan. He was prepared to break with the closest natural tie, because his heart clave unto David, and why? Because David had smitten Goliath, and he was God's Anointed. Who has come forth on the part of God with every right? It is Christ. He like David was God's Anointed. Who has smitten the power of Satan and accomplished redemption? It is Christ. He is the Elect of God -- the true David, who has given His life for His friends. Now *we* have come to the true David -- to the true God, who can bless. I ask, is it not reasonable that the influence of Christ should be paramount and supreme to every other influence? If your friends are not contrary to Christ, well and good; but we have to be prepared for a breach with *every* influence which is counter to the influence of Christ. The Lord Jesus says, A man must forsake all that he has in order to be His disciple. There is to be no influence as potent on man down here as that of Christ. He is God's Anointed -- the One who has come in to take up every liability under which we lay. He went down under death and everything, so that we might be delivered from bondage. He has smitten the head of the enemy that the people of God might be delivered from the fear of death. I tell you the effect of being under the influence of Christ is that you will be kept in your orbit, that is in the path of God's will. No cleverness nor propriety will keep you there; no influence but the influence of Christ will keep you in the path of God's will down here. The influence of Christ will enable you to "build a house", and to overcome the king who comes against you with twenty thousand (@Luke 14). The apostle
{58}
could say, "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me" (@Philippians 4: 13). And why? Because be was under the influence of Christ, and was thus kept in the power that could overcome the "twenty thousand". We cannot meet a king with twenty thousand, if we have only ten thousand. But if we are to come under the influence of Christ we must forsake all that we have; that is the *condition*.
Now I want to speak of the other side (see verses 9 - 12, @John 11), "This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you", etc. I have spoken of the influence of Christ, and its mighty power. What people do in the world are not really mighty things. Kings may take account of destruction in war, but that is not mighty in the eye of God. Mary spent her ointment, three hundred pennyworth, on Christ, and that was a great victory under the eye of God. The overcoming of what is natural, and refusing all distinction here; that is a mighty power here, for nothing else could bring about such results.
Now we cannot do without a circle here; it would never do for a christian to be shut up to himself. In a circle you have scope for affection; an only child lacks brother and sister -- it lacks opportunity and scope for its affections. On the day of Pentecost a circle was formed, Christ formed the circle, and the Holy Spirit came and dwelt there. To be truly in the christian circle is extremely important. You cannot "bring forth much fruit" by merely going to meetings or preachings; that will not enable you to bring forth fruit to God. We need to be in the christian circle. I do not want to discourage you from going to meetings, but I want you to take great account of the christian circle, for there it is you are moulded in christian affection. Encourage yourself to have your *full* part in the christian circle; I do not mean the family circle. I like to see affection there, of course, for it is right that there should be family affection, but it is in the *christian* circle that *spiritual* affections are moulded, and it is in that circle that we escape the
{59}
influence of the world. There was a potent influence introduced in the influence of Christ, but He took care that there should be a retreat; He formed a circle before ever the gospel went out. Before the apostles went out to preach there existed a christian circle formed by Christ. Take advantage of the christian circle, even of what comes to your hand. Do not despise what comes to your hand, even though it be a little circle. Depend upon it what comes to your hand is not despised by the Lord, and your wisdom is to take the fullest possible advantage of what is there -- enjoy the spiritual affection, and be careful to fulfil your part in it. Christ took what came to His hand -- just a few fishermen, but He loved them, and He taught them to love Him and to love one another.
One word more. There are those two conditions which I have spoken of under which we bring forth fruit to God. The first is the influence of Christ, and the second is the enjoyment of the christian circle. I counsel you to take *full* advantage of both, so that our distinguishing mark may not be merely as a people who go to meetings, but as those who are *under the influence of Christ*, where we get the full benefit of sunshine and rain.
May God exercise our hearts as to these necessary and divinely appointed conditions, so that there may be continuity in bearing fruit for God. It will be so with Israel by and by; the fruit will reproduce itself. So with us. If we continue in these conditions we shall bring forth fruit, and the fruit will reproduce itself and will abide.
{60}
THE SANCTUARY, THE HOUSE OF GOD AND THE HOLIEST
F.E.R. There has been some confusion in people's minds as to the sanctuary -- the house of God -- the holiest, and so on; it might be well to clear these up.
@Hebrews 3
F.E.R. The house of God in this chapter is composed of the companions of Christ. Christ was the Builder of the house, and those who had been the companions of Christ upon earth became the house of God in the day of Pentecost; the Holy Spirit came to them. "*We* are become companions of the Christ" (New Trans). "Whose house are we". "*If* we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end". It is conditional.
Ques. Has it reference to the wilderness?
F.E.R. Yes; all is now provisional; all is final in regard to Christ, but in regard to us all is provisional.
Ques. Does the house include profession?
F.E.R. People may take the ground of the house of God, but it is put conditionally here. It is "*if*". The end will prove who are real and who are only professors.
Ques. May there not be two classes, those who perish in the wilderness, who do not go on to God's purpose, and apostates?
F.E.R. I should not say there were two classes. Falling in the wilderness is an end of them. There are a great many people who do not go on to the ground of divine purpose, who do not become apostate. People do not become apostate all in a moment. The beginning of departure is very small; defection is very gradual. In connection with the house of God, it is important to see that it is said here, "as says the *Holy Spirit*", not as *Scripture* says; there is a constant gracious appeal of the Holy Spirit, and that gives the idea of the house of God. "Perishing" in the wilderness is really apostasy -- the
{61}
sheep of Christ can never perish; they are in Christ's hands. It is a poor affair and anomalous, not going on to the other side of death to God's purpose.
Ques. What about Moses?
F.E.R. God showed him the land, but J.N.D. has often said, the lawgiver could not go into the land; but God *showed* Moses all the land. I think I should have been very well content with that. The *heart* of Moses was in the land, and God gratified his heart. The people had to be led into the land by Joshua -- the type of a risen Christ. Moses was a priest; people forget that; he was apostle, but he also discharged the highest priestly functions. At the consecration of the priests all the consecrations had to be carried out by Moses. And we get "Moses and Aaron among his priests" (@Psalm 99: 6). Aaron represented the people *more*, but you must not forget that Moses discharged priestly function, and offered sacrifices. All that took place at the consecration of the priests was carried out by Moses. Moses was a very great man; there is no more distinguished man than Moses; he was apostle and priest in the highest sense, and he was king too. Moses had to carry out the intercessory place, when Aaron led the people to the golden calf. But we are getting away from the "house".
The first idea we get of the house of God is in Israel; they had that place, Moses was "faithful in all his house". I take that to be a reference to what God said to Aaron and Miriam. Mere professors may take their place as on that ground, but I do not think scripture so contemplates them. The church had the character of the house of God at the beginning, but the great house is brought in as a figure, as to what was to come in in christendom. In the beginning of Acts the church had that character. If a man has not the Spirit, I could not say he forms part of the house. It is a *spiritual* house. The Spirit brings into the house because it is spiritual.
Rem. The corrupter of real christians will be destroyed.
{62}
F.E.R. The pope has done his best to introduce doctrines which would corrupt christians. Even in regard of Israel the thought was that God would dwell among them, and the basis of that was redemption. It became possible in figure, because of redemption, for God to dwell among them, and Israel was the house of God in that way. It would not do to diminish the privileges which belonged to Israel. God dwelt among them, and so they were God's house. In dwelling among them God took up in figure a representation of that which was before Him. He set up in their midst a testimony of what was before Him. The house, in that way, is figured in the tabernacle. There was a redeemed people, and God dwelt among them, and they were the house of God so far, but that was not final, for the people perished in the wilderness, but God took care to set up in the midst of Israel a figure of Him who was before Him as the One to establish the true house of God. Israel did not see what God had in view; they were not wise. If they had been, they might have seen that nothing could be established in connection with *them*. The tabernacle pointed on to the world to come. The Spirit of God has opened up to us the final issue of things, but a wise Israelite would have been taken up with what God had before Him in the tabernacle.
The dwelling of God in the world to come is universal. The tabernacle refers to the "*all* things", and "He who has built all things is God". The tabernacle was the pattern of "all things", i.e., of the universe as the house of God. The present world is governed by the *providence* of God; in the world to come all will be ordered by the *presence* of God. If Israel did break down, they really had in their midst the figurative representation of things in heaven. The tabernacle was anointed with oil; that prefigured that the world to come would be set up in the power of the Holy Spirit. All will be then the dwelling-place of God; the presence and influence of God will be felt everywhere. In the world to come, we are going to have a grand time. A man is a fool who wants to go to see
{63}
Jerusalem *now* -- *I* wait to see Mount Zion, I want to walk over it, in *that* day. It will not be material; "thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise" (@Isaiah 60: 18).
Now we may turn our thoughts from Israel and look at the tabernacle which was the figurative representation of "all things". What we have now is not the world to come (though we "*speak*" of it), but what was set forth then in the tabernacle is realised by us now of whom it is said, "whose house are we". It is anticipative in us, but it is real; for God dwells in it now figuratively as in regard of Israel, but in a real way. We have now in reality what in figure was set up by Moses. The house of God is all obscured now, but it is a great thing to take what comes to your hand. When the Lord was going to feed the five thousand He took up what came to hand -- only five loaves! He did not refuse these.
There are many in fellowship with us who think that there are better people in system than there are amongst us. Probably there *are* better christians practically, but the practical difficulty is that they are not *to hand*. Our wisdom is to take what is *to hand*, and to be content with these, for the Lord disposes all things. The christians who are mixed up in system, they are not to hand, and we cannot walk with them. I want to make the best of what is *to hand*.
Ques. What is "the true tabernacle"?
F.E.R. It was what "the Lord pitched". On the day of Pentecost the work was all the Lord's work; there was no work of man in it at all.
Now as to the sanctuary -- the sanctuary took in the court. We read in history that when men committed crimes, they went into sanctuary, where the arm of the law could not reach them. That referred to the precincts of monasteries -- Grey Friars, Black Friars, etc.
The sanctuary refers not only to the building, but it includes all hallowed precincts, and christian *baptism* introduces to that.
Rem. Children are there, (@1 Corinthians 7).
{64}
F.E.R. The children are in sanctuary, and they are admitted by *baptism*. No one can go into the court of the tabernacle except through the gate or door.
Ques. What is "wood, hay, stubble"?
F.E.R. It refers to what is built up in people's souls. It is the superstructure, built upon a good foundation. The sacramental system was brought in by those who were not christians, but true christians have become corrupted through that. The house of God is here, it is obscured, and you cannot get it cleared from the obscurity. The great thing is for us to get light as to what is God's thought, and to go on in the light of that. False teachers came into Corinth, and they introduced what was never taught by the apostles. False notions are brought in by people who are not christians, and the mischief is that *real* christians are affected and influenced by these. See how real christians are influenced by sacramentalism. Christ is Great Priest over God's house.
Rem. It is terrible how people go about here and there from curiosity, to hear and see what is going on.
F.E.R. Having "itching ears". The sanctuary includes every pan, the building and the court included. Wise Israelites would have turned to the tabernacle. Joshua felt it was useless to count upon the stability of the people. Wisdom would be to turn their attention to what God had established among them.
Rem. Moses was a servant -- Christ was a Son.
F.E.R. Moses was a servant in having no authority of his own. He was faithful in setting up all *as God had directed him*. Now the actual thing exists, and Christ is *Son* over it.
{65}
OUR COMMANDING INTEREST
@John 16
It is a great word which we get at the close of this chapter, "Be of good cheer; I have overcome the world". It really involves that Christ will bring in another world -- the Father's world. He overcame the existing world, every other one had been overcome by it, but He overcame it, and He would establish the Father's world. That is a passing remark.
What I want to bring before you is the importance of having a commanding interest. It is necessary to man, because of how he is constituted. People who have no commanding interest are apathetic and listless. In the world people are commanded by different interests; one by business, another by politics, and another by science. A man with a commanding interest has an aim in life. It is important that we should be here as having an aim. I see people who lack energy because they have no definite object to pursue. It would greatly affect people if they had a commanding interest. I want to bring that out of this chapter. But to go back for a moment -- the basis of chapter 14 is the coming of the Comforter. The relation of the Comforter with the saints down here is unfolded in chapter 14. The point in chapter 15 is our relation to the Father and the Father's relation to us. We begin with the Spirit, and then we learn the relation in which we stand to Christ, and from that we are led on to our relation to the Father. It is in connection with the Father that we find our commanding interest, and we want to know what that interest is, and to be regulated and commanded by it. Take the Israelite of old. When the tabernacle was set up, what would then be his supreme interest? The tabernacle! Now the tabernacle was the *truth*. As to their practical state, they were perverse and lawless, and that was *not* the truth, but the tabernacle was figuratively *the truth*, and that was to be the Israelites supreme interest. So *now* the truth is to be
{66}
*our* commanding interest. The Lord says of the Spirit, "He will guide you into *all truth*", and the truth is to be our commanding interest. I shall try and make plain to you what the truth is, and then press upon you that every energy that you have should be bent on promoting the truth.
One word more as to these chapters. In chapter 14 we get the Spirit. I would compare that with the first epistle to the Corinthians, which unfolds our relation to the Spirit, and the Spirit's relation to us. Two great truths come out there. They were the temple of God -- the Spirit of God dwelt in them, and they were baptised into one body, by one Spirit. Then chapter 15 compares with the epistle to the Colossians, where they were "fruitful in every good work", because they stood in relation to Christ. Then chapter 16 compares with Ephesians. The Father's world is "the truth". This world is kept up by appearances, and that is not truth; the truth is the Father's world. People think that the truth is the bald exposure of what is very wicked. The exposure of wickedness is not truth; truth is what things are in regard to God and there is no wickedness in that. It is *of* God, and according *to* God. You will find it profitable to compare these scriptures at your leisure.
There are three points I want to touch on in chapter 16: (1) see verse 10, "Of righteousness, because I go to my Father"; (2) verse 13, "When he, the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth"; (3) verse 23, "In that day ye shall ask me nothing ... whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you". Thus the first point is, righteousness; (2nd) the whole truth -- the "all things"; (3rd) *Christ's Name*. If you do not apprehend the "all things", you cannot apprehend what Christ's name imports. The "all things" are the Father's things. In regard to the first point, "of righteousness, because I go to my Father", men would like to get rid of these principles -- sin, righteousness, and judgment -- men would blot out these words in their scriptural meaning, in their moral significance, from
{67}
their vocabulary. Man dislikes the idea of things being brought to a point. But the Holy Spirit would come and substantiate these principles; He would bring *demonstration* of them. The world is declared to be lawless -- but there is righteousness there. The Spirit maintains that, for it is the principle and basis of God's world. What is here is Satan's world. God's world is with the Father; it is hid, but it *will* be developed and displayed -- there is a world to come out from the Father. Righteousness is gone to the Father; righteousness is there as the basis and bond of God's world. There, too, judgment will be maintained. "The prince of this world is judged", @John 16: 11. There is a world which for the moment is hid in God in Christ. It is important to apprehend righteousness; it is the basis and bond of God's world -- the coming world, and Christ is the righteousness of the whole world to come! The nations will be justified in Christ. Israel will be justified in Christ. The basis and bond of the coming world is there. Christ is with the Father. The Lord says, "righteousness because I go to my Father". It could not be said until Christ was there.
"All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you". I venture to read the prayer at the end of @Ephesians 3: 14 - 21. See especially verses 15 and 16, "Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named", etc. All these families go to make the "all things". "He that built all things is God", @Hebrews 3: 4. The tabernacle was the pattern of the "all things", not as we see them but as they are in the purpose of God. "Of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named" (@Ephesians 3: 15, New Trans.). The expression "all things" leaves nothing out. They are not what our senses can take account of; they are what are before the Father.
To go back to Israel, when the people made a golden calf, what must Moses and Joshua have thought of the people? There was nothing in the contemplation of the people to give pleasure, but there was in the tabernacle,
{68}
which was set up in the midst of Israel. Look around christendom -- can you get satisfaction in that? Is there satisfaction in popery, or in the eastern church? or even in Protestantism or in any existing bodies which surround us in this country or in other countries? We want to comprehend the "all things"; we want to contemplate them, and that is what the Holy Spirit would bring before our view. The Lord explains what are *His* things; they are "all things that the Father hath". Every family is named of the Father. The "all things" can only be taken account of by the Spirit of God. We want to have in view a world different from this world. For the Father everything is established in the Son; all depends on the fact that the Son is with the Father. All that was prefigured in the tabernacle is in Christ. The whole world to come is hid in Christ with the Father. The Holy Spirit can show us all that. It is He who can bring it before us. "The truth" is what is before God in Christ, and God would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. The different families have not yet come into view, but all is hid in Christ with the Father. "All things that the Father hath are mine". I would like to impress upon you that, in the world that will be of the Father, all belongs to the Son, and it is for that reason that the apostle prays that "Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith", that the saints might comprehend the breadth, and length, and depth, and height.
Now as to the name -- asking in His name. The Lord says, "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you". "At that day ye shall ask in my name" (chapter 16: 26). We get brought out in this chapter our relation to the Father, and the relation of the Father to us. "The Father himself loveth you". They had a commendation to the Father, and that was that they loved the Son. The Father loved them because they loved the Son. If you knew the Father's love, you would have no difficulty in approaching Him, but then we approach the Father in the name of the Son. Now in
{69}
connection with that name we could not ask for any benefit in this world, for I cannot connect His name with this world; I connect it with the Father's world. The name of the Son is in connection with that world -- I would ask in the name of the Son whatever would tend to promote that world. To come to the application of it -- we are not being formed for this world, but for the Father's world. The apostle's prayer in @Ephesians 3 was in Christ's name. He prayed to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ -- that prayer would tend to promote the Father's world, both in oneself and in one another. Many are content with the conversion of others. That is the first step, but we want those who are converted to be attached to Christ, and to be conformed to the Father's world.
I appreciate the position. I abide in Christ, and bring forth fruit, and I love the brethren, and I am controlled by a supreme interest -- even the Father's world. We ought to be a pattern to other saints. The apostle Paul could say, "I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds", @Acts 26: 29. The desire of every christian ought to be to cultivate what would promote these things, first for ourselves, and then being a pattern to others we seek that it should be promoted in others.
The interest of supreme importance is the "all things" that are of Christ, and which the Holy Spirit brings the report of. We have our part in it; Christ dwells in our hearts by faith. When we have thus this commanding interest we have confidence to approach the Father -- to ask in Christ's name. I think each one should be so controlled by the Father's things that he can say, 'I should like every saint to be in the same position as myself, so that he might have liberty of approach to the Father'. The whole system of the world to come, will come out when Christ comes out from the Father. The heavenly city will play a most important part in that day, and why? Because we have been
{70}
instructed *here* in the light of the Father's world. If people have not a commanding interest in this way they are bound to drop down to the level of things here, and so become listless in regard of God's things. It is of all importance that we should have an interest which commands us here.
May God lead us into it in His grace.
{71}
THE ANTICIPATION OF WHAT IS FINAL
@Hebrews 10
F.E.R. We might go on with what we had before us yesterday.
The present moment is peculiar in a way; although we have not got things in their final shape, yet we have come to the end of things. Take a simple thought -- to have put off the old man, and put on the new (@Colossians 3: 9 - 10). Well, that is not final or absolute, and yet it is true. We have come to what is final, in a way, and yet not in an *absolute* way. We have come to it in spiritual power. So again -- "raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places", @Ephesians 2: 6. We have in a way come to that, and yet not in a final way. We await the actuality. The Spirit has come down to lead us into the anticipation of what is final. All is final that is established in Christ; it is all according to God's purpose, and in that way final; and yet we have not come to the display.
Ques. "Reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin" @Romans 6: 11?
F.E.R. The "reckoning" is possible, because Christ has brought in all that is final; all that is final is brought in in Christ, and therefore we can reckon it to be true of ourselves. We have the Spirit of Christ, so that we can take account of things according to Christ; you can take account of things differently from what they actually are. *We* are not "dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God" (@Romans 6: 11), but it is true of us in Christ, and we can be in accord with that by the Spirit. What has been reached in effect and fact in Christ, has to be reached in us, in *mind*. Christ has been crucified and has died; that is true in effect and fact, but *we* reach it in *mind*. So the putting off the old man and putting on the new is the "truth in Jesus". Christ has reached it in effect and fact, but we reach it in *mind*. We could not reach it in mind unless it had been brought to pass in
{72}
Christ, and we reach it, by having the Spirit of Christ.
Ques. How does that bear on the holiest?
F.E.R. I was thinking of it in connection with "no more conscience of sins". When you have found that the sins belonged to another man, and you get free of that man, then you have no more conscience of sins. We get sanctified by being apart from the man. Conscience is no part of a man, it belongs to neither the old man, nor the new; it is the connecting link. It is no part of a man, because you cannot control it; it is a witness-bearer. Conscience will bear witness, whether man likes it or not. Keep *yourself* right.
Ques. What is a "seared conscience"?
F.E.R. It is when a man is so demoralised that his conscience does not bear witness; the man then comes to the level of the beast. A man can violently silence his conscience. "No more conscience of sins" is arrived at, when you are apart from the man that sinned, and that is very intimately connected with "reckoning". You cannot take that ground unless you have reached it. If you are formed in the divine nature, you are another man. There is another man then, and there is no more conscience of sins: the divine nature is the evidence that I have put on the new man. It is impossible to have no more conscience of sins, unless you are apart from the man that sinned. It is then "no more *I* that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me". We come to that point by the process described in @Romans 7. I distinguish between myself and sin. If I think of the old man I only think of him as put off.
Individuality is character. If you have put off the old man, and have put on the new, then you understand it. It is the same person who puts off and puts on. Another *nature* means another *man*.
Ques. What is purgation?
F.E.R. We get "purge your conscience from dead works" in chapter 9, but these chapters show the extent of the purgation. We are "sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ" -- we are apart from
{73}
the old man, and the new man is put on; sin does not attach to us. "Dead works" are works done while a man is in a state of moral or spiritual death. There are plenty of dead works going on today; there are religious works carried on by the old man. The new man does not sin; the new man is "created in truthful righteousness and holiness", @Ephesians 4: 24. The new man exists in the *mind* of the believer. The whole extent to which I go is that I have *put on* the new man. I cannot say that I *am* the new man; if I were I should never sin; but I *put on* the new man; he controls my practice: the new man is the "truth in Jesus", *not in us*. What is final and established in Christ is reached in us in *mind*; that gives christianity its peculiar form. "As many as walk according to this rule" (@Galatians 6: 16), i.e., of new creation. We walk according to the rule of new creation; that is the rule of the new man. My practice is controlled by the new man, and therefore in character it is "after God". In Christ risen we see Man according to God, but on the cross all the state of the old man was condemned and removed, and so in Jesus you get the putting off of the old man, and putting on the new.
Ques. Why are *sins* spoken of here, since underlying it there is the removal of the man?
F.E.R. Because when it is a question of entering the holiest all that is connected with your responsibility is put away; it has nothing to do with it. We should not confound the meeting with the holiest. If you enter the holiest, and your mind reaches the holiest, things are entirely settled for you. You are occupied with what God presents to you, and you meditate. I believe that is the proper qualification for priestly function. It is what you have seen in the holiest that qualifies for worship. We are encouraged to enter the holiest to learn the secret of God. Entering the holiest is individual, and the part you take in the assembly is to be the effect of your having been in the holiest. People either come to the meeting as believers or as priests. You can tell by what people do whether they are there as priests or believers.
{74}
*All* are believers, but all are not priests. You cannot discharge priestly function without being qualified. The sons of Aaron could not officiate until they were consecrated.
You are not going to get something wonderful in the meeting unless you bring it there.
Everyone comes to the meeting according to his measure; everything has to contribute to the priest -- tithes, etc. -- the priest is to be nourished and fed. If a man comes to the meeting merely as a believer, he is not in accord with Christ. He may come to Christ as an object of reverence. If you are there as a priest, you are kindred to Christ, and that is entirely different ground. "Yourselves *also* as living stones", @1 Peter 2: 15. He is a Living Stone, and you come to Him as living stones; you enter into the holiest to get perfect assurance of heart. On the mount of transfiguration the disciples were in the holiest; they heard the "excellent voice". I would not confine the holiest to the present moment. God will be revealed in the world to come.
We have to recognise that everything had to be contributory to the priest. The great point to which we are called is priestly service. We are called to serve the living God. We get tithes from everything which contributes to us as one who serves the living God. The priest is to serve the living God; and then there are things in service which have priestly character. You learn in the holiest what you cannot learn anywhere else. It is there we learn what Christ is, not for us, but for God. We know Him as the ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat. It is where God has established every purpose of His heart according to His nature, and that is a very big thought. The Lord took up the three disciples to the mount of transfiguration that He might give them assurance of heart. The holiest is full of glory. Man despised Christ here, but the disciples went up where they "saw no man save Jesus only". The man who had not come under the new covenant could not enter the holiest, so @Hebrews 8 precedes chapter 10. If we have
{75}
learnt what it is to be in the holiest, then you can bring all the effect of it into the meeting. We cannot enter the holiest *en masse*.
There is a great difference between the sanctuary and the holiest. What you *get* in the holiest is what you can *use* in the assembly. A priest is not a priest without training. @Hebrews 10 is the climax. Chapters 11 and 12 bring in the path and the life of faith. Reverence and worldliness may go together. I care for no reverence except what is produced by the sense of the presence of God. I do not care for anything which is not moral. I do not care for what is formal or reverential. These are often united, and there is the form of piety which is often imposing, but it is really what I spoke of as attitudinarianism. On the other hand, there should not be irreverence, but, as I have said, it is the sense of the presence of God which produces real reverence.
{76}
THE LAND OF PROMISE
@Hebrews 12: 18 - 29
F.E.R. In chapter 10 we get the holiest; here we get the land of promise, i.e., breadth and length, and depth, and height -- and that is *outward* in a sense. You could not get a survey of breadth, length, depth, and height except as you had entered the holiest. You have first to learn how God is going to carry all out, and how Christ is going to fill all things. How is God going to effect all this length and breadth and depth and height? You learn it in the holiest. The ark of the covenant is there, and in it you get the law of God established, and a point of communication with men in the mercy-seat. These two points are essential. It is only on the ark of the covenant that you could get the mercy-seat. The law of God is in the heart of Christ; it is secured in the One who accomplished redemption. God could not touch man otherwise except in judgment. The law of God is secured in relation to men, and God puts Himself in communication with men at that point. "Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation (*mercy-seat*) through faith in his blood" (@Romans 3: 25). What a man is first awakened to, is his own position in relation to God, and that God is a judge. In regard to the land of promise, the first thing is to have Christ "dwelling in the heart by faith".
You could not otherwise comprehend length, breadth, depth, and height. We want to know what is going to fill that. You learn it in the holiest: what is seen there is the ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat.
Ques. What do you understand by the land of promise?
F.E.R. It is what is in the purpose of God to accomplish; if we are off the ground of responsibility, then we come to all that God is going to accomplish.
Ques. That would carry us on to the eternal state?
F.E.R. Well, *here* it does not go beyond the world to
{77}
come. It is that we are come to mount Zion, and to the Mediator of the new covenant, etc. The eternal state is brought before us as the final solution and disentanglement of the question of good and evil. What is brought before us in Scripture is the world to come. The rest of God as in @Hebrews 4 refers to the world to come. The world to come is really the glory of God. Mount Zion is the first element of the world to come. A mountain in Scripture represents a power. Israel came under the influence of a power, and they were dreadfully frightened; it was a power that struck them with terror.
Rem. "Ye have come" means that we have come to it in a spiritual way; we shall come to it actually by and by.
F.E.R. In the wilderness they had a mount, but they had no city. In figure we get the city in David. He brought back the ark to mount Zion. You get a mount and a city. All had broken down under Mount Sinai -- then David is chosen and the ark is brought back, and then you get Jerusalem, the city of David, and in that way we get a figure of what will be. Now we have mount Zion, and the city of the living God; the heavenly Jerusalem. We have come to these.
Ques. What is mount Zion?
F.E.R. Mount Zion is Christ risen. The ark of the covenant had fallen into the hand of the Philistines, but Christ has been brought again from the dead, the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, redemption having been accomplished. The Philistines put Christ to death; it was not by the true people of God that Christ was crucified. But then when all was forfeited, God brought Him again from the dead; thus typically the ark was brought to mount Zion. The men of faith in @Hebrews 11 had promises, but they had not *come* to anything; but now that Christ is there, and the Spirit here, we have come to everything in that way. We have come to the sure mercies of David in having come to mount Zion. See @Acts 13 in that connection; it is most interesting (see verse 32, etc.). The promise made
{78}
to the fathers God has fulfilled. He has raised up Jesus, as it is said, "Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee". Then concerning that He raised Him up from the dead, He said on this wise, "I will give you the sure mercies of David" (@Acts 13: 34). It is *resurrection*, you see, and the bringing back of the ark (typifying resurrection) meant the sure mercies of David. He was brought again from the dead in the blood of the everlasting covenant (see end of @Psalm 78: 60): "So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among men; and delivered his strength into captivity and his glory into the enemy's hand"; verse 65: "Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep"; verse 68: "But chose ... the mount Zion which he loved"; verse 70: "He chose David also his servant"; verse 72: "So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands". The ways of God are recounted; all was lost, and then God comes in, in sovereign mercy. He chose mount Zion and David, and then you get the sure mercies of David. Mount Zion in that way is Christ risen. We have come to a *city*. A city is a pledge of stability. You get no city connected with mount Sinai, you get it in connection with David. Israel had forfeited all by unfaithfulness. They took the ark into the land of the Philistines. Then the ark is brought back to mount Zion, and the sure mercies of David are secured. Then you get Jerusalem, a *city* which hath foundations: it was built upon the sovereign mercy of God. The church, too, has been taken by the Philistines. The same thing has been repeated as with Christ. It is a great thing to have come to mount Zion, and to the city of the living God. On coming to Christ risen we have come to mount Zion.
Rem. We have come to all that is stable in connection with a risen Christ, i.e., we have come to the city of the living God.
F.E.R. The moment Christ is exalted, and the Spirit given, all is there.
Rem. It is all there in Christ, and all here in the Spirit.
{79}
F.E.R. All is final in connection with Christ; all is established in Him. The old covenant is worn out, and the *new* is brought in.
Rem. Everything is established in Christ risen, the man of God's purpose, and the Spirit has come down to maintain that here, and to lead us into the present good of what is established.
Rem. Our ability to enter into these things depends upon our attachment to Christ.
F.E.R. Yes, I think so. The church of the firstborn is God's position. The city is the pledge of stability; it rules. It is a great witness on the part of God "That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus" (@Ephesians 2: 7). It is the display that is the pledge of stability.
Ques. The angels -- the general assembly?
F.E.R. They are like the mountains round about Jerusalem; so the Lord encompasses His people. The testimony of the gospel now is the pledge of the present mercy of God. By and by the church -- the heavenly city -- will be a witness of the grace of God, the river of the water of life, flowing forth; and no one will be afraid of God; they will see the exceeding riches of God's grace. "To myriads of angels, the universal gathering". They are the great protection of Jerusalem. The Lord is round about His people, as the mountains are round about Jerusalem.
Ques. Heavenly Jerusalem, and the assembly of the firstborn?
F.E.R. The former hangs upon mount Zion. You get a great power, and then a pledge of stability. That is the first element. When people are paralysed with terror, as at Sinai, there is no stability at all; there is no strength about them. The church of the firstborn ones, is *for God*; it is what God has for Himself. It is His portion.
Then "to God the Judge of all", because all is in view of the world to come. When God Himself is Judge, He
{80}
does not hide Himself behind a veil of providence; God Himself is Judge; judgment is not entrusted to others. "To the spirits of just men made perfect". It is the *men* that are perfected, not the spirits. "The church of the first-born which are written in heaven". Those are God's portion. We have very little seen that Scripture has in view a world to come. We are told very little of the eternal state; we are not capable of understanding what will be then. Even Ephesians is all in view of "the dispensation of the fulness of times". In the gates of the heavenly city, you get the names of the twelve tribes. It is the progeny of Isaac and Rebecca. It is in that way you get the true Israel; it comes out of Christ and the church. "Behold I make all things *new*". That carries us on to the eternal state. The world to come represents the glory of God. It represents the moral triumph of God. This world is the dishonour of God. God might have abolished all by judgment, but then there would have been no evidence of His glory -- of His triumph; everything is to be shaken; stars are to fall; the powers of heaven are to be shaken. There is to be a great shake-up both in heaven and on earth -- it will be a political shaking. This new western system that they are so proud of will be all smashed up. I fancy God will use civil war to break it all up. Heaven will be shaken too, because Satan will be cast out. Michael and his angels are to fight against him.
There are three things we have come to here -- the Mediator of the new covenant, the blood of sprinkling, and the "better things". The blood of sprinkling speaks better things, because it is purging. Abel's blood was a witness of murder, and that defiled the earth. The blood of Christ did make an appeal to God for judgment, but still it calls for redemption. The cleansing comes in by the blood of Christ; we have come to that. We have come to Jesus, and to the blood of sprinkling; we have come to a complete system because it takes in heaven and earth. Sprinkling is purifying. It will be applied to Israel by and by; but we have come to it now. The church is the
{81}
greatest feature in the world to come. What would the universe be without the sun? "Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father" (@Matthew 13: 43). The church in that way will have the place of rule; we "shall reign in life" -- look at things morally. We shall be able to tell a Jew more about his calling than he knows himself. Our knowledge of God in His ways and dealings is so profound; we are so instructed in them that we shall be able to go here, and there, and everywhere, and instruct others. Everything in the present moment is taken up in the church, so that we may be instructed in every way of God. The church is so profound in its acquaintance with God, that it can instruct, and will sit on twelve thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. The church is the house of God -- the flock, etc. -- and thus we can instruct a few perfectly in these things.
Ques. Why might mount Sinai be touched?
F.E.R. We have not come to what is material. Mount Sinai was material. Sacraments are taken up in that way (i.e., materially) -- that requires no spirituality. When we come to christianity in its true character, the least thing will affect you -- will affect your spirit. You have to take care that you are not affected spiritually, i.e., in your spirit. Christendom has gone back to what is material and what appeals to the senses -- great buildings, etc. -- the clergy have all that kind of thought.
{82}
THE REALITY OF LIFE IN CHRIST JESUS
@2 Timothy 3
D.L.H. We have been on the subject of salvation and life, and the connection between the two. Would you mind giving a little outline of what was in your own mind in suggesting the subject?
F.E.R. The apostle introduces himself in this epistle and in the epistle to Titus, as an apostle in connection with life, and it is plain on the face of it that salvation has a prominent place in both epistles. The fact is, the two things must inevitably be bound up together. You can only have salvation in life. I think there is a little difference between this epistle and the epistle to Titus. In the latter the thought is "in hope of eternal life" but in this epistle it is not the hope of eternal life he speaks of in the introduction. It is "according to promise of life, the life which is in Christ Jesus", and it has now all come to light (see chapter 1: 10). Life and incorruptibility are brought to light, but they are bound up with salvation -- "who has saved us, and has called us" (chapter 1: 9).
W.J. Do you distinguish between life in Christ Jesus and eternal life?
F.E.R. I think so. Eternal life has a much more dispensational thought, but life in Christ Jesus is purely a moral thought. You could not speak of life in Christ Jesus as being dispensational.
D.L.H. Is it more what you get in the gospel of John?
F.E.R. Yes -- in Christ Jesus. You do not get the dispensational thought in the gospel. It is the living bread which came down from heaven -- the Spirit is a well of water springing up into everlasting life. What comes out in this epistle is that anything which is life morally is in Christ Jesus. In the second and third chapters of this epistle you get the contrast of what would come in with the corruption of christianity, and
{83}
the reality of life in Christ Jesus.
W.O. Jannes and Jambres were foiled by life.
F.E.R. Yes. It is the only thing which will meet the existing state of things -- that is, life in Christ Jesus. You cannot attempt to counteract the existing state of things by mere outward ecclesiastical order. The apostle says, "Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life", that is life-the life which is in Christ Jesus.
D.L.H. You would not say with regard to eternal life that you can lay down any rule as to the dispensational meaning of it, because there are times when it has a different application?
F.E.R. No, but I think there is the dispensational thought in it. In Matthew, Mark and Luke you get the thought dispensationally, in John morally.
D.L.H. You do get one expression in John's epistle -- "the promise which He has promised us, eternal life".
F.E.R. Yes, but he has defined what it is, and then adds, "this is the promise".
W.O. Is eternal life always an objective thought?
F.E.R. Always.
W.J. There is one passage that presents a difficulty, "no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him". I see that eternal life is objective, but that passage presents difficulty to my mind.
F.E.R. What I understand by it is that if you dwell in eternal life, eternal life dwells in you -- if you dwell in it, the truth of it dwells in you. The word dwelling is to my mind the important part in it. He (the murderer) has not the truth abiding in him, but if you abide in it, it abides in you. I have not a doubt that eternal life is abiding in christians, but if they are not abiding in it it does not abide in them. The great point for us is to abide in it.
D.L.H. When you say "abide in it", what do you refer to exactly?
F.E.R. I think you have to continue in all the conditions in which it consists, and if you do so, you
{84}
continue in it. If you were to take a living child and put it into a vessel hermetically sealed, the child would die. In order to live, it has to live in the atmosphere, and in the light, and under rule; it can only live in those conditions; so we have to abide in the conditions. Of course, with us it is not a material but a moral thought.
B. Is that why Timothy is exhorted to "lay hold of eternal life"?
F.E.R. Yes, quite so. If you come to moral considerations, it is very important to remember that no person can claim to possess anything except that into which he has entered. I do not think that can be disputed for a moment.
W.B. But are not there many things true of a man before he apprehends them?
F.E.R. No.
W.B. Suppose you take a newly converted soul. Is not that soul accepted in the Beloved?
F.E.R. I should not predicate that of it. I should predicate it of the Ephesians, but not of the newly born believer.
W.B. I should have no hesitation in saying that every believer was taken into favour in the Beloved.
F.E.R. But you would have no warrant for saying so. You apply a scripture which has no application to the case at all. The realisation of a thing is the possession of it, and no one can claim to possess a thing into which he has not entered.
J.B. You are speaking of the realisation of it on our side.
W.J. It is true for them.
F.E.R. Yes.
W.B. But I go a little further, and say it is true of them.
F.E.R. Then you have no warrant. If you put people in possession of something into which they have not entered, you take it out of the moral sphere, and make it material.
W.B. Is it that a man becomes a child of God when
{85}
he believes that he is one?
F.E.R. No. When he believes what is God's mind as set forth in Christ -- then he really comes into sonship "ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus".
W.B. But you would not say of believers that some are the children of God and some are not?
F.E.R. I should not say so, but I should suppose that there are many believers who have not an idea of sonship. Everything is on the side of apprehension. You get the perfect expression of God's mind in regard of man in Christ, but I think that mind must be apprehended and then we enter into what God's thought is.
J.B. Christ is the mind of God for every man, hence eternal life is for every man. Otherwise you could not say, "He that believeth not God hath made him a liar".
F.E.R. It is distinct in @John 3 -- "God so loved ... eternal life" (verse 16). It is God's thought of man and set forth in Christ.
D.L.H. There is a certain difficulty in taking up scriptures, say at a public reading, because a great number of persons may not be, for instance, in the 'Ephesian' condition.
F.E.R. A very great deal of difficulty. If you were to take the mass of christians in christendom at the present time, what is put forth in Galatians and Corinthians would have much more application to them.
D.E.R. I think one has to bear constantly in mind that the epistle to the Ephesians was written to the Ephesian people, who were in a certain apprehension of divine things -- the Spirit had formed them, and so with other epistles.
W.B. And yet to them the exhortation was given, "Let him that stole steal no more".
F.E.R. But you must not stop there, B., because I think there was to be the expression and exemplification of having put off the old man and put on the new.
W.B. I have great difficulty in taking up these passages, and thinking that they only become true when they are made good in the soul.
{86}
F.E.R. What I said was that no one can claim anything that is moral except as he enters into it.
W.B. But I could labour to show a believer that he stood in the favour of God.
F.E.R. I would not work that way. I would work all I could in the way of testimony to present what Christ is, before God, as the perfect expression of God in regard of man. The apostle says, "whom we preach warning every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus" -- there was the end for the apostle's labour.
Ques. Then the idea would not be that they had things, but to present to them the things in Christ?
F.E.R. Yes -- to present to them the things in Christ as being the mind of God, in regard of men -- there is a wonderful width in it.
B.J. I suppose the way we apprehend things is by the Spirit.
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. Are all the privileges of the saints made good for faith?
F.E.R. I think faith apprehends them -- "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus". Faith apprehends the privilege. I think the privilege is apprehended in Christ, but the privilege is made good in us by the Spirit -- "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father". Then you can claim sonship, because you have entered into it.
Ques. I suppose it is the same with everything from forgiveness onward?
F.E.R. I think so.
W.J. Will you say a word as to life and salvation in chapter 2?
F.E.R. I think the great point before the mind of the apostle was to insist that everything was in Christ Jesus. Timothy was to be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus. Faith was in Christ Jesus. Salvation was in Christ Jesus. Therefore it is most completely exclusive of all
{87}
that is in man. Man had to go completely, and now everything which can be spoken of as life morally is found in Christ Jesus.
J.B. If everything went to pieces down here, God has established life in Christ Jesus.
F.E.R. Quite so. The great point is that life abides, in spite of all that has come in. You may have all the architecture spoiled and defaced, but life abides. That is the great point -- life in Christ Jesus.
D.L.H. It enables you to steer your way out of the ruin?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. You have been saying that God's thought for all men is in Christ, yet do not His purposes apply especially to His children?
F.E.R. The effect of the fall was that man became alienated from God, and if man was denied access to the tree of life, he was denied access to God, because you could not separate the thought of life from God. Man became completely detached from God. The effect of redemption was to place all men in the hand of God, so that God could work in man all the pleasure of His will, and the first result is that God puts Himself in communication with all men in Christ, Christ being the mercy-seat. What follows is that Christ is the expression of God's mind in regard of every man, but then when it comes to the work of God in man, it is another matter, because God will not engage to work in every man -- His sovereignty comes in. At the same time He has set forth a perfect expression in Christ of His thought in regard of every man.
J.B. I suppose the work in man is not the subject of testimony?
F.E.R. No.
W.B. The necessity of God's work in man may become the subject of testimony?
F.E.R. Well, it is not exactly the subject of testimony. I am sure you will agree that the great subject of divine testimony is Christ.
{88}
W.B. Undoubtedly; but do you not think that there are times when God would have some of His servants insist on the new birth?
F.E.R. It is a little difficult to me, because the new birth involves the sovereignty of God. I think it is well to steer clear, in testimony to man, of truths which involve the sovereignty of God.
D.L.H. A man might turn round and say, 'I cannot do it'.
J.B. It might be well to say such things to people who are in an outward relationship with God, and trusting in forms and ordinances. Do you not think that in the confusion in which we are here, one has to say a great many things to a congregation, which you can hardly say are the subject of testimony?
F.E.R. Yes; because you are dealing with people who are on christian ground. In all our preaching we really take it into account. We do not preach like we would to heathen. The apostle had special grace and ability to speak to the heathen -- he was specially empowered in the testimony.
Ques. Why are these days called the last days (verse 1)?
Rem. But there will be other days after these days.
F.E.R. Yes, but not of christianity. We must not expect there to be any great resuscitation. It is a terrible indictment and has come fully in. There are two things presented in contrast -- a form of piety on the one hand and life in Christ Jesus on the other. The former can only be met by the latter, and you will find that the form of piety entangles people because a great many do not want much more than the form. Amongst us the question might fairly be raised as to what people are really after -- whether they are after a form of piety, or life in Christ Jesus because the latter means the complete rejection of all that is of man, of the flesh. You cannot talk about life in Christ Jesus and not exclude the flesh. They are put in contrast here. The apostle's doctrine, manner of life -- all that is morally life.
{89}
Ques. Are there a great many that have life in Christ Jesus who do not know anything about the end of man in the flesh?
F.E.R. I do not know at all. One is the necessity that hangs upon the other.
W.J. The washing of regeneration and the renewing go together.
F.E.R. I think so. The point is that christianity is vitality. It is not simply faith. There can be no vitality without faith, but christianity is vitality. People are put back to faith to a very large extent. The reformers were in that boat largely, but christianity is really vitality -- it is the life in Christ Jesus which has come in.
W.B. But you would say there was a little vitality with those in chapter 11 of Hebrews?
F.E.R. I think there was underneath; but the Lord says, "I am come that they might have life". Life and incorruptibility was not brought to light -- it was brought to light by the gospel. The fact is, we can speak of those men more than they could speak of themselves, with the light we now have. God put sanction to a very large extent even upon the flesh. It was not yet rejected. You get men acting in the flesh and after the flesh -- it was not yet set aside. All that has come out in Christ.
Ques. Could you say they had salvation?
F.E.R. No; I do not think so.
W.J. You must have Paul's doctrine and manner of life.
F.E.R. Yes. Manner of life succeeds it, and not only so but "faith, longsuffering" (verse 10). I think the apostle's doctrine involved the setting aside of man because one very important point in Paul's doctrine is justification in Christ. "... by him all that believe are justified".
Ques. But resurrection is the ground of our justification is it not?
F.E.R. Yes, but it is not His resurrection, it is Himself. He was raised for our justification. You cannot have justification without attachment, so that every
{90}
justified person is attached to Christ. It is in the very fact of being attached to Christ you are justified -- otherwise you are lawless. There are really two sides. You are justified in Christ, or else you are lawless. There is no escape from lawlessness except by attachment to Christ.
K. When you say attachment to Christ, you do not mean affection for Him?
F.E.R. No.
P.R.M. What is the force of righteousness being imputed?
F.E.R. That a man is accounted righteous.
P.R.M. Does that differ from what you are saying as to justification?
F.E.R. I do not think so. The whole universe of bliss will have its justification in the head of it. Israel will not be justified in itself and the nations will not be justified in themselves. It is a vast system, the whole of which is justified in the head; and that is so now. Though God dealt with men on the ground of flesh more or less, He had Christ before Him.
D.L.H. The "forbearance of God" indicates that?
F.E.R. I think so. God has set Him forth a mercy-seat through faith in His blood to declare His righteousness. The mercy-seat is the declaration of His righteousness.
B. You were speaking of eternal life as being dispensational?
F.E.R. I would only say it is always presented dispensationally in Matthew, Mark and Luke, but the difference between those and John's gospel is that John presents it morally, and gives to it a present application.
Ques. Would you say that Paul's "manner of life" was the life of Christ coming out in him?
F.E.R. I think so. Everything savoured of life. All the qualities which enable you to overcome down here savour of life, but where is the life? It is in Christ Jesus. A dead fish goes with the stream, and if we are to go against the current we must have life. It is in the energy
{91}
of life you overcome. There is no salvation apart from life and it is in the energy of life that you come into salvation.
Ques. You would say that Paul came into life in a very special way. "It pleased God to reveal his Son in me"?
F.E.R. Yes.
Rem. At the best we are very slow.
F.E.R. I think so, but really we see all around us what is depicted in the early part of the chapter. How are we going to meet it? I think we have to see that we overcome in the energy of life in Christ Jesus. We ought to be marked by purpose and faith -- qualities which enable us to overcome. Everything is against us in a way. I wonder how many people are going to be drawn into the net in connection with what is going on this year? All these things come along as a test, but what are people after? Do they want the good of this world, or do they want salvation from it?
Ques. We are saved from it in life, you would say?
F.E.R. Exactly. As new-born babes desiring the sincere milk of the word that by it ye may grow up unto salvation. It accompanies life.
W.C. I have thought that manner of life is exemplified in the second chapter of Philippians, and purpose in the third.
F.E.R. I think so. The wonderful thing is that you overcome down here. It is the proof of the energy of life in Christ Jesus. Christ overcame. Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. I am sure we do not overcome except in life.
Ques. In what sense had David salvation -- "Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation"?
F.E.R. I do not know. I think his soul got under the power of evil, and he wanted to be delivered from it. No doubt God did a very great deal for the saints in the Old Testament in anticipation of what was coming, and in advance of where they really were in a way.
J.McK. I suppose there is no such thing as standing
{92}
still, we must overcome or be overcome.
F.E.R. I think it is either one or the other. Properly speaking, the position in which we stand in relation to christendom renders it perfectly certain that everyone ought to be an overcomer; because we have taken a very serious position in regard to the form of piety. We ought not to have one person among us who is not an overcomer. Everybody ought to be in the energy of life in Christ.
Ques. It is by faith we overcome?
F.E.R. No. I think it is in life.
Ques. What is the force of that scripture, "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith"?
F.E.R. I do not know. You will not overcome the world without faith -- faith in Christ Jesus -- "wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus". I have no doubt that as things are in the present time, faith is an essential element of life in Christ Jesus -- "The life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God". We have nothing for sight. Everything is for faith now. You get a very remarkable expression in this epistle -- the faith which is in Christ Jesus. It is characteristic of that state.
{93}
CHRISTIANS AS IN THE LINE OF GOD'S WAYS UPON EARTH
@Titus 1 and 2
F.E.R. These epistles do not take us to heaven. They seem to present things on the line of God's ways down here. I think it is very important to see that there is a certain line of divine ways down here upon earth -- the heavenly calling and the being taken to heaven is another thing. Hence you get the appearing of the Lord brought out in this epistle and in 2 Timothy, and certain things are connected with it -- "awaiting the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ". In regard to christians too, you get the expression "that he might ... purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous for good works". So that it is evident they are viewed on the line of God's ways on earth.
D.L.H. I suppose the thought is that there should be a people morally suitable to God in this world?
F.E.R. I think so. Christianity fills up the interval -- the Jew being set aside for the time. The church in that sense comes in as "a peculiar people, zealous for good works". That would not have reference to heaven, but to a people here upon earth. It does not quite do to overlook that line. The thought of the heavenly calling might be taken up so exclusively as to shut out all else, but scripture presents another side, viewing christians as in the line of God's ways upon earth, and I have no doubt that it is in that connection that the thought of eternal life comes in.
Ques. Is it the house of God aspect of things that you refer to?
F.E.R. Well, it is not exactly that -- I think it is "a peculiar people".
B. Is that the idea in @Matthew 21: 43: "The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof"?
{94}
F.E.R. Quite so.
D.L.H. Would you say a little more about eternal life coming out in that connection?
F.E.R. Eternal life evidently is the issue of God's ways upon earth and therefore you get faith, piety, and all that sort of thing coming in in the beginning of the epistle. It is all looking on to the end and issue of divine ways here upon earth. So in chapter 2 you get, "awaiting the blessed hope and appearing of the glory".
E.R. What is the blessed hope?
F.E.R. It is the blessed hope of the glory. We "rejoice in hope of the glory of God".
E.R. Not exactly what we speak of as the rapture?
F.E.R. No, that is not the thought.
E.R. Not the blessed hope?
F.E.R. No, it is the "blessed hope and appearing of the glory".
D.L.H. I suppose that refers to the establishment of God's rights here upon earth?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so.
Ques. Why is God spoken of as the Saviour almost in every chapter?
F.E.R. Because he is the Saviour God to man. God has come out in the right of redemption and every liability has been discharged -- hence He has come out as a Saviour God to man.
H.C.A. Is not the thought that God comes forward to deliver man from all the pressure he was under?
F.E.R. I think salvation is brought to man. Righteousness and salvation have been brought to men in Christ, and are available to every man. It only remains for every man to acknowledge Christ.
H.C.A. God has taken that attitude of Saviour?
F.E.R. I think so but it is all consequent upon the introduction of Christ. Men have got a Head.
D.L.H. I think the importance of that is very great.
F.E.R. It is. It is the position, the situation, and if it is not understood, people do not understand anything.
{95}
E.R. In hope of eternal life -- is that the anticipation of the blessing?
F.E.R. I think it is the end and issue of divine ways here upon earth, and all that has come in in christianity is really in hope of that.
Ques. Would you say eternal life always stands in that connection?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so.
D.L.H. Then that was God's thought for man before the world was?
F.E.R. Yes, just as God's thought for man was Christ, before ever the world. The embodiment of God's thought for man was Christ -- not the first, but the second Man. The natural came first, but the spiritual was God's thought.
D.L.H. It is a very great comfort to know that, when we see all the ruin and wreck and dishonour to God that has come in.
F.E.R. Mr. Darby said, 'Adam was the first man historically, but really Christ was the Man of God's counsel'. Therefore you get everything in Christ -- righteousness, salvation, eternal life, sonship.
J.McK. And the grace of God is as wide as the ruin?
F.E.R. I think so.
J.McK. A grand gospel to preach.
F.E.R. Yes, it brings salvation to "all men" -- it is the character of it.
Ques. Then all the exercises that christians have to go through at the present day are in relation to the coming of that Man into the scene?
F.E.R. Yes; because it goes on to say, "In hope of eternal life ... manifested his word through preaching" (chapter 1, verses 2 and 3). So that you come into the light of it all now. It is not that you have come into the thing exactly -- that is not the idea, but it is that God has made manifest His counsel by preaching. It is all brought to light in the doctrine of the epistle. We get everything at the present time according to the verse of a very well-known hymn,
{96}
<blockquote>'That gives us now as heavenly light, <br>What soon shall be our part'. (`64:6)</blockquote>
God has made manifest His word.
Ques. Is not a great deal of New Testament scripture written to indicate a course upon earth?
F.E.R. Exactly, I quite agree -- for a people whose inheritance is not earth, yet after all God is glorified in that people down here -- "A peculiar people, zealous for good works". I fancy that is the divine thought.
F.K. What is the force of the "promise"?
F.E.R. God engaged Himself to it. I think all our ways and conduct ought to be in the light of that in the detail of life, of what God is going to bring here upon earth.
F.K. Will eternal life be known here upon earth by and by?
F.E.R. Quite so -- when the ways of God come to an issue, and God brings out the result to His glory. We have the light of it now, and our ways ought to correspond to that light. I think the great need is to know how to fill up the interval here. The church is left here for that purpose -- to fill up the interval without having any portion here upon earth.
Ques. Would not the house of God aspect of the church come in in that way?
F.E.R. I think it would. Of course, everything depends in a kind of way upon the presence of the Spirit. There is no heavenly light apart from the Spirit.
Ques. Is there a different aspect in Titus from what you get in Timothy?
F.E.R. I think 2 Timothy takes up more the subjective side, and Titus the objective. In the former it is more life in Christ Jesus, but in the latter it is "in hope of eternal life". Life in Christ Jesus is more a subjective thought; on the other hand eternal life is really the end and issue of divine ways and therefore is an objective thought -- it is external to us in a kind of way.
P. How will eternal life affect the earth?
F.E.R. All the world will be brought under the
{97}
influence of Christ. The earth has been affected by three things: darkness, hatred and lawlessness. They are the three principles which have come in, and by which men have been affected. Well, I think the coming of the Lord, the bringing in of eternal life, brings in righteousness, love and light, and just as the world has been affected by darkness, hatred and lawlessness, so in the coming of the Lord, the earth will be affected by what He brings in.
D.L.H. Then eternal life is positive in that way, but the introduction of it really does set you free?
F.E.R. Yes.
H.C.A. Are not saints viewed as already here in that association -- as in connection with what God is presently going to bring in?
F.E.R. I think John gives a present application to it and we come into it morally now; but what I have spoken of is what God is going to establish in a public way.
Ques. That is what you call the "issue"?
F.E.R. Yes. I think it is a very poor heart that cannot rejoice in the issue that God is going to bring about. It would be an awful dishonour to God to entertain such a thought as God being unable to bring about anything better than is now.
F.K. Here the earthly side of eternal life is more looked at?
F.E.R. There never was any heavenly side of it. It is heavenly influence on what is upon earth.
J.N. When do we get eternal life?
F.E.R. When you enter into it.
J.N. When is that?
F.E.R. I cannot say.
J.N. Would you say there is no eternal life in heaven?
F.E.R. I do not think you can speak in that way. It is an expression which has its application to earth. The first three New Testament writers, Matthew, Mark and Luke connect it with the coming age, but John gives
{98}
to it the present application. He ignores all past dispensations and brings in something new and heavenly, and in the light of what John brings in, eternal life comes into view. You must have the fulness of enjoyment in heaven, if it is entered into here. Now, ye abide in Christ, but then, instead of abiding in Christ we are going to reign with Christ. Eternal life is external. The joy of the christian's heart is not the idea of eternal life -- that is part of his state.
D.L.H. I suppose that is connected with the kingdom of God?
F.E.R. Well, it is an effect of it. I think there is a great deal of difference between abiding in Christ and reigning with Christ. "If we suffer, we shall also reign with Him", and reign in life. That is a different thing from abiding in Christ. What marks the present time is abiding in Christ, in a coming day we shall reign with Him -- that certainly is a difference. Then there is the responsibility to love one another. I think the church in a kind of way will give the impetus to the universe. God could set forth in the church the riches of His grace in His kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
P.R.N. What would be the thought of reigning in life by the one Jesus Christ?
F.E.R. Christ coming in brings life in. He comes in as life, but then our portion is to reign in life -- they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by the one Jesus Christ.
D.L.H. I suppose there would be no need for any word about abiding in Christ if there was not some other element to which we are liable to be subject?
F.E.R. No. We are in the kingdom now, and a very necessary thing we should be so -- otherwise we are lawless. But then, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom -- we come under the influence of Christ now. It will be a different thing in heaven; the whole universe will come under the influence of the church. I think we fail to see the great place the church
{99}
has in regard to the world to come -- the nations walk "in the light of it, and bring their glory and honour into it".
D.L.R. At the present time the moral features of Christ should be expressed in the church?
F.E.R. That is a question of state. I quite admit that properly speaking it should be "not I but Christ liveth in me", but that is not a question of eternal life but of state.
Ques. If that state were there would it be a manifestation of life?
F.E.R. Yes. You are alive, but then you are dependent upon the sun, the atmosphere, and light -- you cannot live independent of conditions. All creatures live dependent upon conditions. The only One that is independent of conditions is God. He has life in Himself and so Christ has got life in Himself.
Ques. Then the life and conditions are inseparable?
F.E.R. Yes; you are alive, but then eternal life is dependent upon conditions.
D.L.H. "This is life eternal that they might know Thee, the only true God and Jesus Christ whom Thou has sent" -- you get the conditions there?
F.E.R. Yes. You grasp the conditions and in those conditions you expand. The conditions are healthy and wholesome and in them you grow, just as a child exists and grows in certain wholesome conditions.
Ques. When the christian's conditions are changed, whatever may be in glory -- you would not speak of that as eternal life?
F.E.R. I think the conditions of eternal life always abide -- they are eternal.
D.L.H. I suppose it is true that the great point in scripture is the world to come, whereas the eternal condition is not much spoken of?
F.E.R. Why do you call it 'eternal condition'? But what is beyond? How many verses speak of what is beyond? I have not found more than six.
F.K. Would you mind stating one or two of them?
{100}
F.E.R. There is an allusion to it in Isaiah, in 2 Peter and four verses about it in Revelation.
Ques. What about the first eight verses @Revelation 21?
F.E.R. They give you the heavenly state.
Ques. That will be eternal, will it not?
F.E.R. No, not yet. He is giving you a description of the heavenly state, not of the eternal state -- then, as a matter of fact, I counted those verses in, and there are only about four.
Ques. Is it not alluded to in Corinthians?
F.E.R. God being "all in all"? Yes, that is seven verses. The appearing in glory @Titus 2: 13 is in connection with the age to come.
D.L.H. There must have been something a little amiss in the way things have been looked at, because most people have been excessively anxious to be able to clearly define the eternal state of things.
F.E.R. I very much doubt if we are competent to enter into it at all. God has been pleased to bring before us the complete unveiling of things, but at the same time I very much doubt our capability to enter into things beyond the world to come. On the other hand, the Spirit of God, the Lord said, "shall glorify me for He shall receive of mine and shall announce it to you". I think the Spirit of God really gives us understanding in regard of the world to come.
L.R. Does not that word give you an idea -- God being "all in all"?
F.E.R. Yes; it does give you an idea. You can accept the statement, but can hardly enter into it. I think you can enter into the world to come, @Hebrews 12, but I very much doubt our capability for what is beyond.
Ques. What is the "kingdom not to be shaken" at the end of @Hebrews 12?
F.E.R. That is what we receive -- an immovable kingdom; that is the kingdom of Christ.
D.L.H. It is present in a way.
F.E.R. Yes.
{101}
R. What is the everlasting kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ?
F.E.R. Well, it is everlasting -- it is not set aside.
D.L.R. Then would you just say a word as to why the world to come is the prominent thing?
F.E.R. Because I think you have got a world, built up in the providence of God, which is Babylonish. It is all Babylonish -- the church is Babylonish and I want to see a world that is built up in the light of God. That is what the world to come is; and the light of God is a very different thing to what is built up in the providence of God. The harlot is professed to rule over the kings of the earth -- the heavenly city is going to rule. Influence which God brings in in Christ will be what God has brought in now. He will bring in light, an atmosphere, influence and rule.
H.C.A. The whole point is what you started with -- it is that we might fill up the interval.
F.E.R. Yes and so John's writings are all to the same point. He gives a present application to things and concerns himself very little about past dispensations, and brings in the living bread come down from heaven -- Christ, the heavenly Man, and shows Christ as Man in relation to the world.
Ques. What are the eternal things spoken of in @2 Corinthians 4?
F.E.R. The things which are unseen yet -- when God comes out. They are not set aside like temporal things. We ought to be in the second chapter of Titus -- living here "soberly, and justly, and piously in the present course of things awaiting the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ".
B. And that is the manifestation of eternal life now, is it not?
F.E.R. I would not quite say that.
B. The maintenance of it?
F.E.R. Yes. The apostle apprehended the line and the end of divine ways and he was an apostle on that line.
{102}
H.C.A. He is looking rather at eternal life as the climax?
F.E.R. Yes, as a climax of divine ways -- "Sin has reigned in the power of death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life" (@Romans 5: 21) -- it is the issue but then I have no doubt whatever it is the glory of God. That is when God shines out publicly in effulgence-it is that which brings eternal life in.
Ques. Does John connect eternal life with dispensation?
F.E.R. Not exactly -- he brings in the present.
Rem. It is "the promise which He has promised us, life eternal".
F.E.R. But then he gives it its present application. John disregards dispensation, because he brings in what is from heaven. He brings Christ in not in connection with eternity, but in connection with man in the world down here.
H.C.A. In Him was life.
F.E.R. Yes; and the life was the light of men. So too, "God so loved the world". If eternal life was the expression of God's love to the world, it is that eternal life is to be enjoyed in the world.
Rem. When love was made known, life was made known.
F.E.R. Yes.
H.C.A. That would be a very wonderful way to fill up the interval.
F.E.R. I think so. It is in this epistle that you are to be living soberly, righteously and piously -- what you may call "piety".
{103}
OLD THINGS AND NEW
CHRIST IN HEALING POWER AND IN SYMPATHY
@Matthew 8: 1 - 17
It is important to apprehend the distinctive place and character of each of the gospels. God has been pleased to give to us four, written by different persons; at first sight one might not discern the character and position of each, but it is very important to seek to do so, otherwise you do not really understand any one of them.
The gospel of John has a marked character of its own. I look upon it as that upon which, in a sense, all the gospels turn. It is different from every other gospel. You may, of course, find things in John which are recorded in the other gospels, but it has a character quite different from all, and might almost be called the backbone of all. An apprehension of the gospel of John greatly helps you to see the position of any other gospel. Christ is the one great figure in all the gospels, but in John we have, undoubtedly, Christ presented to us in the light of a divine Person, specially in relation to the Father. John is the one employed by God to present Christ to us in the distinctiveness of His Person and as declaring God. A great many things depend upon that -- benefits to man, and so on; but what characterises the gospel is the Son in relation to the Father. You will recall one expression that frequently occurs on the lips of Christ. He calls Himself the Sent One of the Father. He is the Sent One, not merely to confer benefits on man, but, as the first point of His coming, to do the will of Him that sent Him. "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me". Again, He says, "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work". It is the Son presented to us in relation to the Father. Specially in chapter 5 we see how Christ opens up the relations which subsisted between Himself and the Father. "The Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself doeth". I have said that John is the backbone of all -- I mean in the way in which
{104}
Christ is presented to us in His Person as the Son, who had become a Man that He might come, sent of the Father.
In the other gospels we see Christ more in relation to men. It is one thing to apprehend Him in relation to the Father, but it is important also to apprehend Him in relation to men. The result of that is, that the history of man can be taken up afresh in Christ. That thought gives their peculiar character to the gospels of Matthew and Luke. In Luke the history of man is taken up in Christ, the Head, and in Matthew the history of Israel. You get a remarkable expression in the beginning of Matthew: "Out of Egypt have I called my son". That passage gives the idea of the history of Israel being taken up anew in Christ. In the providence of God it was ordered that His Son should go down into Egypt, not merely to escape the wickedness of Herod, but "that it might be *fulfilled* which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet". Certain things happened in regard of Christ, as one may say in a natural way, but to suppose that He went down to Egypt only to escape the wickedness of Herod would be very low ground. It was that the history of Israel was taken up afresh in Him. The importance of it is, that it affords a fresh standing ground for Israel. The same holds good in speaking of Christ as the Head of every man, it affords a new standing-ground for man -- a ground on which he can be with God. Every one who recognises Christ as Head has a standing-ground with God. The Head is there for every one to accept. If I accept Him as Head, God cannot reject me, because the Head is divinely appointed. God would have "all men to be saved". The Mediator is the One by whom any man can approach God, and it is an impossibility that God should reject any man who accepts the Head. He is available to every man.
The coming of Christ as the true Israel, the true vine, gave to Israel a new standing-ground before God. You see in the parable of the vine that those who believed in Him were the branches. They had a new place in the
{105}
true vine.
I make these remarks as preliminary; and there is one further remark I would offer. The history of Israel was taken up in Christ, but at the same time the advent of Christ was bound to bring about new and unexpected developments. I can shew you that from the scripture we have before us now. Christ being light from God was bound to test every man down here. He was the true light, and every man was tested by Him. It follows upon that that there must be new developments, as we see in the beginning of this chapter. The mass of the people who professed to be the people of God was rejected; but on the other hand there was faith found in the gentile who recognised Christ, and the gentile was brought into blessing in connection with the fathers. That is what I mean by a new and unexpected development; it is realised in the church. No Jew could have expected that the gentile would be joined with him in blessing. A Jew would not have entertained that thought for a moment, but it is that which has come to pass; and that development was according to the counsel of God, though it was brought to pass very much through the perversity of man. Christ came to His people, but they received Him not. The mass of them was perverse and lawless; they did not accept the light that came to them; but there was faith in the gentile which recognised Christ as God.
What I want to touch upon in the beginning of the chapter (verses 2 - 13) is the position of the Lord. I sum it up in one word: it was *God* here. And God acting as God. That is what we see in the earlier part of the passage. It was not the presentation of God morally in nature as in christians, but God presented to man in a substantive way -- God manifest in flesh -- none the less God. It is a point of importance to be held in the present day. There is an attempt abroad to fritter away everything in Scripture in bringing all to a footing where it can stand on a level with the ideas of man. But God is presented here in a Person, and in such a way that man can take account of Him; and now when He begins to
{106}
act He does not act according to the laws of nature. The Lord had to encounter what I should suppose is not according to the laws of nature. I do not think leprosy was according to the laws of nature nor death -- Christ had to meet something that was abnormal. There are many such things in the world, many things morally and physically abnormal. Undoubtedly physical results may follow moral departure, so one is not astonished to find things that are abnormal.
The leper is, I think, a picture of Israel, leprous in the eyes of God. I should call that abnormal, and so I should speak of death. All fall under its power, I own, but I do not for a moment believe death is the proper, normal condition of a man. Well, we get God here, Emmanuel, God with us, and taking account of things. What do you think His purpose was? It was to bring back man into consistency with moral laws; to bring back man from the lawlessness in which he was, under the influence of divinely appointed laws; to bring him back under the moral sway of God. It was that which Christ had in view in the leper and in the centurion, and, in fact, in all the miracles which He did. It was to bring man under the application of laws which have their seat in the love of God. All moral laws have their source in divine love. Moral laws are of God, and must have their seat in His nature.
Now just a word about the leper and the centurion. The presence of the Lord here was bound to test everything and to prove its character. If God came into His own creation it was likely enough to bring about a revolution. God did not come into a world that recognised Him, but into one which had departed from Him, and it was bound to bring about a moral revolution. In the leper and the centurion there was faith. The Lord says of the latter, "I have not found so great faith". But there was faith also in the leper. But the faith of the leper was accompanied with an "if". "If thou wilt". We do not see that in the centurion. He had not a doubt of the will of the Lord. There is no "if" on his part;
{107}
but on the part of the leper faith was there. The Lord answers both. It was a great mercy for the leper (and for many another too) that he had faith -- the Lord healed him for a testimony; but the faith of the centurion was the better. The Lord was equally ready to respond to the faith of both. But what was likely to be the result of that was that Jew and gentile must be found on one common ground. The leper was healed on the ground of the compassion of Christ. He could say, I had no merit, I was a leper, my condition was hopeless, and I have been healed simply as a question of divine compassion. Now the centurion comes forward, and he recognises that Christ is God; what can the leper say? Can he find fault with Christ or with the centurion if he was only an object of compassion himself? Can he complain of God having compassion on a poor gentile? It was impossible. His faith was less than that of the centurion; he had nothing to recommend him to Christ save that he was a subject for compassion. He appealed to Christ, and the Lord healed him and cleansed his leprosy; he could not complain if the gentile came forward and asked for and gained the Lord's compassion too.
People are amazed in the present day at wireless telegraphy. Here the word of the Lord touches one who is far off and he was healed. The servant was healed immediately.
My point is, that the presence of God here in Christ was bound to bring about a moral revolution, because the Jew was really only a subject for the compassion of God, and on the other hand, faith was found in the gentile. The leper was healed on account of need. It was his misery and leprosy, his appeal, that the Lord took account of. But then there was the same need in the gentile. There was faith there, and the Lord responded to his faith.
Now you can understand what the Lord says consequent on that (verses 10 - 12). You can see the kind of company you get in the kingdom. The Lord took account of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob because they were men of
{108}
faith, all of them. The Lord recognises their place there. Christ is supreme in the kingdom of heaven. He is the Sun of righteousness. As the sun is supreme in the physical heaven, so Christ is supreme in the kingdom of heaven. You get Christ, and the followers of Christ, and those coming from the east and west, from every direction, who will have their place there, while the children of the kingdom are left outside. They are spoken of in that way because they had been brought up in expectation of and relation to the kingdom. They were tested by the presence of God. The children of the kingdom would not have Him, but there were those who followed Christ, and the gentile was brought in with them.
Christ was the true Israel, and the true Israel is identified with the church. God took up the true Israel, beyond all doubt, in the remnant that was brought into the church. Who could impugn the faithfulness of God when God brought the remnant who were attached to Christ into heavenly blessing? Who could lay a charge against His fidelity? But on the other hand, no one could attach blame to God when He brought in the gentile too, because Israel as a mass had departed from God. That is why I spoke of a new development which the presence of Christ brought about. We have a foreshadowing of the change here. God is righteous, but He is also faithful. His people Israel are taken up in blessing -- those who were attached to Christ -- and the church is now the Israel of God. But when you consider the state of the people to whom Christ came, there was no lack of faithfulness on the part of God in bringing the gentile into association with His people. The apostle takes this up in Ephesians. You are no longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints and of the household of God (@Ephesians 2: 19, 20). That is what is foreshadowed here.
These two miracles are of the greatest interest to my mind, as shewing the true position of things in the mind of God: the Jew, a leper -- an object of compassion -- and
{109}
faith in the gentile. That is what Christ answered as God down here. God must be God, and the Jew has not a word to say against the fidelity of God, nor against the gentile.
Now if you look a little further on (verses 14 - 17), you get a reason given from Scripture why Christ did those things. It is blessed to see the comment of the Holy Spirit upon things. You get the comment of the Spirit here upon what Christ did. They were miracles of mercy without stint or limit; but what was the reason? "That it might be fulfilled ... Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses". Those miracles of mercy which the Lord performed were that that might be fulfilled. Miracles expressed what God was. The interest is not simply in the miracles; the healing of the people in that day would not be much benefit to you and to me, but if they bring out the heart of Christ, what Christ is and what God is, they are of very great value to us -- more so even than to those who were healed in that day. The Lord did not wait for their conversion. His miracles were without stint; but "himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses". That is the point I come to.
In the early part of the chapter we have Christ very distinctly as Emmanuel, but now I think we get Him on another side. I might venture to say on the sympathetic side. If I speak of the attitude *of God* to men, the thought is compassion. The leper and the centurion appealed to His compassion; He was divine and responded to it. But here it is not the response of Christ to an appeal, but a crowd of afflicted and oppressed people who came into His presence and He healed them. The point of instruction is to let us into the knowledge of Christ in another aspect, and that is in sympathy in regard to man. It is a very wonderful lesson to learn. Things would not be complete if we only had the conception of the Lord answering to man's appeal down here to deliver those who were oppressed. It gives another thought of Christ when we understand that He had sympathy. He had a sympathetic feeling in regard to what men were suffering
{110}
under, all that lay upon men. He was outside of it Himself; so far from being under it He was healing those who were under it; but we learn that Christ entered in mind into all these things by which men were affected. It has been most beautifully expressed: 'He suffered in His spirit what He took away by His power'. He could only bear them in His spirit.
I use the word sympathy advisedly. It gives us another view of Christ. We get something very touching in the ability of Christ, because He had become a real Man, to enter sympathetically into all that which pressed on man down here. I think it leads up to the priesthood of Christ.
It says in @Hebrews 2: "He himself hath suffered being tempted". I think we often place too literal a meaning upon Scripture words. Many things must have tried the Lord here. We are tempted by evil, which the Lord could not be. What tried the Lord must have been of another character. He did not have to resist temptation, as we do, but "He ... suffered being tempted". You may say that it must refer to the direct temptation of Satan which the Lord had to meet. Undoubtedly the Lord did suffer when Satan tempted Him; but I think the Lord suffered by everything He saw about Him. No doubt the unbelief of man tried Him. We read of His being angry because of their hardness of heart. We also find Jesus weeping at the grave of Lazarus. He was affected by the presence of death here and man's inability to meet it. It was no doubt to a large extent that which tried the Lord here. When He was tried He suffered. The working of that with regard to us is, that He can sympathise.
He was surrounded by all those sick people, and He healed them all. It has been said there are three classes of trial of which most people have experience more or less. There is bereavement, trial in circumstances, and in bodily affliction. The Lord knows what we labour under and can sympathise with us. He healed all these people, but He suffered in sympathy. This is of all moment to us. The Lord does not now take away our
{111}
sicknesses. When He comes in glory and power His people will not suffer by sickness; He will be the great Healer, the great Physician; but He does not now take away our sicknesses and weaknesses. But when He did take them away here on earth *He* suffered. Hence it is not difficult to understand how the sympathy of Christ can touch His people at the present time, and He is able to succour them that are tempted. People are sorely afflicted and tempted but they have the sympathy of Christ, and it is a proved sympathy.
I have touched on these things just to shew you what is true in the present moment. These things came out in the Lord's ministry here on earth, but they lead up to what is true in Christ at the present moment; we apprehend that God was manifest in the flesh; the true Israel is secured in the church, and that to my mind proves the fidelity of God; and the very experience through which the Lord was passing in the exercise of His power was proving His ability to sympathise with His people in their infirmities. Thus He is able to succour them that are tempted. He succours us so that we may not be overwhelmed by that to which we are exposed down here. It is a great thing to know what Christ was here on earth, it has not passed away. We have not exactly the same circumstances, but there can be no change in the Lord. All is recorded in order to present Christ before us and to lead us to the apprehension of what Christ is at the present time as giving effect to the purposes of God. The gentiles have been brought in, the children of the kingdom have been cast out. But we also get the capability of Christ to sympathise with His people.
{112}
CHRIST THE RESOURCE FOR GOD AND FOR MAN
@Matthew 11: 20 - 30; @Matthew 12: 1 - 50
We had before us last time how God's people had ever proved His fidelity. Whatever man might be, and man had ever proved unfaithful, in every circumstance God shewed His unfailing faithfulness. This is presented in a remarkable way in the gospel of Matthew. In spite of the condition of the people, Christ was "Immanuel", God with them. The prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled in that way. That is what the presence of Jesus in the midst of Israel meant, and nothing short of that. You cannot understand the responsibility of the people and their guilt, unless you apprehend that the One among them was "Immanuel". It was the last test applied to them. In connection with that, God took care to make good the import of another prophetic name in Isaiah, namely, "Shear-jashub". He ordered that a remnant should return. But the presence of Immanuel tended in general to bring out the perverseness and lawlessness of the people. They said, "This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours", @Mark 12: 7. Nothing ever brought out the character of the people like the presence of God among them. This rejection of God was bound to bring out other developments. This came before us last time. Christ was there in compassion for the leper, but at the same time recognising the faith of the gentile. If God came in compassion to a leprous Israel, it was impossible for Him to ignore the faith which was found in the gentile. They should come from the east and west and sit down in the kingdom of heaven, and the children of the kingdom would be cast out. That was the result of the last great test which God was pleased to apply to His people. But the fidelity of God was proved in that, in spite of the perverseness of the people, He had taken care to maintain a remnant.
We shall, I think, find the same principles in the
{113}
passage I have read tonight, and in a more distinct way. There is more light here in regard to what was in the purpose of God. In the first instance the woes which the Lord pronounced shewed that everything was coming to a point. He pronounced woes on the cities wherein most of His mighty works were done. All had failed on that ground; the testimony of His mighty works had not produced repentance, but what comes out is, that God had a resource, and that the revelation of that resource furnished a ground for those who were in any way conscious of the condition of things in Israel. That is evident in the end of chapter 11. God brings out other things which were in His mind in contrast to the presentation of Christ to the responsibility of the people. These come out, and it is important to see how, in them, God proves His faithfulness in that He finds a standing-ground in them for any one who felt the condition of things amongst the people.
What follows upon that is, that God sets aside the public link between Himself and Israel; this comes out in the next chapter; and Christ becomes the hope of the gentiles. It is remarkable to see the Lord contemplating this. We are familiar now with the new thing which the Lord has brought in, consequent upon the lack of repentance on the part of Israel. That is the resource of God, christianity. I am speaking of christianity in the true power of it. The first to be brought into christianity was the remnant of Israel. They composed the church at first, and there was nothing else there. A little later on Cornelius was brought in. God provided a standing-ground for faith in that way. God's covenant with Israel has been set aside; all testimony to them specially has been sealed up, and Christ has become the hope of the gentiles. That is what is true at the present time. I suppose we are all looking on to the time when Christ will take up again, in the mercy of God, His relation to Israel. Then God will shew judgment to the gentiles. In the meantime, "in him shall the gentiles trust". That has come to pass. The apostle Paul quotes this in
{114}
the latter part of the epistle to the Romans as a justification of his mission and preaching to the gentiles.
I will ask you to look now at the end of chapter 11 (verses 20 - 30). The point that comes out first in this chapter is that the Lord pronounces woes on those cities wherein most of His mighty works were done, and the result is that they are, so to say, lost in the judgment-day. There is a comparison between Sidon and Tyre and those cities. That was the effect of the presentation of Christ to the responsibility of man; everything was ended in the judgment-day. There was nothing but lawlessness in the heart of man in regard of God. That is true now. You have only to look round to see the disposition there is to set aside every bond of God. It is not only that men set aside that which we believe to be the revelation of God, but they reject the thought of revelation entirely. There is a word abroad now, men call themselves agnostics. An agnostic regards revelation as an impossibility. The result of it is, that man must be left in the dark completely with regard to God. I merely speak of this as evidence of that which marks the mind of man. His mind is essentially lawless. It refuses the law of God. And yet when you look around in the physical universe you see everything governed by law, and men are ready enough to form rules and laws for themselves. If every one were lawless in this world, society could not go on. As men have congregated they have been obliged to make a system of laws to render life endurable. But with regard of God, man's mind is lawless. The effect in itself of the presentation of Christ's mighty works was to bring woes upon these cities.
But what is the effect as regards Christ Himself? It says, Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and He thanked God. Christ is spoken of in Scripture as the wisdom of God. I understand by that that He is God's resource. The occasion of Christ's rejoicing was the consciousness of the resource which God had. God had hid these things from the wise and prudent, and had revealed them unto babes.
{115}
Suppose the revelation of God accommodated itself to the wise and prudent; suppose it needed a highly cultivated intellect to apprehend the things of God, what a poor look out there would be for the poor and ignorant! It seems to me, the revelation of God must suit the meanest and the poorest, because with Him there is no respect of persons. It is in a way a sort of accident that a man attains great culture -- many people have not the opportunity -- God could not take account of an accident in that way. It must be that any revelation of God, to be really a revelation, should be such as to suit itself to the poorest and meanest. That is exactly what God has done. He has "hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes". God could not put any sanction upon the cultivation of man.
Well, the resource of God is found in the expression, "All things are delivered unto me of my Father". The Lord brings to light what existed in the heart of the Father. There are resources in God, and those resources really depend upon the truth of the Godhead. We can understand these resources of God, because we know the truth of the Godhead. There was One in the unity of the Godhead who could come forth from God. It was in becoming a Man that He came forth from God, and it is to Him who came forth from God, and who was God, that all things could be delivered: "All things are delivered unto me of my Father". The Father had counsels and plans and thoughts in His heart, and all was delivered to the Son in order that He might give effect to all.
I believe that this involved two things, namely, that Christ should be a centre and point of gathering for man, and that He should accomplish redemption, that is, that the rights of God in regard of man should be maintained and vindicated. Man was under certain responsibilities and liabilities -- all that had to be maintained and vindicated in redemption; and the One in whom redemption was accomplished has become a centre and point of gathering on that ground for man. This was
{116}
true in the Son. The ground is that He maintained the rights of God. He has accomplished righteousness. "By the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life", @Romans 5: 18. That is as to the bearing of it. God had the right to redeem. Man was under liabilities, and God saw fit to exercise His right of redemption in the death of Christ. Righteousness is established, redemption accomplished, and Christ has become the centre and gathering-point for man. We get the thought of this in @John 12: "I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me".
The condition of man was brought out fully by the presence of Christ. The incarnation made things only darker as regards man; the mighty works made men more responsible; but there were resources in God. God has been presented in a man. Now He says, The Father has put all into My hands; I am going to accomplish everything. The terms were that He should taste death for everything, that the rights of redemption might be maintained in *Him*, and also that, on the ground of these rights, He might be a gathering-point for man.
Have you ever considered the point why Christ is the Sun of righteousness? The reason is plain: He is the righteous One who has accomplished righteousness. Redemption originated in grace, but the character of it is righteousness. Christ has maintained the rights of God, hence it is that He is the Sun of righteousness. He will arise with healing in His wings, but in the meantime He has become the gathering-point. That is implied, I think, in the expression here: "All things are delivered unto me of my Father".
Then another thing comes out. He is the Revealer of the Father. He came down here to give effect to the Father's will, and on this all the Father's counsels turned. But then, in the fact of His coming to accomplish the Father's counsels, the Father is revealed. It is a great point to apprehend what Christ is. We have come to a state of things pretty much analogous to that which existed in Israel.
{117}
The Lord makes an appeal: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest" (verse 28). The Lord would draw to Himself those oppressed under the condition of things which existed in the religious world. There were those in that day who were heavy laden, and the Lord appeals to them that they should detach themselves from the system under which they were heavy laden and come to Him and He would give them rest. The same thing is true in the present day. There are many christians connected with the great ecclesiastical system who groan and are heavy laden; they cannot be entirely unconscious of the state of things -- infidelity all round, vital christianity swamped by the formalism around, the decrease of piety and the fear of God, everything going to the bad -- and the so-called ministers of christianity accommodating themselves to the mind of man. What strikes one at the present day is the disposition of the ministers to find a footing on the ground of man's mental activity. They are using the pulpits to undermine the faith of the saints. The true outlet is to detach yourself from what is worn out. What is the good of remaining in it and groaning? It is a poor thing to continue groaning, though many relieve their consciences by it. If you are in a state of things which keeps you groaning, it would be wise to consider whether you are right to stay in it. I do not think God means His people to be always dissatisfied and weary. The relief is in coming to Christ; there is nothing for you but Christ. "Come unto *me*". People sometimes find it difficult to come to Christ. It seems so unsubstantial; and yet it is the only thing to do. Have done with what keeps you weary and heavy laden! Get to Christ! But take care that in seeking this you do not get to another system! There is the danger! People leave these great systems sometimes and attach themselves to some other kind of system. That is what you have to be careful of. It is a great thing really to come to *Jesus*. Then you will never go to another system. Such a thing as to come to Christ is possible -- we are attached to Him -- and Christ is
{118}
enough for you.
I look upon myself as a unit. I do not say but what I am in company with other units, but I try to keep my mind clear from the thought of connection with any kind of system down here. Having come to Jesus, I seek to walk as a unit in His light.
Groaning is not rest. If I see a person groaning or depressed, I should say he has not come to Jesus. If he had, He would certainly have given him rest. It was the provision made in God's goodness for a people heavy laden in a condition of things that was worn out. The point for faith was to detach itself from Israel and all connected with it, and to come to Jesus. He was the blessed centre of God's universe and the gathering-point of all in whom God had wrought. I ask each one, Can you stand alone with Jesus? People want a system as a prop to lean upon, but by and by the prop fails them. Another class of people depends on meetings, and meetings are an artificial prop! Others depend upon the letter of Scripture. I believe that too may be an artificial prop. Everything will fail you but Jesus. He will never fail you if your soul has really come in contact with Him. He is the Father's resource, who came to accomplish all the Father's will. He has become the resource to us, and says, "Come unto me ... I will give you rest". Rest is a great thing down here. A person burdened has not rest. A person depressed has not rest. A person excited has not rest, nor a person elated. I believe there is nothing more valuable here on earth than rest -- nothing is more indispensable to people even in natural things as rest. Then the Lord adds, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me ... and ye shall find rest unto your souls". That is coming under the law of Christ. "Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ". The Lord Jesus put Himself in the place of lowly service down here, and we have to take His yoke upon us in the service of love (verse 30). All this comes out from the simple statement, but is pregnant with the deepest meaning, "All things are delivered unto me of my Father".
{119}
Christ was independent of man; He was the blessed centre and point of gathering, and the appeal is to come unto Him.
I have a strong conviction that Christ is making the same kind of appeal to people in the present day. We get a wonderful word in the address to the church of Laodicea: "I stand at the door, and knock". It applies to the last phase in the church's history. Think of Jesus, the Root and Offspring of David, the bright and morning Star, saying, "I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me". It is a great thing for Christ to manifest Himself to you. Do you think it impossible? I believe in the reality of it; and of His coming to sup with you and you with Him.
It is a great thing to have your soul brought by the Spirit into contact with Jesus, so that you are free from the necessity of any human organisation. You are dependent then on nothing but Christ. God would not have you dependent on anything else. If you yourself know the support of Christ you will be a support to other people, but not otherwise.
I desire to add just a word on chapter 12: 14 - 21. The sabbath was the sign of the covenant between God and the people. The Lord allowed certain things to shew that the covenant was about to be broken. God put mercy above the sabbath. The Lord seals up the testimony among His disciples. He charged them that they should not make Him known. He does not discontinue His service, but He finishes the testimony. His voice was not to be heard in the street -- the street of Israel -- this was a solemn thing for Israel. But Christ could retire into the truth that He was God's beloved Servant. The Son of the Father, but also God's beloved Servant. "Behold my servant, whom I uphold". God's Spirit was upon Him. It is a wonderful change to think of Christ coming to shew judgment to the gentile. The Jew had not, but Christ will, Now comes the point which is peculiar to this moment. "In him shall the gentiles
{120}
trust". The Lord is coming into the world to establish judgment. Judgment is to return to righteousness. He is coming to swallow up death in victory. Satan's power is to be broken. Christ will send forth judgment, not to destruction, but to victory, and in His name shall the gentiles trust. Christ is the Head of every man and the hope of the gentiles at this moment, He is both the root and offspring of David, and the bright and morning Star. He says, "Let him that is athirst come". That is what arises out of the rejection of the mighty works of Christ. There were resources with God. It was impossible for God to be baffled.
I wonder what Christ is to us at the present time. I am afraid of people being content in a rightly ordered system with well-ordered meetings, and living on that, with a decrease at the same time of personal piety. I plead for piety. I can say for myself, in measure, that my soul feels independent of everything save Christ. I do not know that I am dependent upon any order or organisation. The point is that Christ is enough. Have you come to Him? If you come to Him He will give you rest. Coming to Him is very real -- He is there to come to, and if there be the movement in your soul to come to Him, He will make Himself very precious to you. Christ will be enough for you even if you should be bereft of everything down here.
Nothing will be able to stand its ground against the power of the enemy in the present day except Christ. Nothing will meet the character of things we have to meet except the reality of life in Christ.
{121}
THINGS NEW AND OLD SECURED IN CHRIST
@Matthew 13: 34 - 52
I think there can be no doubt that one of the peculiar marks of the gospel of Matthew is the bringing together of things "new and old", I do not know that you get even the expression elsewhere. The Lord uses it at the close of the passage I read: "Every scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old". Both are found in the kingdom of heaven. It is one of the results of God's ways in the bringing in of Christ.
The church, which is new, has come in by Christ. And yet God has been in no sense unfaithful to what has been. You get the two brought together; the "old" is substantiated and confirmed, and yet God brings in "new" things.
It is this bringing together of things new and old in a divine way that marks Scripture. I have no fear for all that man may do to Scripture, because all through it you have a living, powerful voice speaking in the same moral tones from beginning to end. One voice makes itself heard in strong moral accents. You cannot find a parallel to it anywhere else. It is not the voice of man speaking, or even man's conduct, that is the prominent idea; though there is a moral apprehension of things that are happening here; but it is one living voice making itself heard. And *that* is not going to be easily set aside. The voice of God is not to be set aside by the puny attacks of man! "The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars; yea, the Lord breaketh the cedars of Lebanon".
Another reason why Scripture could not be set aside is, that things which are present and come under our observation are intimately connected with things that have been; we have, for instance, one peculiar people in all parts of the world that has a long previous history.
{122}
The present condition of the Jew so links itself with the past that it remains as a standing witness of God's past ways. And yet, though the Jew be set aside for the time being, as Scripture predicted, God has never been and never will be unfaithful to His promises. He will remember the Jew. That has been my point in the previous lectures: the fidelity of God to the Jew, and yet His bringing in other developments.
Have you thought what the epistle to the Romans means? I believe it to be the fundamental epistle. It is essential for every one to be established in first principles, and they are God's righteousness and God's fidelity. If you look abroad in the world, you see what calls in question the righteousness of God and His fidelity -- you see the rights of God contested on every hand by the spirit of lawlessness prevailing. And you see another thing: the chosen people of God scattered all over the earth in contempt and reproach, not enjoying the promises made to the fathers; they are aliens, trodden down of the gentiles; all that seems to call in question the faithfulness of God. The epistle to the Romans is the answer to all that. The beginning of the epistle is the unfolding of the righteousness of God in Christ; and the latter part the unfolding of the faithfulness of God in Christ. So the christian has in Christ the answer to all here that seems to call God in question. I cannot see anything more important than that our hearts should be established in the knowledge of the righteousness and faithfulness of God. Lawlessness may prevail for a moment, but it is not going to set aside the righteousness of God; nor, on the other hand, can anything interfere with His fidelity. No failure on the part of man can alter the faithfulness of God.
You may not see all this at first. The ways of God take a certain time to work out as men judge, but in the end God will vindicate Himself -- He has done it already. God has proved His fidelity to His people. In the introduction of the church, God took care to make provision for the believing remnant of the Jews. In the
{123}
beginning the church was entirely composed of such. The gentile did not appear in the first instance. It was a further unfolding on the part of God when Cornelius and the gentiles were brought in.
I take up these parables now, for they are remarkable in this way, that you get things old and things new. You get the bringing together of things new and old, the new has not set aside the old, and the old does not interfere with the new. My main thought is that in the kingdom of heaven you get the church -- that was new -- and yet you get the kingdom of the Son of man -- that was old.
The Jew was very restricted in his thoughts. He had carnal ideas with regard to the Messiah and the glory He would confer on the people nationally; he ought to have apprehended another thought, that is, the kingdom of the Son of man. The Jew will never be restored except in connection with that kingdom. It is a world-wide dominion. When God establishes it in a public way the Jew will get his own position nationally in Christ, and not till then. In the kingdom of heaven you get the idea of the kingdom of the Son of man, which is not a new thought; but we also have what is new, in the parable of the treasure hid in the field and that of the pearl of great price. These are not made manifest in any previous communications of God; they are new. It is to that the Lord alludes, I think, in speaking of things "new and old". We can understand it all now, because we have some intelligence with regard to the pearl and the treasure. In some way, too, the net was new; you do not get the idea in the Old Testament of casting the net into the sea and putting the good fish into vessels.
Before we go on to this we will just look at the exposition that the Lord gives of the parable of the tares (verses 36 - 43). I call your attention first to verses 24 - 30.
The point to my mind in this parable is, that you get the thought of the kingdom of the Son of man. It is a very important thought. The kingdom of the Son of man is not existing in any manifest form at the present moment, but there is a form in which it does exist. For
{124}
the moment it takes the form of the kingdom of heaven. The kingdom of the Son of man has reference to God's dispensations upon earth, hence you get twice over the thought of "the completion of the age" (verses 39, 40) That refers to the dealings of God on earth. A change will take place in God's dealings. The Son of man will purge out of His kingdom all things that offend and them which do iniquity. That is remarkable, as it puts together the age to come and the present age. "Things that offend" are finding their place at this time in the kingdom of the Son of man; they will be gathered out, and the kingdom will be taken up in power and glory. You get an allusion to this in @Hebrews 2: "The world to come, whereof we speak".
The kingdom of the Son of man connects itself, too, with what has been. The mind of the Jew overlooked the kingdom of the Son of man. That was the idea prophetically conveyed, it was not new at all.
The thought of it comes out in @Psalm 8. In @Psalm 2 we get the King in Zion and authority over the nations, but in @Psalm 8 we see the universal dominion of the Son of man. "Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands". And in the comment on that in @1 Corinthians 15, we find there is nothing that is not put under him. There is no exception save in regard of Him who put all things under Him. It is the universal dominion of the Son of man based upon redemption.
In @Hebrews 2 we find Jesus "made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death ... that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man". I take it, that is the character of the kingdom, a universal dominion, characterised by grace because founded on redemption. It is by the grace of God Christ had to taste death for every thing. This is not a new thought. A Jew ought to have known of the universal dominion of the Son of man. A moment came when the Lord prohibits the publication of the testimony that He was the Christ. He speaks of Himself as the Son of man who should suffer and rise; but that was not new. The thought of the
{125}
Son of man stood out distinctly in the Old Testament. The promises to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob will be fulfilled in the kingdom of the Son of man. It is an old thought. It appears plainly in @Psalm 8, and is the principle of the world to come, the universal dominion of the Son of man.
In @Hebrews 1 you get the establishment in the Son of the throne of God -- a most important point -- and in chapter 2 the kingdom of the Son of man. The world that had been was put under angels, but the world to come is put under the Son of man, because, I take it, it is founded on redemption. That is not new.
It is striking that directly we get the kingdom of the Son of man we have in view the enemy, the devil. It reminds one of @Revelation 12. Directly the man-child is born, the dragon is there ready to swallow him up. The enemy, the devil, is against Christ, against the universal dominion of the Son of man. The world-wide authority of the beast comes in antagonism to the Son of man and His kingdom. The wicked one is ever opposed to the Son of man.
We are told that "the field is the world". What I understand by the field is not the earth but the world, which, in regard to the people in it, has been bought by Christ. It all belongs to Christ. In the parable it speaks of the Son of man sowing good seed in His field. From that point of view all men belong to Christ, whatever they may think. He has acquired a right over all, and is Head of every man. It is a point of great moment to apprehend. If people reject Christ, they reject One who has divinely-given rights in regard to them. The distinction between those who are christians and those who are not, is that the christian recognises the right of Christ, and one who is not a christian does not; but the right of Christ is the same over both. The field is His.
He sowed good seed in His field. The good seed we are told are the children of the kingdom (verse 38). I call attention to a verse in chapter 8 of this gospel (verses 11, 12). The children of the kingdom there are spoken of
{126}
as cast out. Here in this parable the good seed are the children of the kingdom. The thought in the seed is different from what we find in the parable of the sower; there the seed produces children, so to speak; here it is the good seed *are* the children. In chapter 8 the children of the kingdom are cast out. As far as I understand it, the children of the kingdom, or sons of the kingdom, are those who are recognised by the King. The Jew had expectations in regard to the kingdom. They stood on that ground in the sight of God. They were tested by Christ when He came, but did not answer to the test and were rejected. It could not be imagined that God would set up the kingdom without regard to the moral condition of those who were to be in it. Man may do such a thing, but you cannot conceive that could be the case with God. He must have regard to the moral condition of those in His kingdom. The Scripture spoke of the kingdom, and the Jew had the Scripture and was recognised by the Scripture; but when tested by Christ there was no moral capacity on their part to enter into it. They were not subject to the moral sway of God and did not answer to the test of Christ. They did not receive the light and were cast out.
But now in this parable "the children of the kingdom" appear, but as planted in the field. It is not the restoration of the Jew that is promised for the moment. The children of the kingdom are planted in the world. They have to be of God's planting. It is seed-sowing here; and indeed, if there are the children of the kingdom in the world it is the effect of the sowing of God. You may be sure the field would never of itself produce the children of the kingdom; they are not going to arise from man in the flesh, that is not the divine idea; if they are found in the field they are of divine sowing. They are a seed of God, not a natural seed.
You get that seed brought to light on the day of Pentecost, and in possession of the Holy Spirit -- they were the divine seed. They did not apprehend it at that moment, for God had not publicly set aside the Jew and
{127}
all connected with him; but they were a divine seed; whatever was in them was the work of God. And so with regard to christians at the present time; they have been sown in the field. The children of the kingdom are brought into existence by the work of God. It could not be otherwise. The Lord said to Nicodemus: "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God". It is evident that the children of the kingdom are a seed of God, but sown in the field.
On the other hand you get the tares, and they are the children of the devil, from a moral point of view, I take it -- they fulfil the lusts of their father.
The children of God are begotten of God in holiness and righteousness of truth. There is a moral resemblance to God. In the children of the wicked one there is also a moral resemblance. We get this at the beginning of christianity -- the devil brought in heresies; they were applied to the minds of men, but they could not affect people for good morally -- rather in the opposite direction. I do not conceive that tares represent merely unconverted people; I think they are the fruit of heresies sown by the devil, and are really the children of the wicked one. That is what has come to pass in the field. There are the children of the kingdom and the children of the wicked one. These are in a sense all in the kingdom of the Son of man. It is a great thing to recognise that by redemption all belong to Christ. I am sure we do not take enough account of this. The great majority of people in the world do not take account of it at all. He sows seed in *His* field, and all this takes place there.
The two classes have to remain there until the harvest. The angels come in as reapers, and we get the cleansing of the kingdom in view of its being taken up publicly by the Son of man. The rights of the Son of man are for the time being in abeyance. He had to suffer and to come again in glory; but between the two His kingdom is here, and is going to be purged in order that it may be taken up in the world to come. It is extremely important to apprehend the connection of the kingdom of the Son
{128}
of man with the future, and at the same time the connection between christianity and the time to come. God has not allowed any lapse to take place, but has maintained the links between the past and the future in the kingdom of heaven. That will be purged, in order that it may be suitable to the Son of man.
There is one word of great importance to us: "Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father". That refers to those who have their part at the present time. They will be resplendent in heavenly light; will shine forth as the sun in glory and brightness.
Before passing on I venture again to press the importance of recognising things as they are. The field all belongs to the Son of man. He has sown a seed entirely of Himself -- the children of the kingdom -- and the enemy of Christ has come in to sow the tares. If you understand these two things you will have a key to the character of things existing in the world. You will practically divide the world into three classes: the children of the kingdom, the children of the devil and the field.
When Christ sowed the good seed He had regard to His own people. The first that ever were sown were those who were His own, brought into possession of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost. They had been sown in the field, but then larger thoughts came into view -- not merely Israel and the land. That was put aside for the time, to come into view again hereafter -- the world came into view and the church.
Now I will just pass on to the new things. These come out in verses 44 - 50. I want to say a word in regard of these two parables. No one will contest the right of the man who bought the field for the sake of the treasure to possess the treasure. The treasure was there, and he bought the field for the sake of it. And so, too, if the merchant man was seeking goodly pearls, no one would be inclined to contest his right to possess himself of the most beautiful pearl he saw. No one could accuse him of
{129}
unrighteousness. Christ has bought the world for the sake of the treasure. How do you think the treasure is hid there? It could only be by the work of God. But it is hid there. The treasure is not yet brought into manifestation. The field is the thing in view. The treasure is there, and the Man has His eye upon the treasure. Here you get something entirely new.
Israel was in a way the treasure of the Lord, but they were not *hid*. They were manifest -- God's people in the world, and so, too, hereafter they will be manifest as such. The figure employed here will not have application to them, but it does apply at the present time. I do not think God intended the church to be a great, public, manifest thing in the world. The "mustard tree" is not the thought of God. The treasure was never intended to be conspicuous in the world. The world has taken up christianity as a profession, and therefore stands before God on that ground; but this parable does not indicate that it is the mind of God. Christ bought the field for the sake of the treasure, and having bought it, He hid the treasure. Men could not distinguish the two at the present time.
So with regard to the pearl. I do not think there is the thought of present manifestation. It will come out in the heavenly city. It will be conspicuous then, and so too the treasure. And yet the church was to be known here. The church was to be a peculiar people, zealous of good works, and the life of Christ was to come out in His people; but that is another thing. It was not to command the attention and consideration of man; it was a treasure to the man who bought the field, just as the pearl was a great point to the merchantman who was seeking goodly pearls.
I would desire that we should be taken up with what is occupying the attention of Christ. I do not think Christ at the right hand of God concerns Himself very much with the great things of the world. Things there are allowed to run their course, but He is occupied with the treasure for the sake of which He bought the field: and
{130}
with the pearl of great price, and that ought to be our concern. We are here to "do good unto all men, *especially* unto them who are of the household of faith". The supreme interest which should occupy the hearts of christians down here is that which is of the utmost concern to the eye and heart of Christ. A great many things that are passing in the world, great things as men term them, take up our attention, but they are often very small in the eyes of God. Everything here passes away. How will these events be thought of fifty years hence? It will be found they have produced little lasting effect. Other things come in which set aside these.
The thing is to have the treasure before us. The eye of Christ is on it here. Christ knows where it is. The pearl is priceless in the eye of Christ, as we read: "Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it ... that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish".
I wonder how far we are in the mind of Christ in that respect, as here without spot or wrinkle? We expose ourselves to a good many spots and wrinkles. As I understand it, christians are waiting here for the moment of presentation; and our desire and thought should be to be morally fit for presentation, to be without spot or wrinkle, holy and without blemish. I believe it would be a spring and source of happiness to us here if our thoughts were taken up with that which has its place at the present time under the eye of Christ. He is the Son of man and will come in His glory, and the kingdom will be purged, and great things will come to pass in the world then. We want to understand what it is, in the field, which is priceless in the eye of Christ, so that He gave all He had in order to possess it.
There is only one word more I have to add. In times gone by there was no such thought as we get in the next parable, the net cast into the sea. Scripture pursues the thought of the gospel going out to Israel, as in @Isaiah 53, but not this thought of casting the net into the sea and
{131}
gathering of every kind. Then it is brought to shore, and at the end of the age there is a selection going on; the good are gathered into vessels and the bad are cast away. This is going on, I think, at the present time. The pressure of things about us tends to draw the good together, but also the bad are coming out as bad.
It is much like what it was in the days of Jeremiah: the good figs were very good, and the bad were very bad. And, I think, today the bad are coming out as very bad, unrestraint and lawlessness of mind are rampant; but at the same time the good are coming out in their proper character according to God; seeking to be here according to the mind of God, and to know the divine thought in regard to the people of God.
What great favour God has shewn to many of us by detaching us from things that once greatly hindered us! I am sure I feel for myself very sensible of God's power in delivering me from associations that detained me. God has shewn us this great favour that we may be brought into the light of and be characterised by the truth. You cannot be characterised by the truth until you are brought into the light of it. But what a wonderful thing to be in the light of the Sun in heaven! Not a person on earth but appreciates the brightness of the sun! What a moment when we apprehend Christ as the centre and sun of a heavenly system! We are permitted to walk in that light here. We are in the light of the Sun of righteousness, under His rule, in the blessed light and warmth of heaven. God has brought us out of darkness into His marvellous light. We can truly say, "The darkness is passing and the true light already shines". We are subject to the great light in heaven which God has set there to rule the day, so that we can walk in that light while down here.
If that be the case, the good figs are very good, and the bad are very bad. The professors are becoming more and more lawless, and the good are drawing together. The sorting is going on in that way no doubt.
It is a great thing if we can be used to bring the truth
{132}
of God to bear upon those still entangled, and to bring about the disentanglement of any. God is very much bent upon this, I think. Things are much mixed up in the world. It is a great service if the people of God can be disentangled from associations in this world which are not according to God -- a great thing if the good can be "gathered into vessels".
Well, we have these things found together: things old and new. Things old have their place in the thought and mind of God as well as things which He has been pleased to make known now. The kingdom of the Son of man will have its place; the promises to Israel will have their place; but at the same time it has pleased God to make known things which were in His mind previously to all those. They have come now into view and we see a great expanse in which they have been established. Christ has died for all, in order that these great things might be known in reality.
God will prove His fidelity in regard to everything which He has seen fit to establish here on earth, or to speak of in His ways.
{133}
THE END OF THE WORLD -- GOD'S BEGINNING IN THE CHURCH
@Matthew 16: 1 - 20
The coming of Christ into the world of necessity brought in new things. It was impossible that the Son of God should accommodate Himself to what existed here; He must bring in what was new; yet it is most important to see that God proved His fidelity to Israel and what had been. That is one of the great principles which I have endeavoured to make plain through this gospel. I continue that thought in connection with the passage which we have before us.
I might call this chapter almost the most important one in the gospel. We get the death morally of all that had professedly been for God in the early part of the chapter. Then there is the real point of departure in that which God intended to establish. That point of departure is the living God. This is a remarkable expression which we find continually in Scripture; it is not confined to the New Testament. In connection with Israel going into the land of promise, the passing over Jordan was the proof that the living God was among them. God came out in that character. Such a title as that was doubtless in anticipation of what was coming. What really proved God to be the living God was the resurrection of Christ. We get in christianity the Son of the living God, the Spirit of the living God, the church of the living God, the service of the living God; everything connects itself with the living God. I would not attempt to give any definition of the expression, but it indicates surely One who is entirely above the power and dominion of death. God has come out in that way as the One who can deal with death. Men were powerless as to it, but God can deal with it. He proved this by the resurrection of Christ. The power of death was broken there, and God was proved to be the living God -- just as the entry of Israel into the promised land was a proof that the living God
{134}
was among them. Jordan was a figure of death, and it lay between Israel and the promised land; but the ark of the covenant could bring them through Jordan: "Christ who has annulled death, and brought to light life and incorruptibility by the glad tidings". The living God has come into view, and the Spirit of the living God. Everything is living. If we serve God at all, it is as the living God we approach Him.
But I want to speak first about the state of death that existed in Israel. We get this brought out remarkably in the beginning of this chapter. A number of things come into view. The unbelieving Sadducees and Pharisees appear first; the Lord warns His disciples of the leaven of the Sadducees and Pharisees, then we find that people all entertained their own ideas with regard to Christ; one said one thing and another another. Well, what all that speaks to me of is death. The Lord speaks of a wicked and adulterous generation. A generation that were not faithful to the light they had. That was the character of the world which presented itself to Christ.
If you look at the world, its most important element is its religion. I do not think the world is such, according to the divine idea, when there is no religion. When God established a world in connection with Israel there was a divinely appointed religion. When that world was swallowed up of Babylon, even then there was religion; the god of this world came in in Babylon and established false religion; but you get the religious principle there. There is bound to be that in any organisation which can be spoken of as a world. We get the character here of the world that had been; it is presented in its religious aspect, and we see in every direction moral death.
First they covered up their unbelief by seeking a sign. They were not attentive to what was there before them. And it is the same in the present day. There are plenty who are uncertain of mind, and would like a sign, but such people are not really attentive to what there is. When Christ was present there was abundance of evidence, but men disregarded what Christ did, and
{135}
asked for a sign. It was the covering up of unbelief. So in the present day. I wonder if infidels have given any real attention to Scripture. I very much question it. They come to Scripture with preconceived ideas, and interpret Scripture according to certain rules of their own, as they would anything in the world. Suppose Scripture to be what it assumes to be -- do you think people of that description are likely to arrive at any true judgment of it? They are covering up their unbelief, like the Pharisees and Sadducees, and asking a sign. What attention have they given to discern the true moral character of Scripture? Have they looked at Scripture at all, from a moral point of view, to see what the mind of God is and what is approved of God? If Scripture is not what it professes to be it is the worst imposture in the world; and if it is what it professes to be it cannot be treated as other things on the part of man. Man has such conceit of himself that he thinks he can judge of a sign. I very much doubt the capacity of man to judge of a sign if it were presented to him. In the time to come men will have signs presented to them -- "signs and lying wonders" -- and they will be taken in by them; so one cannot think very highly of the capacity of man to judge when one has the conviction that they will believe falsehood.
I refer to that as the first mark of the character of the then world, looked at religiously. There was a religious world which presented itself to the Lord, and of which He took account, and it was in a state of moral death. Unbelief was covered up by the pretension of desiring a sign.
The account which the Lord takes of it is this: He warns His disciples to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. What I understand by leaven is what is human. Christianity has become leavened. In one of the parables in @Matthew 13 the Lord likens the kingdom to a woman putting leaven into three measures of meal till the whole was leavened. The Pharisees and Sadducees had reduced religion to what was material, the Pharisee in one direction and the
{136}
Sadducee in another. You will find there are two principles in the world at the present time: religiousness with authority, and scepticism. In a sense they are in conflict, and scepticism, that is, infidelity, undoubtedly will gain the day. They are the two most powerful influences in our part of the world.
I will explain what I mean. There is a certain class of mind that will come under authority in religion; they cannot help it; you might reason with them for ever, but you cannot prevent it. They are not all unintelligent people, often the contrary; but religiousness and authority suit a certain class of mind. That accounts largely for the status and continuance of popery -- there is a class of mind which prefers that state of things; that is the Pharisee. But there is another and large class that is sceptical about everything, disinclined to believe anything of which the mind of man cannot take cognisance. This is prevalent, but not universal for the reason of which I have spoken. So the Sadducee did not believe in "resurrection nor angel nor spirit", because they did not come within the cognisance of man.
Now any *moral* operation of God does not come within the cognisance of man. If you say it is an impossibility for God to work in any way morally in His own creation, I do not admit the principle! God has constituted certain laws which operate in this universe of ours, and which are unvarying and consistent in action, but I do not think laws which God has constituted can limit God if He chooses to act. It is a weak position to take up, that one is only to believe what comes within the experience of man. The leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees is at work in the world at the present time.
The Lord warned His disciples of these things, and it is terrible to think how they have come into christianity. It has become pervaded by these principles, and is getting much more so. There was a great mass which used to lie in neutrality between them, but that is fading away, and things in christendom are resolving themselves very much into the two principles of which I have
{137}
spoken. Now my point is, it is all *death*. You will get the two remaining after the church is gone. The Pharisee and the Sadducee really mean spiritual death.
The disciples took up what was said in a material way, and thought it referred to bread, they were so dull. At last they begin to see that the Lord spoke of moral things.
We come to another point. The Lord questions the disciples as to what man's thought was in regard to Himself. Some said one thing, and some another. It is pretty much the same at the present day. It is curious that people cannot leave Scripture alone. They do not like it, and cannot understand it; but they cannot leave it alone! Scripture is not learned in the letter; "the letter kills". Vast numbers of people come to Scripture not in the right spirit, and so are stumbled. The fact of its being inspired shews that you must get it by the Spirit and not in the letter. A great deal of Scripture is the record of the circumstances into which the word of God came. Take the utterances of Job's three friends, for instance. They were not giving the mind of God, but 'darkening counsel by words without knowledge'. We need to get at the spirit and thought of Scripture. But one person has one theory, and another another, and all are human and very much akin to the ideas entertained in regard of Christ when He was here. It was a state of moral death. They had no knowledge of Christ. The Lord had done many wonderful works, but they did not apprehend Him as what He was, the One promised; they were darkened by the unbelief that was covered up by asking a sign.
I refer to these things because they shew the state of the world when the Lord was speaking in this chapter. Evil principles were at work, principles contrary to truth, while unbelief was covered up by the pretension of seeking a sign. That is the state of things before the eye of the Lord. There was no life there, all was darkness and ignorance of God. And alas! that it should have to be said, the same state of things marks christendom very much now. Light has been and is there; the Spirit of
{138}
God is there, but darkness is settling down on christianity. You get these principles revived -- a wicked generation, ignorant of Christ.
Now I come to the contrast. All so far was death. I want to touch on the other side, for that is life (verses 13 - 17).
What I would point out is this. All that is of God begins with the thought of the living God. In the beginning of Genesis God did not come out in that character. He was, of course, the living God, but He did not speak of Himself in that way. He created man, and there was no death there. Man has come by sin under the dominion of death, and the expression "the living God" is in contrast to the condition in which man is found. I do not think it is so much a question of what God is in Himself as of what He is in regard to man. He is above death, and by that fact can deal with death. The power of resurrection is in the hands of the living God in regard to man.
The next thing is "The Son of the living God". It was revealed to Peter that Christ was the Son of the living God. This is morally antecedent to the beginning of Genesis, for, behind all that comes in, there the living God was. It is a great comfort to know that, whatever might come in, God was never taken aback. Sin and death came in; man became subject to death, and after death the judgment; but the living God was behind all.
He had His own way and His own purposes before Him. Then there came a long period of the reign of death -- four thousand years; and then is revealed the real starting-point of the living God in the Son of the living God. Nothing could be established for God till the Son of the living God came in. He must be the Head and centre of all that is for God.
The Son came out to declare God, and to do this in accomplishing redemption. Redemption is a very important point to my mind. I have spoken of it as God taking up rights that properly belonged to Him. He had the right of redemption in regard to man, and the Son of
{139}
the living God came that that right might be taken up in the death of Christ. But if Christ died, He must be raised again. He could not be holden of death. Peter says, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God". How could anything that proceeded from the living God be holden of death? The great thing is to be of the living God. The Son of the living God entered into death that He might annul it, but could not be holden of it. He entered into death because God saw fit to take up that liability in regard to man that He might discharge it. Resurrection *declared* who Christ was, but He was just as much the Son of the living God when He spoke to Peter as in resurrection. Have you apprehended the starting-point of everything for God? The Son can begin a new world because He is the Son of the living God.
We come now to another point. The Lord had come into contact with men on earth; men had become His companions. He had spoken of them in that way: "Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations". If Christ had come into such a place as that men could be His companions, can the grace of that be lost? What a wonderful expression of grace that was! It was a great thing in the eye of God. It proves the greatness of the Son of God that He could come into such a place. If He came down to be their centre, that they should be His companions as here after the flesh, you may depend upon it they will be His companions in resurrection. A thought so full of grace could not be lost. He said that they should eat with Him at His table in His kingdom and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. He valued their companionship; it is morally the beginning of the church -- not dispensationally, I admit. Christ had come into such a place in grace; but if the Son of God would have companions here, He will have them, too, when He is revealed in glory and power. The truth was a revelation of the Father to Peter. "Flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens"; and the Lord goes on to
{140}
say, "On this rock I will build my assembly". That is on the confession of Himself as the Son of the living God. "And hades gates shall not prevail against it". A most wonderful and blessed truth comes out. There is His assembly, and the great privilege in it is, His mind is there. If we would desire to enter into the mind of Christ we should not find it among the priests at Jerusalem, if they were there; that used to be the case, and people got light by going to the priests. We shall not now find the Urim and the Thummim or anything of that kind. Christ has His assembly, and His assembly is the place where His mind is. Some may perhaps be disposed to ask, where shall I find the assembly? I could not tell you, but I can tell you this, if you regard His assembly, and are seeking to walk in the light of it, you will find great gain. Many will endorse that, I am sure. We have all been in different associations, some in one and some in another, and I do not think we found there the mind of Christ. What brought me out from what I was in was this: thoughts were brought to me that I had never heard of, and I desired to be in the truth of Christ's assembly. You may say, It is very little light I have. That I admit; but whatever I have, I have got it where I am.
There is nothing more wonderful than the assembly of Christ. The powers of death and evil are not going to prevail against it. The assembly of Christ is still here. The gates of hell have not prevailed against it and are not going to, and I will tell you why: because it is *living*. Christ lives in it, and what Christ lives in cannot be prevailed against. The apostle Peter takes up the thought in his first epistle, "To whom coming, as unto a living stone ... Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house".
I think all will recognise the great importance of getting back to what is vital from what is merely doctrinal. I admit the importance of "sound doctrine", but the great point is to be exercised to get into what is vital and of Christ, and it is against that that the gates of hell shall
{141}
not prevail.
The assembly is composed of the companions of Christ. The companions of Christ are His friends, and He makes known His mind to His friends. You might ask, Are not *all* christians friends of Christ? I admit they are; but they have to come to that place away from the world which disallowed Christ. Then they will find that Christ makes known His mind to them as being His friends. "I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you". Do you not think that is as true to us as it was to His disciples? Not in the same direct way perhaps, but it comes to us none the less in the power of the Holy Spirit.
One word in regard to those who were the first to be brought into this place. Evidently it was the disciples. That proves the fidelity of God to the Jew. The foundation of the assembly was made known to Peter, and the disciples were brought into it: they were Jews. The remnant of God's people were the first to come into the place of the companions of Christ, but it could not be limited to them, because all was established on the ground of resurrection, and the Jew had no claim to that. Everything in regard of them had expired, and if so, they had no claim to anything on the ground of resurrection more than any other; and yet God was faithful; He brought a remnant into the church on the ground of resurrection. Further light came out making known the truth in its application not only to the Jew but to the gentile. In connection with the advent of Christ you get such developments, for it was an absolute impossibility that the Son of the living God could accommodate Himself to limits accepted in the mind of man.
I have only one word more to say, it is in connection with the expression, "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven". I have spoken of the necessity of resurrection coming in. If the Son of God went into death, and rose again from the dead, He must be set in heaven in order to be the light and centre of God's universe. If He had accomplished righteousness, then it
{142}
appears to me that He must be the Sun of righteousness. He must be the source of light and rule in regard to men on the earth.
What I understand by the kingdom of heaven is the light and rule of what God has set in heaven. The best illustration I know is that of the sun. God set a great light to rule the day, and He has set a great spiritual light to be light and rule for man on earth. The moment we apprehend that God has set in heaven the Man who accomplished redemption, it is evident that the principle on which He is going to rule down here is grace -- so that men on earth should not be under law but under the light and rule of grace. It is very simple. It operates in this way. In the light of Christ in heaven man receives forgiveness from God, and what he has received is to become the spring of his conduct on earth. You find this coming out in chapter 18. I owed ten thousand talents, so to speak. God has forgiven it. In what light am I going to walk? While denying ungodliness and worldly lusts I am going to walk in grace. That is what is preached.
The Lord said to Peter, I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, not the keys of law but of the kingdom of heaven. That was given to Peter that he should go forth in order to bring man into the rule and light of what is established in heaven. That was the mission on which the Lord sent out Peter. You find at the beginning three thousand were converted -- brought into the light of grace, affected by it. They did not take their fellows by the throat and say, "Pay me that thou owest"; they walked in christian fellowship and grace. That is the principle of the kingdom of heaven. I have received forgiveness of all my debt, and grace is the principle that rules and governs me in my conduct on earth.
When the kingdom of heaven was first preached Peter was the preacher. A Jew, one who had been a companion of Christ. God proved His fidelity to the Jew in this. And on the other hand you cannot limit the sun to any particular nation. The gospel must go out to all God's
{143}
creation under heaven. All will understand that; though the one first sent out to preach the kingdom of heaven was a Jew.
The more you look into the matter the more you will see that in connection with the coming of the Son of God you must have new and greater things. The Son could not be limited to what existed; but it is equally true that God took care to prove His faithfulness in regard to the Jew. That principle comes out all through. We have to take into account things new and old. God proving His fidelity to what was old, and yet at the same time bringing to light other things consequent on the Son of God coming into this scene.
{144}
THE HUSBANDMEN DISPLACED; THE SON EXALTED
@Matthew 21: 33 - 46; @Matthew 22: 1 - 14
It is a point of great moment that our hearts should be established in the first principles of the knowledge of God, and so in the sense of His faithfulness. One generation passes away after another; centuries go by; thousands of years pass; and yet God abides, and abides the same. That is the impression which the history of things that God has been pleased to give to us has produced upon my mind, a sense of the fidelity of God.
I have brought before you on previous occasions what is characteristic of the gospel of Matthew, that is, God coming out in faithfulness to the promises in His Son; but that in the very introduction of the Son of God other and new things necessarily come to light. For instance, there is the church. That comes to light in this gospel. Christ came in faithfulness to God's promises in regard to Israel, but being the Son of God, it could not be but that God should have other thoughts in His mind. It was impossible that the Son of God should come in to be the crown of things that existed here. He came to test everything that was here. If the Son of God became Man, He must be the beginning. It must be so by reason of what He is. He was the promise of God to Abraham and to David, but He must be the beginning of an order of things which should be entirely according to God. He is "the beginning of the creation of God", not simply the end of it. So we read in the epistle to the Colossians: "who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the pre-eminence", that is, the first place. I cannot conceive how it could be otherwise, when we consider that Christ is the Son of God.
God applied the greatest possible test to Israel. He came to them in the person of His Son. They had had many a previous test. That comes out in the first
{145}
parable that I read. God had sent them prophets previously again and again, but they had no test equivalent to the Son coming. The Son brought in the light of God. He was the true light. The true light came and they were tested by it, but did not answer to it. They did not come to the light. They preferred darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. That was the result of the Son of God coming to the Jew. But although that was the case, and they stumbled, yet God was faithful. We see that coming out in the second parable. God comes out in faithfulness to all that had been, and yet brings in other things. He brings in things according to His purpose, things that must be, yet at the same time vindicates His faithfulness to all that had been.
I cannot conceive anything more important as the foundation in our souls than a sense of the righteousness and faithfulness of God. It forms a foundation on which a superstructure of the knowledge of God can be built up.
I am going to touch on these two parables with God's help. There is one essential point of difference in them. In the first the vineyard is in view; the second is a similitude of the kingdom. The point in the first is the bringing out of the responsibility of the husbandmen, those in charge of the vineyard. All through the vineyard is in view. God is sending to the husbandmen to receive of the fruit of the vineyard, to which He was entitled. He had formed it and cultured it, and was entitled to look for fruit -- evidently it is the vineyard and the husbandmen that are in view. It is man taken up on the ground of responsibility to bring forth fruit to God. It is not exactly man in nature, but under certain conditions and the enjoyment of certain privileges, with a certain experience of God, and so responsible to bring forth fruit to God. I do not think God looked for *much* fruit, but I think He looked for thankfulness and praise on the part of His people. He intended them to enjoy what He had put within their reach: His sun, His rain, His land; His favours which He had put in their possession. It says in one of the psalms: "Whoso offereth praise
{146}
glorifieth me", @Psalm 50: 23.
Now the second parable is a great contrast. It is the Son that is in view. The Son is common to both parables. He is the last One sent in the first; that is, the last test which God saw fit to apply to Israel. God had applied many before, but the last was God's Son. When here He gave abundant proof of who and what He was. "God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit". There was abundant proof in the power of the Spirit of God that Christ was what He maintained He was. The people were left without excuse. He was the final test. "But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said ... This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him". And that was the end of their responsibility. You have the witness of it at the present day. The Jews are a people under reproach, under the wrath of God, scattered over the face of the earth. They are a standing witness of the judgment of God. Though God afterwards offered mercy to them, they refused the Spirit of God, and wrath came upon them for their rejection and crucifixion of Christ and they are suffering under it now -- excluded from their land, having neither ephod nor teraphim. The apostle Paul says in regard to them, "Wrath is come upon them to the uttermost". And no doubt what has been is a foreshadowing of what will be to them in the judgment of God. They will have to suffer, as we read, "double for all her sins".
I have said this much because I want you to understand the different point of view in the two parables. Undoubtedly the first represents men in responsibility under the care and culture of God, enjoying advantages, a measure of light and the worship of God. There was no other people that enjoyed the like privileges on the face of the earth. They had a place where God had seen fit to set His name; they had the priesthood and the Urim and Thummim and the prophets. They had, too, God's discipline from the outset. God punished them for their
{147}
iniquities. "You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities"; that was an advantage because the chastisement hindered them in the way of evil. It is so in a family; if we exercise discipline in regard to a child it is that the child may be kept from the path of evil and self-will. The discipline was a proof of faithfulness on the part of God to His people.
The vineyard represents the house of Israel and the husbandmen those in charge. It is to these God sent for the fruit of His vineyard. In any nation or company there are leaders; it is inevitable; so there were leaders in Israel; the husbandmen were specially responsible. The same principle is seen in the seven churches in @Revelation 2 and 3. The "angels" are addressed, those in the church, whoever it might be, who came under special responsibility in regard to the state of the church. It was to such that the Lord spoke.
There is nothing more remarkable than the parables which the Lord uttered. They were pictures that could come only from a divine mind. They are not imaginations, but presentations of the position. Here it is the history of Israel extending over a vast period. Who could have given it from such a standpoint but One who was divine. The detail of it is furnished to us in the Old Testament.
In the next parable, and that is what I want to speak more of, the Son, whom you get also in the first parable, is prominent. The Son is killed in the first parable, but He becomes the great figure in the second. We get in this parable a similitude of the kingdom. I have endeavoured previously to convey an idea of what the kingdom of heaven means, the rule and light of that which God has been pleased to set in heaven. That is the simplest idea I can give of it; and properly man is now under the sway and influence of the kingdom down here. It is akin to what we get in Genesis, where God made a great light to rule the day. God has now set a great moral light in heaven, and we come under the sway and influence of
{148}
this. That is what I understand by the kingdom of heaven.
The prominent feature in this parable is not Israel, nor the servants, nor the guests; the one who had not on the wedding garment is not the prominent thought, though he comes in; the One prominent is the Son. The King would make a marriage supper for His Son. It is a celebration which has the Son in view. That is the first point in this parable, and it is a contrast to the preceding one where the vineyard and the husbandmen were in view.
The truth is this: God had a great purpose in His mind, and that was to bring in One who should be the pillar and centre of the moral universe. God did not bring Christ in at first, He brought in man at first and man was set up in innocence, and we know the result. But that was not exactly the purpose of God. Then He took up Israel, a people; then in David a kingdom; in Nebuchadnezzar He established imperial power in the hands of man; but there was no real pillar, no centre, no sun as the source of light and influence and rule. The history of the Old Testament fails of that; at the close of the Old Testament we read in Malachi, "Unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings". That is where everything had failed in regard of the past.
The Son of God was to become the Sun of righteousness, and thus to be the centre and Head of the moral universe. God has made known to us the mystery of His will to gather up in one all things in Christ. Christ is the Son of God, who has come in to take the place of the Sun of righteousness. That was ever in the thought of God.
I quite admit that Christ was to come as the Messiah to Israel according to the promise of God, but He could not be limited in that way. It was revealed by the Father to Peter that Christ was the Son of the living God -- not merely the Son of Abraham or David, but the Son of the living God. In the Revelation we find that He is not only
{149}
the offspring of David but "the root of David". The Jews had, no doubt, the idea that Messiah would be David's Son, but I think they forgot He was "the root of David". That is a very important point, because the Root of David is evidently divine. I want that we should all apprehend the position which the Son of God must take in regard to the moral universe. Everything depends on it. I cannot see any security without it. In that I can understand eternal blessing and security.
But there is another point. In order that the Son of God should come into contact with man, He must have a medium for the world to come. What I understand is, that there must be a body so formed and wrought in the knowledge of the Son of God as that the Son of God might be known through that body, and that body is the bride. I could scarcely understand the constitution of the world to come apart from that. I do not think that the Son of God could come into immediate contact with the world again. There is the idea of the bride, the heavenly city, which has the glory of God, the wall of jasper and every gate a several pearl. It is essential to the universe of bliss that the Son of God should be the Sun and light and principle of rule in it. Another thing seems also essential, that is, a body effulgent with His light. That is what I understand by the holy city, new Jerusalem, the bride, the Lamb's wife.
Now that was in the thought of God. It has not displaced anything else. God did not bring it to light in Old Testament times, but it was in His thought. It was not intended to displace Israel, but it was a necessity to the world to come. The universe of bliss could hardly be brought into existence save with this. You have often read a remarkable passage in @Hebrews 12; you are come to mount Zion, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem. These things are moral necessities. Mount Zion is a moral necessity, everything is established on the ground it represented; so too the heavenly city is a moral necessity, and the church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven. All are part of the great system which
{150}
God had in His mind, and all necessary parts. That system could hardly exist, so to speak, without them.
Now there is a foreshadowing of these things here. God would make a supper, and those called in to it are called to a celebration, to a place of peculiar privilege in the present time in regard to the Son of God. God will do honour to the Son. The great thing for us is to do honour to the Son. He is the Bridegroom, who is coming again to enter into alliance with everything that was in God's purpose down here. The Son is for the moment hid in heaven, but He is the Bridegroom. He is the centre and pillar of everything. The universe of bliss centres in the Son of God. That is involved in this parable. "A certain king ... made a marriage for his son". He invites men to come into the celebration while the King is in heaven -- that is, to recognise the thought and purpose of God in regard of His Son.
The parable is a picture of the kingdom of heaven which is still subsisting. We are here on earth, but in the light and under the influence of heaven, that is, of the One God has been pleased to set in heaven. We are called to recognise Christ as the Son of God, and that God has made a marriage for Him. We are to be down here in fidelity to God, and believing that all belongs to Him. The bride is to be taken up with the interests of Christ, Christ dwelling in the heart by faith, and maintaining all that belongs to the Son of God during the time that He is hid in heaven. That is what God has called us to. We have the privilege of being in the secret of God as to what is in heaven. We could not know it unless the Spirit had come down from heaven. The apostles could not know it by their own knowledge. Paul was the only one who had been in heaven, and he heard unspeakable words which it was not possible for a man to utter here. We know it by the Holy Spirit, who has come as a witness of who and where Christ is. He is declared to be the Son of God with power; and we are left upon earth to enter into God's appreciation, so to speak, of Christ. We are called to the marriage supper to find our delight
{151}
and joy and food in Christ, in what He is in the thought and purpose of God, the centre and Sun of God's universe. You can understand how this is, simply because He is the Son of God. That is a far greater thought than His being the Messiah to Israel. He did come as Messiah, as Son of David, but His place in the universe of bliss is an infinitely greater thought; and in the light of that every purpose will be fulfilled.
Now you get the faithfulness of God in regard to the Jews. The first addressed in the parable were those bidden to the marriage. You would have thought, after the preceding parable, there would have been a complete end of Israel, when they said, "This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and seize on his inheritance". And so there would have been on the footing of their responsibility, but not on the ground of redemption -- in redemption every right of God has been discharged, and on that ground God addresses the Jews in regard of the marriage supper. They were the first bidden. They had been tested on the footing of responsibility, and had not answered to it; they had only proved themselves perverse to the backbone. They had no claim as to the supper, but God was faithful, and they were the first addressed. And what came of it? They went "one to his farm, another to his merchandise". They treated the invitation with indifference, as though nothing had happened, and there was a remnant which "took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them". In the first parable the Son was slain; in this the servants are slain. That is what came of God addressing the invitation to those who were bidden, the Jew. But God was faithful.
Another point arises. Who were the servants? They were the messengers of the Lord, but they were Jews. The apostles entered undoubtedly into the blessing of the marriage supper. We find that on the day of Pentecost. They were the first to be brought into the light of the glory by the Spirit of God. And they were a remnant of the Jews. Three thousand were afterwards gathered in to the marriage supper. The taking of the servants and
{152}
slaying them did not come to pass immediately, but it appears very distinctly in the case of Stephen, when they said in effect: "We will not have this man to reign over us". It would have been the same with all but for the providence of God. But God had proved His faithfulness.
The first to whom the light of Christ above was presented were all Jews. "God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ". That was the burden of Peter's preaching. Paul comes after, and in testimony to the Jews says Christ is the Son of God. There was the testimony of the glory of Christ at the right hand of God, and not only that, but of what the Son of God is as the beginning of the universe of bliss. It was in the perverseness of the Jews that they would not come in, and so the invitation goes out beyond. It goes out to every one, according to what was ever in the mind of God.
In the world to come the holy city has a most important place. You cannot attach too great importance to it. It seems so essential. Christ's glory will be effulgent through a body of people by whom He is perfectly known. They were called to the marriage supper in order that they might all come to the unity of the faith and the full knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man. It is a blessed thing that we should be formed in that way by the Spirit of God. Gifts are given to that end. It is the purpose of God in regard to us down here that we should be bound together not only in the unity of the faith but of the full knowledge of the Son of God. The thought and aspiration of the apostle Paul was, "That I may know him". That is what we should be set upon, to know Him not only personally, but in all that He is in the thought and purpose of God, the blessed centre and light of all that system that God has in view. That is what we are called to -- we come to a perfect man in that way. The apostle Paul speaks of his labour among the gentiles, "Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus".
{153}
I will say one word more in regard to the man who had not on a wedding garment. Though not exactly my subject I cannot very well pass it over. He is a representative man, because a great many people are affected when the invitation goes out far and wide, and good and bad come in. The supper is the celebration of the glory of Christ in heaven; it is the recognition down here that He is the Son of God in heaven. When it is a question of testimony going out and of people accepting it, a great many may come in without very much thought, not having on the wedding garment, without the question being raised in them as to their suitability for the occasion. But that is an extremely important point. The question has to be raised.
And what is our suitability to be at the supper? It is the wedding garment. You must be there according to righteousness. There must be the recognition in the soul of the rights of God and of those having been met in Christ, else you have not righteousness. If you think your own garment will do you have not on the wedding garment which God has provided that we may be in suitability to the occasion. The truth is, where there is faith in Christ and apprehension of the Son of God, we have not to provide anything at all. Christ is provided. He is righteousness to all who come in; they have gone in and are there in suitability. God presents Himself in that way: no longer appealing to the responsibility of man, but calling on him to believe in what He has established in heaven.
If men come in truly they turn to God by the death of Christ. In the gospel there is the witness of forgiveness of sins in Christ's name. That is presented to men in grace; but there is another question to be met and that is defilement. If a man turns to God by the death of Christ he is free of defilement in the presence of God; and that is an obligation that rests upon every one in coming in to the marriage supper; you cannot come in in any other way. There is no difficulty it seems to me about the forgiveness of sins; it is heralded in the gospel to every
{154}
man on earth; but that does not release man from the obligation of coming in by the death of Christ so that he might be suitable to God. Such a one has on the wedding garment and is in suitability to the occasion.
A moment will arrive when the King will assert His right to pass in review His guests and His eye will detect the one who is not suitable, and He will consign him to outer darkness.
We see what the kingdom is -- Christ at the right hand of God, the sun and centre of all that system of glory which God has ordained for Himself. All here will pass away; the world and the lust of it, to make room for what God will display in the Son of God. Nothing will fail, but all will be maintained according to God. We are in the light of that now -- our privilege is to be here in the blessed light of the Son of God. It is a great thing to be in accord with the occasion. If any one asks me how I am, I say, I have Christ! Every right of God is maintained in Christ, and Christ is the covering for me -- He is righteousness for me and then I become righteous in practice. I get the "white linen" in that way, the righteousness of the saints. No one will practise righteousness unless he is righteous as Christ is righteous. It is the first principle of christianity to understand where we are in these different relations, and when we understand it by the Spirit of God we can practise righteousness down here. We can shew our fidelity in every relationship in which we stand.
That is what we are called to.
{155}
THE COMING OF THE LORD. ISRAEL AND THE PREPARATION FOR GLORY
@Matthew 24: 29 - 51; @Matthew 25: 1 - 30
It is rather a long passage that is before us, but my object is to shew the connection between the different things presented in the course of this instruction. It may serve us if we see the connection, and I think I can make it pretty evident.
I follow on the line which has been previously before us. I have endeavoured to bring out the fidelity of God. In @Psalm 40 the Lord speaks of the righteousness and faithfulness of God: "I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation". There is in that a foundation for the soul. The present time is a time of faith, not of sight; nothing is made manifest to sight yet; and we need to be in the faith of God, and in the apprehension of the first principles connected with God -- righteousness and faithfulness.
My point in connection with the gospel of Matthew is this: while the faithfulness of God to His people comes out continually, yet we observe that the advent of Christ brought in new things, which never entered into the mind of the Jew as connected with the Messiah. It was evident that their thoughts were carnal; they did not go beyond the glorifying of their nation. But then, Christ being the Son of God, if He came, He must sit at the right hand of God. It is the suited place for the Son of God. It was even spoken of in the Old Testament: "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool".
Another thing the Lord takes up, which is spoken of in Hebrews: The Son of man made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour. It was not merely because of the sufferings of death that He sits at the right hand of God, but of necessity as Son of man He must be at the right hand of
{156}
God. He must be received up to glory. It was a moral necessity, not merely on account of the work He accomplished, though it does not take place until redemption is accomplished, but on account of *who* He is. If He takes a place in heaven as yours new things must come to pass here. Hence you get the kingdom of heaven. It comes in, consequent on Christ taking a place at the right hand of God. That ushers in the kingdom. God has set a great light in heaven for the whole earth. You could not limit the thought of the Sun to Israel. God will prove Himself faithful in regard to His promises, but everything will be fulfilled from the right hand of God. The right hand of God is the key to the position, so to speak.
To a Jew, like Daniel, the centre of interest was Jerusalem. He did not understand the right hand of God. But to a christian Jerusalem is nothing. I would not care to see Jerusalem if I could. The centre of interest to the christian is the right hand of God. If I could go up to heaven and see what is at God's right hand, I would like to. But one does not need to go, for, by the Spirit, one can get a very good apprehension of what is there. Stephen had an apprehension. Jerusalem had been everything to him, but he saw something much better than Jerusalem. Jerusalem was fading from his view. "He ... looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God". Stephen had the key to the position. God had not forgotten Jerusalem nor the promises -- they would pass away for the time being -- but Christ was at the right hand of God and they would all in result be fulfilled from there.
I want to touch on these scriptures to shew how the faithfulness of God to the Jew comes out, and how further developments appear also. The faithfulness of God to the Jew comes out in the end of chapter 24, but in chapter 25 we get the further developments.
I just give an idea of what is before me. The Lord opens up in chapter 24 the coming of the Son of man and
{157}
what He will effect at His coming; then He passes on to refer to the servants and their charge in the meantime. The point noted is that there was uncertainty as to the moment of the coming of the Son of man, and the obligation for the servants was to watch. But not only to watch, for I do not believe God has called us only to watch, but to occupy the time in service in the christian household. The coming of the Son of man would test the servants. The Lord had gathered together a sort of household round Himself, and He makes provision for it in His absence. In the parables of the ten virgins and of the talents, the Lord is not making provision for the care of His household in His absence, but preparing for the day of His glory. That is the point in these parables. It is not exactly the thought of a people upon earth to whom He is coming, but of those who go in with the Bridegroom to the marriage and then the door is shut. In the succeeding parable we have those who are to enter into the joy of the Lord. The Lord contemplates provision for the day of His glory, when the Bridegroom will enter into alliance with all that is of God. The end of chapter 24 depends on the absence of Christ, but chapter 25 depends on the glory of Christ.
I was saying before that in the end of chapter 24 the Lord proves His faithfulness to Israel. The Son of man comes. No one knows when He will come, but when He comes He does not lose sight of the people of God who are lost down here.
In the world to come all will stand upon the footing of resurrection, for the reason that everything must be in accord with Christ. Had it been possible for Christ to remain here after the flesh then other things might have remained after the flesh; but He stood alone. "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit". If Christ be risen everything must be in accord with Him as risen. Everything that constitutes the world to come must be on the footing of resurrection. This will apply undoubtedly to the companies in heaven, and to Israel,
{158}
and even to the nations. We are told the receiving of Israel will be life from the dead as to the world. Everything will stand on that footing in the day of Christ, and death will have no right. That is a great point in connection with the world to come.
When the Son of man comes in glory He gathers His elect -- that no doubt refers to scattered Israel -- from the four corners of the earth. What greater proof could you have of the faithfulness of God? God has not lost sight of His people. Who can tell where Israel is at the present time? It is a problem man cannot solve, but God will send His angels and gather together His elect from the four corners of the earth. We know something about the Jew, but we know exceedingly little about Israel; but God has everything under His eye. Lapse of time makes no difference to Him. So when the Son of man comes we get the faithfulness of God in gathering His elect from the corners of the earth.
The Lord was speaking here to the disciples and they were a sort of election from the Jews. "Behold, I and the children which God hath given me!" They were not gentiles but children given to Christ for signs and portents, a kind of remnant from the people. The Lord speaks to them in that point of view. He puts them to the test, as to what they would do in the interval until the Son of man came. There was uncertainty as to the time of it. No one knew about it save the Father. The Lord left the disciples in charge of His household until He came again. He predicts what will take place. There will remain the servant doing his duty until the coming of the Lord. If a husband of necessity went away and left his wife in charge during his absence, she would be diligent in looking after the household and be occupied with the interests of her husband. I think that is the real attitude of watching.
But the servant may take another line. It is evident that all are tested by the uncertainty of the moment. Three things mark an evil servant: the first is officialism; the second is dictation; the third is worldliness. Dictation
{159}
is sure to follow on officialism, be begins to smite his fellow servants; then he eats and drinks with the drunken. He settles down to the world, becomes worldly instead of watching. Alas! this has come to pass too clearly in christendom. I think faithfulness on the part of a servant has always been maintained, and always will be by God's grace. There have always been and always will be those who seek to minister good to the Lord's household in due season, those who care for the Lord's interests; but the mass of those who profess themselves to be servants in christendom are given up to officialism. Then there follow dictation and worldliness. If you want to see the perfection of the evil servant, no doubt you find it in popery and the like. Their principles are foreign to the mind of Christ. Nothing can be more obnoxious to the mind of the Lord in regard of His servants than these three things.
Faithfulness to Christ is shewn in watching and using the opportunity of ministering to the Lord's household. It is a great thing for servants to have done with all idea of ministerialism. I do not undervalue ministry, to give the morsel of meat in due season, but to set up for it is to my mind a mistake. It is a great privilege to be used of God to minister the morsel of meat, but I would not do it professionally. Officialism is a deadly thing in the household of God. We want as servants to be here in the place of the Lord's slaves, guarding His household and caring for it in view of His coming.
One word more in regard of that. All this was spoken to Jews. That proved the fidelity of God. Christ does not call in gentiles to give these instructions to, but those who had been His companions while here on earth. He gives them charge in that way, and shews briefly what will take place in His absence.
But I want to dwell for a moment on the following parables. Another thought comes in them, and that is, the preparation for the day of His glory. In both parables you get the thought of long absence. In the first it says, "While the bridegroom tarried"; He did not come
{160}
quickly, He tarried. And then, "After a long time the Lord of those servants cometh and reckoneth with them". My point is, that in these parables we have preparation for the day of the Lord's glory.
I do not think that what comes out in chapter 24 goes necessarily beyond the Jew and those associated with the Lord at that moment; but the thought of the kingdom of heaven cannot be limited to any particular people. If God saw fit to set a great light in heaven it must be common to all the earth. You cannot limit the idea of the ten virgins to the Jew. In chapter 25 we are evidently on broader ground, for we have a similitude of the kingdom, that is, of those who profess to be in the light and under the sway of what God has been pleased to establish in heaven. All the ten virgins take that ground, they "went forth to meet the bridegroom".
Now we can easily read the parable, but what do you think the mind of the Lord in it is? Evidently the Lord has something to secure. What I see is this, in the system of the world to come there is to be a vessel in which the light of God will shine forth. Christ is to be effulgent, but in a vessel. I do not think Christ will come to be looked upon again as He was in time past. He will never come again in humiliation close to man, but to be glorified in His saints and admired in all them that believe. We get that thought in the end of Revelation. The holy city, new Jerusalem, comes down from God out of heaven, having the glory of God and her light like unto a stone most precious.
I judge that is what the Lord has in view. He wants the five wise virgins. All ten take the ground of being under the influence and sway of heaven, but the five foolish were deficient, gravely deficient; they had not the Spirit; they had no oil in their vessels with their lamps. Without oil one can really have no moral suitability to the Bridegroom. In the virgins you get the idea of those uncontaminated by the world and its influence; they need to be in moral suitability to the Bridegroom. That is brought about in our being led by the Spirit of God
{161}
into the knowledge of all that subsists in Christ for the glory of God and the blessing of man.
I see that thought in the four prophecies of Balaam. In the first prophecy we get separation; in the second justification; in the third comeliness; in the fourth glory. These things are necessary for the glory of God and the blessing and well-being of man. These are all found in Christ and could not possibly be found elsewhere. They could not be found in Israel. Israel will come into the gain of them as we have done; but they are found in Christ, and we undergo an education now by the Spirit of God which enables us to apprehend all that subsists in Christ. I think it is thus we learn what is involved in the thought of the Sun of righteousness. He is to rise with healing in His wings. In Him is found everything that is necessary for the well-being of man here on earth. Men will find in Him true separation from the course of the world; they will be justified in Him so that God can say, I "have not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither ... perverseness in Israel;" they will find in Him comeliness under the eye of God, but the comeliness will be of Christ; and so, too, the glory will not be of themselves, it will be of Christ. Simeon said when he took the child Jesus in his arms, that He was the glory of God's people Israel. The moment is one in which we are learning all that is in Christ. We have our part in it, otherwise we could not learn it; and we get apprehension of what Christ is as Head and centre of the whole system of blessing which God has purposed for the world to come.
That is dependent on the oil which sustains the light of the virgins. But what was the character of their light? Suitability to the Bridegroom. You cannot bring suitability to the Bridegroom about in any other way than by appreciation of the Bridegroom; and that can only be by the Spirit. And the result is you bear a light, and this is maintained while you are going into the marriage. And when the Bridegroom comes out, the church is to be the blessed vessel in the presence of the
{162}
universe, in which will be set forth the excellencies and the glories of Christ. All in it will be so acquainted with the virtues which reside in Christ.
All these parables present what is provisional, not final, for the reason that Christ is absent and every one is tested. The servants are there provisionally, so too the virgins; only five stand the test, only five have oil; and so of the servants in the next parable, only two enter into the joy of their Lord.
This is a solemn moment! Many people are on the ground of the virgins; many take the ground of the servants; but all are being tested. The point is endurance. Endurance brings out the power of the Spirit of God in the believer. In the parable of the talents the thought is different from that of the virgins, and yet it runs close to it. You get in it the same idea that Christ is preparing a vessel for the day of His glory. That is seen in the two faithful servants; Christ is preparing those who are to have part in the joy of the Lord in that day. This is not limited to the Jew. Many take the ground of being servants, and God does not reject them in that place, the Lord bears with them. But they are being tested. The point is, will they answer to the test?
We would say, I suppose, that we have five talents, or two, or one; but are we making more? It has often been observed in christianity that you have to look first to yourself. The apostle says to Timothy, "Take heed to *thyself*". You will never rightly take heed to any one else if not to yourself first -- it is "thyself" first, and then those that hear thee. You must not be content with what you have got. Christ has entrusted to you something that is precious, and whatever that precious thing may be you want to increase it. And for whom do you increase it? For the Lord, no doubt; but if you increase it for the Lord you increase it for yourself. Turn your two talents, or whatever you have, to account for yourself, because you want to have more of the joy of the Lord. The man who made five had the ten for himself. It was gratifying to the Lord, but he had them for himself. Take heed to
{163}
thyself; then you will save "those that hear thee".
I think I am justified in saying that these parables shew that the Lord is preparing those who will have joy with Him in that day when He has His proper joy in the manifestation of divine counsels. The Lord will have partners with Him in that day. The five virgins that go into the marriage will be the vessel in which the glory and moral excellencies of the Bridegroom will be reflected, as the moral qualities of a man are reflected in his wife. Christ is conforming the bride to Himself, that she may be cognisant of all that resides in the Bridegroom. That is the vessel which He is preparing in the present time to be set forth in the world to come. I delight in that wonderful passage, "that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God, having the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal".
One thought occurs to me: everything is final, no testing there. You get the measurements all taken, and everything is perfect. All perfectly answers to the rod of the angel. The vessel is perfect; perfect in divine righteousness, in unity, in light, in its full appreciation of all the virtues that reside in Christ for the glory of God, and for the blessing of man here on earth.
Well, all these things have their application to us. The Master has stayed away a long time, but He will come. Men do not think so. They have no idea that the present course of things is going to be subverted, they think things will continue, as it ever was. They do not see that everything here will be turned upside down in order to make room for the Sun of righteousness, who will arise with healing in His wings, and for the holy city which will come down from God out of heaven to exercise the most amazing influence here upon earth. I have no doubt whatever, whether it be Israel or the nations, all will walk in the light of the heavenly city, the new Jerusalem.
Jerusalem on earth ought to have been a witness to
{164}
Jehovah, but the position of Jerusalem on earth was provisional. It would not answer to any measurement by the angel. It is very different from the holy city. Everything there is final and perfect. "Her light was like unto a stone most precious". The kings of the earth bring their glory and honour unto it.
We are left here to enter into the secret of the Lord, to see what He is preparing for the world to come. It is a great thing to be going on in the appreciation of the Bridegroom. We have a link with the Bridegroom by the Spirit, and may we be led on in the appreciation of Christ. There is nothing indispensable but Christ. I am sure of it. Christ is going to fill all things, and if He is to fill all things this will exclude all else. What a great thing if He dwells in our hearts by faith! And if He so fills them that we have nothing else before us save in a little way to witness in fidelity to Christ.
Then what a great day when He says, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord!"
{165}
GRACE ABOUNDING
MAN NOTHING, CHRIST EVERYTHING
@Luke 5: 1 - 26
I have taken up this passage because we get in it remarkable instruction. The instruction to a certain extent depends on the way in which things are put together. I do not know whether these things happened consecutively; but that is not the manner of Luke. Luke pays little attention to what was simply consecutive in point of time: his point is what is consecutive morally, and that is vastly more important than what is consecutive historically. Now these things are morally consecutive, and they have to follow morally in our apprehension.
What I want to bring out of the passage is extremely simple, but has to be verified in the experience of every one who is going on with God. I see many people in the world -- true christians -- pretty much content with pious life down here, and correctness of doctrine. They are zealous in regard to doctrine; and it is often a mark of people who have departed from vitality, that they are zealous as to doctrine. You see this in Ephesus: they had left their first love, they had departed from vitality, and they were zealous in regard to doctrine. I believe the true way to get at doctrine is vitality. Pursue vitality: if you get into that, you obtain more correct thoughts in regard to doctrine. You learn the letter from the spirit, not the spirit from the letter. No one ever got the spirit of truth from the letter; but by getting what is vital, you come to understand the letter. It is extremely likely that there will be a great deal of blundering in that way, but one arrives at doctrine in a sounder and better way than if one simply pursued the doctrine in itself. I would venture to urge on everyone the pursuit of what is vital; not simply to go in for correctness of doctrine and walk, but to go in for what is vital. "Lay hold of what is really life". Riches, you can well understand, are practically the life of this world; a man cannot make
{166}
much headway in the world if he has not riches. But riches are not the life of God's world, and Timothy was to exhort those who were rich in this world to lay hold on that which is really life. It is a great thing to be in possession of durable riches. Wisdom says, "I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment: that I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasures", @Proverbs 8: 20, 21. Wisdom will give you durable riches and righteousness, and that is the life of God's world. The rich man in the parable had his barns filled, but he was not rich toward God. I pity men that are laying up riches in this world, even if they be christians; it is too dangerous a path.
Now I want to speak of the contrast which comes before us here; it is between man and Christ. Man has to go, and Christ has to become everything, and this has to be verified in our experience. All that we are has to come to an end in our own thought of things; but on the other hand, Christ has to become everything to us. I think that is the only safe thing for man down here. It is a great thing when it comes to pass. I am sure it is the true way of happiness, and I do not believe there is another way. People have their ideas of happiness, and their ways of pursuing it. I have had enough experience of life to see that paths which people think lead to happiness do not lead to it at all; they lead to self-gratification. Gratification is not happiness: it has a sting. In real happiness there is no sting. "The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it", @Proverbs 10: 22. With self-pleasing, which people pursue in many ways -- in reading and other things -- there is a sting, and it will not secure happiness.
When I speak of man coming to an end, I see it illustrated here in Peter. Peter was a disciple of Christ, and a true man, and greatly attached to Christ; but a striking picture is presented to us at the beginning of the chapter. Peter had given up his ship to Christ, and in return, the Lord would, in a way, compensate Peter and
{167}
therefore the latter gets the draught of fishes. Peter was a pious man at this time. I do not think he was always what we should call an intelligent man, but he was pious, and he had opportunities. I think I see the opportunities in the boat and the net. Very many men have opportunities down here. Now the Lord gives to him favours; he could not himself command favours. They had toiled all night, and got nothing. The riches of the sea were in a way turned to his use; but what came to pass was that the net broke and could not hold them. The result of all was that Peter fell down at the feet of Jesus, and said, "Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord", @Luke 5: 8. All that had come to pass did not have the effect of bringing him a single bit nearer to God; with all the opportunities and favours he felt his distance from God.
Now that is a great lesson. I see it exemplified in a great many people in the world; they may be pious, may have opportunities, favours and mercies on the part of God, and are very likely taken up with them, but these things come in practically between themselves and God. Their thoughts are taken up with their opportunities, and the favours and mercies which God has granted to them, and that has not the effect of bridging the distance between God and themselves; people of that description rarely come to close quarters with God. The very opportunities and mercies they have on the part of God really intervene, in a sense, between themselves and God. People with great opportunities and favours in this world are not to be greatly envied from a spiritual point of view; because what a man is in the mercy and favour of God down here, may so fill his thought and mind that it comes between himself and God, and he never really gets into intimacy with God. That was the case with Peter. He does not come into the presence of the Lord, but he says, Depart from me! What an appeal on the part of Peter, after all that the Lord had given to him! The truth is that what Peter needed, and what we have to come to, is that *we* have to go. A man has to get
{168}
free from himself in his own thought of things; then every bit of riches and acquirement goes too. If I am nothing in my own thought, everything I have as a man has gone. Every acquirement of a man is secondary to the man. If I had a million of money, I am more important than the million. A man is greater than that which he has, and if the man goes in his own sense of things, all that he has goes in the idea of its value to him.
Now that had come to pass in the case of Peter. I cannot conceive that a greater favour could be granted to us on the part of God, than that our minds should be practically rid from the encumbrance of self. What belongs to oneself may have such importance in one's mind, that it practically becomes a hindrance to intercourse with God. When we come before God, what can we bring to Him? You cannot bring yourself before Him; what are you in the eyes of God? What are the favours you have in this world? We want to be before God in mind and spirit divested of their importance and power, so that we are before Him in nothingness. There is a hymn which expresses it: --
<blockquote>'O keep us, Love divine, near thee. <br>That we our nothingness may know'. (`87:3)</blockquote>
Peter could not bring his fishes to Christ, nor was he anything in the presence of Christ.
That is one side. But now I want to point out that there is another side, and that is, that Christ is everything. Conceive what a wonderful thing it is that I can be so completely divested of myself and of all that attaches to me, that Christ shall be everything in my thoughts. We often say Christ is everything; but saying it is no good; the point is that practically Christ shall be everything in my thoughts, and myself nothing. You may not be brought to that point until your dying day, but it is very much better to be brought to it at the beginning than at the end, because your course will certainly be very much brighter and happier.
Now look at verses 12 - 26. What I point out is not
{169}
simply what took place here, but the moral import of these things. Peter's mind had to be divested of himself, of self-importance, and of all the favours that God had given to him, and to come before the Lord as nothing; as a sinful man, Peter had to disappear. Now if man is to be nothing in his own thoughts, the great point is that Christ is to be everything. I cannot bring it about in anyone here: I can only look that it may be brought about in myself. The point to which the Spirit of God would lead us is, that Christ may be dwelling in the heart by faith: then He is everything. If a wife is away from her husband, and her husband is dwelling in her heart, her husband is everything to her -- by faith -- because he is absent. Now the Spirit of God would bring us to that point, that Christ should be everything.
The first thing we get in connection with Christ, is the result of His having, so to speak, touched humanity. This is the first principle. What has come to pass in the advent of Christ is that the Son of God has touched humanity. The effect of that touch is that the leprosy which lay upon man has in the view of God departed, and He can take man up upon entirely different ground. This is the first principle of the advent of Christ; the leprosy under which humanity laboured -- defilement and uncleanness -- has been removed from under the eye of God. If anyone save Christ had touched a leper, he would have been defiled; but the effect of the touch of the Son of God was that the leprosy departed. There was faith with the man: If Thou wilt; the Lord says, I will. He came here in the will of God, became Man, took up a position in regard to man, so that it might be possible for God to touch man in Christ. This has come to pass in the incarnation of Christ, but you have to go on to the death of Christ, because Christ's touch of humanity was not complete until His death; but in the fact of His having thus touched humanity, leprosy has departed from the eye of God. You remember the vision that was accorded to Peter, the great sheet let down from heaven which contained four-footed beasts and creeping
{170}
things. Peter was called upon to eat, and he would not; then the Lord says, What God has cleansed, that call not thou common. Peter practically had to learn that Christ was the Head of every man, and it is in the Head whom God has thus set in relation to man that the leprosy under which man lay, has departed in the eye of God, and the result is that God addresses Himself to every man. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, and God's testimony goes out far and wide addressing itself to every creature under heaven. That is the practical result of Christ having touched humanity. God does not treat man now as if he were to be held at a distance as unclean. The whole position of things is altered, owing to Christ having become Man, and taken a position in relation to man in virtue of redemption. God has put Himself in touch with man; He has set forth Jesus to be a mercy-seat through faith in His blood, and He appeals to man.
That is the first thing we have to apprehend in connection with Christ. What could be more wonderful? We may be exposed to many things down here, to many a sorrow and trial, but one great answer to anything to which we may be exposed is that the Son of God has touched humanity, with the result that in the eye of God, the leprosy under which man lay has departed, and God can appeal to man, so that man should respond to God.
Now the next point comes out in verses 17 - 24. What I have spoken of hitherto is general; it indicates the position of Christ and the attitude of God in regard to men generally. But if there is to be blessing, there must be a personal link between Christ and man. That is a point of great moment. Man has become nothing in the believer's own sense of things, and Christ has become everything; He has become the life of the believer's soul. If you take a rich man of this world, his riches are his life. With a scientific man, or a business man of the world, his science or his business is his life. But with the believer, Christ should be the life of his soul. Not
{171}
riches; not business; not science; not literature; but Christ. If that is to be the case, one must not only know in a general way the grace of God and the attitude which God has assumed toward man, but another thing is necessary: the formation of the link between the soul and Christ. This comes out in a remarkable way in the case of the paralytic. The link begins with hearing the word of Christ. The paralytic accepted the first word, and got a second. The first was, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee. Individually, be received forgiveness of sins. God presents forgiveness of sins to every man, that is, in virtue of the attitude He has taken in regard to man. God has that mind in regard to man upon earth: He would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. But man must personally receive forgiveness of sins, else the mind of God would not be much good to him. How does a man receive forgiveness? In hearing the word of Christ. "Thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations", @Luke 24: 46, 47. That was the commission given to those who were to preach. But if a man is to receive forgiveness, he individually must hear the voice of Christ. It is not hearing the voice of the preacher, but the voice of Christ; that voice becomes the first link between the believer and Christ. But the work of Christ does not stop there. The next point is that a spiritual bond should be formed between the believer and Christ, so that the believer should be able to walk (verse 24). What the Lord had in view was that the palsied man should be a witness to Himself. Every believer who receives forgiveness of sins is to become, in his walk down here, a witness to the One who has forgiven him. What Christ is bent upon is to form a link between each one of us and Himself, with the result that each one of us, being forgiven and having ability to walk, may be a witness to the One who has forgiven us, to the living One. After all, Christ is the preacher; He came preaching; and where forgiveness is really known,
{172}
it has been conveyed by the word of Christ; the voice of Christ has been heard. Then He communicates the Spirit, so that the believer may be enabled to take up his bed and walk. No one could do that except by the Spirit of God. We could not carry out the requirements of the law except by the Spirit of Christ; and the end in view in the preaching of the gospel is that Christ may communicate to us of His Spirit, so that we may be enabled to take up our bed and walk. Then it is in our walk here, and in our ability to carry out the requirements of the law, that we become witnesses to the One who has forgiven us.
That is the end which the Lord had in view in the paralytic. He had been helpless: now he is a forgiven man; he goes forth, at the bidding of Christ, to carry his bed -- which had carried him hitherto -- and in carrying his bed, be became a witness to Christ.
Suppose the leper had been a millionaire: what would his millions have done for him? Nothing. If the paralytic had had great possessions, of what value would they have been? But now that he is forgiven, and takes up his bed and walks, would he think of his possessions? No, but of the wonderful things that Christ had done for him and communicated to him. He had been let down through the tiling on his couch into the midst, before Jesus, a poor, helpless paralytic; but he went out of the house on his legs. He could say, I have forgiveness, I can carry my bed and walk, and am a living witness in the world to the One whose power raised me up. That must have been his thought. He had not glorified God before; he glorifies Him now.
Now if we know Christ in these lights, Christ ought to fill our hearts, and we should be subdued. We should be filled with the sense of what has come in by Christ. I look upon these things as wonderful: to think that the Son of God should be content to become Man, to touch humanity, in order that the leprosy under which humanity lay might depart. He has not ceased to be Man. His condition has changed, but He has not ceased
{173}
to be Man. It is as the risen Man He is said to be the Mediator. We have heard His word; His voice has come to our ears, and He has announced to us forgiveness; but the object He had in view in making us know forgiveness was that He might establish a link individually between Himself and us, so that He can say, Take up thy bed and walk. What has He given us the Spirit for, but that we should love God, love Christ, and love our neighbour; that is what it is to carry out the requirements of the law; to bring forth fruit unto God. The point which Christ had in view was that He might attach us to Himself, as a wife is attached to her husband, that we might bring forth fruit unto God. In taking up our bed and walking, we do that; we are a testimony in the world to the One who has made us know forgiveness and communicated to us living water, a well of water in us springing up into everlasting life. Being set free from sin (@Romans 6), that is what came to pass in figure in the paralytic: he was set free from sin -- we are become servants to God. There is fruit for God, and the end is everlasting life. That is what the Son of God has come in for. Such a One as He is entirely capable and suitable to fill the gaze of the believer. We do not want to turn to other sources of life, to any of those things in which people live in the world, as literature, science, art or pleasure; anything which constitutes the life of the world. We are to know our nothingness, but Christ is to be everything. I wish I could maintain much more strongly that Christ is competent to be everything to the believer. What could be more amazing than that the Son of God should bring the whole world within the reach of God's appeal and testimony, that the voice of Christ might be heard in the soul of the individual, and a link be established between the individual and Himself? That is what has come to pass. I thank God one can put these things together by the Spirit of God.
The two principles are, that we are to come to a knowledge of our own nothingness, that our minds may be divested of all self-importance, and therefore the less
{174}
a man has in this world, the better off he really is; and then, that Christ should be everything in our thoughts.
I would desire that by the grace of God, this might be effectuated in the experience of each one of us, with the result that we might be here in witness to the One who has communicated to us the knowledge of forgiveness, and who has recovered us from the moral weakness in which we once were, and enabled us to carry that which once carried us.
{175}
GRACE ABOUNDING
@2 Kings 4: 1 - 7; @Matthew 25: 1 - 13; @Titus 2: 11 - 14
It is not surprising that we find the same principles always appearing in Scripture, because Scripture is the utterance of the living God, whatever part it be; and God being one, you do not expect to find differences of principle in His utterances. You may find great differences in detail, and in the way in which God presents Himself at different times to men. Before the flood, God did not, in a sense, present Himself at all; He allowed men to walk in their own ways. Then under the law, the attitude of God was that of a legislator, and that attitude was more or less maintained in regard to Israel right on to the end of the Old Testament. When we come to the New Testament, we get another attitude which God has assumed -- that of a Saviour God. The apostle Paul very commonly uses that expression. Evidently the attitude of a Saviour God is different from that of a lawgiver. Hereafter God will assume the attitude of Judge of all (@Hebrews 12). So that you see there is a great deal of difference in the attitude which God from time to time assumes in regard to men, and yet that does not for a moment affect the truth. The same principles prevail in Scripture from beginning to end. "The Same" is a remarkable expression, used in regard to God. It is a title or designation; "Thou art the Same". He does not change; "I, Jehovah, change not". This is a great point, and as one comes to know more and more of Scripture, one sees the same principles prevailing throughout the entire dealings of God with men. It is a great expression of grace on the part of God that He has been pleased to give us the record of His dealings with His people of old. In a sense, those dealings do not immediately affect us, because God is dealing with us outwardly on a different principle, but they are of the deepest interest to us.
Now the principle we see coming out in regard to the
{176}
widow woman in Kings is the principle of the gospel. Grace came in in regard to her, for Elisha was a prophet whose ministry was characterised by grace. Elijah had a different mission. He represented the claim and right of God, and sought to recall the people to allegiance to God. Elisha, on the other hand, came in the ministration of grace, and thus both are sustained. Surely God is entitled to reproach His people with departure, and to recall them to allegiance in connection with their responsibility; but if the work of God stopped there, it would not effect anything. God might reproach His people with departure, and did so continually in the prophets. It was perfectly right; the people ought not to have departed, and if they did, they ought to have returned, but they did not. Elisha supersedes Elijah, and comes to God's people in the ministration of grace in spite of everything. He represents, in a sense, the still small voice; he presents the grace of God coming in to deliver the people in spite of everything. The enemy that oppressed them at that time was the Syrian, and the people had deliverance from the Syrian by the intervention of Elisha.
But my point is that we get here what I may call a typical incident. The woman was an obscure person, a widow, of the wives of the sons of the prophets, but she was representative; what happened to her is in a way figurative of the ways of God in grace. The grace of God, by the prophet, came in to relieve her from her liability, but at the same time, the grace did not end there: the same grace which relieved her of her liability, enabled her to live. I think that is a great principle in the ways of God. The same grace which has come in to relieve us of our liability is the grace by which we are enabled to live according to God down here. I see the principle in the parable of the ten virgins, and we have it expressed in terms in the passage I read from Titus. The first aspect of the grace of God is that it brings salvation to all men, but then, it goes on to teach us. There is first the grace of God presented toward us, then
{177}
the power of that same grace in us. The grace of God that brings salvation to us becomes in us a power, that we should live according to God, soberly, righteously and godly, in this present age.
Now it is a point of great interest to see that this has ever been the principle with God. God is ever the same. Principles might not come out so clearly in the Old Testament as they do in the gospel, but they were there, and we have incidents related to us in Scripture which show that they existed, and they come out clearly enough in this case.
The woman was obscure; not a person of distinction, like Naaman, and she was encumbered by debt. She was under heavy pressure, and the creditor was about to take her sons. She had nothing in the house save a pot of oil. That is the kind of person presented to us in this instance. I want you to bear this in mind, as the woman may be spoken of as a representative person, one suitable for the grace of God. Nothing could help her but the grace of God. She could not help herself, and even the little help she had was about to be taken from her. She had nothing in the house save a pot of oil.
In one sense, the prophet did not do anything very striking; the woman had to provide vessels, and grace came to her in a simple kind of way, in the multiplication of her oil. The oil was increased, very much like you find the Lord making use of the five loaves and two fishes which the disciples had. The Lord did not ignore what they had; the five loaves and two fishes were multiplied so as to suffice for the needs of the whole multitude. Now Elisha does not ignore the pot of oil; he takes what the woman had, and in the hands of the prophet the oil becomes abundant, not only sufficing to pay the debt, but that she might live of the residue. The oil only stayed when there were no more vessels. The supply of oil was unlimited, but the vessels were limited, and when there were no more, the oil stayed.
It is a beautiful illustration of the grace of God, the way in which it comes to us and in which it works. The
{178}
first thing in regard to man is, that he is under liabilities which he cannot meet, liabilities which God has imposed upon him. "It is appointed unto men once to die" (@Hebrews 9: 27) -- that is the position of man in the world, under liabilities which he cannot meet, either for himself or another, and he has really nothing. If he cannot meet the liabilities, he has no power to live in regard to God. While a man is under death and liable to judgment, how can he live to God? The thing is a moral impossibility. If a man is to live in regard to God, he must be free from the liabilities which God has been pleased to place upon him. There are many people in the world who are not at all relieved of their liabilities, who profess to worship God. Until they are free of these liabilities, they cannot worship God. If a man were put in prison for theft, how could that man, until he were free, approach the king? Such a thing would be impossible. How can a man with the sentence of death on him and judgment before him, approach God? If a man is going to live in regard of God, the first thing is, that his liabilities should be discharged.
Now, on the part of God, grace has come in, bringing salvation to all men. It is the grace of God, and what is inherent in it is, that it brings salvation to all. Grace has come in, on the part of God, to deliver men from the thraldom and bondage in which they were found. There is the first expression of the grace of God toward man. God Himself, by Christ, has been pleased to come in, and to discharge the liabilities under which man lay, the object of it being that man might live in regard to God. The first that we know of the grace of God is as the grace which has discharged our liabilities. Christ offered Himself by the eternal Spirit to God, and spiritual grace has presented itself to us in Christ; spiritual grace has come to man, in order that man may be free from his liabilities in the eye of God. Where do you get forgiveness of sins? In the knowledge of God's mind; and until one has the knowledge of God's mind, no one has forgiveness. If you are to have a spiritual benefit, it
{179}
must lie in the knowledge of God's mind toward you. I suppose all here would be prepared to say that they have forgiveness of sins. It indicates that you have the knowledge of what is in God's mind in regard of man. It is the mind of God in regard to every man. The difference between a christian and one who is not, is that a christian knows what is in the mind of God toward man, and the one who is not a christian does not know it. God has taken His own way to maintain His own rights; redemption has come in; but before it came in, forgiveness was in the mind of God toward man, only there were liabilities under which man lay; they had to be taken up, and have been taken up in redemption, and now we are privileged to know what is in the mind of God toward man. Grace expresses the attitude which God has taken in the present time in regard to man.
It is a very wonderful thing to be in the secret of God's thought. I cannot conceive a greater privilege. A great many, even in christendom, are entirely in the dark as to what is in the mind of God toward man. It is not that they have not Scripture, but they are quite in the dark as to what God's mind is toward man. The believer has, by the grace of God, an insight into it, and that is the first experience we have of spiritual grace. Forgiveness was ever in God's mind for man. God has not altered; I do not think even the work of the cross has altered the mind of God. As a matter of fact, God passed over sins in times gone by -- we find that in @Romans 3. The cross vindicates the dealings of God with people in the past; the secret was that forgiveness was ever in God's mind in regard of man. But anyone might say, What about the judgment under which man is? You may be sure God would take care as to that, and He did. But the fact of these liabilities being discharged did not alter, but expressed the mind of God. They have been discharged that we might know what was in God's mind. Saints in the past did not know that, but now we are privileged to know it, since the liabilities have been discharged in grace.
Now I go a point further. The grace of God is a
{180}
question of God's mind. Of course the spring of it lay in God's nature, because His mind is governed by His nature; but it is in the knowledge of God's mind that we have the first acquaintance with spiritual grace. There we see how the oil has met the liabilities under which we were. Now that same grace is to affect us, that we might live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present age. The purpose of the grace was that we might live here in regard of God. The grace of God was not exhausted in meeting the liabilities, but it had in view, that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly. One is as much the grace of God as the other. Everyone can understand that. Forgiveness of sins is of the grace of God, but it is equally part of His grace that we should live in regard to Him; and how are you going to do it? "Soberly, righteously, and godly" (@Titus 2: 12): there is no other way.
You get warning in the history of the children of Israel. The grace of God brought salvation to them. They had the expression of God's grace in Egypt. The mind of God toward them evidently was forgiveness; they had the expression of this in the blood, and grace brought salvation to them: they were delivered out of the hands of the Egyptians, but they were not affected by the grace of God; they had not got oil in their vessels. They were deficient in that way. The grace of God had been toward them, but they did not appreciate it, and the consequence was that they did not live toward God; they fell in the wilderness. Now I do not think any of us want the history of the children of Israel repeated in us. We begin with the knowledge of the grace of God in the forgiveness of sins, but then God would have us so affected by it that we should live to Him. The grace of God is perfect, and expresses itself perfectly in us; it comes out in that way in us down here.
We should be a wonderful people if that marked us. Piety is a great thing. My own impression is that many are deficient in it. I see christians exceedingly anxious to make every provision for themselves. That is not piety.
{181}
Piety is practical confidence in the living God. God would have us living piously. It is a great thing to live in practical confidence in God, not to lay out plans for yourself; if you do, it is a practical denial of piety. We have to go on from day to day in confidence in God. I do not expect great things, but have confidence in God. People sometimes get overwhelmed by the pressure of things down here, and sometimes things press hardly upon the people of God; sickness, unexpected visitations, straitness of means. The secret of it is that things in the world are out of course, and therefore the people of God suffer (and so do people of the world, for that matter) under many a pressure.
But do you think that that can affect the truth that God is good? If God were not good, it would be a poor look out for you and me. What a fearful prospect there would be for the creatures of God! You could not find any possible comfort in coming to any other conclusion than that God is good. He is good, and He is behind all the things that press upon people here, and He works good for His people out of these things. Job did not wait long enough. God allowed him to be tested; he suffered great and undeserved hardships in a way; but he had to learn that there was a power of evil in the world, and that things in the world were, because of that, all in confusion. Job expected things to go on straight. He was a pious, God-fearing man. I think he overlooked the fact that in the world there was confusion, and he pleaded against God, and wanted to come to the conclusion that there must be something arbitrary in the dealings of God. Job was mistaken; he had to wait a little; afterwards God came in, and Job learnt that he had been foolish in regard of God, and God gave Job twice as much as he had before. The principle of piety is, that in spite of things discouraging in the world, you wait upon God. If you do that, you will find the end of the Lord is, that He is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. Whether we arrive at it in our experience or not, nothing can alter what God is, but it is a great thing if we arrive at that
{182}
conclusion in our souls. Piety is the principle by which in spite of pressure and discouragement in the world we can trust God. I have seen people take great pains in making provision for themselves and their families, but unexpected things have come in. It is a very great thing to go on from day to day, learning practically to be here in the reality of a living God, who is the Preserver of all men, especially of those that believe; and I venture to go so far as this, that where there is a lack of piety, there is not very much indication of people living in regard of God. We need to cultivate piety, sobriety, and righteousness. That is extremely important, and is the effect of the grace of God in us. If we apprehend the grace of God which has been toward us, the next thing will be that that grace is effectual in us, and if so, it enables us to live in the world according to God, looking for the glorious appearing of the great God. When God comes out publicly, we shall have a perfect answer to a great many things which we find inexplicable now. There are many things which will perhaps never be explained to us in this world, but we will get the explanation of them at the appearing of the great God.
Now I turn to @Matthew 25. The virgins had their lamps and vessels, and the point was that there should be light until the coming of the bridegroom. It is God's will that there should be testimony until the coming of the Lord. Now how could that be sustained? It could not possibly be except by life; there is not light where there is not life; light and life go together morally. The foolish virgins did not understand what it was to live soberly, righteously, and godly; had they been doing so, there would have been light. There was a flash of profession, but not sustained light, for light is dependent on life. It was so in the Lord Himself: what was light in Christ really was life, and so in regard of us. If we are living here according to God, there will be light. There is life in regard to God, and light in regard to man. The secret of the failure in the case of the five foolish virgins was that they had no oil in their vessels. They were not living
{183}
of the residue, like the woman in @2 Kings 4. They did not know the power of the grace of God within them; consequently there was no sustained light. I think this proves that they never had an insight into what is in the heart of God toward man. There was the real defect; you have to trace it back to the source. If they had had an insight into that, they would have known the power of the same grace within them, teaching them to live in regard of God, and had they been living in that way, there would have been sustained light until the bridegroom came. If you want to understand a defect, you have to go back to the beginning. If a doctor has a patient, he will question him as to his past life if he wants to arrive at the root of the symptoms. The symptom in the case of the five foolish virgins was that their lamps had gone out; there was no vitality. It was a proof that they had not been affected within by the grace of God. I look upon the oil as symbolising spiritual grace.
Now to refer again to the woman in Kings. What was in the mind of God toward her was that she should be relieved from her pressure. The prophet, who expressed the mind of God, came to her to that end. In a sense, God would have done the same in regard to every one in Israel, if they had received the prophet. The mind of God is the same in regard to all men. What a privilege has been accorded to us here, that we should have insight into what is in the mind of God toward man! God has cleared away everything which would have stood in the way of His thoughts being known; He has cleared away the liabilities which lay upon man, so that the thought of His mind might be apprehended by man. That is the beginning of the oil; then that grace becomes effectual in me; I live here according to God. I wonder if all here have considered the point. You cannot talk of it except you have been affected by the grace of God; and if you have, it is bound to come out in this way: you live soberly, righteously and godly. There is no other way in which it could come out morally in anyone. And
{184}
if you live in regard of God here, the effect will be that without any effort on your part there will be a sustained light in regard to man, for light is the effect and result of life in the soul.
Evidently the one thing in regard of us all is spiritual grace, that is, the knowledge of God's mind. It is everything to us. We could not know what was in God's mind unless He had been pleased to make it known; but God has interfered, to remove all that under which man lay, that His mind might be known. God's mind is that He would have all men to be saved. His mind is an inexhaustible fountain of spiritual grace; the knowledge of that mind will continue with us and affect us within so that we should live here according to God.
The point is whether these things are effectual in us. Could it be said of us that our lamps are burning? It is a great thing to look to our lamps; we might very well all arise and trim our lamps, and see what the source of supply is. The source of supply is in the apprehension of and the power in us of the grace of God, and the grace of God lies in His mind in regard of man. We want to be here in sobriety. I look upon sobriety as indicating that a man has got a true measure of himself. A man who has an inflated idea of himself is not sober, but like a drunken man. Righteousness is fidelity in every relationship in which God has been pleased to place man -- to Himself, to Christ, to fellow-christians, and every other relationship. Piety is confidence in God, that can trust Him in regard of all that is necessary down here in this world, so that I do not make provision for the flesh, but realise what it is to go on from day to day in confidence that God will never leave nor forsake me. It is in these qualities that life according to God comes out, and then there is light, in the way of testimony to man, in the people of God down here.
May we all, through the grace of God, look to it, that not only have our liabilities been met, but that grace should be operative in us as a mighty principle, enabling us to live here according to God.
{185}
THE SERVICE OF CHRIST
@Luke 8: 26 - 56
The interest of this scripture is that it furnishes an epitome of the service of Christ. It is what could not have been invented by man; it could only be given to us by one who had divine knowledge of things, that is, by the Spirit of God.
Another point comes out in connection with that; one sees in the passage how completely all the power of evil, everything that oppresses man, was under the hand of the Lord. We get devils -- a legion of devils; bodily infirmity in the case of the woman; then the pressure of death in the house of the ruler of the synagogue. All these are things which affect man. In the case of the daughter of Jairus, it was those who were living who were affected by death. The maid had passed away, but those who were living remained under the pressure of death. The power of evil and the pressure of death are weighing on man in the world; but we find in the Lord complete authority over all. He came here in the grace of God, with complete power over all that afflicted man, the blessed expression of divine grace toward man. The grace of God that brought salvation to all men had appeared; it was ushered in by the presence of the Lord Jesus here upon earth. There went virtue out of Him, and healed all.
I speak of that to give a general idea of the passage. It begins with the demoniac, and terminates with the raising of the daughter of Jairus. I say one word in regard of the last incident, because I shall not refer to it again; it no doubt carries us on to the time when Christ will come again. It is then that He will appear in the power of life and raise up the daughter of Israel. But I want to occupy your attention with what comes out in the case of the demoniac and of the woman with the issue of blood. I refer to what came out on the part of the Lord. It is a great thing to get a true thought of Christ,
{186}
and of what appertains to Him, because it tends to increase our appreciation of Christ. We want not only to know who Christ is, but to apprehend all that is vested in and belongs to Him in regard to man. We find out thus what the value of Christ is in regard to man.
Now we see in the case of the demoniac the ability of Christ to bring everything to an issue -- I might put it in other words -- we have the power and authority of Christ to resolve the question of good and evil, to disentangle what has become entangled. The effect of sin and the power of Satan having come into this world has been to a large extent to entangle good and evil. If you look abroad in the world, you will admit that it is a scene of moral confusion. Well, no one can think that confusion is according to God; God is not the author of confusion; I think it would be a poor mind that would attribute confusion to God. But it does not take much perception to see that the world is full of confusion; everything is mixed up. If you look around the little circle which is known to you, you will see any amount of confusion. What I mean by confusion is the mixing up of good and evil. In any circle of society you may see remains of what is of God, and good, natural affection is in the world, intelligence, and conscience on the part of man. I am not now speaking of converted men; but of man as man, and in him you see many beautiful things. Amiability and the like; the Lord looked upon the young ruler and loved him. You see natural affection in a mother and her children; with children you often see a large measure of innocence -- I do not mean absolutely, but in a way. There are qualities in the world which are of God, traces of His hand in the world, and no one can deny their beauty. I pity the person who would. I have often thought that a saving clause in the world, as it is, is the presence of natural affection. It is the one thing which prevents the world being a kind of hell. No one can deny that these things are beautiful in their place, and that they are of God. But if I look at man as he is, these things are mixed up with an evil will; they are distorted
{187}
and marred by will, temper, lust, pride, and arrogance; so that wherever you look abroad in the world, you cannot fail to see the terrible mixing up of good and evil.
That has been the work of the devil, just as in one of the parables of the kingdom of heaven (@Matthew 13), the Lord referred to what would take place; He had sowed good seed in His field, but an enemy had sowed tares, so that there might be a mixture and the Lord said the mixture was to go on until the time of harvest; then the disentanglement would come. I only refer to it to show that entanglement is the work of the enemy.
Now with Christ is perfect authority and power to disentangle good and evil; that is, the Lord can bring, and will bring, everything to an issue. That is what God has been doing all along the line, and the last act in this disentanglement will be the great white throne, and in result, good and evil will each find their own place. What we find at the end of the Revelation is, on the one hand, the lake of fire in which are the devil and his angels, the beast, the false prophet, death, hell, and whosoever was not found written in the book of life; but, on the other hand, we have presented to us a new heaven and a new earth, in which righteousness dwells. This shows the great end which God purposes to bring about, and for which He is working: the complete disentanglement of good and evil.
Now we see that coming out here in principle in Christ. The demoniac was possessed of a legion of devils, but they were cast out; and that was not all -- they went into the swine. Of course the scene is figurative, and really represents what occurred in connection with the coming of Christ into this world. What came to pass was that there was a little company of His people out of whom the devils had been cast. Amongst that company was Mary Magdalene, and she was representative of many another. They had been delivered from the power of Satan by the grace of the Lord, whilst the power of evil entered into the great mass of the Jews and hurried them down to destruction. The advent of Christ
{188}
into the world brought everything to an issue with reference to the Jew, and God took care that there should be a little remnant, delivered by His grace. On the other hand, the mass of the people, who were tested by and refused Christ, became possessed by the power of evil. They said, We will have no king but Caesar, then they became rebellious against Caesar. They were like the herd of swine that ran down into the abyss, they were swallowed in the waters of the gentiles. That is what came to pass in Israel consequent on their rejection of Christ.
It is a very interesting passage; but the point of moment is to see what appertains to Christ: He has power and authority to bring to an issue the question of good and evil. God cannot tolerate confusion for ever: everything in result will be disentangled. It is a great point when that takes place in regard to us. The work of grace in us is to disentangle good and evil; we get our senses exercised to discern both good and evil, and in that way we learn to approve of good and to refuse evil. How is the question brought to an issue? By the Spirit of Christ in us. It was predicted in regard of the Lord Himself, in Isaiah, that He should eat butter and honey, that He might know how to refuse the evil and choose the good, and that becomes verified in those in whom is the Spirit of Christ. The question of good and evil will be brought to a final issue at the great white throne; in the meantime it has been brought to an issue in regard to the Jew. The Jews are a public witness of it to the present day; they are lost in the sea of the gentiles, and what brought that about was their rejection of the light presented to them in Christ. They became possessed by the power of evil, and were hurried down to national destruction. But in the meantime God took care that there should be a remnant delivered from the power of evil, who should be at the disposal of the One who delivered them. The man who was delivered wanted to be with Jesus, but the Lord did not suffer him; He said, Go home, and show how great things God hath done
{189}
unto thee. I think we find a company answering to the delivered man in the beginning of the Acts of the apostles, a company at the disposal of Jews, and entrusted by Him with His testimony.
My desire is that we might have an apprehension of what belongs to the Lord. Of course all has not come out yet, although it has in a way: "For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil" @1 John 3: 8. Confusion is to be brought to an end. God is not the author of confusion, and will not always tolerate it, but will disentangle things, and bring confusion to an end, and in result there will be new heavens and a new earth, wherein righteousness dwells. What really laid the foundation of it all was the work of redemption. Had it not been for that, such a solution would have been impossible; but the question has been solved in redemption, so that God can set to work, in Christ, to disentangle good and evil in detail, that is, all that is of Himself from all that is of the devil. We are told expressly of the lake of fire that it is prepared for the devil and his angels. It does not say it was prepared for man. The devil will be cast into it, and the beast, and the false prophet, and the children of the devil. There will be nothing there but what is morally of the devil.
Now we have Christ presented to us in another light (verses 43 - 48). It is not here exactly the power and authority of the Lord which can disentangle good and evil; but what Christ is in grace toward man. It is a very beautiful picture. I think that in the gospel of Luke humanity is not infrequently represented in a woman. That may be the case in the widow of Nain. The woman with the issue of blood presents to us the idea of humanity, and we find what the Lord is toward man here in this world, in the pressure under which man is. Christ came here to make known what was in the thought of God toward man; you get that brought out very beautifully in @John 3: 16. The kindness of God our Saviour toward man appeared in the presence of Christ down here. That He came to undo the works of the devil
{190}
was not enough. The point was that He should bring to light what was in the heart of God towards man; He presented to man that which He knew. We find that coming out in the ministry of the Lord. So here in regard to this woman. What is interesting in the incident is that she not only got virtue from Christ, but a word from Him. He was at her disposal, and so the whole time that the Lord was here He was available to all kinds of need. No recommendation to Christ was ever wanted; the simple recommendation to Him was need. He was at the service of all. The woman with the issue was beyond the help of man. It is a picture of the state morally of every person: life is ebbing out, and they are beyond the power of man's healing. There are plenty of would-be physicians in the world; they cram people with lies, but they do not heal them, and I should put them down as quacks; and the curious thing is that people are far more ready to listen to quacks than to physicians. It is true enough in natural things, and certainly it is the case in moral things. There are quacks with nostrums; but the truth is that man is beyond the reach of physicians, and his life is ebbing out.
But now the truth is this, that Christ is at the disposal of all. The woman had that amount of light, that there was virtue in Christ. That is the evidence of faith. You are not called upon to believe anything about yourself; the idea that Scripture gives is, that you apprehend what is in Christ, and this woman apprehended that there was healing virtue in Christ, and Christ was available to her. She was healed by the virtue which went forth from Christ.
But she would have gone away; for she had not faith enough to come into personal contact with Christ. She did touch Him; but she had not courage or faith to come before Him and to acknowledge what she had received from Him. The Lord would not let her go; He called her to Him, and obtained an acknowledgment from her of what she had received. She received what was of equal value with her healing: a word from the Lord: "Daughter,
{191}
be of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace". The Lord had marked out her path -- that was a great point; she was to "go in peace".
Now I want to apply that to us, because I have no doubt that we get in the latter part of this chapter an epitome of the service of the Lord; and what took place in regard to the woman really gives us an idea of what is the present service of the Lord, just as what took place in regard of the demoniac presents to us what came to pass in connection with the presentation of Christ here. On the other hand, what came to pass in the case of the daughter of Jairus refers to what will take place when the Lord comes again.
Now I put before you what all will allow; that is that at the present time Christ is available to all. He is the Mediator between God and men, and at the present time there is not a man in the world to whom Christ is not available. The only recommendation to Christ is that a man should have need, and be beyond the power of human physicians. Let a man come to that sense, that his life is ebbing out, that he is going on to eternity and is beyond human help -- he is in a fit state for Christ. But then Christ is always available. He is not simply available to a man who is awakened to his need, but always available. But if a man is to avail himself of Christ, he would not think of it until he comes to find his need of Christ -- and he finds that in apprehending that his life is fast ebbing, and that there is no human physician who can bring moral healing to him. People try all sorts of things in this world, and think they are going to get by them happiness and satisfaction. You may get gratification, but not happiness. Happiness is really a test of everything. The point is, what will minister it to you? Self-gratification will not. You may read novels, and get gratification; you may pursue music, and gratify yourself in that way; but depend upon it, no pursuit of that kind will bring content and happiness. Things may be pretty much measured by whether they bring content or not. None of the nostrums which
{192}
quacks can give you will ever bring content and happiness. What a man wants is healing; he wants saving.
Now Christ presents God to us in grace through redemption. That is a great thought to my mind; and what I mean by redemption is this, that God has been pleased to take up the liabilities under which man lay. I need hardly say that God did that by Christ. Man was under liabilities under the eye of God, and God in Christ took up those liabilities, so that they have been discharged. Christ is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the whole world. The liabilities have been discharged in the grace of God, so that Christ might be available to every man, and He presents God to us in grace through redemption, not simply in grace, but in grace through redemption. That is the light in which Christ presents God to man.
If that is accepted, there is healing for man; a man says, I find my comfort in the grace of God; I find a place of quiet, and content, and rest. I see what is in the heart of God; I see the liabilities have been discharged, and the thought of God toward me is grace. It is a very wonderful thing that the grace of God has been brought close to you in Christ, so that your soul should find its refuge in God. The real healing which Christ has brought to man is the light of grace through redemption.
Now there is another thing: Christ communicates of His Spirit to the believer. His Spirit means really life, and peace, and liberty. It is morally Himself; my spirit means myself, and the Spirit of Christ means Himself morally. I think there is real healing in knowing what the thought of God is toward me; my liabilities gone, my soul in the light of divine grace, and the Spirit which Christ has communicated to me is the Spirit of life, and peace, and liberty -- no longer death, and distance, and bondage, so that I am able to say, "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death". @Romans 8: 2. That is the true way of content and happiness.
{193}
The Lord says in @John 10: "By me if any man enter in, be shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture". You see how you enter in -- by Me. What do you enter into? Into what Christ has brought. He has brought to you the light of God, the light of grace, through redemption. You get entrance into that by the faith of Christ; you enter into the light of the grace in which God presents Himself to you. The grace of God which brings salvation to all men has appeared, and now you enter in by the faith of Christ. "By me if any man enter in, he shall be saved": his soul shall be delivered from every entanglement, from the world, and Satan's power, and from sin. That is the effect of entering in by Christ. What a wonderful thing it is to be delivered from the terrible bondage in which people are -- to the world, to opinion, to their fellow-men, and to a great many other things. Everybody ought to appreciate liberty. Many people in the world are, alas, fond of bondage, of things that hold the soul away from God, but I like to be free, like a bird. That is what the Lord means, I take it: "he shall go in and out" -- he shall find liberty. You do not now want a fold. Before Christ came the sheep had to be kept in the fold; now they are saved, and they go in and out. You do not want to be identified with any system. Then you find pasture for your soul; that is the virtue of entering in by Christ.
Now I think that comes before us in the woman. The Lord was available to her; she did not believe anything about herself, but she believed there was virtue in Christ. She touched the hem of His garment, and virtue went out of Christ and healed her. And there is a very important sequel: the Lord was not content without her being brought to the personal knowledge of Himself. I think that is the case at the present time. Some of us stop short of that: we do not come into personal contact with Christ; I am quite sure if we did, it would greatly alter our pathway down here. I see many who do not seem to have pleasure in coming into close quarters with Christ. The point is to get a word from Christ, to get light and
{194}
direction from Him, to be married to Him (I use the figure in @Romans 7) so that we might bring forth fruit unto God. You will do no good in this world if you do not come under the influence of Christ. Then it is that you go forth according to His mind and serve Him down here; you bring forth fruit unto God. People seem to turn to this and that as if Christ were not good enough for them. It is pitiable, and I do not see any happiness about such people. I do not see they live for others; they are no great benefit to themselves or to anyone else. If they are no great good to themselves, they will not be to others. The point is that we should be content and happy, having life and peace and liberty, and seeking, so long as we are down here, to be beneficial to others, in other words, to bring forth fruit unto God. I have no doubt it was in that way that the Lord sent forth the woman. He brought her to Himself that she might know Him and get a word from Him; she got one of great value, and in the power of it she went forth from Him to her pathway in the world.
Christ is not simply the One who will bring to an issue every question of good and evil, but He is the blessed living One, full of inexhaustible virtue. If every man in the world availed himself of Christ, there would be no diminution of the virtue. He loves that those who have obtained virtue from Him should know Him and get a word from Him; He would send them forth in their pathway here in the world. May we all get the good of it, and be led by the Spirit of God into the full knowledge of all that which is presented to us in Christ.
{195}
CHRIST AS LIGHT IN THE SOUL
@Luke 10: 21 - 42
There is nothing much more striking in Scripture than the way in which we get incidents grouped together in the gospel of Luke. It has been pointed out that Luke concerns himself very little about chronological order: his habit is to group incidents together so as to present a kind of picture.
Now I desire to put together the incidents and the parable related to us here, for they give us a very interesting picture of Christ. What we want is the apprehension of Christ. The apostle Paul could say that be counted all things loss for the "excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord" (@Philippians 3: 8), he appropriated Christ in that way. Then again, the object for which gifts are given is "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God". @Ephesians 4: 13. The faith and the knowledge of the Son of God would bring us into unity; and gifts were given to that end. Christ is the blessed Head, and we have to grow up into Him in all things; we grow up, in point of intelligence, in Him who is the Head. I will make use of the incidents I have read in order to present Christ.
Christ is here brought before us in three aspects. In the first part of the passage I have read, we have the Son in relation to the Father. Then we learn what Christ is to man, as Neighbour; then what He is to the disciple; Mary sat at His feet and heard His word. In regard of the Father, all things are delivered to Him of the Father; then in regard to man, in being Neighbour to the one that fell among thieves, He is really Neighbour to every man; then as to Mary, Christ is light to the believer's soul. It is our privilege to know Christ in all these lights. Our blessing depends upon our being led by the Spirit of God into the knowledge of Christ. You have an unction from the Holy One, and know all things; we
{196}
know the things which are centred in Christ. I cannot conceive that an unction from the Holy One would do anything else except lead us into the knowledge of Christ, and that which is centred in Him. You are not taught of man; you may have certain things brought under your attention; gifts are given to that end, that truth might be kept under the attention of the saints; but you are not taught of man. I am not your teacher, nor anyone else: you are taught of God. The anointing refers to the Spirit of God, who is the teacher of the people of God. The anointing teaches in an indescribable kind of way, I could not attempt to explain how people are taught by the Spirit of God. The mighty power of the Spirit in the believer brings his heart under the influence of the love of God, and if you come under the influence of divine love, you make rapid and natural progress in the things of God.
The first point I want to touch upon is that which Christ is to the Father. In @Romans 6 we read that He was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father; here He says, "All things are delivered to me of my Father". The Son is the object of the Father's counsel and the subject of the Father's love: He is the centre of the Father's system. It is a great thing to apprehend that the Father has in view a system of blessing, a universe of bliss, in all its varied parts, which originated in the Father's counsels, and of that system Christ is the centre, so that He may order everything according to the love of God. We get an idea of it on the mount of transfiguration, when He received from God the Father, honour and glory.
There is one word more in regard of that: "No man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father". The Son is not known to us in His own proper being: He is only known to the Father in that way. We never know the Son other than become incarnate, and in that sense subject to the Father: "my Father is greater than I" @John 14: 28. We know Christ as the blessed sent One of the Father, that He might make known the Father, and
{197}
the Father's counsels, of which He Himself is the blessed centre. There is nothing hid from us as to what Christ is morally; and we are privileged to know all that He is according to the Father's counsel, even what He is as an object of the Father's love; but His own proper being, as such, is known only to the Father.
You may remember the remarkable prayer at the end of the third of Ephesians: the expanse of the system of which Christ is the centre is there brought before us, and the apostle prays that the saints might know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge. That gives us the idea of how Christ will order everything according to divine love. It is a great thing to apprehend what Christ is; Head of that system which originated in the counsel of the Father and in which God will be glorified, and every circle ordered and affected by divine love, so that the whole system will be pervaded by God. That is what Christ will bring to pass, that God may be glorified in everything; as we sometimes sing: --
<blockquote>'Of the vast universe of bliss, <br>The centre Thou, and Sun'. (`11:4)</blockquote>
We get the same thought stated a little differently in the gospel of John. The Lord says, "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand". This brings in the additional thought that the Father loves the Son. John brings it in there to show that the Son is the test of everyone. He that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. The Son coming in has of necessity become a test to man: every man is tested by the Son. The Jew is an example of the one who is not subject to the Son, and has come under the wrath of God. Wrath has come upon them to the uttermost, because having been tested by the Son they are not subject to Him. The Jew after the flesh shall not see life, but the wrath of God continues on him.
I desire that the Spirit of God may lead us into the apprehension of what Christ is to the Father. We could
{198}
know nothing about it unless it had been revealed; but the Spirit is our teacher, to lead us into all that which is revealed. The things that are revealed belong to the people of God. It is our privilege to enter into them, and the capacity to do so lies in our being formed in divine affections; it is very much as in natural things, as a child is formed and developed in affections towards its father, it gets a ready entrance into the father's things. The point in regard of the people of God is, how much we love. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard ... the things which God hath prepared" -- for whom? "For them that love him" (@1 Corinthians 2: 9), the great point is to love God. And why do we love God? Because He first loved us. The Spirit is given to the believer, and the love of God is shed abroad in his heart, and the answer on the believer's part is that he loves God. Every christian loves God, and as we love Him, we get a ready entrance into the things of God.
Now the One to whom all things are delivered of the Father has become Neighbour to man, and the distance is bridged between the Father and man. It is a very blessed thing to meditate upon Christ as man's Neighbour. In order to make that point clear, I refer to the man that fell among thieves. That man evidently presents to us the Jew, but not the Jew in his best estate, for the thieves had left him nothing, neither reputation, possessions nor covering; they had wounded him, and stripped him of his raiment, and left him half dead. That is the position in which the Jew was when the Neighbour appeared. The Neighbour did not appear before the Jew was stripped and impoverished. The Jew did not make use of the privileges and opportunities which God had placed within his reach, and God allowed him to be served in that way by the thieves. That was the position into which Christ came: Israel had been carried away captive by the Assyrian, and the Jew led captive by Nebuchadnezzar. The man that fell among thieves was beyond the power of priest or Levite. The truth is that the Jew represents man under culture. There are two
{199}
figures employed to present the Jew to us: the vine and the fig-tree. The fig-tree represented man under divine culture; the Jew had the opportunity of knowing what man ought to be for God. Then in case he failed, God placed within his reach means of atoning for his failure. That was the system connected with priest and Levite. A system of offerings had been provided on the part of God in case of failure under responsibility. It was a curious system, in which grace was really mixed up with law, and the point was whether man could maintain himself in fidelity to God under those conditions. We know what came of it: when they were in the wilderness they went after Baal; when they came into the land, they worshipped the gods of the land. They were degraded to the level of the heathen, and God allowed them to be carried away captive; and God brought in the Babylonish power on the decay of Israel.
Now it was into that state of things that Christ came. The Neighbour came when everything was it its worst, when the Jew was robbed, stripped, and half-dead. Things had come to that pass that the legal system was of no use to them. Then came the Neighbour, full of grace and truth, seeking to affect man by grace, bringing the light of what was in the heart of God. He came with illimitable power to support man, if they received the grace. He could support them down here; the Lord proved that in regard to the disciples. He supported them in all their ministry, so that He could turn to the Father at the end and say, "Those that thou gavest me I have kept" @John 17: 12. Not only did He minister to them of the abundance of grace, but, so long as He was down here, He kept them in the Father's name. When the Neighbour came upon the scene, it was the darkest day in the history of the Jew. It was not the beginning, when Moses or Joshua was there, but the day when everything had come to ruin on the footing of responsibility.
Now why I bring that before you is because, if Christ came as Neighbour to the Jew in such a condition as that, when all was hopeless, then Christ may just as truly
{200}
be Neighbour to the gentile. When everything had failed, the Jew was a simple subject for grace, and grace came to him. The Jew had no claim on the Neighbour, and if He came to the Jew in that plight, He can be Neighbour to the gentile. I have no doubt that the teaching of the parable is to show us the position into which Christ has come, not simply in regard to the Jew, but in regard to man as man. The Jew representing man under culture had entirely failed to answer to the mind of God, and God no longer goes on with the culture, but the last Adam, as Neighbour to man, has come in.
We have in the gospel pretty much before our minds where Christ is now, at the right hand of God, and we are accustomed to the thought of Christ coming again. But what we have not sufficiently taken into account is the position which Christ occupies at the present time, not simply in regard to God, at God's right hand, but the official position He has in regard of man -- I do not say of the believer: He is Lord to the believer; but my point is the position He occupies in regard of man as man. Christ has come in as Neighbour to man: to what man? To the man that stands in need of Him. And what man is there that does not stand in need of Christ? What man upon earth can be said to be self-supporting? The king on his throne is not self-supporting, and no other man is. If a man can support himself for time and eternity, he does not want Christ; but if man is not self-supporting he wants a neighbour.
Now the Neighbour expresses the present position which Christ occupies in relation to man. We are told in Scripture that Christ is the Head of every man -- that is at the present time -- and that He is the Mediator between God and men. None of these three terms, Neighbour, Head, or Mediator, expresses the idea of Lord; they present an entirely different idea, but every one of them expresses the relation in which Christ stands officially in regard of man at the present time, and of which relation every man is free to avail himself. That is what the gospel unfolds.
{201}
I just say a word in regard of that which Christ ministers. The priest and Levite ministered nothing; they had nothing which they could minister. The man was in such a plight that he was beyond the power of their service; but the Samaritan had oil and wine; he had, too, his own beast. I have no doubt that what Christ ministers to the one who is in need of Him is grace and the Spirit. Both are in the power of Christ: grace, through redemption, and the Spirit of life. We have found that Christ came in divine love into the place where we were; He came to the cross and identified Himself with our position, and we have received from Christ the abundance of grace and the Spirit, that is, living water.
It is wonderful to think that Christ has become available to us, and that we on our part have availed ourselves of Christ, and a link has been established between Himself and us; that link is the Spirit which is given to us. Everyone that has the Spirit which Christ gives is attached to Christ. The grace of God is presented in Christ in order to attract us to Him; then He imparts to us living water in order that we may be attached to Him. We have an unction from the Holy One; we are in Him, and He is in us.
That is the fruit of Christ having come in as Neighbour. One delights to think that He has come in at man's lowest estate. The Jew and the gentile were both alike bad, but the Neighbour came in to rescue us, and He has done this, poured in oil and wine, and shown us what the heart of God was toward us. The Lord has imparted to us of His Spirit, that we might be maintained down here. We are kept by the influence of Christ. I do not believe anyone is kept except in that way. We are not kept by seeking to be proper in our conduct, or by precepts; we are kept in our path by the influence of Christ. What keeps you under the influence of Christ? The Spirit which is given to you. Being kept under His influence, we are preserved and guarded down here, are saved, we go in and out -- have liberty -- and find pasture. The influence of Christ is so potent that we do not need the
{202}
fold to guard us; we are kept in spite of every kind of evil, maintained by the influence of Christ. I would not underrate for a moment the importance of our obligations to one another, to wash one another's feet; but the real power which operates upon saints down here is Christ, and it is in that sense that we bring forth fruit unto God. Were it not for the influence of the sun, the earth would not get rain, and we would not get fruitful seasons. It is under the influence of Christ that we get rain. It comes upon us by the influence of Christ, and there is sunshine; and under sunshine and rain we bring forth fruit unto God. It is the blessed result of Christ having come in as man's Neighbour, to minister grace to the heart of man, and the Spirit of grace, by which we are maintained in our pathway, in this scene of difficulty and contrariety.
In the latter part of the chapter we find Mary sitting at the feet of Jesus, and bearing His word, and Martha complains. There can be no doubt that Martha was attached to Christ; but she was restless, whilst Mary had more spiritual instinct. I very much like to see people with spiritual instincts. I would rather see saints right by instinct than by intelligence. Mary could not have told you why she sat at the feet of Jesus; she would not have defended herself. But the Lord spoke for her, and rebuked Martha -- very tenderly, because He loved Martha; but He approved of Mary. Christ was light to her soul: that is what I understand by her bearing the word of Christ. People are sometimes content to say they have heard the word of Christ; a verse in @John 5 is not infrequently taken up in this way, but the point there is the present attitude of the soul; it is the one *hearing* His word. Not that *has* heard it, or *will* hear it: it is characteristic. So here; Mary sat at the Lord's feet and heard His word, and He speaks of it as "that good part", and the good part should not be taken from her. There would not be a moment in the history of Mary down here when she would not be sitting at the feet of Jesus. She might have to take up other things; she very
{203}
likely had to take her part in the serving, but she never would give up that attitude. What I understand by it is the recognition of Christ as light to the soul; and there is another thing in connection with that, and that is, the refusal of every other light. The Colossians were disposed to look to other lights; teachers were coming along, attempting to turn them aside by philosophy and vain deceit. These set themselves forth as lights. In our day we get the light of science, and philosophy, and criticism; but a Mary would not listen to either one or the other, because neither science, nor philosophy, nor criticism could for a moment tell you what is in the heart of God. The only One who could do that is the One who came from that heart. I do not care to know anything except what is in the heart of God. Science may be interesting, but what moral effect will it produce upon me? The heart of man needs to know what is in the heart of God towards him, and that is what Christ is capable of unfolding; He makes me acquainted with the love of God in its application towards me here from beginning to end. That is the word of Christ, and there is no word which can be compared with it. It is altogether peculiar, and could belong to none but the Son.
In our pathway here we can say we have known and believed the love that God has to us. We come under the discipline of God; but that is the proof of His love; He chastens us because He loves us. Then "as he is, so are we in this world" (@1 John 4: 17), this disperses all that remains of fear. The love of God is made perfect with us, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as Christ is, so are we in this world. I put it side by side with a verse in @Romans 8, nothing "shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord". It is in that way that love is made perfect with us.
Now that is the light which Christ has brought to us. What do you think is going to comfort you in this world? The knowledge of the love of God. "All things work together for good to them that love God". @Romans 8: 28.
{204}
A great many things here appear very crooked; we pass through many exercises which disturb our spirits; but all things work together for good to those who love God. And who are the people who love God? They are those who have found out that God loves them. I shall come into the day of judgment in a certain sense, because everyone is to be manifested there; but the truth remains, as Christ is, so are we in this world.
Remember that Christ has commended the attitude of sitting at His feet. It is a great thing if it should mark us. Do not be content with having heard His word, but take good care that you are always hearing it. His word is the light, and do not pay attention to any other light. You do not want what is after the traditions of men, and the rudiments of the world, because in Him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. Let your ear be circumcised and attentive to hear the word of Christ, that you may be instructed by Him and led into the knowledge of the love of God, not in its application to you in heaven, but down here. It is a great thing to have Christ as the light of the soul, because it never fails; it is a true and wholesome light, and carries with it no evil consequence; it is full of blessing, not only for eternity, but for time. If you should be called upon to do any little service here, the thing is to do it still hearing the word of Christ. There is no other; I wish all would take account of that. Many read other things, and get damaged by them. I dread a great deal of the reading which is abroad, which is damaging the young; the point is to sit at the feet of Jesus and hear His word. It was properly the attitude of the man that fell among thieves, when he found out that Christ was his Neighbour. The next thing for him was to be found in the position of Mary.
Do not be content with listening to me, but ponder these things for yourselves. Seek to apprehend first what Christ is to the Father, the object of the Father's counsels; then what He has become in service to man, to the man that stood in need of Him; and then what He
{205}
is to the believer as the blessed, unfailing light of the believer's soul, so that he should not stand in need of any other light. May God give us to be always attentive to the word of Christ!
{206}
UNITY
@Ephesians 4: 1 - 16
The two chief thoughts that are presented in this passage are unity and completeness, and these two go together. Unity in the true sense cannot be unless there is completeness. In the case of man and wife they are complete, and they are one. In the universe there is unity and completeness, unity pervades the system (the sun, moon and stars), but intelligence is lacking. They move in relation to one another perfectly and exactly, but they are not themselves intelligent. But in the case of man and wife there is unity, completeness and intelligence, and in the body of Christ you have the three also.
I want to bring before you the thought of unity and completeness with regard to Christ: all is working to get unity and to the measure of the stature of the completeness of Christ, that refers really to the church (see chapter 1: 22), the fulness of Him that filleth all in all. The church is His completeness -- nothing is lacking. Eve was the completeness of Adam, there was no quality lacking that was in Adam; but with completeness you get unity, and unity is not incompatible with individuality, as may be seen in man and wife. There is a contrast between objective unity and subjective unity. Objective unity is seen in verses 4 and 5, it is what is presented *to us*; subjective unity is seen in verse 13, it is what we *arrive at*. In verse 4 it is *one* body, *one* Spirit, etc., unity is brought forward so as to enforce the exhortation to endeavour to keep the unity. Everything around us is seen to be in great confusion, there is neither unity nor completeness, so it is a great thing to come back to the truth that there is one body. These truths have to be held abstractly, we have to stand apart from these systems of man because we see the truth that there is one body, one Spirit, etc.
We have to take account of the truth of divine
{207}
Persons; the presence of the Spirit is a great reality. It is sad to stand apart from the great bodies around us, but it has to be done: if we are to endeavour to keep the Spirit's unity we must separate from them, because we see that there is one body, one Spirit, etc. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, the gifts are directly given of Christ; officialism will not do. Undoubtedly there is much gift buried in the systems around, but gift is there, and it is *given* by *Christ*. Whatever gift there may be in christendom it is a witness to an ascended Christ; all gift has come from an ascended Christ, and the thought is found in the expression, "that the Lord God may dwell among them". Gift witnesses to an ascended Christ, therefore gift is of great importance as witness to Him. All these gifts exist or have existed, and all witness to an ascended Christ. They all give proof of the ability of Christ to fill all things; the sun fills our universe, there is nothing hid from the heat thereof, so Christ is able to fill all things. He descended into the lower parts of the earth, and the One who ascended is the One who descended. He descended, He laid down His life; this is applicable only to Christ, not to us; the great point is, that the One who descended is now ascended: the same ability or power is seen in Him descending as in Him ascending. As the Son of God it is more wonderful really for Him to go into the lower parts of the earth than for Him to ascend. He went into the grave for the will of God, and that morally was greater even than ascending. Christ -- the term implies *fulness*, and He *fills*; all fulness was pleased to dwell in Him, that God might be made known to man, but He also fills; go back to the thought of the sun that fills the universe with light and warmth, so Christ fills the moral universe with light.
@Luke 2: 8 and end of chapter -- in the first of these passages you get the thought of heaven -- glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace and good pleasure -- all this is presented in Christ, He is able to fill earth and heaven; but in the passage at the end of the chapter He is
{208}
seen *full of* divine intelligence. Now as to the thought of Christ filling all things (@John 20: 19; @Acts 2: 44; @Revelation 21: 22), these passages give an idea of Christ filling all things; in @John 20 you only get a small circle, but He fills it with peace, joy and the Holy Spirit; Christ is able to fill all things if He could fill that circle, that is clearly seen and seen directly when He rose from the dead; righteousness was there in His death, and peace and joy and the Spirit; they were brought into attachment to Himself. In @Acts 2 the circle is greatly expanded, but Christ *filled* that circle, they overcame all the natural tendency to selfishness that there is in all of us. What a blessed scene! that circle was filled with divine light, they had passed out of lawlessness into attachment to Christ, and as a result were shining as lights in the world. In @Revelation 21 we see all filled with Christ, the whole city is pervaded by a light greater than the natural light; the nations bring their glory into it, and waters flow out of it for the healing of the nations; kings, etc., walk in the light of it. You must see thus that Christ is able to fill all things. He that descended -- that was a mighty stoop -- He has ascended and He has given gifts; ministry is dependent on gift, not on officialism. Gift only it is that can bring light to bear on the moral being. Gift is given to bring us to unity, to unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son of God. All ministry must *act* on us individually. I would not be connected with anything that would not do for God; but what I want to see is piety in individuals; we want to be before God in secret, and then the effect will be seen in our lives; we shall come out as lights in the world, and we can only do this as we are in the shining of Christ. Gift has great importance, because it is really the virtue of an ascended Christ.
{209}
THE LAST ADAM
@1 Corinthians 15: 35 - 58
The subject of testimony, "Remember Jesus Christ, raised from among the dead, of the seed of David" (@2 Timothy 2: 8), has been before us.
That was the subject of paramount importance for Timothy, and he is the type of the servant who is to continue till the coming of the Lord. Paul knew that he was passing off the scene, but Timothy was to continue typically. You will get the type of servant like Timothy until the Lord comes -- till the appearing of Jesus Christ.
So you find the apostle charging Timothy by the appearing of Jesus Christ. Timothy was a simple man; a man of pious parentage, he was a vessel fitted to be charged with the truth of the apostle's doctrine. Scripture looks for a succession of *faithful* men: it was that thought which led me to @1 Corinthians 15. Christ, the last Adam, comes in in connection with the resurrection of the body. This passage shews that the position of Christ as last Adam is connected with resurrection, and marked by a spiritual body. He takes up that ground in resurrection: He takes it up entirely on that footing. I want to shew how all is connected with Him as the last Adam -- the *beginning* of the *creation* of *God* (@Revelation 3: 14), the Amen.
A contrast is seen between the first Adam and the last: God put the first Adam on the ground of responsibility, the first man Adam was made a living soul: that is, he was a responsible man. The last Adam is a life-giving Spirit, there is no thought of responsibility there at all. In the raising of Lazarus you can see life-giving power: He is divine, He is Son of God, He is the last Adam. The last Adam stands in the same relation to a race as the first Adam did. The first Adam was head and beginning of a race; the last Adam stands in relation to that same race as a life-giving Spirit. He must be such if He is to recover man. Lawlessness and hatred had come in, and men are
{210}
to be recovered from those two things, and the principle of recovery bears analogy to the way of departure. The last Adam stands in relation to the *same race* as the first Adam; the last Adam is a life-giving Spirit. This is seen in two ways: (1) the rights of God have been regarded and discharged; (2) the enemy of man has been defeated; Christ has annulled him that had the power of death. Redemption has secured all for God: the liabilities have been met and discharged. Man came under death and was liable to judgment; Christ has discharged all. Christ takes up the position as last Adam: the liabilities are discharged and the power of Satan annulled, so He is the last Adam.
In the case of Israel of old we see them with Pharaoh and his hosts behind, and the Red Sea before; God came in and the waters of the Red Sea were smitten, and Pharaoh and his hosts were annulled. Christ attaches to Himself in two ways: (1) by His words, and (2) by the Spirit of life; by these He attaches to Himself; He has ability to do this. When the Lord was on earth He attached to Himself, and it was by words. We see this in what Peter said at the close of @John 6, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal": the communications which He had made to them had attached them to Himself. You get another instance in Martha and Mary -- the latter sat at His feet and heard His word, the word was the bond between her and the Lord. Saul saw the Lord after the resurrection; others heard a voice but did not receive any communication. Saul heard and understood the communication. He attaches us to Himself by the communications that He makes to us, and so the word of Christ becomes the bond between our souls and Christ.
Next we get the bond of the Spirit of life: He is the point of attraction, as it is written, "I, if I be lifted up ... will draw all to me" (@John 12: 32), but it is by the Spirit of life. In @John 20 the communication was, "Peace be to you". Then He breathed into them and said, "Receive the Holy Spirit". He proved Himself to
{211}
be a life-giving Spirit. We get a communication in the first instance, and then He gave us the Spirit of life, and that is a bond that cannot be broken -- we are firmly attached to Christ. Now everything attached to Christ must go through the experience of death and resurrection. Now look at verse 54. Death is swallowed up in victory, that cannot take place till resurrection has come to pass. It is a wonderful thing to see that God has before Him death being swallowed up in victory, 'sin and death no more shall reign'.
God is forming a company for heaven, and has been doing so all along, and each had to go through the experience of death and resurrection. Adam had to fall into a deep sleep; Noah had to enter the ark, and that meant *death* to man. Death means morally when a man has come utterly to an end of himself, and nothing but the power of God can do for him. Noah had to go in figure into death, and came out on to a new earth, which figuratively is resurrection. Now look at @Genesis 15. God said to Abraham, "Look now toward heaven", but then he had to fall into the deep sleep and the horror of great darkness, which answered to the experience of death.
Isaac was offered up in figure; he had to go through death, he was a resurrection man. Then we see Jacob in @Genesis 42: 36, where he says, "Me have ye bereaved of my children"; he had to go into death in experience in losing his children, but then in chapter 46: 3, God says, "Fear not to go down into Egypt". He is the God of resurrection. The same principle is seen in Joseph; he was put in prison, "he was laid in iron", helpless -- none could help him but God. We see God's dealings with all these so as to teach them death and resurrection; God wished then and wishes now to bring the mind of all His saints into this thought of death and resurrection. David too and Daniel had to learn the power of God in resurrection.
And all this teaching was in view of Christ coming out as the last Adam -- a life-giving Spirit. The Lord attaches.
{212}
us to Himself by His word and His Spirit; but by the epistles and in the teaching of baptism the thought is to bring us into accord with Christ in our souls, that what He has died to we should die to. The Spirit is leading to accord of mind to Christ. He has died to sin and to the world, how can we then live in these? We are dead with Him and we are risen with Him through faith of the operation of God, who raised Him from the dead. It is the pleasure of God that we should be brought into accord with Christ now. 'In him we stand, a heavenly band'. The Spirit is working mightily to bring us into accord with Himself now by death and resurrection. So in a future day in regard of Israel, they have to go down into the horror of great darkness; there will be the time of Jacob's trouble, but they will be saved out of it; but then death will be swallowed up in victory: it says, "Some to everlasting life and some to shame and everlasting contempt". The same principle will apply to the nations then -- it will be life to the nations, but all is connected with Christ as a life-giving Spirit. The great point is that distinction might be brought to Christ: the Spirit is working to this end in us to make us surrender ourselves. In Mary's case Christ was her life, and she spent all she had to confer distinction on Christ. We read in Job "skin for skin", etc. -- any sacrifice will be made by a man for his life; even if Christ is your life, will you give all that you have for Him? All that Mary had she was prepared to give for her life -- for Christ. We have to use all we have to distinguish Christ. When we pass away there will be something left if Christ is really our life, then in glory Christ will distinguish us, "when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory" -- what Mary did, He said, should never be forgotten. We want to be dead to all that which Christ died to; but then He is risen, and Christ is our life, and we shall take opportunity to distinguish Christ: a risen Christ is our life, "because I live, ye shall live also)" death cannot sever that connection. "For me", said the apostle, "to live is *Christ*". It is a total mistake to
{213}
say, For me to live is Paul or myself; it is neither righteousness nor is it wisdom.
{214}
RIGHTEOUSNESS BY ATTACHMENT
@Psalm 72: 8, 17; @Luke 2: 14
God has a definite thought in the gospel. Man has a wrong thought, he thinks he just wants pardon. He *does* need pardon, but that is not the great thought with God in the gospel. Man is lawless and unattached and God purposes to bring him into bond and the object He has in doing it is that man may practise righteousness. The child of God practises righteousness because he is righteous -- he is attached. The earth stands in relation to the sun -- is attached to it -- and so gets the benefit of warmth and rain and is fertile; in the same way God's thought in the gospel is that man should be attached and should bear fruit for God, that is, that he should practise righteousness. There is no true evidence of a christian except that he practises righteousness, that is the real test. The purpose of the gospel is to bring man into righteousness that he may practise righteousness, so in @Titus 2 we get that He might redeem us from all lawlessness. The meaning of righteousness is that you are *faithful* in every relationship in which man is found down here, both to God and to man; that is true righteousness, it is not a mere paying of debts. The practice of righteousness is God's thought in the gospel and that because the man *is* righteous. Everyone who is not in bond to Christ is lawless and everything that is lawless must go to destruction. God has intervened in His goodness to attach souls to Christ and bring them out of lawlessness.
This Psalm is for Solomon, David prayed for Solomon and then his prayers were ended. There are many things in the Psalm that were never accomplished in Solomon, but they will be accomplished in the greater than Solomon. Verse 8 for instance was never accomplished in him, nor was verse 17: "All nations shall call him blessed"; this was not fulfilled in Solomon, although God gave him very wide dominion, but as a
{215}
fact the end of Solomon's reign was very sad, the kingdom was divided. The reason was that Solomon never could be the point of attraction for men, for he was not personally or absolutely righteous, and he could not bear the curse that lay upon man. That curse needed to be taken up in order that man might be *really blessed*: in verse 17 it says, "Men shall bless themselves in him", it must therefore point on beyond Solomon.
Solomon's heart, alas, turned away to idolatry. Therefore, he was not righteous and could not discharge the curse that lay on men. Hence nations could not be blessed in him, we have to go on to the true Son of David. Now turn to @Luke 2: 14: "On earth peace, good pleasure in men". In @Psalm 72 you get peace and good pleasure in men, for men are to be blessed in Him and in verse 7 you get abundance of peace spoken of.
Christ is the righteous One; Peter says, 'You denied the righteous One'. In Christ we can see the righteous One who was here entirely for the will of God. He was *righteous* and therefore able to take up the curse under which man lay. He came to discharge the liabilities under which man lay; when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth His Son. But not only was it so, He was able to *rise again*. He had power to lay down His life and He had power to take it again, He could take His life again as Man. He gave proof of His power by healing the sick, and greater proof still of His power in being able to take again His life that He had laid down: He had authority to take it again.
God maintains government in *anyone's* hands. Christ is crowned with glory and honour, but it is not *seen*: it is known by the presence of the Holy Spirit. The Spirit came down to bring the report of the glory of Christ; this we see in the first preaching in Acts. He is presented to man in order that man may be brought into bond to Christ and may practise righteousness. "I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me". He discharged the curse, He laid down His life and took it again. He loved righteousness and as raised He becomes the point
{216}
of attraction for man. In the history of the children of Israel you get in @Numbers 21 the serpent of brass as the remedy for those bitten by the fiery serpents. We too have been bitten by the serpents. We have been bitten by lawlessness; I see it all around that man has been bitten by lawlessness; you have now to look at the Son of man lifted up and you *live*. A man becomes morally conscious of the lawlessness by which he has been bitten, and he looks to the serpent of brass. If a man is lawless he is under the ban of God, but the Son of man has been lifted up, that man might be free of the curse and be brought into blessing. The last Adam has discharged the curse that had come in through the first Adam, and has brought in blessing; here we see the great contrast between the first Adam and the last. It is indeed "abundance of peace".
There is a King of Kings and Lord of Lords *now*. He may be hidden for the moment, but He is not always to be hidden. The Holy Spirit has come here to bear witness of Him, who was content to be lifted up and content to be the witness of the love of God. Christianity is moral and not dogmatic; it is *right* in every part of it. We were all lawless once and man in general is lawless; he sets himself up as a rival to God, to do his own will instead of God's. All was perfect in Christ; *He* learned obedience by the things which he suffered, and being made perfect -- that is being crowned with glory and honour -- He became the author of eternal salvation to all them that obey Him. I can see no other way possible in which God *could* have wrought for man, save as it is in christianity. Christ had every right to live on earth for He was righteous, but He was lifted up. Do you not think you want the living water? You are dry and hard and selfish? You want water, moisture, living water. Are you content to go on being lawless? Look to the Son of man lifted up, look at the serpent lifted up. He is presented to every man. If you believe on Him you get the living water and are brought into the practice of righteousness. Lawlessness is deadly, and can end in
{217}
nothing but moral destruction. Contemplate Him. To meet that thirst of yours you *need* the living water.
{218}
VITALITY, THE THOUGHT IN THE BODY
@1 Corinthians 12: 1 - 31
In chapter 11 you get the Head, you get Christ Himself; in chapter 12 you get the body, the assembly; in chapter 13 you get the life of the body or assembly; and in chapter 14 you get the medium of communication, that is, how we may profit one another. The One who is Head is the Head of every man (chapter 11).
We come together in assembly really in order to bring in Christ as Head; this is the point of the Supper. We recall Christ, and He is only to be recalled by that which speaks of His death. The great point for the disciples was to recall Him when He was leaving or had left them, to bring Him to mind; so it is with us all along the line. *Paul* got it from heaven for revelation to the gentiles.
The first great point in coming together in assembly is to recall the Head, and that is through the breaking of bread. We call Him to mind according as He has been set forth in death. No one else is known by his death, but with Christ it is so; you cannot properly know Him apart from His death. You see the great principles that ruled Him, and those principles were shewn out in His death; every act of His ministry really came out in His death. In death man was put out, but it was in order that God might be brought in. All His miracles brought God in, but then there was the exclusion of man; no pretension of man was allowed at all by Him; man had no place, but on the other hand God was brought in. All this was seen in its fullest extent in His death. Man was really condemned by the very fact of Christ becoming a Man, but then God came in. So we see that in the assembly there is no room for any pretension of man, but God is there.
So in chapter 14 you have the unbeliever falling down and reporting that God is there; man is exposed and God revealed. In the assembly the great point is the exclusion of everything except what is of the Spirit; all
{219}
are baptised into one body by one Spirit. But then there is a further thing in all being made to drink into one Spirit; they are all of one mind; this is by the work of the Spirit.
Unity in contrast to pre-eminence is brought out in this chapter; every member serves the body for its good, there is no idea of a member serving itself. It is the general idea of the body, not Christ as Head of the body here, but the human body brought up as a figure to affect us as in the assembly. The gifts are the endowment, and chapter 14 shews how they are to be utilised.
We are not a corporation or company, we are really in an individual position; we must take care not to assume anything. The Spirit of God has opened our eyes to the truth of the church and to the confusion around. You may be asked the question, What christian body do you belong to? I belong to the church.
The great point here is that the manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit withal: the word of wisdom is given to one; the word of knowledge to another. As to the difference between the two, my thought is that the word of wisdom is used abstractly, whereas the word of knowledge is more the application of it, and both are needed; the wisdom is the wisdom of Christ and knowledge is the application of wisdom. In a congregation of christians there must be a good deal of buried gift, there is no room for the Spirit to act.
"Ye are the body of Christ", they were the local expression of Christ; they had that place and privilege. In the temple the great thought seems to be holiness, and in the body the thought is vitality.
When it says, "Covet earnestly the best gifts", it means those that are most profitable to the saints. The saints then, we must remember, had not the Scriptures and so were very dependent on prophecy, for in that way God's mind was brought to bear upon them. How are you really going to help people? You are to help them by bringing to them what the mind of God is toward them -- you cannot serve people in any better
{220}
way than that. It tends most to the profit of people to let them know the mind of God toward man. You want to talk to the saints and not to speak to the ceiling; if you do not carry the people with you then you are not speaking to edification.
{221}
THE NEW MAN
@Ephesians 4: 17 - 32
Christ is always the new man morally: in the death of Christ we see the old man put off, we get a picture as it were of the thing. It is not that you could speak of Christ putting off the old man exactly, but He was done with that order of things. God sending His own Son in the *likeness of sinful flesh* -- He was done with that order of things. Everything is set forth in Christ, hence it is as the truth is in Jesus. He bore all that man deserved, so that the old man might be set aside and the new man be brought in, and He is the new man morally. It is hardly to be limited to christianity, for in measure it will be true of Israel. The new man is for earth. In the case of the Galatians they had formally adopted Christ in baptism. Baptism is a form of doctrine to which you have been delivered, and we cannot go beyond our baptism, but we are to be consistent with it. Note that the new man is created *after God*; it is morally according to God, so that we are told to be imitators of God and walk in love and as children of light. Light and love really express the divine nature. You may get the worst kind of lawlessness now, as in the expression, "the mystery of lawlessness already works", and yet the highest practice is set before us -- imitators of God. *Love* -- walk in love -- is really in contrast to self-gratification or lust; the new man is really a witness of God. A man may be most moral and yet be lawless; he is out of gear, and that is intolerable to God. A man that is merely moral is not in proper relation to God and to Christ, he is lawless because the crucial question is Christ. He is head of every man, and the beginning of the creation of God. You must know your proper place before God, and then you can rightly come out for Him down here. What you are to God is a secret for you, and then you express Him publicly in walk. The apostles were morally according to God, and thus they would properly present Him to
{222}
people.
Individual practice is so important for us, because the collective testimony is so obscured, and there is no hope of recovery. The Spirit is formative and not simply the power, He does not act in us as if we were mere machines. His is a formative work: He sheds the love of God abroad in our hearts and then we cry, "Abba Father". The Spirit brings you under the influence of divine love, and then you respond to it and cry, "Abba Father".
A christian ought to have the utmost dread of lawlessness. Adam was lawless and then you find hatred and murder in Cain, but Adam's was the worst sin really, the hatred and murder were only the result of Adam's sin. The flesh is not subject to the rule of Christ; it is out of gear. In Ephesians you get "according to God", in Romans you get "according to Spirit" and in Colossians you get "according to Christ". The new man is *myself*, *I* delight in the law of God after the inward man. The inner man is in contrast with the outer man; the new man is in contrast with the old man. Directly a man is born again you can speak of the inward man, there is that in him which answers to God. The new man is the work of God, a new creation entirely. A person might be very busy, but there is no real good done in this world except by the appreciation of Christ.
When a christian is filled with the Spirit then he sings; he may be despised by the natural man as David was despised by Michal, but *filled* with the Spirit is a very large and high thing, because the flesh is excluded. We must be careful what we pray for, because the question comes, 'Are we prepared for nothing being made of the flesh?' If you pray to be filled with the Spirit it involves that.
"Christ shall shine upon thee", (chapter 5: 14) you want to get into the light of the sun. Without sunshine you do not get fertility or rain. Ministry is dependent on sunshine, rain is dependent on sunshine. You need to be awakened out of the moral darkness around; you awake and get into sunshine, you get the rain, ministry will then
{223}
do you good.
Christians may get into a bad state; the apostle evidently contemplated this when he wrote, "All seek their own".
If you get into the sunshine you get fruit. Too much rain brings the leaf without fruit to perfection, for fruit the sun is needed.
{224}
CHRIST OUR LIFE
@John 12: 1 - 11
In chapter 11 and this chapter you get a kind of special testimony to the Lord, in Lazarus and the Greeks. If He was to suffer, God takes care that there should be a full witness to Him, as Son of God, Son of David and Son of Man. Mary's thought in her act goes really beyond death, Christ was her life and she thought to distinguish her life. A man tries to distinguish his life: if he is a man of the world he is right to try to distinguish his life by getting on in the world. Mary was wise, she distinguished Christ, and *she* is distinguished by doing so, for it says of her, "Wheresoever these glad tidings may be preached in the whole world, that also which this woman has done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her".
This act of hers was the moral sequence of sitting at the feet of Jesus and hearing His word. Christ was her life in the matter of His being everything to her. So with us Christ is our life, and it is well when all that we have is devoted to Him, our speech and other things -- that is true wisdom. A christian really wants to pass out of sight himself, but when opportunity offers, you want to distinguish Christ. Mary gave her all -- she did what she could; the widow also who gave her two mites, she did what she could. The ointment was a sacrifice, so what we have is devoted, it is a sacrifice. Martha would have been wise to do as Mary did. Martha as seen in this chapter may have learnt her lesson; it says she "served" and she did not grumble at Mary's not helping her, but Mary is the one here who is distinguished, because she distinguishes Christ. Mary's act drew out the thoughts of the disciples, it was waste in their view, and many a christian is judged in that way. Why not devote your energies to benefit the world! The true way is to distinguish Christ, no real good is done to this world except by Christ. It is real waste to try to benefit the world in any way except by Christ, but if you distinguish
{225}
Him, then you do the best for the world. You may be impelled by man in some way and you need to analyse your motives as to whence the impulse comes; thus you may be impelled by divine influences and not by human.
In @Psalm 19 the law of Jehovah is really Christ; you first know Him as the law of Jehovah, and then you become wise. "The testimony of Jehovah is sure", -- that again is Christ, you know Him and are made wise. Christ has brought to us the revelation of God, and people ought to have a great deal more joy in connection with this revelation than they have. It is so blessed to have such a revelation of God. Mary was held to Christ; the Spirit was not yet given, but she was held to Him. In Him there was the testimony of God brought to her, it was this that held her to Christ. All was divinely ordered, she did the right thing at the right moment. The Lord appreciated it, He said, "What *she* could she has done". He appreciates everything done to Himself. Mary was misjudged even by the disciples, but you must just go on and not try to vindicate yourself. Christians who are going on with the world will misjudge you, but the spiritually-minded christians will be with you. We read of Abraham that he was to walk through the land in the length and breadth of it, but we get also the depth and the height; Paul prayed for this for the Ephesians, but really for the *gentiles*, and there must surely be some results accruing to us through his prayer. Mary did a good thing at a suitable moment for His burial. Christ is our life, and therefore we ought to be exercised to distinguish Him rather than ourselves. Speech should not be used for distinguishing ourselves, if used for distinguishing Him, then you are out of sight as a result. The great rule is that Christ is our life and therefore it is true wisdom to distinguish Him. Then we get the Lord entering into Jerusalem and there is the testimony rendered to Him as Son of David and King of Israel. He claimed it in the way of testimony; what the prophets had spoken of was claimed in the way of testimony: this
{226}
is often seen. So now we claim inheritance in the way of testimony. "Be strong in the Lord and in the might of his strength". He is the head of all things and you claim inheritance in that way for Him. God's way is to claim all in testimony; God gives ample and full testimony before He comes in in a decisive way. The present moment is a very peculiar one, our testimony is to Christ as head, before His headship is asserted publicly. Christ has come in as last Adam and head of all things and we want to be in the witness of it, before God comes in in a decisive way.
The testimony of Christ as head will tend to bring out antichrist. If there were a united testimony to Christ as head it would tend to bring a crisis and antichrist would be set up. The enemy takes his cue from the testimony and sets up antichrist, and then God will have to come in in judgment and bring Christ in.
What is set forth in Christ is God's thoughts for everyone. Witness is the result of affection, and you do the right thing at the right moment. Separation from the world morally is most important for us, not separation from men, but from the principles of the world. Christ is our life: this too is most important, a man's object is his life. If Christ is my object, He is my life. As to eating with a ruler, if you eat you put yourself under his power, he has invited you for an object, and he will take you in. Therefore put a knife to your throat, you must not be affected by the man's principles. We must not avoid men, but you want to be prepared. In such cases it may be best to be aggressive, if you are courageous enough. Man's civilities are to be dreaded, you put yourself under his power. You want to be faithful to Christ.
In the early days in Acts, Christ was their life. Christ did not avoid men, but He did not touch their dainty meals. He could speak straight to them; how beautiful to see the Lord in the houses of those whose thoughts were completely contrary to His own -- in @Luke 7 in Simon's house, and also in @Luke 14 -- how faithfully, how wisely He spoke! There was no fear or favour of
{227}
man there, and what comes out in His death illuminated every act of His life. So in the Supper it is "this do in remembrance of *Me*". In His death God was brought in and man was put out, so call Him to mind. When they saw the principles that governed all His life, they would call *Him* to mind; for these principles were fully seen in His death, where God was brought in and man was put out.
{228}
BLESSING THROUGH THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD
@Jeremiah 9: 23, 24; @Matthew 8: 1 - 17; @Matthew 23: 23
All blessing for us lies in knowledge, any thoughtful person must allow this. We are not blessed as Israel in a future day will be with temporal blessing. Israel was promised material blessing -- a fruitful land and so on. God gave promise of this to them if they were faithful, but we have no guarantee of that. In the Acts we find Peter saying, "Silver and gold have I none". Again Paul had to say that he suffered hunger and thirst, his blessing consisted in what he knew and that is our blessing. That thought runs through all Scripture from beginning to end. See this verse in @Jeremiah 9, amid warnings and imprecations to the people for their unfaithfulness, man is to glory in knowing and understanding that "I am Jehovah". It is a great thing to understand that He is Jehovah. This was many a long year before christianity came in, it was God's thought of blessing for man in general. It says that He exercises loving-kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth. How do these things come to light? In the death of Christ -- they came out in His life surely, but are seen specially in His death. He *exercises* loving-kindness, judgment and righteousness there. Suppose that all London understood and knew Jehovah in that way as exercising loving-kindness, then London would exercise immense power in the whole kingdom.
You get a remarkable expression in @Revelation 18 as regards the great whore, that is, the great city that rules over the kings of the earth. The great city is Rome, and Rome has influenced kings at one time and another, superstition has been learnt from Rome. She is the city that rules over the kings of the earth, they have learned their manners and style from her. There is another city spoken of in the Revelation and the kings of the earth bring their honour and glory into it. The
{229}
heavenly city will exercise amazing influence in the world to come. God is subjecting us to education now in order that we may be qualified, as heavenly, to exercise amazing influence in the world to come, just as, if London knew Jehovah, then London would have immense influence as regards the whole kingdom. The thought then of knowing God is found throughout all Scripture. *He* exercises loving-kindness; science is the food of some men, art is the food of others -- man's imagination is the food of these vessels -- but to understand Jehovah as exercising loving-kindness surpasses all that, surely. Wisdom, might and riches are spoken of here and it is one of these things that gives importance to a man of the world. In human wisdom there is nothing morally good; God is left out, and there can be no true wisdom where God is left out. Philosophy leaves Him out. Power and might are often used to satisfy the ambition of man. Riches are often a calamity, they often have the effect of keeping a man away from God. So the rich man is not to glory in his riches, nor the mighty man in his might, nor the wise man to glory in his wisdom; the Spirit of God takes up these three things that give importance to man in the world. Christ came and He made nothing of men of these three classes; and why? Because He brought in *divine* wisdom; *divine* power, *divine* riches -- durable riches in the revelation of God: no need was there then for *man's* wisdom or riches or might. He took very little account indeed of the wisdom, riches or power of man here. He preached the gospel to the poor, He healed those who had no power at all. In @Matthew 8 we get the leper first -- in this chapter the Lord enters upon His ministry and where is the rich man there? The leper had no riches, might or wisdom, he was outcast.
Then the centurion was outcast also as regards the Jew. Then you get Peter's wife's mother, and Peter himself was only a fisherman -- there was no wisdom, might or riches in his case, but in all these cases you see Jehovah exercising loving-kindness, judgment and
{230}
righteousness in the earth. Jehovah was present and He was dealing with all those that were sick. It was the presentation of Jehovah and He was presented in His character as exercising loving-kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth. Judgment is seen in verses 11 and 12, "Many shall come from the east and west and shall sit down" there is discrimination seen. Loving-kindness is the spring of divine action, but with regard to God's judgments things are not upside down, there is discrimination, He is to be known as exercising loving-kindness, righteousness and judgment; righteousness, that is, He maintained what was right. His loving-kindness is seen towards the poor leper. In the case of the centurion He raised up his servant, and He raised up Peter's wife's mother. He maintained righteousness, that is He maintained all that was right before God and man, whereas in chapter 23: 23 the converse is seen in the scribes and Pharisees. The Lord takes up the chief among the Jews, they laid stress on trifles and omitted the great moral principles. In their minds things were upside down, they attached far too much importance to trifles and omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy and faith. Now pass on to the death of Christ: there we see the wise man, the rich man and the mighty man, all arrayed against Christ. Judgment was divorced from righteousness -- all were in accord to condemn Christ -- but on the other hand there was the perfect expression of the loving-kindness and righteousness and wisdom of God seen. In the death of Christ there was a perfect distinction seen between the wickedness of man and the loving-kindness of God.
The house of God is not material but is moral; God is dwelling here by His Spirit. We get tuition in the house of God and are brought to the blessed experience of the loving-kindness, righteousness and wisdom of God. The church is learning these things now and hence its influence in the world to come. We see then the importance of the moment to us, for the opportunity is given us to know and understand Jehovah; how blessed to
{231}
know "him that is true". We know Jehovah in the things in which He delights.
{232}
THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THOSE WHO PROFESS
@Matthew 25: 1 - 30
In the different gospels you get different groups of incidents, so you cannot put the four gospels exactly side by side. You get certain parables that are peculiar to one gospel. In Luke you get the parable of the debtor and the creditor in chapter 7, you get the good Samaritan in chapter 10 and the prodigal son in chapter 15 -- these are to illustrate the truth that is peculiar to Luke. You get grace, mercy and love in those parables. In Luke you do not get the side of man's responsibility but that of the grace of God. In the good Samaritan, He came to minister to man. So what we see there is the mercy of God, mercy coming in efficiently as regards man; you do not see there the responsibility of man. In the case of Simon and the parable of the two debtors, both were unable to pay and both were frankly forgiven; you see then a beautiful picture of the grace of God. So also in the parable of the prodigal son, you see the love of the Father coming out; the moment there is any movement in the son, then you get the Father running. It is really the love of God shewn out. The coming out of God in grace, mercy and love to man is seen in Luke's gospel.
The responsibility side comes out in the four parables peculiar to Matthew. In chapter 18 the king who took account of his servants; in chapter 20 the householder; in chapter 22 the king who made a marriage for His Son, and in chapter 25 the ten virgins. These four are peculiar to Matthew and each of them takes up the responsibility of those who profess to have been affected by the truth. In chapter 18 the servant says, "Pay me that thou owest"; grace had been shewn him, but grace had not affected him. Then in chapter 20 you get the householder and in chapter 22 the man with the wedding garment was there without being in proper form for the supper. In chapter 25 the virgins went forth to
{233}
meet the bridegroom; they all professed to have been affected by the truth. We see how wisely things are placed in the Scriptures. Each of these parables is a similitude of the kingdom of heaven, this is not so in the three parables referred to in Luke. The kingdom of heaven is really what we call christian profession on earth. All professors are in the kingdom of heaven; they claim to be under the rule of heaven, and if they take that ground then there is the responsibility with them to answer to it. As to chapter 22, at a marriage supper you are supposed to be suitable to the occasion and not being so was really an insult to the king. The man without the wedding garment presents a picture of a flippant person who has taken up the profession of christianity in a light way. If you take it up at all you profess to have come into the light and under the rule of heaven, and your ways ought to be in keeping. If we avow that we have come into the light, and under the rule of heaven, then we ought to be in keeping with this. If I am not, then I have not the wedding garment on. In chapter 25 the Bridegroom is presented, the One who is coming -- Christ. He has come, and when here He spoke of Himself as the Bridegroom; but now He is gone, He is taken away and He is coming again. This is a point of vital importance, specially for one who takes the ground of christianity. "The bridegroom" is Christ: He is the One by whom God enters into all that He sees fit to take up. He that hath the bride is the Bridegroom; all awaits the coming of the Bridegroom, and the ten virgins went out to meet Him. You cannot connect Christ with the present order of things; all connection is broken between Christ and things down here. You cannot connect Him with the lust of the flesh, the pride of life and things that characterise the world down here. You must therefore "go forth" to meet Him, you must in spirit leave the present order of things if you are going to meet Him. This is really to be seen in such a book as the *Pilgrim's Progress*, where Christian turns his back upon the City of Destruction,
{234}
and may be said to go forth to meet the Bridegroom. We all take that ground of having gone forth to meet Him, we must then see that we have things suitable to our profession. The wise were prepared, the foolish were not. The point for us is, Are we prepared? Christ has accomplished all and He is coming, there is therefore no reason why you should not be prepared. Are you in keeping with what is presented to you? The foolish virgins were not, they were mere professors, and mere profession will not do. Profession may be there without moral condition, and God is not to be imposed upon by profession, there must be moral condition. Even our fellow men are not imposed upon by mere profession, so certainly God is not taken in by profession, *moral* condition is necessary. It is most important that Christ should be a reality to you. Christ should be as great a reality as the sun in heaven; if that is not the case then you are in darkness or lawless. Is *He* a reality to you? Have you concerned yourself to find out much about Him?
You take the ground of being a christian, but have you given close attention to Christ to see what He is? Chemists try with the greatest diligence to find out what are the component parts of light, surely then it is of importance for you to find out all you can about Christ, the Sun of righteousness: there is enough in Him to engage your attention. What pains have you taken to know about Christ? Where do you hear of Him? Not merely in the preaching, but in the fact of His coming to this scene in love. Then you believe in Him and you get the Spirit, and then your moral condition will be suitable to your profession. You will be ready for the coming of the Bridegroom.
In @Luke 2 the Babe was presented as God's salvation. Simeon took Him up in his arms and says, "Lord now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace". He desired to go now: he says, I am content to go now. Simeon was in keeping with the occasion. When the Lord was about to die, Mary had the box of ointment ready: she was in
{235}
keeping with the occasion. Again in @Acts 9 we have the instance of Paul: he saw Christ in glory and said, "Lord what wilt thou have me to do?" When leaving this scene, although he had to say that all had forsaken him, yet he could testify that the Lord stood by him, and he could look forward confidently to the crown of righteousness which the Lord would give to him, and not only to him but to all those who love His appearing. He was thus in keeping with the occasion. He asked the question, "What wilt Thou have me to do?" and he was told what to do. You ought also to raise that question and to expect an answer. If you really ask the question you will get the answer as Paul did. Christ was a reality to Paul. He was a reality to Simeon and a reality to Mary of Bethany. We are all here in the profession of christianity, you have taken the ground of having gone forth to meet the Bridegroom, you must then be in keeping with your profession. Then Christ will be a reality to you -- a living Christ at the right hand of God. When He is a reality to you then He gives you the living water. That will not fail you at the critical moment. What a terrible thing for Him to say to these foolish virgins, "I know you not", and yet He will say it to many who have professed to know Him for years. Each one of you should enquire, "Lord what wilt Thou have me to do?"
{236}
THE KINGDOM, SALVATION AND ILLUMINATION
@Titus 2: 11; @Titus 3: 1 - 7
There are three great fundamental principles in christianity: the kingdom, salvation and illumination. You get the kingdom in the end of chapter 2, you get salvation in chapter 3, and illumination is just touched upon in chapter 3: 7. All the three are presented to us in Christ, but we have to come into these things. All are in Christ, but all have to come out in us. You see illumination more fully in @1 John 4. You get rule and salvation here. The people of Crete needed these; He puts them, and us too, on the line of God's ways, to lead us into eternal life, so that we may come into it. In verse 11 grace has appeared, the kingdom is toward all and salvation is toward all. We are never called upon to believe anything about ourselves; faith apprehends what is presented to me in Christ, and *that* is presented to all. You believe, and you see that every man has a claim to Christ, but the christian has come into the light of God's disposition towards man, The work of God in me is not a subject for faith, but His work for me in Christ, that is for faith. The sun shines for all men, but a man may be blind. God's wish is that all should be saved and the mediator is available for every man. Christ has a claim on every man, and every man has a claim to Christ, this is why you baptise infants.
You want to be brought under the rule or sway of grace; that is, you act under a sense of the grace of which you have had experience. My conduct must be regulated by that which has been presented to me, that is my responsibility. Grace teaches, you must come under rule, the rule of grace; that rule affects me. In @Matthew 18 we see that the servant came under grace in being forgiven, but he was not affected by the grace and so said, "Pay me that thou owest". We are to be affected and influenced by grace that has come out to us, teaching us, that is,
{237}
teaching those who have been affected by the grace. We must not be exacting with regard to others, some are very tenacious of their rights. In dealing with children you want to act on the ground of grace, you must not be too exacting. You want to promote obedience in children; if parents are subject to the Lord, and grace is acting in them, there will be the promotion of obedience in the children, and grace will be promoted in them. We come under government, but it is a government of grace, a rule of grace. How is God going to regulate the world to come? It will be by a government of grace. Insisting on law in a family will not be a success. Eli did not frown on his sons; he was wrong, for lawlessness must be frowned upon, but will against will in a family is not successful. You want to affect them by grace, it is grace that has affected you, and it will affect them. Righteousness must take its character from grace, they are not opposed. Grace maintains what is right. God has intervened in grace to redeem from lawlessness, that is to bring about what is right in us. Directly we turn to God we come under rule -- directly a child is born it comes under rule, the rule of gravitation. "They that are in the flesh" do not come under rule and they *cannot* please God, but directly you are born again you can: you come under the influence of God and of grace. Then you want an atmosphere; I connect salvation with Christ and the christian circle. Men are hateful or hating one another; that atmosphere is deadly, you escape it by coming into the christian circle, By the death of Christ, in the company of the saints you find a congenial atmosphere. The kingdom is individual, but salvation is collective. In the Acts people came into the christian circle by baptism: it is very different now as regards the christian circle. Then it was, "Save yourselves from this untoward generation", and they were saved by being baptised and brought into the christian circle. Deliverance from the world is found by coming into the christian circle. The *principle* is seen and then it delivers you from the world order; if you see the principle and I see the
{238}
principle too, we gravitate towards one another and the principle is seen working in us. As to illumination: the child has eyes as well as a body. Illumination fits you for heaven, you are fitted for God and for heaven. The renewing of the Holy Spirit works in the direction of salvation. The Lord upheld the twelve under His influence; the atmosphere of that circle was the love of Christ, and the light was what God was toward them. They were right in the starting point -- the kingdom is the start, you are not lawless, you surrender your own will and you abide in Christ. Get right in regard to Christ, in regard to rule, this is most important. You get out of lawlessness into rule and you get out of death into life.
{239}
THE CLAIM CHRIST HAS ON ALL WHO LIVE
@2 Kings 5: 1 - 19; @Acts 11: 1 - 14; @2 Corinthians 5: 14, 15
At first sight the connection between these scriptures may not be seen. They refer to different circumstances, but there is a moral connection to be traced between them, and this is always to be seen in the word of God. The same principles are seen running right through Scripture. The point I want to reach is the claim that Christ has on all who live; Christ died for all, there is no exception there, that they which live should live to Him who died for them. He died for all, for a certain object, that is, that they which live should live to Him. He died and He rose again: all should live to Him, that is the purpose and aim of God, that the living, that is all who live, all who take the ground of living, should live to Him. Christ died for all, that is the basis of the passage.
What is it to live to Christ? It is to live as man in fidelity, that is to live to Christ. We stand in a certain relation to God, to Christ, to our fellow christians and to our fellow men, and we should be in fidelity to each of these; this is really what it is to live to Christ. The pleasure of Christ is to lead in the way of righteousness, and in the paths of judgment: that is His pleasure. He would not leave men running after the wind, He would have you inherit substance, that is His pleasure. Christ is wisdom.
Now in @2 Kings 5, the evangelist was the little maid. We get there the truth of the Lord's word in @John 4, "salvation is of the Jews". Naaman's salvation was of the little maid, and so of the Jews. The king was no good in the matter, it was out of his power, but the prophet could help, and so the principle is maintained that salvation is of the Jews. We also get it through Paul and he was a Jew. Naaman came into the land and came to the prophet, and he was told to wash -- this was very humiliating. Jordan too was a contemptible river in comparison with the rivers of Damascus. The whole
{240}
proposition was most humiliating, and God meant it to be so. Naaman had to come down, he had to humble himself to be exalted. His servants were wiser than he was, they advised him to do such a little thing as to wash and be clean -- they were wiser than he. Naaman becomes really a witness against Israel. There were plenty of lepers in Israel at that time, but they were not cleansed. They might have had the blessing if they had themselves listened to the prophets. What is the application of this story to us? It is an interesting story but we want to see its present application to us. We have not to do with actual leprosy, but there are moral lepers. The case of the actual leper is dreadful and there are such even in this day.
But moral leprosy is dreadful too and there are many such in this day. The mass of the gentiles were lepers morally, they were in darkness and distance. How has God taken steps to meet this? It was possible for Naaman to wash in Jordan, but no amount of washing will cleanse a man from his moral leprosy. Christ has gone into Jordan: the blessed Son of God has gone into Jordan and He became identified with man's leprosy. Now see @2 Corinthians 5: 21, He, God, has made Him to be sin for us. God ordained Him, who knew not sin, to be made sin for us. He became identified with man's sin -- leprosy. Gentiles were lepers, sin was working in them, He became identified with man's sin. He was "made sin" -- a very strong expression. He identified Himself with the leprosy of the gentiles, He went down into Jordan, and He came up out of Jordan very like Naaman. He as it were left the leprosy in Jordan. "He rose again", He rose without the sin. Christ became identified with man's sin, but when He rose, all was left behind in death. He left the leprosy behind Him. In the grace of God the Son of God was made sin, He has been lifted up, but He has left behind Him the sin or leprosy and become the Head of every man. He is mediator.
In @Acts 11: 1 - 14, Peter got a vision from the unseen
{241}
world, and the sheet was let down three times to impress it upon him. Peter looked at all gentiles as unclean, as leprous. He had not got rid of his Jewish ideas: he thought the gentiles were specially leprous. The sheet comes really from a risen Christ to impress upon him that God did not now view gentiles as common or unclean. In the eye of God they were now regarded in the light of Christ, as it is written in @Acts 13, "I have set thee to be a light of the gentiles". God looked at them no longer as outside the blessing. Peter had to learn the change in God's view, now all were looked at in connection with Christ. Paul was marked out to be the apostle of the gentiles, their leprosy had really been removed in the death of Christ.
It is appalling to me to see the indifference with which people treat Christ. People do not want to have you talk of Christ, but the thought of God is that Christ is of the utmost importance. He is the One before God. Christ stands in relation to men every moment, they should ever regard Christ, because He is ever the mediator between God and men, He has a claim on men. He has been into Jordan to remove man's leprosy, and there is no one in the whole world but what has a claim on Christ, and no one on whom Christ has not a claim.
Now to go a point further, it is very nice to hear that God can now go on with the world, but God had a purpose in the death of Christ. As men we have a purpose in doing things, so how can you think that God had not a purpose in the death of Christ for all? God could only bring order out of the confusion, in which the world was and is, by the death of Christ and the purpose of God was to bring about order. God made Him sin to remove the leprosy. The purpose of God to bring in order is seen fulfilled in those who live, no more living to themselves but to Him who died for them and rose again, and this is His thought for all. We see all around us how far self is the great object for men. How strong even in the christian is the tendency to have self before him. God's purpose is to bring in order in the
{242}
midst of this confusion and now Christ, a divine Person, is set before men that they may live to Him, that is to God, not to an archangel, but to God. He who died for all is the Son of God, and the purpose of God is that the living should live to Him who died for all. How are you to live to Him? The first step surely is to ascertain all that you possibly can in regard to Christ. If a man were going to change his occupation, he would certainly enquire all he could about his new master. You are going to change your master: you have served Satan and self hitherto, now you are going to change masters, and as a prudent person you will surely seek to find out all you can about your new Master. There is a great deal to be found out about Christ, and you are not wise if you do not find out all you can in regard to Christ. He is now living, He died and He rose again, and you can find out about a living Christ. He is going to be the Sun in the universe of bliss.
Then again as to living to Christ, you get the Spirit. Man of his own will cannot live to Christ: we cannot imitate Christ save by His own Spirit, and Christ is the giver of living water -- the Spirit, to everyone who asks. In the energy of the flesh no one can live to Christ. The report of Him, as living, has come down, and He is presented to man as living. He is the giver of living water to men, that they may live to Him. They which live; that is all of us, none is excluded. We may have to go down into Jordan, that is to die, but I have to tell you that Christ went down into Jordan that He might remove the leprosy in which the gentiles were. The time past of your life may suffice to have lived to yourself; it is now well to come to an end of that. Now is the time to recognise that God would have you to live to the One who died. God had to deal with a moral chaos and He wanted to set it in order, and He did it by the death of Christ. What a wonderful thing really that we should be able to live to Christ! May God give you grace that you may not disregard Christ. He is to fill all things and is not to be disregarded.
{243}
THE HOUSE OF GOD
@1 Timothy 3 and 4
The object the apostle had in writing the epistle is given us, "that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house". The epistle is therefore of extreme importance. We know how to behave in one another's houses, we have an idea as to proper conduct in regard of them, here we get instruction as to our behaviour in the house of God. The house of God is the place of light; it is the place where light is because God dwells there. The tabernacle was the place of light, because it was the house of God. In christianity God dwells by the Spirit in the house, it is the place of light. If God dwells there, then conduct suited to this is needed and if you know how to behave there, you will know how to behave everywhere. A man would be so affected by the house of God, that he would not misconduct himself anywhere. People take off their hats out of reverence when they go into a church, but they put them on again when they come out, their conduct is not affected by it, but we are always in the house of God, and our conduct is ever to be affected by this thought: 'God is ever here'. The house of God is a conception; you have to entertain the conception in your mind and then it affects your conduct. It is a spiritual house but this term used in @1 Peter 2: 5 does not apply to a local assembly, but is a general idea. The house is as much here as ever, but the idea of it is greatly obscured; the Spirit is here and, if so, He dwells in the house. It was Christ who formed the house and then the Spirit came to dwell in it, and the house was widened out greatly.
Testimony goes out from the house; the leading thought is that it is "the pillar and base of the truth". It is the place of our education, and so discipline goes on in the house. So also we read that judgment must begin at the house of God, that is, discipline as shown in the case of Ananias in @Acts 5. Persecution is also allowed
{244}
for our education in the house of God, and you get in @1 Corinthians 11 those weak and sickly among them; so too you get comfort and encouragement in connection with the house. All is vital in the house, it is a *spiritual* house; it had been a *material* house, but Stephen said, "The Most High dwells not in places made with hands". For a time christianity had the character of God's house, but when man came into authority, then christianity ceased to be the house of God, because man then ruled rather than the Spirit of God. Christianity has ceased to be the house of God though the house is still here, but man's rule has come in, and hence that which is of God has been lost sight of. I ought to rule in my own house and God rules in His. True believers only form the house of God: the church of the *living* God. In the house of God restoration of order is really seen, man and wife are seen in their true relationship, there is prayer, intercession and giving of thanks made for kings.
In my sense of things the thought of the house of God ought ever to be present with me. It is anticipative in a way: God will dwell in the universe but now He dwells in the house, it is provisional, not final. When He dwells in the universe then we find that God is all in all. A person might say, What is the good of getting a thought of the house of God, why not make the best of things as they are? It is only in separating from things unsuited that you get any idea of the house. To very many the building is the house of God and so they have very little light in regard of Christ. Here you get very definite thoughts of Christ.
Ques. Why is it, "Christ Jesus our hope", in the first verse of the epistle?
The apostle saw everything failing, so it is our hope; although everything be failing, He is our hope. Certain truths became prominent as soon as failure came in. When everything decayed in Israel in Old Testament days, faith was sustained by prophets, who spoke of the coming of Christ, so in the New Testament when failure
{245}
had come in, truths such as Christ our hope and the truth of eternal life, came more into prominence. In the house of God you get the thought of order: man and wife, elders and deacons. Elders have more to do with things spiritually, deacons more with things temporally; it would not be seemly for a boy to look after people spiritually. When the assembly came together, elders and deacons would not be there as such. God dwelling here by His Spirit is most important, it affects your heart and spirit: I am in the presence of God sensibly. There are a thousand things now that I cannot touch because I recognise God dwelling here by His Spirit. I cannot resort to certain methods because God is here: I recognise that God is dwelling here, I have it before me. What is suitable to the presence of God? In furnishing a house even or in a woman's dress this question confronts you. A person may have a fine house, but what if the children are unruly? In the house of God the Spirit speaks expressly; He knew that things would come in and corrupt the saints.
As to the thought of the Father's house, there you get the grand result: the house of God is on earth, we have hardly got to the Father's house yet.
What we lack is piety; you may get a lot of faith and very little piety, faith does not test as piety does. Piety is God brought in and that tests; God is a reality to you, you bring in the living God. The man who does that is considered a fool by the world. In Cromwell's day the saying was, 'Trust in God and keep your powder dry', but the question is, Was the powder according to God? You must see that the things that you take up are according to God; Paul would hardly have insured his life. A man having a free hand ought to trust in God, that is piety. The line between prudence and piety is very difficult to point out, prudence may develop into covetousness.
It is a very real thing to apprehend continually the presence of God, and to trust in the living God, in contrast to all that is of death around; you have not to
{246}
do with a God who is subject to such conditions as we have to do with, He is the living God. When He comes out publicly as the living God, men will not die; things will be changed then. It is a great lever to piety when you apprehend the presence of the living God; He is the Saviour of all, but especially of believers. The great point is piety -- it is the doctrine according to piety; we want to see the young more pious. Piety is not merely consenting to truth, but you bring the living God into the details of life.
{247}
A CHRISTIAN'S RESOURCES IN THE DAY OF RUIN
@2 Timothy 2
As to the ruin we use the term rather loosely perhaps, but it is really the failure of the church as a witness to Christ *morally*. The *church* should have been the faithful witness, but in Laodicea we see that *Christ* is the faithful witness.
Ques. With regard to the question of there being a company waiting for Christ as such when He returns, would not, "The Spirit and the bride say, Come" lead us to the thought of there being a *company* in which bridal affection had been wrought by the Spirit?
F.E.R. I thought that that was more the normal attitude of the bride, and that in these days it is more *he that hears* who says, "Come". The Spirit has never ceased to gather to Christ and is still doing it. As the vessel of testimony the church is a ruin. It is important to know where we are and why we are there.
To separate from the churches around, our ground must be an apprehension of the presence and unity of the Spirit. An organisation gives no room for the Spirit, but makes room for man. In separating from churches around it is an individual action and you take individual ground. The body is here, therefore we can hardly say that we are gathered on the ground of the one body. We recognise the truth of the one body being here in its completeness, and this being known to us we gravitate one towards another. The path is not to be broader, but the heart to be larger.
Verse 1, "in Christ Jesus": in the failure of what has been entrusted to man, it is important to see what there is for us in Christ Jesus, what is there is always available for us. There are unfailing resources in Him. You must realise that you are an individual -- your position is individual -- and then you are very much cast upon the grace that is in Christ Jesus. It is a living, a vital
{248}
connection with Christ, not a doctrinal one.
At the beginning of the chapter we see that when testimony has declined the important point is the maintenance of the truth. To maintain the truth is better than trying to keep things together. Each one has to digest the truth himself and then to maintain it and pass it on to others. We have not succeeded in maintaining truth, and many breaches have come in upon us. With J.N.D. the first point was the maintenance of the truth and the transmitting of it. In Malachi the ones who feared the Lord spoke often one to another, pious people drew together. So it is now: I appreciate a person who is trying to go forward in spiritual things, I do not mean a person who is merely breaking bread.
Truth has been committed to *saints*, so it is not enough to say that the Lord will keep the truth. The position is an individual one essentially; the whole body is here, therefore it must be individual, we cannot take a place as any separate body.
Daniel began to consider the seventy weeks of Jeremiah, and an angel came in to tell him about them, so if we *consider*, then the Lord will give us understanding. We get brought before us here three things: (1) we are not to entangle ourselves, (2) the man who wrestles must do so within the rules and (3) the husband-man must labour first -- that is, patience is needed. Resurrection is set before Timothy as encouragement. All turns on the resurrection of Christ; there are two points connected with it here: first, in the seed of David you get the thought of the faithfulness of God to His promises, and secondly a risen Christ opens up a new scene entirely. So the exhortation is, Do not entangle yourself; you go on with your work lawfully, but do not be entangled.
As to *relationships*, discipline is found in them, it is not entanglement. Lawful striving is that which is according to the Spirit of God, so that bands will not do, no method outside the Spirit of God is lawful. Then patience is needed, the husbandman cannot get fruit
{249}
until he has laboured.
The seed of David tells of the fidelity of God to the promises. He has been raised according to *my gospel*. Paul presented Him as the Son of God, as the last Adam. It is different from Peter's gospel rather: Peter's gospel was that God had exalted Him to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance and remission of sins.
The whole resurrection scene is brought in here, then you begin to realise that you are risen with Him.
Peter confessed Him as Son of God, but it was not his testimony. When you preach you preach what you are told to preach and not what you *know* -- you are told to preach repentance and remission of sins.
{250}
THE SPIRIT HERE IN THE PLACE OF WITNESS
@John 14: 15 - 26
Christ had been here as the witness to the Father. Now He was going, and the Spirit would be here in the place of witness. The disciples were to be here as the vessel of the Spirit's witness, and as such they were to be suitable; chapter 15 shews that they were to be marked by fruit-bearing.
Chapter 16 shews that they were to have intelligence. The Spirit would shew them things to come and they would have intelligence as to all that belonged to Christ. Hence it was a very great and important change that was to take place in the state of things and so He tells them not to let their heart be troubled. He was about to be an Object for their faith. The Comforter is spoken of as a divine Person, not as an influence, so you get here the Father, the Son and the Comforter. The latter is presented here as a Person: the Holy Spirit and the Spirit of truth -- the last may be characteristic but He is the Comforter, a Person. By Him they had access to the Father -- you could not have access if you had not a place. Access involves heaven. The Father's house is necessary to the thought of access. They knew the way morally; they knew the Father really in knowing Christ. They said, "Lord to whom shall we go?" They appreciated Him and thus knew the Father. His place is our place; He really is the place, access is really in the appreciation of Himself. Christ is the place of the church, the husband is really the place of the wife -- it is difficult to speak of, but Christ is the place of the church. Christ presents the church to Himself; there are the friends of the bridegroom, but Christ Himself is the place of the bride. In knowing Christ they knew both the Father and the way to Him. The Father really characterised Christ and so in knowing Christ they knew the Father, He is "the way, the truth, and the life".
{251}
People think that as they believe on Christ therefore they have access to the Father, but it is really the appreciation of Christ that gives access to the Father. All outside of Christ is death: Christ and life are bound up together. Outside Christ is falsehood, lawlessness and death. Christ is the way for us because there is nothing lawless in Christ.
In verse 11 you get that Christ was in the Father and the Father in Christ. In verse 20 a change was coming in, they were to know in the Spirit's day that He was in the Father, and they abiding in Him, and they were to present Christ in the way of testimony and unity by the Spirit. So the Corinthians were Christ's epistle; they presented Christ. That is really quickening -- "Christ in you the hope of glory". In @Colossians 3 you see the way Christ comes out in the saints, bowels of compassion and so on. "We in Him" -- we are not lawless, we abide in Him and then He comes out in character, and all by the Spirit.
Christ is all as Object and in all as Life. Christ will have an entrance in the world in spite of the world's rejection. "I will come to you", He is brought in by the Comforter -- not again and again exactly -- the Comforter brings in Christ spiritually. Christ is the source of life to us and we live in His life. The Father too comes here, everything divine is brought to us in the presence of the Comforter. You cannot separate divine Persons, all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell in Christ. Where a test is brought in then it is individual: "if a man ..". His presence must be realised, Christ is the Covenant, He is the perfect expression of God's disposition towards man. A purged conscience means that I can view myself apart from the man that did the bad work. There is no such thing as a forgiven sinner, because the man is retained; a purged conscience means that the man is gone, so we read of "a man in Christ". When forgiveness is preached, then faith sees it is there in Christ and then I get the Spirit. Christ has accomplished righteousness for Himself, that He may occupy
{252}
a certain position for man: He has seen fit to take up man's liabilities so that He might be Head, that for the glory of God He might occupy a certain position as Head of every man. The question is now, Will man have Christ as the last Adam?
Was Christ to take up a position as the last Adam? If so, what He did was for Himself. All that He accomplished was in order that He might take that place as Head for the glory of God. Christ is the test, so it is the glad tidings of Christ. Will men accept Christ? As to chapter 16: 23 they had made enquiry of Him and they would have such intelligence by the Spirit that they would not need to enquire then. Fruit-bearing is evidence of vitality, it is moral; they were to be here morally according to Christ, and then intelligence would follow. The instructions of these chapters are perfect. Fruit, that is every quality of Christ -- love, joy, and peace, for this to be brought forth there must be abiding in Christ. God looks for fruit in life, Christ is a life-giving Spirit, we live by Christ and He lives in us; the evidence of life is seen in fruit. Sunshine and rain are needed for fruit and you must be in the shining of Christ; so @Ephesians 5: 14, "Arise up from among the dead and the Christ shall shine upon thee".
{253}
BROUGHT INTO THE CHRISTIAN CIRCLE
@1 John 3
We get two things brought before us in this chapter: firstly the passage from lawlessness to righteousness and secondly the passage from death unto life. Verse 5 "in Him sin is not": there is no lawlessness in Christ and so we read, He "suffered ... to bring us to God", that is to attach us to Christ who is God. By the Spirit we are brought into the christian circle. There was no preaching of the gospel until there was a Head and a circle into which souls could be brought. The escape from lawlessness and from hatred was all ready for them then. There is no righteousness without a Head. The Head is seen in @Romans 5; it is really a question between Christ and antichrist in the heart. If men do not come into attachment to Christ they really set up antichrist in their hearts. It is difficult now to get a true idea of the christian circle; a person who is converted in popery does not find himself much in the christian circle and there is no christian circle in the Church of England. Hereby perceive we the love -- it was a good atmosphere in the early days in the Acts.
There is no righteousness without a Head. Adam was not lord or head, Christ is Lord and Head, and it is as Head that repentance and remission of sins are preached in His name. Salvation is in the Lord, righteousness is in the Head, and attachment is to the Head and is connected with the thoughts of the Head, whereas confession is to the Lord, and connected with the thoughts of the Lord.
We have come into a circle of love: there are doubtless more distinguished christians to be found in the systems around us. We go on as individuals and it is with us really, "he that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies".
People want a boat, so these christians in system have a boat. Peter left it and we have to leave the boat, whatever that boat may be. If you try to walk on the water you are
{254}
much more exposed to the action of the wind and water than if you were in a boat, but if you walk on the water the hand of the Lord can sustain you there. What is going on now is the Spirit's work in the individual, causing him to have an ear to hear. Then He can make revelations to you -- you hear what the Spirit is saying to the assemblies. We cannot depend on the company: it is, "he that hath an ear". So in the second epistle to Timothy the apostle looks for fidelity to Christ in the individual. "Study to shew thyself approved unto God".
{255}
THE LIGHT OF CHRIST AND THE CHURCH
@Ephesians 5: 22 - 33
The light of Christ and the church as loved of Him is brought in here to shew what is right as to natural ties. By bringing Christ in, everything in regard of us falls into its right place. Christ is *the* Man; Adam had a place and he died; now the point is that everything should be right according to Christ.
Christ claims the body; He is its Saviour, not merely its preserver. Salvation is not complete until you get the redemption of the body; it is brought in here in order to complete the thought. He is Head of the church now, but He is the Saviour of the body, and then the thing is complete; it connects with the next verse, the church is subjected to Christ, so the wife is to be subject: the church has all its supply from Christ, and He completes the whole when He saves the body. The husband is the source of supply and intelligence to the wife; the husband has to look after her. Now that the truth of Christ and the church is made known you can understand the bond of man and wife; in Old Testament days there was excuse, and you read of plurality of wives, but now there is no excuse: the true character of the bond is seen now. When the bond was first begun in Genesis God had before Him really Christ and the church. The husband is the head of the wife, as also Christ is Head of the church; the Head signifies intelligence. Eve was not to walk by her own intelligence, but by Adam's; it is possible that had she done so she might not have fallen. Christ's intelligence is to guide and direct the church, but, alas! the church has acted on its own intelligence, and has been led astray like Eve; hence all the confusion we see around. The wife is to be subject, the husband is to guide her; he has the intelligence, and she has to bow to his guidance; so with the church, all the supply comes from Christ.
"That he might sanctify and cleanse", Christ has the
{256}
offering up of the church in view, therefore it is to be holy, that the church may be morally in accordance with Himself. He is to present it to Himself, therefore it must be morally suited to Himself. We are affected by the knowledge of God's disposition towards us; the word is the light of the testimony of God, and He brings that to bear upon us, and it has a sanctifying effect upon us. In @John 17, that they may be set apart by the truth -- "sanctified" -- the thought there seems to be more positional, here it is sanctification in the way of cleansing. *He* does it, and does it individually, but with a view to the whole. We are formed in the divine nature, in that way the spots and wrinkles disappear. The Lord said to the disciples, "Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you". We are formed entirely anew, and the spots and wrinkles go. He cleanses *me*, He forms me in what is according to God. You cannot cleanse the flesh, *I* am to be cleansed; He forms in me that which is absolutely new and *according to God*. You get a similar thought in the end of @Romans 7, "I myself" and "set me free". The ministry of the new covenant is really my being kept by Christ in the sense of God's disposition towards me. I cannot conceive how a man can do without God, for even the very best of men, what are they but poor, dying creatures? How can they then do without God? The vessels of service are the saints, and Christ concerns Himself with the cleansing of the vessels of service.
The new covenant is connected with man universally, and not only with believers; it is God's disposition towards man. The church is in the good of the covenant: the thought is that the church should be witness of the disposition of God towards man.
It is in the right of God to limit lawlessness, and this is seen really in the lake of fire.
Redemption is in Christ for *all*, but it is not *availed of* by all; it is available for all, but when we come into it it is: "In whom we have redemption". Glory is perfection, the church is morally according to God, that is
{257}
perfection -- holy and without blame, that is glory. The imagery in the Revelation is taken largely from the prophets: the Spirit never leads to material ideas, but ever to moral ideas.
A helpmeet for Christ -- that is, that His glory will come out in the church: the church will be the means of the display of Christ to the universe. God has glorified Christ by putting Him in the position of Head and centre of the universe. "The glory which thou gavest me I have given them"; He has given us His place before the Father. Christ loved the church -- that is the beginning and spring of everything: the love of God. When the love of God is known, then you respond to it and you love God.
Verse 29. Christ takes care of *the* church. He nourishes it and cherishes it, and will do to the end: He nourishes the church, not brethren. He has in a way severed connection with Israel, He has in that way left His kindred, and Christ and the church are joined.
Chapter 1 brings out our relationship to God, and chapter 2 brings out our relationship to Christ -- raised and seated. We have relationship to Christ as the bride, but we are also sons of God -- the thoughts are distinct.
{258}
HOW WE ARE TO STAND
@Ephesians 6
In the epistle to the Ephesians you get anticipated what will be brought in at the coming of the Lord: it helps to the intelligent entering into the detail of the epistle to see this.
In chapter 1 we get made known the mystery, "that he might gather together in one" -- that will be at the coming of the Lord; and then you get the prayer in chapter 1, "that ye may know what is the *hope* of his calling", and in chapter 2 you get "quickened us together with Christ", which will be really brought to pass at the coming of the Lord; it is anticipated spiritually now. Then in chapter 3 you get the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; that is anticipative of what will come to pass at the coming of the Lord. Then in chapter 4, in the giving of the gifts, @Psalm 68 is quoted, and that psalm goes on to the coming of Christ. You can see the same thought coming out in the armour here: it is the Lord Himself who comes out with the breastplate of righteousness, also the helmet of salvation; it all refers to the coming of the Lord. *Spiritually* we take that ground now, and we maintain it. It is in the way of testimony now, the moment is not yet come for the display, but display is anticipated in the saint now.
Armour is what is necessary to enable us to stand our ground; the influences abroad tend to blind people to all that God is about to effectuate by Christ. Every saint has intelligently to know his place in order really to take the armour. Daniel did not belong to Babylon, though he was in it, so we see he was wont to pray toward Jerusalem. We belong to Jerusalem above, our mother: our place is prepared of Christ: He said, I go to prepare a place for you; He has prepared it. We want to see the place of the church relative to divine counsels.
The two-and-a-half tribes helped to fight, but they came back to enjoy their inheritance this side of Jordan.
{259}
God in great mercy keeps most of us poor because few of us can stand wealth. The effort of Satan in this day is to assail the truth; how are we going to stand, seeing that we are not clever like those who start plausible theories? How are we to stand? We must have on the whole armour of God. God anticipated the evil and provided for it: the great effort of the enemy is to discredit the truth. The armour does not add anything to us, we get all in the gospel really, but we want to use it as *armour*, and we must have proof of the armour. To Him belongs the power; Christ is God, and has power to subdue all to God.
Strong in *moral qualifications*; not merely strong in grace, but strong in moral qualifications. The first is truth, it can regulate you and direct your affections in every divinely-appointed channel; man's affections go out in wrong and irregular directions, as you see in the woman of Samaria -- truth comes in to direct the affections in a right and *proper* channel. If a man loves God, he loves his wife and children. Truth is the regulating motive, truth is the presentation of things as they *are*. Next you get the breastplate of righteousness; I am faithful in every obligation; philosophy does not do this, but the truth does it for a man. Saints are often very slack in their obligations; this will not do at all. The breastplate is protective -- you are not struck in the vital parts. Truth, righteousness, peace, faith, helmet of salvation; these things are all present and form a moral *whole*. Feet shod -- that is ability to walk in peace here with all men; the Jew and gentile can walk together. You stand in the good of what came to you in the gospel: you are equipped by it, you find the value of it as armour. The gospel brings to me that which is morally perfect. The gospel has brought to me truth, righteousness, peace, faith, salvation; all these things are presented to us in Christ, and we take these things up as armour.
The sword of the Spirit is aggressive, it is a weapon to be used. We are to *withstand*, the enemy is *very near*. The word of God is the utterance of the Lord; every
{260}
utterance of the Lord will stand (@1 Peter 1), and "the word of the Lord endureth for ever". All these things are seen in Christ; when He comes He will have the breastplate of righteousness, the helmet of salvation and a two-edged sword (@Revelation 1), and in @Revelation 19: 11 He is Faithful and True; that is what He is called.
"*Take* the helmet of salvation" -- you want to carry it with you in testimony; the apostle could say that he endured all things for the elect's sake, that they might *obtain* salvation. Christ comes with the helmet of salvation for His people, but the apostle endured all things for the elect's sake; it was the witness of salvation for others. We ought to be positive in our attitude and deportment, and we should be positive in word too.
{261}
THE VICTORY OF GRACE
@Luke 8: 22 - 40
We have presented to us here two great forces at work and there is the battle ground. The battle ground really is man, and the two forces at work are God and the power of evil; they come into conflict here and man is really the battle ground. God is the source of good, and victory must be on the side of God and of good. There are great forces contending for man, and the power of evil really holds the ground. This is a very distinct advantage on the side of the power of evil; it had possession of the demoniac; the field was, however, gained; that is, the man was gained. These two forces have been in conflict throughout the record of the world; they came into conflict in @Genesis 3 but from the beginning you get great *encouragement*. God foretold that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head; the power of evil *seemed* to gain the day, but God is greater than the power of evil. When Israel came into the land of promise idolatry was strong in the land and it overcame Israel. They were ordered to extirpate the Canaanites, but they did not, and so were overcome by their idolatry. David was beloved of the Lord, yet he was overcome by evil for the time being, but God works in bringing about repentance, and God gained the victory and David was delivered. In the case of the demoniac Christ gained the victory, although the power of evil was so great. In the book of Proverbs we see good and evil brought before us under the name of wisdom and the foolish woman. The great point is the domination of man -- the foolish woman generally gains the day, but in the long run wisdom will gain the day and God's power will be seen to be greater than the power of evil. In the world today are there not evidences of divine goodness? There is the sunshine, and the rain descends upon the evil and the good. We have no idea what the evil of this world is in the eye of God. The
{262}
sunshine and rain testify to His goodness, and besides that, there is the continual effort on the part of God to gain man's heart, and on the other hand the foolish woman is clamorous; the walls and street corners shew how active she is, so that in no case persons may come under wisdom. The word of God is good and is ever presented to gain man's heart, but on the other hand there is the constant activity of the foolish woman to try to turn away people from the paths of rectitude. These two great forces are at work in the world, and man is the battle ground. If you want to find where the power of evil works, it is where there is lawlessness -- that is, insubjection to divinely appointed rule -- underneath that lies the power of evil. The devil sins from the beginning; it is thus the working of the power of evil in man when he is lawless. There is a time coming when God will not tolerate lawlessness.
Now as to the demoniac. In verse 28 you get a perfect expression of lawlessness when he says, "What have I to do with thee?" The expression of righteousness is the very opposite to that, as seen in the convicted Saul of Tarsus: "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" The demoniac had been under the power and influence of evil, now he is brought under righteousness and under the influence of good. The purpose of God in regard of him was achieved, he was attached to Christ. This is what God is now doing; the gospel reveals this, "it is the power of God unto salvation" to bring man out of lawlessness into righteousness. The passage is made by the demoniac from lawlessness into righteousness, he is attached to Christ; so with us in the gospel. The gospel is God's power to do all this for every one who believes. The demoniac said, "What have I to do with thee?" He recognised Christ, and even when under the influence of evil he recognised Christ.
"What have I to do with thee?" is the language of a lawless man -- it is sad language. Christ had a great deal to do with that man; to begin with He had created him, for all things were created by Him. Christ also is Judge,
{263}
so that in that point of view Christ had much to say to the demoniac. Christ had become Man in order that He might accomplish redemption. He was on the way to death to bear all that under which man lay, that He might be the Mediator between God and man; so He had much to say to the demoniac, as Creator, as Judge, and as the One who was to be the Mediator, and yet the demoniac says, "What have I to do with thee?"
If Jesus had said to the demoniac, 'What have I to do with you', how terrible! but He did not say so. The demoniac recognised Jesus as Son of God. He, the Son of God, was on the way to the cross to give Himself a ransom for *all*, and so for the demoniac. Everything is going to find its proper place; the demons find their proper place -- go down the hill to the abyss -- all that is unclean goes there. Now as to the demoniac, he is clothed and in his right mind; he no longer says, "What have I to do with thee?" He is brought into bond to Christ; he was brought into righteousness. There is no righteousness for us save in being brought into attachment to Christ, then Christ is our righteousness and we want no other; there is no longer lawlessness, the demoniac was brought into attachment to the Sun of righteousness.
It says, When they saw it they were afraid; there was no need for this and yet it is so today, men are more afraid of righteousness than of lawlessness; men are often afraid of a newly converted person. Now as to verse 38: the man besought that he might be with Him; the Lord directed him into the path of God's will; wisdom directs into the way of righteousness. "I lead in the way of righteousness".
You have not Jesus in the world now, but the present moment is the time of faith. People are under the power of evil; people betray themselves by lawlessness, and that shews the cloven hoof. God bears with that for the moment; when lawlessness gets to a head, that is, antichrist, then He will put it down. A child if indulged in his own will is spoilt. Is the child happy?
{264}
Is that the way of righteousness? The child will not reap much happiness and in the end will die a fool. The path of righteousness is the path of happiness. You *must* then be brought into attachment to Christ, because that is the way of righteousness and happiness. Now Jesus is the great Deliverer, and it is a question of apprehending Him as a great Deliverer.
Lawlessness must lead to the judgment of God and to His wrath; there is a way of escape, and that is by the faith of Christ as a great Deliverer. Christ has a title in regard of you, He has the title of Creator and the title of Redeemer. To recognise His title is to believe in Him, and to believe in Him is to be brought into attachment to Him as the demoniac was, and you become like him, clothed and sitting at His feet. If you believe on Him as the great Deliverer, the result will be the same. Saul was very lawless, but he was brought to the faith of Christ, he was found sitting at the feet of Jesus, and for him the Lord appointed a path as He did for the demoniac.
The faith of Christ has changed things for many of us here in a blessed way, and He has appointed for us a path in this world. Christ took the thief on the cross right away to paradise, but on the other hand He finds, as we see, a path down here for the demoniac -- the path of His will. Lawlessness is dreadful, it shews the power of evil. Christ becomes righteousness to us and He is our hope too: we look for Him as *Saviour*. He will complete what He has begun.
{265}
HELD AT THE DISPOSAL OF THE DELIVERER
@Luke 8: 26 - 40
All that under which man lay was the fruit of sin; in the case of the demoniac it was the effect of sin; it was the same with the woman with the issue, and the death that had come in in the case of Jairus daughter -- all was the fruit of sin. The kingdom of God comes into view in connection with the healing of the demoniac. It was no common case at all. Satan had unusual power so that the man was a terror to all, and he had his living among the tombs; it was an extreme case of the power of evil. Israel had given way to idolatry and so God in retribution allowed them to feel what the power of the devil was: this is how you account for these special cases of demoniacal possession which we read of in the gospels. But the kingdom of God was come nigh. Authority and power were here above *all* the power of evil; this was the kingdom really; they said, "With authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out".
Every one who was delivered from the power of evil, as the demoniac was, proved that the kingdom of God was come. On the mount of transfiguration we are told He received from God the Father honour and glory -- this proved that God's kingdom was here. Man was in thraldom, that was certain, but the power of the kingdom was here. The people of Gadara come and inquire about it, but the world would sooner have the demoniac than Christ. The spirit of man is essentially lawless, man does not want the kingdom of God; in the Gadarenes we just see the spirit of the world coming out. But next we see that the demoniac was attracted to Christ; he wanted to be with Him, but the Lord sent him home to his friends. He was delivered from the thraldom of evil and delivered from the world. He answered to the claims of Christ in desiring to be with Him; he came under the influence and sway of Jesus; he came into the
{266}
kingdom. In this day the children of God have listened to the world, and in retribution God has allowed them to be largely under the influence of the world and blinded by it. What a man sows that shall he reap -- this always stands. In Hezekiah's day he shewed the messengers all that was in his house, and in retribution God tells him that all in his house should be carried to Babylon.
When the Lord was here the kingdom was here in His Person, now it is here in the Holy Spirit. The kingdom of God means deliverance for man: then man must be in bondage. Man, as man, is not free, he is in bondage; he does not much mind bondage, but that is so much the worse. Man is in bondage to many things, he is in bondage to imagination, so you see many in bondage to light literature and novels -- in bondage to the writings of others. Again, others are in bondage to the opinions of others -- you see a young man in an office afraid of the opinion of his fellow-clerks. Or again, people are in bondage to the fashions of the world. But all the fashions of the world spring from the god of this world. Where do worldly sentiments and fashions come from? From whence come the opinions of men? All come from the god and prince of this world. There is nothing of righteousness and holiness in these things. Men are in thraldom to one thing and another as in @2 Corinthians 4 in whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds -- his energy is ceaseless -- "lest the light of the glorious gospel ... should shine unto them". God wants people to be in liberty, not in thraldom, so the blessed Lord in @Luke 4 speaks of the Spirit of the Lord being upon Him, because He was anointed to set at liberty the bruised ones -- deliverance to the captives -- and where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty. There is no liberty for man save by the Spirit of the Lord. In @Romans 14 we get, "The kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". Liberty is a thing to be coveted. The man of dignity is not the man of the world, but the man who stands free from worldly influences. Dignity was
{267}
concentrated in Christ. The mind of man is to be brought into liberty, so we get the expression, "bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ".
In @1 Timothy 2 we get really a revelation of the mind of God; He will have all men to be saved. It is important that men should grasp the situation. God is one, and He will have all men to be saved. The situation is there whether men accept it or not; but it is a great thing that you should accept the situation. God is one, and the Mediator between God and men the Man Christ Jesus. Christ stands as truly in relation to all men as He does to God; Christ has a claim upon men. The position of *not denying it* will not do; you must *accept it*. I want you to apprehend the situation. The Mediator is there and He stands as really in relation to man as He does to God. He gave Himself a ransom for *all*, that is His voice to man. Men disregard the situation. He is specially spoken of here as the Man Christ Jesus, so He has a voice to every man. Why does He appeal to you? That you may believe in Him as Mediator, and believing, you may receive living water. Have you received the gift of living water? "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his". He appeals to you with the great object that you may get living water. He has it at His disposal -- the Spirit. Suppose that you accept the situation, you come to know the Mediator. Truth presents the situation and then souls are brought to accept the Mediator. If you receive the living water you come into the kingdom and you confess Jesus as Lord. The kingdom of God is here now in the power of the Holy Spirit: "the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". These are three blessed things and they are all in the power of the Holy Spirit. Man is delivered from every kind of thraldom and he is brought into these blessed things in the power of the Holy Spirit. In the case of the demoniac it is expressed in the words, "sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind" -- it is a scene of holy liberty. Other lords have had dominion over us, but now we are
{268}
brought to the Lord Himself. Death is the true measure of a person: the moment of his *birth* or his *death* -- these are the two weakest points with man. There is no true liberty with regard to man except by the Spirit; but that is connected with righteousness, peace and joy. The situation is there and no soul can help it; but man's wisdom is to accept the situation that he may get the gain of it -- namely, the living water, and that then, as in the case of the demoniac, he may hold himself at the disposal of the Deliverer.
{269}
GOD'S WAYS WITH MAN
@1 Samuel 15: 12 - 23; @1 Samuel 24: 4 - 7; @2 Samuel 1: 6 - 16; @Hebrews 1: 8, 9
My object in reading these passages was to illustrate principles in the dealings of God with man. In the verse read from Hebrews you get the two principles -- righteousness and lawlessness. The place Christ has in relation to His "fellows" is really the result of the great question of righteousness and lawlessness being brought to an issue. In Old Testament times there might be a question as to the pathway of a godly person; not so now, everything is clearly and definitely defined, and therefore the path of Christ is our path, to love righteousness and hate lawlessness.
We are become fellows of Christ; our practice must then be according to Him, and that way is loving righteousness and hating lawlessness, and the power has come in to enable us to refuse the one and to practise the other. We thus manifest that we are the children of God by our practising righteousness. When God created man there was no such thing as lawlessness; when it came in, then, as a result, death followed and hatred too; Cain hated his brother. It may be covered up in society, but underneath all you may be sure there is hatred.
We get these two principles illustrated in Saul and David. Saul was a distinguished man after the flesh, and in the beginning Saul shewed his prowess; he was distinguished as a man. What we find in David is that whenever he was in a crisis righteousness prevailed. With Saul, when he was in a crisis we find that the *opposite* came out. Saul had to wait for Samuel seven days, and he was lawless and did not wait. What the prophet said to Saul was the word of God to him, and Saul did not wait for the word of the Lord; the fear of *man* was before him and that brings a snare.
Next we see that Saul was ordered to destroy the
{270}
Amalekites; he did not do so -- he spared them -- the favour of man was before him; in both cases he was lawless. These two things are prone to govern us, the fear and the favour of man, and if we yield to their influences we shall be marked by lawlessness. Any one who has had experience of the world knows how we are tested either by the fear or the favour of man, and if you yield you become lawless. Saul had direction from the Lord; so that to act by the fear or the favour of man was to be lawless, and it is a shocking thing to be lawless. Some would say that he did not do anything gross, but we must not be biased by anything of the fear or the favour of man. Saul lost the kingdom; he was lawless; God does not allow the kingdom to a lawless man.
In David you get a righteous man; in the two passages read you find the righteousness of David; to cut off a piece of Saul's skirt was to do dishonour to the Lord's anointed. I do not know if the Amalekite really slew Saul, but if he did it was very remarkable, because Saul had spared Amalek; but as for David he had the Amalekite slain because of the dishonour done by him to the Lord's anointed, and David shewed thus his allegiance to the Lord's anointed.
David would not touch the Lord's anointed, Saul, and this was righteousness, that is, fidelity in every relationship as regards God and man in which he was placed. David therefore had the Amalekite slain. Saul was never governed by any other principle but lawlessness; he was governed either by the fear or the favour of man. No man really has what is called free will, for man has a conscience; no man works entirely apart from other men; we are greatly influenced by the fear or the favour of man.
Now we turn to a greater than David. In @Hebrews 1 we read, "A sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom". In Christ we get the perfect solution of these two -- lawlessness and righteousness; His righteousness was to do the will of God. He was here as the vessel of mercy to man; mercy is in the right of God and God
{271}
was with Him in the expression of His mercy to man. His was a straight path of righteousness from beginning to end. Christ did what He heard: "as I hear I judge;" so also in His works He fulfilled all righteousness.
Another thing, He was not affected by the fear or favour of man. His brethren said, "If thou do these things, *shew* thyself to the world". He said, "My time is not yet come"; no fear and no favour influenced Him and yet He was ever serving man perfectly; He came as the true Neighbour to man. He was entirely apart from fear or favour, and on the other hand He was the complete expression of the mercy of God. He went right on to the cross, not turned aside either by the fear or favour of man, but He was also the expression of the mercy and goodness of God. He offended men's sensibilities constantly, He would not accommodate Himself at all to man's thoughts; He could eat with publicans and sinners in spite of the complaints of scribes and Pharisees, and why? Because the publicans and sinners had need of mercy. The result is that He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows; He is the Head and centre of the company, and that because of His own perfections, His moral excellence in loving righteousness and hating iniquity; we have to give Him the place of superiority.
The line between righteousness and lawlessness is clearly marked out in the path of Christ, so He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows; the fellows too are anointed; we can say, we are privileged to say, We are His companions -- the house of God is down here.
We are brought into the place of companions of Christ, and what is the effect? We get all impulse from Christ, we are indebted to Him for all impulse; if we get love in His circle we get it in Christ. The great weakness at the present time is that so many do not recognise His circle. We find love there and gladness prevailing. *He* gives the impulse to both these. He is pre-eminent; there too we discern between good and evil: "have their
{272}
senses exercised to discern both good and evil"; we are not influenced by the fear or favour of man -- these two are very dangerous to a saint.
We want to be controlled by the word of God, that is, by Christ. We want to have the appreciation of Christ, that is the way. He loved righteousness and He hated lawlessness, and we appreciate these things in Him. It is not imitation that will do it, it is appreciation of Christ, and that leads to affection; then we seek to walk in His path. We must not yield to the lawlessness that is in the world; the path is clearly marked out for us, for He loved righteousness and hated lawlessness. We shall follow in Christ's path as we appreciate Him, and then we shall be more truly His companions.
{273}
THE UNIVERSE
@Psalm 36; @Titus 3: 3
In the Psalms we often get great conceptions although written long ago. When you look back a few thousand years, as in the Psalms, it is astonishing what you find there; there are great conceptions. You do not get much originality in this day, there is not really a great advance on the conceptions of @Psalm 19. It is evident from @Psalm 36 that there was in the psalmist the conception of a moral universe. We have a physical universe and that serves to shew the moral universe. In the material universe there is completeness; and in the moral universe too you find completeness. In the Psalms you get a certain amount of vagueness, but now there is definiteness in Christ. In verse 9 you get the beautiful expression, "With thee is the fountain of life" -- that is with Christ -- it is the effect and consequence of what He has wrought.
Instead of being empty and dissatisfied, the believer understands what it is to get the fountain of *life*. Where Christ is not known there is no life morally. Where He is not known there is more acquaintance with *death* really than life. Such things as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of life savour of death and not of life. Then again they are in darkness; darkness has blinded their eyes, but how beautiful are the words, "*With thee* is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light".
Now with regard to the universe, verses 5 and 6 put these things together, you have the mountains, the deep, and man too; the heavens are of all importance to us, for in them He has set the sun. The earth is really governed from heaven, because the sun is there; we are dependent on the clouds. We get moisture distilled and clouds and then rain. Then as regards the earth there are mountains, all is not flat or level; then there are man and beast. Completeness is seen here, God preserves man and beast. The heavens, clouds, mountains, deeps, man and
{274}
beast, all these are the material universe, and it is a grand conception on the part of the psalmist, and he lived when people were not very lettered as they are today -- it was a rude time, we should say.
But now I want to bring before you a moral universe; this is seen in the terms, mercy, faithfulness, righteousness, judgments. It is a question of principles, and what lies hid in the background is mercy. Then you get faithfulness; there are engagements to which God has committed Himself. The righteousness of God stands firm, immovable, stable. His judgments are a great deep, they are unsearchable, and yet God may be pleased to reveal them. These are the great principles of the moral universe.
Then I want to shew how things touch us; if they do not touch us we have not entered upon them at all. Every part of that moral universe has come into view for us in Christ. Happily for us mountains are stable, though you hear of earthquakes or eruptions; yet, speaking generally, mountains are stable, the physical universe is settled and witnesses to the goodness of God. So it is also as regards the moral universe, mercy or loving-kindness, faithfulness, righteousness and judgments -- all these things are stable.
Look now at @Titus 3; God's judgments are really the first thing for us, though coming last in the two verses in the psalm. We have to link His "judgments" with the kindness and love of God in Titus. When God took up Abraham, no one knew what He was going to do. So with Israel; He put Israel into Canaan and they brought idolatry in, and so were carried captive to Babylon. What is God going to do? He brings back a remnant that Christ may be presented to them; He is presented to them and they crucify Him; then Christ is raised again from the dead and goes to the right hand of God, so as to be light to the gentiles -- these are the judgments of God.
The result of the judgments of God is that there is light to the gentiles (see @Acts 13: 46, 47): "It was
{275}
necessary ... lo, we turn to the Gentiles ... I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the earth". These verses shew out, "Thy judgments are a great deep". There was the accomplishment of God's promise to Abraham: "In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed". Christ is become light to the gentiles to make God known, and salvation, that is, deliverance from all that is unsuited to God.
In the gospel all is so beautifully moral; you know God's mind toward man, and you are emancipated from all that is contrary to Him. To believe on Christ is to know what is suited to God and to be delivered from all that is unsuited to Him. In @Romans 11: 15, 21 you get a thought of the judgments of God, and in verse 33 you get that His judgments are unsearchable, they are a great deep. It is the greatest grace of God that He should make Himself known, but then He would also deliver us from everything unsuited to Him.
Then we come to the point of God's righteousness: it is like the great mountains, the thought in that is stability, it is stable because it is set forth in redemption. Death and the curse lay on man, and it was within God's rights to discharge what lay upon man. The righteousness of God has been asserted in the death of Christ and it is immovable, and every man may come under the cover of redemption; it is available for every man. It means forgiveness of sins; God has availed Himself of His right to take up and discharge what lay upon man: it is the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, it is the immutable foundation of redemption and it is available for *all*, as in @Romans 3, "unto all".
You look up to the clouds and consider the faithfulness of God; He will vindicate His faithfulness to Israel. "The deliverer shall come out of Zion", it is said, and again: "They shall see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven" (@Matthew 24); and "then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven", the witness and expression of the faithfulness of God to His promises.
{276}
His mercy is hid behind His providences -- it is in the heavens, as the hymn says:
<blockquote>'Behind a frowning providence <br>He hides a smiling face'.</blockquote>
God has brought mercy into full display in the moral universe which I desire to bring before you; all is established in Christ. Righteousness is established in the Sun of righteousness. Christ is the expression of the mercy of God and He is hid in the heavens.
Christ is really the name that God has to set before man. Philip preached Christ to them in @Acts 8. Paul had nothing to preach but Christ. "I have set thee" -- that is Christ. If Christ is not light to you, you are taken up with the frivolities of the world; the people of the world just go in for frivolity, but light in Christ gives moral weight. I can recall the bondage in which I was, bondage of sin and lust, till the mercy of God came in to bring me into the knowledge of Himself and of deliverance from all that is contrary to Him. The deliverance for us spiritually is quite as great as the deliverance of Israel from the bondage of Pharaoh. It is possible to know with absolute certainty what the mind of God is toward us, and it is possible to be delivered from all that is unsuited to Him. Christ is that light to us and salvation to the ends of the earth.
There is no living water to be found elsewhere but in Christ, so let him that is athirst come -- let him take the water of life freely, that is, without money and without price! Christ came to bring in light and life, "by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved". "I am come that they might have life". With Him is the fountain of life. Every man has a title to Christ, but it is equally true that Christ has a title to every man. Believe on Him, you are entitled to Him, and you get light and life in Him.
{277}
THE CHURCH CONDUCTED TO CHRIST
@Genesis 24: 32 - 67; @Ephesians 1: 19 - 23
There are few things more interesting than the way in which God's purposes are foreshadowed in the Old Testament. If we had not the light of the New Testament, we could not have understood the types which foreshadowed these. The prophets searched diligently to understand their own inspired writings. Now we have the light of Christ, and we can look back, and in all the simple things narrated we see the shadow of all that has come to light in Christ.
I want to speak of what was set forth in connection with the patriarchs in regard to the world to come, and then I wish to speak more particularly as to the church being conducted to *Christ*. I do not mean conducted to *heaven*. He Himself will come and take us to heaven; but the Servant -- the Spirit -- is here so that He may conduct us to Christ. It is a great thing to understand what the saints are in relation to Christ. It was that which led me to read the passage in Ephesians. The church has the remarkable place of being His body, the fulness of Him who filleth all in all. That is God's thought in regard of the church; it is the place God has given to the church. Christ is Head over all things, and He is given to be Head to the church, which is His body.
I want now to shew how in the patriarchs we get a foreshadowing of the world to come.
Abraham is to my mind the representative of the world to come. God is going to take out of this world what will form the world to come. It was for this reason that Christ came to save the world. The world to come is the depository of blessing, and in that way Abraham appears to me to represent the world to come, and it is out of the wreck and ruin of this world that God brings to pass another world. God does not absolutely create another world, but He evolves a world out of the wreck and ruin of this world. In that way God took Abraham
{278}
out of country and kindred, and father's house, and made him the depositary of blessing and promise.
Sarah represented the new covenant, Hagar the old covenant. The child of promise was Isaac; Ishmael was born but rejected. Isaac represents the heavenly man. There are two things set forth in Isaac: he was the child of promise, and he was in figure raised again from the dead. In the passage I read (@Genesis 24) you get Isaac being comforted after the death of his mother by forming a new tie with Rebecca. The progeny of that marriage was the patriarchs. My conviction is that the true Israel springs from the union of Christ and the church; that is what came to pass in the ways of God. When the church is the witness of the surpassing riches of God's grace, then the true house of Israel will come into view. That is foreshadowed in the history of the patriarchs: you get Abraham the depositary of promise; then you get Isaac the child of promise; then you get the death of Sarah, and the union of Isaac with Rebecca, and as the result of that the true Israel is brought to light.
We want the confirmation and establishment of people in the word of God. There are so many influences abroad which tend to shake people's confidence in the word of God. Scripture carries its own evidence, and you do not need to go outside of Scripture for evidence. Wherever I look in Scripture I see one great subject presented to me, and that is *Christ*. Whenever or wherever inspired men wrote, there was but one Christ, there is one great Author. There were different men inspired to narrate, but they lived at long intervals from one another, and there could have been no agreement or collusion, and therefore there is but one Author -- the Holy Spirit. Holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Spirit. If Scripture is not authentic, it is an imposture; but if you get to see beneath the surface of Scripture, it is impossible not to believe in it, for there is but one subject, and that is Christ and the world to come. From the moment this world went wrong, the world to come came into view. In @Hebrews 11 you get men who were
{279}
witnesses to the world of faith. Every one of them is a witness of the world to come. All refer to the world to come. Abraham is the depositary of blessing; Isaac is the child of promise; Rebecca prefigures the church, and Jacob prefigures the house of Israel.
But now I want to shew you the special place of the church. (See @Genesis 24, the latter part read.) What I venture to say is this -- no one can apprehend the place of the church who does not apprehend the place of Christ. If you connect Christ with this world, you can have no apprehension of the church. The Spirit of God has come down to report the glory of Christ. The Father has given all things into His hands -- "All things that the Father hath are mine" @John 16: 15. The Spirit was to glorify Christ, "for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you", verse 14. Abraham had given all that he had to Isaac. Abraham was greatly blessed of God, and he had given all that he had to Isaac, and that is what the servant reported to Rebecca's kindred. If you do not apprehend the place of Christ, you will not understand the place of the church. We need to apprehend another order of things of which Christ is the Head; we need to appreciate that the Father has given all things into His hands. You cannot connect Christ with this world. Christendom bears His name, but Christ is not palatable to it.
It remains true, alas! that Christ is refused here. There is an attempt to make it appear that Christ is in honour here, but apply a simple test, and you will find He is not palatable here in this world. Talk to people of righteousness, and holiness, and meekness, and you will find it is not palatable to them. I never met a *holy* man after the flesh. Christ is rejected here; but Christ is Head of all principality and power. I do not think much of principalities and powers in this world. Take the greatest monarchs in modern Europe, and you will find they were the very worst of men; but Christ is Head of all principality and power. I find it difficult to speak about it, because it is all intangible. We cannot speak of the
{280}
world to come as what exists, but as *truth*.
Well, we get the truth in figure here (@Genesis 24) that the Father has given all things into His hands. Now the church has the place of being the body of Christ, "the fulness of him that filleth all in all" @Ephesians 1: 23. We should give attention to the place of Christ. Every possible glory attaches to Christ; He is Son of God, King of Israel, the Son of man. How are we conducted to Christ? It is by our apprehension of Christ. Our minds are conducted by the Spirit of God to Christ. We have to apprehend Christ not as connected with this world, but as He is -- Head of all principality and power. The Spirit of God is conducting us, in our apprehension, into the light of the present glory of Christ. He has given gifts, and what for? For the edifying of the body of Christ, to lead us in our apprehension into the light of the present glory of Christ. If you apprehend Christ's place, you will soon understand the place of the church.
When Rebecca is brought to Isaac, she lights off her camel and she covers herself; she was to lose her individuality. Why does she cover herself when in the presence of Isaac? Because she apprehends her own place, as his fulness. Eve was formed that Adam might be set forth in her. God has given the church its own proper place, that Christ may live in it. We have professed to have put off the old man, and to have put on the new. The new man is *Christ living in us*.
The real power of the truth is Christ living in the saints in the power of the Spirit. If we put on the new man, we have put off the old. We avow that, but it is well to test ourselves as to how far we have done so. One great end of the church was that Christ might be perpetuated here, morally, in the very scene from which He was rejected, that there might be a continuation of Christ down here. The church is "the fulness of him that filleth all in all". It is a great thing to have been conducted to Christ. If we have been conducted to Him, we are prepared to cover ourselves, for there it is we get a true sense of what the church is, and what God
{281}
intended it should be -- the body of Christ -- His fulness.
Christ is the Bridegroom. He is the One who takes up everything from God. With all His greatness, Head of all principality and power, He is meek and lowly in heart. He has not altered morally from what He was when He was here. He has altered His place and condition, but He is morally the same. No one could describe the greatness of Christ save the Holy Spirit; He is the great centre and Sun of the whole divine universe. We need to be led by the Spirit of God into the apprehension of the greatness of the true Isaac -- the resurrection Man, the Head of all principality and power. When we see that, and that all things are put into His hands, then we shall apprehend the place of the church. We shall be content to get out of sight so that nothing may be seen in us but *Christ*. As the apostle says, "Yet not I, but *Christ* liveth in me", @Galatians 2: 20. How far better to have Christ set forth in us than to set forth ourselves! Why attempt to engage people's attention with ourselves? Let us be content to be vessels here for the setting forth of Christ. The time will come when the Lord will fulfil His word, "I will raise him up at the last day", @John 6: 40, 44, 54.
May God give us to apprehend the greatness of Christ, and so be led to accept our own extinction -- in having put off the old man, and put on the new. If that were verified and exemplified in every believer upon earth, think what an amazing witness there would be to Christ down here! At any rate let the divine thought be fulfilled in us -- we ourselves not seen, but Christ set forth in us, and thus answer to what is God's thought for the church -- His body, as "the fulness of him that filleth all in all".
{282}
THE NEW COVENANT
@2 Corinthians 3
The ministry of the new covenant is divine teaching, and the new covenant is not of practical value to us until divine teaching is effective. Human teaching is for the mind, and the impression may fade away, but divine teaching is an impression which God makes upon the heart, and it never fades away. Divine teaching is not corrective; discipline is corrective, and comes in that divine teaching may be effective.
Ques. What condition is necessary for divine teaching?
People are not in a condition for divine teaching until they are in the good of the kingdom, and have the sense of being under grace. No one is in the condition to be divinely taught until he is in the sense of security, which is the kingdom. A man is formed by divine teaching, but I doubt if the formative work of the Spirit goes on until one is in the good of the kingdom, and has the sense of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. The effect of being in the good of the kingdom is that we do not fear evil; we are apart from the course of things here, and in the sense that God is greater than all evil. The object and end of the kingdom is salvation from every enemy, and that gives the sense of security, and deliverance from fear of evil. The kingdom is maintained in power in the believer, for "greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world" (@1 John 4: 4). Divine teaching gives character; God teaches His people that they may be an expression of Himself, and it will result in the heavenly city. The kingdom, the new covenant, reconciliation, and eternal life all apply to earth, and Israel therefore will come into them. Christianity brings in consciousness, but we cannot have the consciousness of anything that does not exist. The kingdom is here, hence we can be in the consciousness of it. The kingdom is individual, and we are under the new covenant when
{283}
we are in the kingdom. The Testator has died, and the covenant is there, but it has to be ministered to us, so that we may be in the good of it. The covenant is God's mind and disposition towards those who believe. A covenant is really always on *one* side. Israel was taken up on the ground of obedience, but it was the covenant which *God* had enjoined; the old covenant was God's mind towards man in the flesh.
The great characteristics of the covenant are love and righteousness, and both came out in the death of Christ; so the Lord said, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood", @Luke 22: 20. We take the bread before we take the wine; His body given signifies our removal, and the cup is the witness to the love of God. I have an increasing interest in the Lord's supper; the Supper is essentially the Lord's table. What is brought before us in the Supper is what will yet fill the universe; there is the removal of the man, and the revelation of the love of God. It is in connection with the death of the Testator that the covenant comes in; it is not valid until then. Christ's body given is the death of the Testator, and then we get the new covenant set forth in the cup, as the Lord Himself said, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood". The bread sets forth that we have become dead to the law by the body of Christ. Reconciliation goes further, and brings in the Man that is to the pleasure of God. Reconciliation means that there is complacency where there was distance, but then it is Christ who brings in the complacency. Christ had to remove us that He might have us.
In @1 Corinthians 10 we have the *sacrificial* order; in the case of a sin offering the blood was dealt with first; it was carried inside, God's righteousness was vindicated, and then the carcase burnt afterwards signified the removal of the man. That is *God's* side, but in chapter 11, where it is *Christ's* side, His death is put before us as the expression of His love. When it is a question of *God* the blood must come first, and it signifies that every requirement of God has been met. Christ has entered into
{284}
everything which lay on man -- curse, death, and judgment -- and all has been borne according to God. The burning of the carcase is the expression of God's mind in regard of man's state in the flesh. When we look at it as to what Christ effected, He removed the man that He might declare the love. Chapter 10 is the sacrificial side; chapter 11 is the declaration of love. The cup is the expression of the love of God to us. The blood being carried into the holiest conveys the thought to me that *man* is going into the holiest. I cannot see any other object than that in blood going in there; God could have vindicated Himself by judgment, and therefore the blood need not have gone in merely for that.
We have to look at the death of Christ in its *sacrificial* aspect, and also in its *witness* aspect. We could not understand the latter unless we apprehended the glory of the Lord -- that the One who did the work was the Son of God. He was the Son of man suffering from men, but underneath that, the One who was suffering was God's beloved Son.
At the Supper it is a great thing to be simple, and partake of what Christ sets before us. In His body given He presents to us our removal, and in the cup the love of God; we are to be in accord with these, to have Christ before us, and to be occupied with Him. The Supper tests us; it tested the Corinthians, for they were not in accord with it. If we answered to it we should walk in self-judgment; we should judge ourselves and so eat; that is the spirit we are to be of. Lessons of the widest import are brought before us in the Supper, and principles are brought to light by which God will revolutionise the world. God removes the man, and thus sin is removed. The Lamb of God taketh away the sin of the world, and then afterwards it is said that He baptises with the Holy Spirit (@John 1: 29, 33). This looks on to the perfect exclusion of sin in eternity and then God will be all in all; the kingdom will have been given up, and the nature of God will pervade everything. Thus we see that the universe will be filled by what is set forth in the
{285}
Supper. All will be removed that is contrary to God, and He will be all in all.
The simplest illustration of covenant is a will. A will always expresses the true disposition of the testator. Many a man is disappointed at the reading of a will, having thought that he had more place with the testator; the disposition of the testator comes to light when he is dead. Now the death of the Testator has come in, and therefore we have the disclosure of God's love. We get inheritance by the will, but we get the Testator too; we get the good of the Testator Himself, as well as the knowledge of His disposition. The love of God in one way is unbounded; it is *towards* the world, but we do not get into it until we leave the world by the door which Christ has opened up out of it by His death. Then we get into the good of the love. The love of God has its satisfaction in those who leave the world by that open door, in those who accept God's testimony; the Holy Spirit is given to shed His love abroad in their hearts.
The glory of the Lord is unveiled now; there is no question now as to who He is; He is the Son of God. While He was here His glory was veiled, though occasionally there was a witness to the fact that He was God's beloved Son, but now it is clear that His glory at the right hand of God declares Him to be the Son of God. His glory is that He is God's beloved Son, making God known. Glory is the celebration of righteousness, and therefore grace here is equivalent to the glory at the right hand of God. My impression is that "the glory of the Lord" in @2 Corinthians 3: 18 is in contrast to what He was when He was here. "Changed into the same image" is, I think, that we become partakers of the divine nature. On the mount of transfiguration the three disciples saw His true glory for a moment; the veil was withdrawn, and He was saluted as God's beloved Son. Now He is at the right hand of God; the veil is entirely drawn aside, and we behold the glory of the Lord with unveiled face. This last verse is not the assembly; things are individual until we come to reconciliation. Reconciliation brings in
{286}
the assembly. In Colossians the order is, first the Head, then reconciliation, then the body.
The effect of divine teaching will come out in the heavenly city. The covenant gives character to the heavenly Jerusalem; it will come down from God out of heaven, and its light is most precious; the light which it reflects is really the glory of God. There is the same line of thought in @1 John 4, "God dwelleth in us" (verse 12), and "God dwelleth in him" (verse 15). We must get back to the truth; we do not cherish any idea of the restoration of the church, but we should like to get back to *the truth* as it was at the beginning. I do not think we should expect too much from people seeking fellowship; if they are clear about the gospel, and are in the kingdom we may be free to receive them, and then they come into the place where they get divine teaching. I should put the gravity of the step before them, for many people regard it as nothing more than joining a church or chapel.
It is a great thing to be brought into the kingdom, where God is greater than man; there we get the sense of security, and have no fear of evil. Things must be taken up in divine order. We get the kingdom first, because there God and man are in their right places respectively; then we are prepared for the covenant. I think the bride comes in morally before the body.
{287}
RECONCILIATION
@Colossians 1: 18 - 23
Reconciliation is the contrast of the new covenant. The new covenant presents the disposition of God towards man, but reconciliation is what is for God. The High Priest's ministry is God-ward, but the covenant is man-ward. Reconciliation is what is effected for God in the universe; Christ is the Beginning, He is the Firstborn from the dead, and the church is the first-fruits of reconciliation. Through the new covenant and its teaching God gets His place with us; but in reconciliation Christ gets His place with us.
There are three thoughts in the passage we have read: (1) the Head; (2) reconciliation; and (3) the body. "He is the head of the body, the church"; then "you ... hath he reconciled"; and lower down we get, "for his body's sake, which is the church". The effect of reconciliation is to bring Christ under the eye of God. It began when Christ was here; there was that in which God was complacent. The simple meaning of reconciliation is that there is complacency where there was distance; you could not imagine a greater change. When Christ was here His presence brought in complacency; it meant "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill toward men", @Luke 2: 14. We see it more clearly still in the cross, and in resurrection. Where there was the utmost distance there is the greatest complacency. Distance could only be removed by the removal of the man. In principle reconciliation was effected in the death and resurrection of Christ, and the *word* of reconciliation is the testimony of what has been effected, and that is what is used to effect the reality of it in the saints. When Christ was here the eye of God rested upon Christ, not upon man; man was not under the eye of God, save that God was not imputing trespasses. When the second Man came in, man as in the flesh was not before God; in the death of Christ that
{288}
man was removed to the glory of God.
The apostle exhorts the Corinthians to be reconciled to God; they had not really accepted it. Reconciliation is made good in us by new creation; we could not be holy and unblameable before God except in new creation. Man is an enemy in will and mind, and he cannot be altered. In the Old Testament God was dealing with man according to his responsibility, and therefore we get atonement; but in the New Testament God deals with man's state; He goes to the bottom of the matter, and that brings in reconciliation. Atonement does not fully meet the case; reconciliation means the thing is removed in order that something else may take its place. There must be atonement, for in all gospel testimony God is dealing with man on the ground of responsibility, and therefore there is atonement and God offers forgiveness of sins. The actual word atonement is not found in the New Testament, and reconciliation is not found in the Old. Both atonement and reconciliation would apply to the millennium, but not quite in the same was as they do now. Everything will be taken up in Christ, and hence it is that where distance was there will be complacency.
To understand reconciliation, and that order of things, you must take up the idea of the Head. The Head is the First, it is not the same idea as the Lord. The Head is the Beginning, and He is pre-eminent in regard of everything. As Head Christ is on the side of man. He is the Head of every man; He is the Head of all principality and power; and He is the Head of the body. Headship is the same in principle in all three, but the body has a place in relation to Him which other things have not. He has not taken up yet the place of Head of all principality and power in display, but He is so in title. The very fact of the Son of the Father having become Man necessitates that He must be *first* of all men; but then no other could be with Him unless He died. "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone", @John 12: 24. The Head is the first one in regard of God on the part of man; He is the first in regard of what He
{289}
presents.
Reconciliation comes to pass in the full light of God; it is the pleasure of "the Fulness". There is a figure of it in @Luke 15; the Father comes fully out to the returning prodigal, and then there is the Father's full complacency in the son when he is brought inside the house.
In @1 John 4 we get the new covenant, and in chapter 5 we get reconciliation. We must learn God's disposition towards us before we can touch reconciliation; that is, that everything is to be for God. It is a great thing to come to that point in our souls. In @Luke 15 we see first that all is perfect on the Father's side, but all is not perfect as regards the son until he is seated at the table in the sense of complacency. It is a great thing to see that the divine things which are existing as present things are things of which we can have the consciousness *now*. We cannot be conscious of what is future, but the unseen things are not future. We get the consciousness of things by being in the nature which is suitable to them. There is an existing world of which we can say that God has perfect complacency in it. It is a world of eternal things, which are all of God. Everything down here has in itself the elements of decay; it passes away and the fashion thereof.
Presentation hangs on reconciliation; the prodigal was presented with a ring on his finger and shoes on his feet, and the Father's eye rested on the best robe, which is Christ. The prodigal was presented in new moral equipment, and that means another Man. We are to be presented holy and unblameable in His sight; it is for the eye of God we are reconciled. No soul enters into reconciliation until it is fully affected by the love of God; my own great defect has been failing to come under divine teaching. It is a great thing when a man is prepared to be content that all should be for God's satisfaction and glory, and no one comes to this until his heart is instructed in the love of God. The knowledge of God's love begets confidence in God, and then I am prepared that all shall be for God's glory, and all for
{290}
Him. Men have been set on getting their own glory, but reconciliation brings us to another side altogether.
The climax reached at the end of @1 John 5 is remarkable. We are free of the wicked one, and free of the world, and we have an understanding from the Son of God. Then the next step is, "we are in him that is true"; (verse 20), that is, we come to the circle of reconciliation. The acceptance of the truth of reconciliation brings about in a practical way that there is a body here in which Christ is. The body was formed by the baptism of the Holy Spirit, but that is another thought altogether. The force of "Christ in you, the hope of glory" (@Colossians 1: 27) is that there is a body practically here of which Christ is the animating Spirit. The idea of the body is that Christ is presented under the eye of God; the body is for God. Christ is the life of the body, and lives in the body before God. The body is the presentation of Christ in the saints under the eye of God, and therefore it is *holy*. We are *holy* for God; righteousness is for man, and that is connected with the new man. Our testimony here is connected with the new man, but the body is for God, "holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight" (verse 22). Whatever is for God must be holy. The fact of evil having come in has destroyed complacency; rebellion has occurred in heaven, and sin on earth, and everything has thereby been dislocated. So Christ takes up all in heaven and earth, that everything may be reconciled.
Reconciliation applies to the millennium, not to the new heavens and the new earth; it is brought to pass in the fact that all is set right in Christ. All has been brought into disorder by sin, and the kingdom will be the times of restitution. Mr. Darby said that everything depends upon the place that Christ has taken in incarnation. "The Word became flesh", @John 1: 14. He was the Beginning, a Man here upon whom the eye of God could rest with complacency; but there was more to be effected, otherwise He would have remained alone. Christ had to remove the man; the truth is the leper was
{291}
cleansed by the leper being removed. If there is any allowance by the christian of the man that has been removed the rights of God are invaded, and it has to be judged unsparingly. In Deuteronomy everything is centralised in chapter 12; that is, the place is chosen where God places His Name. In christianity all is centralised in the Spirit. Then the second thing is the most unsparing judgment of all that interferes with the rights of God, and therefore if the wife of your bosom, or the friend who is even as your own soul, entice you to idolatry, you are to kill him. That is very unsparing.
As regards reconciliation, the Head is there, and the church is the first-fruits of reconciliation; then if we accept that all is to be for God, we come to the body which is *for God*. What is common in christendom is that God is recognised on the first day of the week, and then people expect that God will prosper them during the other six days. That is all wrong. They have not come to reconciliation, which is that all is for God. When we come together in assembly we have the sense of being in association with Christ outside of everything here, and if you had your choice you would not leave it. When the assembly is convened you leave the world, and join Christ on resurrection ground, and in spirit that position is to be maintained throughout the week. If we were in the sense of being in association with Christ on resurrection ground we should accept our baptism, and be in the fellowship of Christ's death. It is a tremendous thing to me that Christ who came to this world will never be known to this world save as a Judge. If we were in the reality of this we should be in the fellowship of Christ's death here.
The great idea of the assembly is that it is a sphere where divine affections, set in movement by the Head, work through the members. If Christ has His place as Head, He sets everything in movement; it is not a question of what *we* bring. In spirit we should not leave resurrection ground; we have to come back to the wilderness to fulfil our responsibility here, but when we
{292}
meet Christ it is on resurrection ground. Resurrection brings you to the holiest, the holiest is connected with the calling. It is a great thing to apprehend the body and reconciliation.
{293}
THE MIND OF CHRIST
@Philippians 2
Ques. What is your thought as to the mind of Christ in verse 5?
F.E.R. If we are going to be here for the glory of God, we have like Christ to die out of the present order of things; that is what we are not always prepared for. People want to be something in the order of this world, and they use christianity to that end.
Rem. Like the Corinthians.
F.E.R. Christ came down into this order, humbling Himself and becoming obedient to death; He came into it for the will of God but died out of it, and it was as out of it that He received exaltation, and that is the path for us. People would like a recognition from God well enough in this order of things, but that is not the divine way; if you get recognition on the part of God, it is outside of this order of things -- you must die to it. Christ took that path, He humbled Himself to the death of the cross. It is a great thing while in this world not to want a place in it.
Ques. Is it as an example that Christ is brought before us here?
F.E.R. It is His *mind*, and you are to be partaker of it; Christ coming into this world gives us light as to what the divine way is.
Ques. What is the difference between this and the "mind of Christ" in @1 Corinthians 2: 16?
F.E.R. Here it is more the purpose of mind; in 1 Corinthians it is more the intelligent faculty: the "mind of the flesh" is not the intelligence but what lies in the flesh. This mind of Christ would lead us to humble ourselves. As long as the present order of things exists you can only expect to be nothing; few are prepared for that.
Ques. What is the "consolation in Christ" (verse 1)?
F.E.R. Paul is referring to what he had experienced
{294}
at the hand of the Philippians -- their care for him; the point with him was that they should complete his joy. They had been united in heart about him, but the test was with regard to each other. Their fellowship in the gospel was expressed by their gift to him, and he acknowledges this and goes on to say -- "Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded".
Rem. We are tested in our relations with each other.
F.E.R. Yes; the point is to get out of death; all is cold in death; we want to get into life where everything is warm. As long as people are detained by the world they are chilled by it. People in the world are in the chill of death. "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren", @1 John 3: 14. It is impossible to get the true thought of love to the brethren as long as people are in the world.
Rem. If we have "this mind" it will take us out of that chilly region.
F.E.R. Yes; for Christ is out of it.
Rem. I was thinking what marvellous grace that it should be open to us to have this mind.
F.E.R. I think so; but people often want to remain in that in which Christ is not; they cannot get on if they seek to be conspicuous in that which Christ has left. Christ had the right to be something here, but He went down; we cannot go down, for we cannot be lower than we are; we have to accept where we are; the effort of people is to get up. Christ could go down because He was so great. We cannot become obedient unto death for it is the portion of us all, it is where we start; we cannot go lower than we are. Until Christ came into death there was no such thing with man as the acceptance of death; man could never have accepted it apart from Christ's death.
Rem. Death was the end of Christ's path, but it is the beginning of ours.
F.E.R. Well, it is the end of the path in this world, but it is our beginning with God. Christ has come into death that we might accept the fact that death is on us;
{295}
we could not do it otherwise. What you get out of it is, that it becomes death to the world and to sin, the way of deliverance. Nevertheless you only accept what is *on* you; it was not on Christ.
Ques. Is not affection for Him behind the acceptance?
F.E.R. Yes; I can accept it since He went into it. If man could see nothing beyond death it is not likely that he could accept it: "All that a man hath will be give for his life", @Job 2: 4.
Rem. People would not like to go into the Severn tunnel if they did not think there was a way out.
F.E.R. Until death is accepted, you do not get exaltation on the part of God. People like providential exaltation; but it is through the death of Christ you get true exaltation; it could not be connected with the order of things here.
Ques. What is the force of "even the death of the cross" (verse 8)?
F.E.R. It refers to the shame of it; but it was no lower than man was; it was the expression of the curse of a broken law, under which man lay, and Christ went as low as man was. It is a great thing to see that death is the only true way to exaltation. The mind of man is diametrically opposed to the mind of Christ. What has been a stumbling-block to many christians is looking for prosperity as a sign of divine favour. Riches are a hindrance. A great deal of prosperity is the result of will; they *will* it; God *permits* it. I think prosperity and exaltation are to be looked for; but let it be true prosperity; it is not wrong to look for that.
Ques. What is true exaltation?
F.E.R. When a man gets appreciated among those who are spiritual; I see no real exaltation except what is moral -- a man making advance in the knowledge of God; but he will not be marked as one in whom Christ lives unless he is prepared to take the path that Christ took, which was to die out of all the greatness of this world. We go down on one side while going up on the other.
Rem. Then chapter 3 is the answer to chapter 2?
{296}
F.E.R. Yes; the apostle was getting exaltation in chapter 3 even as Christ did. It is remarkable that the exaltation of Paul was accompanied by stripping himself and counting all dross. If a man takes that path in the obedience of faith he will get exaltation from God; and where? In God's world: we all ought to covet exaltation in the christian circle which belongs to that world. All true exaltation is found in the christian circle. What place has a man among the saints? That is his true measure; a man who *tries* to be something would be measured very soon. The Corinthians did not think much of Paul, the Philippians did, because they were spiritual. The "goal" the apostle had in view in chapter 3 refers undoubtedly to the future, but if a man is going on in that line he gets moral exaltation here. The man who is going on is appreciated among the saints, for he is not only going on himself, but he is beneficial to others. If one member suffer, all suffer with it, and if one is honoured, all rejoice. If a man who has been distinguished among the saints drops behind, all suffer with him; he does not suffer alone; you cannot bear to see a saint declining; and on the contrary, if he is going on, all rejoice with him.
Rem. It has been said you must be extinguished to be distinguished.
F.E.R. Yes; but you do not have *to be* extinguished, you extinguish yourself, you accept death. It is a dangerous thing when a christian, who is in the path of the truth, gets worldly distinction. In most cases he will be smaller, less distinguished among the saints. The point is, Where would you like to be conspicuous? A man entering on any course in the world naturally would like to be distinguished; but if he is distinguished in the world he will not be distinguished in the christian circle; he must die out of the world for that. You cannot be built up in Adam and in Christ at the same time. Christ might have been distinguished here; His brethren said, "If thou do these things, shew thyself to the world", @John 7: 4. And Satan said, "All these things will I give
{297}
thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me" (@Matthew 4: 9). The principle of the world is that it will praise you if you do well to yourself. We are as much in danger as others, and have to regard the word, "Let this mind be in you;" this needs to be cultivated. Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; it was in a way the mind of Christ in him.
Ques. Is not cultivating it that I admire and enjoy it in Christ?
F.E.R. Yes, there is nothing in you. It never could be accomplished in you if it were not true in Christ. It is as you appreciate Christ that it is true in you. Man has nothing of his own.
Ques. Is there not misunderstanding as to the expression "in you", as if it were a sort of deposit transferred from somewhere else?
F.E.R. Yes; but that is a practical denial that everything is in Christ. It is wrought in us by the appreciation of that particular thing in Christ: till you have that it never could be wrought in you. It does not belong to you, it belongs to Christ. The general thought with christians is of a converted, reformed, changed man; but that is not the truth -- it is that you have *another* man. My will is not *changed* but *judged*. Where can you find a man that is always for God? Only One; and we get nothing agreeable to God but by the Spirit of Christ. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his", (@Romans 8: 9), let a man be as good as he may. Christ in us is a very great reality, there is nothing so real.
Ques. Is not salvation a chief thought in Philippians?
F.E.R. I think so; but you get it by being out of the scene of this world. It was on the principle of obedience the Philippians were to work out their own salvation.
Ques. What is "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ?" (chapter 1: 19).
F.E.R. There is no limit to it, but one is kept dependent, you cannot command the supply but you get it, an unlimited supply. We are never looked at as self-contained, but dependent, kept by the power of God
{298}
through faith.
Ques. So the thought here of God working in them is love?
F.E.R. It is the good pleasure of God that you come out distinctly in the christian circle; that is how the will of God comes into expression; all lawlessness gone, children of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. It is in that way that the will of God gets its expression. It contemplates two generations as existing, the generation of God's children and a crooked and perverse generation. I would like to see my own children without rebuke and united, it would be my pleasure for them, but I could not bring it about.
Rem. What would produce it naturally is their coming under the influence of your love.
F.E.R. We have had to learn as to our children that God is sovereign, but where they are not what one would wish, I think it is largely attributable to defect in ourselves. There must be love and authority, but you will never get result without exercise on their part. The great thing is that children should be held by conscience, and if not by conscience, by affection; but the greater thing is that it should be conscience.
Ques. "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling"? (verse 12).
F.E.R. Salvation becomes a reality to you. It comes out into result.
Ques. Would it deliver you from the domination of the present order of things?
F.E.R. You get salvation from the one order of things by coming out distinctly and definitely in the other; many are in border land, not fully in one or the other. This is a very important aspect of salvation. It is what Scripture treats of *as* salvation. We are made to feel that there are many who are not saved from the fear of man and the power of things through which we are passing. The children of Israel were not in the completeness of salvation till they were in the land, and even then the two and a half tribes were detained. It is on the other
{299}
side of Jordan that you get the fulness of salvation -- resurrection ground. It is connected with the washing of regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Spirit.
Ques. What is "the salvation which is in Christ Jesus" (@2 Timothy 2: 10)?
F.E.R. It is not to be found in the world but in Christ Jesus, and that takes you a good way for it takes you to heaven -- "in heavenly places in Christ Jesus", (@Ephesians 2: 6), and that is connected in Ephesians with salvation.
Ques. What is the force of working it out?
F.E.R. Coming out very distinctly according to God, not an endeavour to find some border land.
Ques. Does it not imply purpose?
F.E.R. One is set for it. When people come into fellowship the question I am inclined to put to them is -- What are you going to give up? I do not know what, but I think they must have to give up something, and I do not think it is much good coming into fellowship if they do not give up. It used to mean giving up a good deal. I do not believe even the young can come in without giving up; you may depend upon it people have something to surrender.
Ques. What is "holding forth the word of life" (verse 16)?
F.E.R. I think it is moral; life is expressed in us, the truth comes out in what is life, the thing is demonstrated. Christ was "the word of life" not simply in what He said but in what He was.
Ques. Is it the unconscious effect of what is there?
F.E.R. Well, it is spontaneous; the first thing is shining as lights -- you are no longer lawless. The earth could not exhibit one bit of light if it were lawless, nor would the moon; and so with us. It should be one thing or the other; either make up your mind to be distinguished in the world, or to pass out of it and be distinguished in the circle where God exalts.
{300}
THE GROUND OF THE SPIRIT
@Numbers 21: 1 - 18
A.H. It might be helpful to have something before us as to what really hinders our entering into the purpose of God.
F.E.R. To get at what is in your mind we must divide the book of Numbers into two parts.
Ques. What is the division in the book?
F.E.R. When we come to the chapter we have read we reach the ground of the Spirit. It accords pretty much with @John 3 and @Romans 8. The flesh had been tested in the previous part of Numbers; then comes in the death of the high priest, and in this chapter the flesh is met by the brazen serpent, and we have the springing well. After that we get another order of things. There are certain hindrances which affect people up to a certain point, but then another class of hindrance comes in. The hindrances in the latter part of Numbers are different from those in the previous part. The previous ones are in things that test the flesh and bring out the natural perverseness of man. The things into which we are brought in grace become tests to us. We have believed in them, but then they become tests to us.
Ques. As in @Romans 6 and 7?
F.E.R. Yes; we are brought to God in righteousness, but then God and righteousness become tests to us; and so we are married to Christ; then Christ becomes a test to us, and we learn the contrariety of the flesh in relation to God and to Christ. You find these tests in the early part of Numbers. There is rebellion against God and Christ.
Rem. It reaches a climax in loathing the manna.
F.E.R. Yes; you get idolatry, too, and murmuring against Moses and Aaron.
Rem. "These ten times"; (chapter 14: 22), it is a ten-fold failure.
Ques. Do you get what answers to the brazen
{301}
serpent and the springing well in @John 3 and 4?
F.E.R. Yes; but you come on to that ground when the perverseness of the flesh has been learned. The tests are different according to where people are. What tests people in the systems is different from what tests those who are in the truth.
Ques. Is @Romans 5: 5 the same?
F.E.R. It is the same Spirit, but not exactly like the springing well; it is the Holy Spirit given to us, and the love of God shed abroad in our hearts, and in that you get the thought of God dwelling in us. That raises the question of fidelity to God and to Christ. So in @Romans 6 it is, "Shall we continue in sin?" Dead to sin and living to God -- is that going to be maintained?
Ques. Are the tests in @Romans 6 before or after the brazen serpent?
F.E.R. Before.
Rem. The brazen serpent is in @Romans 8.
F.E.R. Yes; only what comes out after @Numbers 21 may in christianity be concurrent with what takes place in the previous part; only the tests apply to people on different ground.
Ques. Do you mean that in the first part of Numbers it is more the perversity of the flesh that comes out, and in the second part it is more the social seduction?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so. After @Numbers 21 we find more of the character of seduction, and in two aspects; one is in regard of association, and the other in connection with the situation. One was through Moab, where the effort was to seduce the people by association; and the other, in the case of the two and a half tribes, to forego the calling to the land on the other side of Jordan. They took up their inheritance on this side of Jordan, but it was not the promised land, and that has detained plenty of people, just as association detains plenty more.
Rem. The nature of the tests must differ in that way.
Ques. In what way would the perversity of the flesh manifest itself now?
F.E.R. In opposition to God and to Christ. Lawlessness
{302}
comes in, and that is the way the flesh shews itself -- not advancing towards holiness. "Being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life", @Romans 6: 22. People do not always advance towards holiness. In the presence of God we begin with righteousness, but we cannot stop there. We want our "fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life".
Rem. That would be increasing in separation to God.
Ques. Are we not holy in one sense?
F.E.R. In what sense?
Rem. By sanctification of the Spirit.
F.E.R. But I do not call that holiness; you do not *grow* in that. Sanctification is more positional, holiness more moral; you grow in holiness.
Rem. Holiness would be connected with love.
F.E.R. Yes, it is promoted in that way. If you are not entering into the love of God, holiness will not be promoted. If people do not enter into the righteousness of God, they are lawless; if they come out in righteousness, they have left lawlessness. There is a great deal of lawlessness I fear in the way of reading, and I have no doubt in other things too, in amusements and in other ways. If you are brought to God in righteousness, there is no room for lawlessness. You are become servants to righteousness, you are in bondage to God, and must not allow anything that is not suitable to God. You come into righteousness by faith, but the moment you come into it it tests you.
Ques. Would practical righteousness be the answer to the righteousness of God? "He that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous", @1 John 3: 7.
F.E.R. Yes; you have your fruit unto holiness, but I do not always see practical righteousness.
Rem. "Yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness", @Romans 6: 19.
F.E.R. One leads to the other. Take the thing I have spoken of -- reading; do you think that a great part of the reading tends to holiness? I think reading light literature
{303}
tends to corruption: taking up that kind of reading is lawlessness, it is entirely outside of the will of God.
Ques. Why should we not do it?
F.E.R. Because we have become servants to God, and have no right to do our own will while in bondage to God.
Rem. A slave has no right but to do the will of his owner.
Rem. It is a pernicious thing habitually to read the newspaper, because it puts you in touch with the world.
F.E.R. Yes, I think so. The point is that you do not take up that which tends to corrupt, you are in bondage to God and have to pursue holiness. Anything that tends to call the imagination into play does not tend to holiness.
Rem. If we read what is not true we become untrue.
Ques. Do you include religious moral tales?
F.E.R. Anything that tends to call the imagination into play.
Rem. "Take heed what ye hear", @Mark 4: 24.
F.E.R. Quite so. If people took up the admonition of the apostle in @Philippians 4: 8 it would tend in the direction of holiness.
Ques. In @John 17 there are two kinds of sanctification. Is the latter what tends to holiness?
F.E.R. Holiness may come out of it but it is positional. The position of Christ defines your position.
Rem. I remember Mr. Stoney speaking of sanctification in @John 17: 17 as constitutional, then the second time it occurs (verse 19) as positional.
F.E.R. I think sanctification is positional -- once for all. Our position here is determined by Christ's position: He has set Himself apart at the right hand of God that we may answer to it.
Ques. Is 'holiness' a different word?
F.E.R. Yes. This question of righteousness affects every christian wherever he is. It may be very well to get married, but when you do, your husband will test you, because you never had a husband before, and you had a
{304}
will before. It has been said that whatever we try tries us, and if you are married to Him who is raised from the dead it will test you, because the question is whether you please Him or yourself. The position we are brought into tests us. The point in preaching the gospel is to make clear to people where they are. It is important to make them see that when they believe they are in righteousness; they are not only forgiven, but they stand in relation to God, and there is no reason for lawlessness. They are in bondage to God, and they cannot move of their own accord. We are brought into another system.
Rem. It is not bondage in a legal sense, but in a moral sense.
F.E.R. That depends on what you are in bondage to. If to law, you are legal; but if to God, it is liberty.
Rem. Some one wrote, 'This bondage to love makes me free'.
F.E.R. Take a woman married to a husband, she is in bondage to her husband, but I do not think it terrifies her much; if there is no love, it is bondage indeed.
Ques. Did the Israelites resist that bondage to God when they lusted after the things of Egypt? They said, "Who shall give us flesh to eat" (@Numbers 11: 4)?
F.E.R. Yes, they broke out against God and against Christ, they were lawless.
Ques. To go back to holiness and sanctification, is holiness moral suitability?
F.E.R. Yes; I think so; and Christ will present the church to Himself holy and without blame. We have to pursue holiness. The "sanctify" in @Ephesians 5 is positional: "That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish". Sanctify is position, and holiness is in nature. You are set apart to be holy.
Ques. If born again, we are holy?
F.E.R. I do not exactly see holiness in the mere being born again; it is connected with the Spirit.
{305}
Rem. And with love, "The Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: to the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints", @1 Thessalonians 3: 12, 13.
F.E.R. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the *Holy* Spirit. Properly, holiness begins with the Spirit.
Rem. You do not connect *nature* with being born again.
F.E.R. How can you get 'nature' till you have a constitution -- a substance? The *being* must be there before you can speak of the nature of the being. Take anything you please, you must have the substance before you can talk about its nature.
Ques. How do you get the constitution built up?
F.E.R. By the Spirit, with good food and wholesome condition.
Rem. Had we not better get on to the second part of Numbers?
F.E.R. Yes; when we come to that it is ground which is more applicable to us. The testing of the flesh by God and Christ is common to all christians; all are so tested, but after chapter 21 we come on to ground which is more applicable to those who are in the truth. If we come to the unity of the Spirit we are subjected to tests which other christians do not know much about. One of the most serious tests with us now is that of associations. People come into fellowship, but do not like to break with their worldly relations and friends. The great object of the temptation to which we are subjected is to bring us into the acknowledgment of the god of this world, and that is idolatry. Where people do not make a break, but give place to worldly friends and relatives, it links them more or less with the world, and that is idolatry in a sense. People are not much above the company they keep.
Ques. Do you not think that many suppose they have continued these links simply because they are natural
{306}
relationships?
F.E.R. People keep up links of that kind and their friends and relatives lead them into all sorts of worldly ways, and they go down to their level.
Rem. It is not only "country", but "kindred and father's house" we have to leave.
F.E.R. The great principle of salvation is the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit. Salvation is in that you are true to your baptism; it brought you into the christian circle. You love the brethren; the laver of regeneration is the way into the christian circle. It is a great mercy in the present time that a christian circle is possible. You cannot get the church, but the thing is to make the best use of what is to hand. It is a great point to cultivate our relationships with one another.
Rem. You must have warmth. That is the right atmosphere.
F.E.R. And that is in the christian circle; you cannot have the atmosphere apart from the christian circle, outside it you get the atmosphere of the world, and that is *hatred*.
Rem. Friendship with the world is enmity with God.
Ques. Is the washing of regeneration once or continuous?
F.E.R. Once.
Ques. Is it true of every one who has the Spirit?
F.E.R. I would not say that exactly; the Holy Spirit is one thing and the renewing of the Holy Spirit another: it is the operation of the Spirit when He has been received.
Rem. That would be continuous.
F.E.R. The passage looks at it as effectuated, it is arrived at.
Rem. It is very clear in the present day that the social element amongst us is the great hindrance.
F.E.R. I think so. People have to judge themselves in regard of righteousness. First, there is often lawlessness in regard of God, then in connection with being
{307}
married to Christ, there is the lack of fidelity to Him. The married woman has no separate interest of her own: the husband and wife are one, but who is to guide? There cannot be two guides. The Head is to order, and that leaves no room for any interest for the christian but those of Christ.
Rem. The wonderful thing is that a christian young or old can choose worldly companions.
F.E.R. Yes; but I see certain things in the world religiously that present great temptation to people. The idea of a clergy, and the glamour connected with it, often presents great temptation to the young. They have never proved these things, and they have not sufficiently valued the christian circle, and in a way they even ridicule brethren, not in a gross way, but they see their peculiarities and speak disparagingly of them. If the young people are to be kept they should value the christian circle.
Ques. Do you not think there is a danger of that in us? We ought to be very careful; they should see that we value it.
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. Is it not a greater thing to be a brother than a servant?
F.E.R. Yes; because the servant can never be other than a levite, but the brother is a priest.
Rem. It is a great thing to come together like this.
F.E.R. Yes; it is a great privilege in coming together to meet one another, but who is the centre of the christian circle? Christ -- that is what gives it its character. We ought to lay down our lives for the brethren because He has laid down His life for us. We regard one another in the light of Christ. We do not want people amongst us who merely maintain proprieties, and if we were right such things would go to the wall. @1 Corinthians 13 teaches us that love corrects everything; there will be no improprieties if you have love. Where love is maintained the young are held, and there is something to affect others. A few of us are
{308}
thrown together in this or that place, and it is excessively important to look to it that we maintain things in a way which will tend to keep the young.
Rem. If we want to keep the young we must be what we want them to be. Young people find out soon enough what you are after. If the parents are in the thing outwardly, but their hearts not in it, the young see it soon enough; they see what you sanction.
F.E.R. Another hindrance is that people are really detained by the place down here, that is earth, what suits us naturally. That is met in @Ephesians 2: 6, "And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus"; but the tendency is to be content to remain down here. But then that does not touch many people. It affects those who have escaped the Balaam snare. They have escaped the snare of association but are detained by things of earth. It was *lawful* in a way for the two and a half tribes to settle where they did, for they went over Jordan and fought the Canaanites. And so amongst us, a great many would go and fight if a conflict arose about the truth, but when the fighting is over they drop back to earth. The snare was that it was divinely given land, it was not Egypt nor the wilderness, but it was not up to the mark.
Ques. How was that?
F.E.R. It was not entering fully into the purpose of God.
Ques. How would that bear upon us?
F.E.R. If people choose to settle down here they must, but it will not be beneficial to them. It is a good place for flocks and families, it is a divinely given land. I have men in my mind's eye who attach too much importance to the social life; they are estimable and faithful, but they give themselves up too much to their families and flocks, and so they drop down to the position of the two and a half tribes. The things are divinely given and are right in themselves, for christianity ought to pervade the relationships of this life, but such things may be taken up in a way that hinders.
{309}
Rem. We are safe in *our* place when we can say *His* place is better.
F.E.R. I think so. When you recognise that your place is in heaven then the only place you have here is to be a vessel for Christ and for the will of God.
Rem. There was apparently a greater measure of devotedness among the two and a half tribes than in the others, they were faithful to the truth.
F.E.R. Yes, they will join the conflict, but when that is over they drop below the calling. The danger is to drop below the calling: a function of the High Priest is to meet that danger. Christ as Apostle maintains the calling at its height; but we have Him as Priest that we may be maintained at the height of the calling. That would keep you on the other side of Jordan.
Ques. Why did the two and a half tribes set up that altar?
F.E.R. Because they were afraid: they wanted a memorial that they were identified with those who had gone over, whilst they were settling down here in earthly things.
Rem. Returning to Jerusalem from Babylon was all right?
F.E.R. Yes, that is the point for us. Many christians remain in Babylon. If you have escaped from Babylon, the point is to come to Jerusalem, but it is Jerusalem above, which is free; not to build our own houses but the house of God. Colossians is really what sets us free, because the scene of interest is transferred to the right hand of God. We christians expect everything from the right hand of God, not from Jerusalem; it is from thence that everything for God will be effectuated.
{310}
THE CHRISTIAN'S DRESS
@Hebrews 13
There is one thing which is very marked in all the Scriptures, and that is that they are not simply a compilation of writings of different times, and by different people, but that in every book you get evidence of method which shows it to be part of a whole. I might take up various points and go into detail, but that is not my purpose; I only wish to refer to that as regards this particular epistle. Scripture is not a collection of wise sayings, nor is any epistle an elaborate treatise on christianity. The truth is given in detail, and it is only put together as a whole by the Spirit of God -- that is what He does in the souls of believers.
Now if we take up this epistle we may note that in all the detail there is order, method. The natural man would not discern this, but it is there. A key is needed to understand it. Unconverted people have not the key, and so they make havoc of Scripture, but when once you have the key you discern the method.
I will touch on two or three points in the epistle. We have brought before us our place as companions of Christ. Later on there is the covenant, giving the terms on which God is pleased to be with us. Then there is the life of faith, a life of activity or endurance -- the practical life of the christian. Then divine discipline comes in, so that our ears may be open to divine communications. God keeps us alive by discipline that we may be partakers of His holiness, so that we may be prepared for His communications. Then at the close of the epistle we see what is our 'dress' before the world. People are known in the world by their attire, and here you get the proper attire of the christian -- that by which we are to be characterised and known. This chapter presents that which is consistent with what comes out in chapter 10. If we enter by divine grace and teaching into God's secret, what God is going to set forth in Christ for the
{311}
display of His glory, we shall come out in the dress of the last chapter. Every part of the epistle is in perfect moral accord; if we were to leave any part out, it would not be complete spiritually.
With regard to the place of christians as looked at down here, there are two things which go together -- inside the veil and outside the camp (verses 11 - 13). If on the one hand we have the privilege of going inside the veil, on the other hand our place in the world is outside the camp. If God encourages us to take up these peculiar and heavenly privileges, our only place in regard to the world is that which Christ has Himself taken, and thus we are in accord with His death. Anyone having the apprehension of Christ as having "ascended up far above all heavens, that be might fill all things", is in the fellowship of the death of Christ. The very thought of Christ filling all things is the setting aside of the world system. Scripture gives us a good idea of what is now filling the world, and that is lust, pride, and ambition. This world is a scene where man seeks his own glory and is glorified. If Christ is to fill all things, that of necessity must set aside the world as it is, because Christ is going to fill the universe with the knowledge of God, and men will be subdued by the light of God, that all may be according to the glory of God. If we have any apprehension of the place of Christ, our place is of necessity in the fellowship of His death. He has died once, and we also count ourselves to be dead to sin and to the world.
The point before me now is, our dress as down here. In the first few verses we get brotherly love, hospitality, regard for those who are suffering, marriage, contentment, and finally to remember the leaders. This shows how a christian is to be marked. Brotherly love and hospitality are to have their place, then we are to regard the ordinances of God. Christians should not run after asceticism, but be content with their circumstances. If you are unquiet and unrestful in the circumstances in which you are placed in the providence of God, you will not make real progress spiritually. The principle is, "Be
{312}
content with such things as ye have; for he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee". We get two things coupled together, contentment in confidence in God, and not being in fear of man. If we expect anything from man we are afraid of man, but if we are content and expecting nothing from man we are not afraid, and can boldly say, "The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me".
But let us pass to verses 9 - 16. I am not seeking to present anything new in regard to the altar. The great point is, "We have an altar". There was no altar within the veil. There was the ark of the covenant, the mercy-seat, and the cherubim. But there is for us an altar. What I understand by the altar is the place of God's holy judgment. The patriarchs had an altar. It was an advantage to them, they could approach God, but the effect was that they came under the holy judgment of God; for the altar was the place of God's holy judgment. The place of God's holy judgment in regard to us was the death of Christ. In the death of Christ man's state as after the flesh, the old man, came under the judgment of God. Christ was made sin for us. The cross was the place where all things came to an issue. It was an appointed place and an appointed moment, and there was the termination of the old man under the holy judgment of God. On our part our minds are to be in accord with that altar. God did not appoint suffering to us, but He did to Christ. Christ suffered when the old man came under the judgment of God. But then as we eat of that altar our minds are in accord with that holy judgment. "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?" If we eat of that altar our minds are in the fellowship of Christ's death. "I am crucified with Christ". "Reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ". "Our old man is crucified with him". This means that by the Spirit of God our minds are in accord with the holy
{313}
judgment of God which came to pass in the death of Christ. If it be so, it is impossible to go on with the religious world. "We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle". Those who serve the tabernacle are not entitled to eat of our altar. It is impossible that they can have the fellowship of that altar, because they seek to maintain religion as connected with man after the flesh, and if our minds are in accord with the holy judgment of God, we cannot recognise one another as after the flesh. The terrible thing is that christendom recognises the old man. The state church takes account of every man in the country as a parishioner. A minister in a chapel takes account of all his congregation; the question is not raised as to whether they have put off the old man and put on the new. Such ministers in principle serve the tabernacle, and therefore they have no right to eat of our altar, because if one is identified with that altar it follows that his place down here is dead to sin and to the world, and especially in regard to the world in its religious aspect. I can show no fellowship with men in religious ordinances of any kind. I am outside of all by my mind being in accord with the holy judgment of God.
Our coming together on the Lord's day morning does not mean that we are in accord with christendom, and that people may come to our meetings as they would go to chapel. What I mean is that we are not in accord with all that is around, but in coming together we come together in the fellowship of the death of Christ, and as separated by that death from all the systems connected with man after the flesh. We have gone outside the camp.
We might look a little at @Revelation 3: 19, 20. My reason for referring to this scripture is that the Lord is presented in it as at the door and virtually saying, I have no sympathy with what is going on inside, though He takes account of all that goes on there and gives counsel, but He is morally outside of it all. "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup
{314}
with him, and he with me". He does not come into this order of things, but appeals to individuals. It is a point of the last moment to apprehend the true ground of coming together in assembly. We come together in the fellowship of the death of Christ, as being apart from the systems which recognise and depend upon the old man.
I should be glad if this point could be made plain, for probably many come together as a religious duty, and the question is not raised as to the ground on which they come. People know that there are certain obligations to God, and they come together to render what is due. This is so far right, but in coming together we are in the fellowship of the death of Christ, separate from the course of things connected with man in the flesh. They have no right to eat of our altar which serve the tabernacle; they are parted from us and we from them. It is an exceedingly important point in regard to our position down here.
Now I come to another point -- we bear the reproach of Christ. Christ came under reproach. He took the place of the old man, and the reproach was His identification with that man, and bearing the judgment that was his due. That man has come under the judgment of God, and we bear the reproach of that condemnation. Then we have here no continuing city, but we seek one to come (verse 14). I can understand a person saying to a christian, Well, if everyone thought as you do, the world would come to an end. I should not mind if it did. There is no assurance of permanency in connection with this world. If it should come to an end, we have to do with a *living* Christ. We are identified with a living Christ by the Spirit of God. The one side is as true as the other; if we are identified with the death of Christ, He is a *living* Christ to us; He lives again in the power of the Spirit. That is a wonderful thought, and we are attached to a living Christ by the Spirit which is given to us. Thus we can reckon ourselves dead to the world and the religious systems connected with man after the flesh, but are able also in Christ to reckon ourselves *alive* to
{315}
God; we are linked with a living Christ by the gift of the Spirit. There is living water, and living water is given to the end that we should not thirst. That is the first great point; but there is also the springing up to everlasting life. Christ gives living water that we may be in the appreciation of Himself. The true measure of a christian in regard to God is the effect of the living water springing up in him, and that is seen in his appreciation of Christ. You get the fruit of it here: "By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name" (verse 15). On the one hand we have an altar, we are dead to the world, but on the other we have the appreciation of Christ by the Spirit. In the measure in which Christ is appreciated there is the capability of offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. That is real power. Our power with God lies in our appreciation of Christ. The more we appreciate Christ, the more we are prepared to offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually.
Take an instance. Mary of Bethany sat at the feet of the Lord and heard His word; she had a great appreciation of Christ, and you may be sure she would offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, the fruit of her lips giving thanks to His name.
The woman of the city which was a sinner, when the Lord sent her away in peace, went forth in the appreciation of Christ, and she was prepared to offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually -- the fruit of her lips. So with many another; the capability of offering praise to God continually is in our being in the appreciation of Christ. That is the spring and secret of what is agreeable to God. When Christ was on earth, there was that which was wholly acceptable under the eye of God. That was not to be lost; it is maintained here by the Spirit of God in christians in whom the Spirit is a well of water springing up into everlasting life. We give thanks to God. The Lord Himself gave thanks to God in one of the darkest moments here, when all appeared to be
{316}
against Him; and at the same time the ministry of Christ on earth is summed up in that He was doing good to men. By Him we can do both. In the conflict here, in the consciousness that the world is against us, we can offer the sacrifice of praise because we appreciate Christ, and if we give God thanks we also do good to men (verse 16).
Now all *that* makes up what one may call the dress of the christian here in this world. "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven". My point is that it is in thanking God, and not in groaning, that our good works are seen, and with such sacrifices God is well pleased. I refer to these things as making up the everyday life of the christian.
I fear there are many true christians who serve the tabernacle. They do not see that the old man has come to an end in the holy judgment of God, or they would not seek a place in the religious systems in the world. As we are identified on the one hand with the death of Christ, eating of that altar, and on the other hand are in the appreciation of a living Christ, we "offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name", and thus there are the sacrifices that are acceptable, well-pleasing unto God.
May God greatly enlarge our hearts in the appreciation of Christ. If we contemplate Christ on earth, we see One who was content to take the lowest place in the world, and yet in the lowest place was dispensing all the good things of God. He raised the dead, gave sight to the blind, forgave sins; He dispensed the mercy and bounty of God down here.
May God keep us in the appreciation of Christ, learning Him more and more, and thus prepared to surrender all that is of self, accepting the holy judgment of God in regard to the old man.
{317}
DEPARTURE AND RECOVERY
@Psalm 19; @1 John 3
I am going to speak of things which are incontestably true. If everything were to be made a question of philosophy, which is man's reason, or of science, which is largely man's deduction, then you might put moral considerations aside; but if our minds entertain any thought of God at all, we must bring in moral considerations, and if there are moral considerations, there are certain things which are incontestably true.
There are two simple thoughts before me with which we are all more or less familiar, but which I am going to present to you in a somewhat new dress: they are departure and recovery.
If you entertain any thought of God at all, you cannot be taken up merely with material considerations. Surely we are moral beings: there is such a thing as conscience, and that is a moral consideration. So, too, in regard to affections: man is capable of intelligent affections, and if so there are moral considerations; and if you take them into account, you must admit the thought of departure and recovery. If you do not entertain the thought of departure, what you are reduced to is, that the handiwork of God is bad, because no one can deny that man is not entirely what he ought to be. If your mind entertains the thought of departure, you can understand that the work of God may have been good, but that man may have been corrupted from what God made him. But then you must entertain another thought, and that is recovery. God has not been pleased to cut man off suddenly, and that leads to the thought of recovery. One is the antithesis of the other. They are the subjects of the two great parts of scripture: the Old Testament is more or less taken up with the departure; you get gleams of light coming in here and there; but in the New Testament you get the recovery, for God was bent upon it. Both are presented in a striking way in the parable of the prodigal: departure
{318}
on the part of the prodigal, and recovery on the part of the father. I should be dead against the material infidelity of the present day: I think it so unworthy and so immoral, because, unless you exclude all thought of God, you must take moral considerations into account, and if you do so, then you must admit departure and recovery.
Now, I want to touch upon the principles of each. The principles of departure were lawlessness and hatred. Consequently the principles of recovery must be correlative, and are righteousness and love. One deduces these things from Scripture: they are not inventions of the mind. I have great reverence for Scripture, and the effect it produces on my mind increasingly is that what is of God must be right. You may not for the moment be quite capable of discerning the rightness: but you may be sure it is right, and if you go on with God, He will show you the rightness of it.
I will bring before you a few thoughts in regard to the departure. It is not a very happy subject, but it is very important that we should understand what has brought about the present state of confusion in the world. I should not give a man credit for much observation if he did not apprehend the confusion which prevails in the world. I do not want to occupy you with that alone; I desire you to see how God has wrought to bring about recovery, and how He has brought in the principles of righteousness and love.
I will tell you what I mean by lawlessness: it consists in this, that a person is unattached. I know of no better definition. That is what came to pass in man departing from God. A bond had subsisted up to a certain point between God and man, and when man broke away from God and did his own will, he became morally unattached. In a sense, an attachment had come to pass between himself and Satan, but I am speaking for the moment in regard to God. Man had become unattached, and thus lawless. Man had broken his bond with God, and what followed in the train of that was hatred and the
{319}
world; It was bound to follow, for when man broke away from God there subsisted no longer any real bond between man and man's neighbour; the principle of hatred came in, and Cain killed his brother Abel. It was just typical of the way in which the Jew behaved to Christ. Christ came to the Jew, and the Jew killed Him. It was the completion of sin; it was morally consequent upon lawlessness. Adam broke away from God and became unattached; then Cain comes out in another direction: he was unattached too, as lawless as Adam, but his lawlessness works out in another direction, and he kills his brother.
I allude to these things because they are manifestly the two principles of departure: lawlessness and hatred; and these two principles are taken up in @1 John 3: lawlessness and hatred are met by righteousness and love.
I pass on for a moment to @Psalm 19. The psalmist looked up to heaven, as we might, to the material heavens; and there he saw no confusion. In a world where there is lawlessness and hatred you have confusion; but when the psalmist looked up to heaven, he saw no confusion. Every planet was moving in its appointed orbit; the sun as a bridegroom coming daily out of his chamber. Anyone who observes the heavens sees that there is perfect rule there. Order is the effect of rule, and that is seen in the heavens. The earth and the moon do not travel out of their appointed orbits, and the heavens declare the glory of God. Confusion is where there is absence of order: in the heavens there is order, hence there is no confusion. But when the psalmist looked down to earth, he could not look at man: everything was confusion. When Balaam looked from above on the children of Israel dwelling in their tents, according to their tribes, he saw no disorder or confusion. But if Moses had looked inside their tents, he would have seen things very differently.
Now, after the psalmist has spoken of the heavens, he is obliged to look at the law. There was no confusion there. All the principles of moral attachment were to be
{320}
found in the law, that a man should love God with all his heart, and his neighbour as himself. If the law were made effectual in man, there would be an end of confusion, because man would be brought into attachment with God and with his neighbour. Instead of confusion there would be order; instead of lawlessness, righteousness; instead of hatred, love. The psalmist could not see that represented in man; he could only see it represented in the law of Jehovah, and, therefore, he celebrates the law of Jehovah.
Now, I will show you how God has wrought for recovery. If God sets to work to bring recovery in, He of necessity brings in recovery in contrast with departure, and introduces principles opposed to the principles of departure, so that in recovery the first principles are righteousness and love.
I will tell you where I think was the real beginning of recovery: on the day of Pentecost. What marked the day of Pentecost was this, that God was pleased to bring in points of attachment in regard to man. The first great point of attachment was Christ, and the second was the christian circle. The preaching of the gospel has been God's great means of recovery: the light of God has gone out in it to bring recovery about; but there was no preaching of the gospel until God had seen fit to establish points of recovery, and the two great points were, Christ and the christian circle. Christ existed, like the sun in the heavens, and the christian circle also existed, before ever the gospel went out in the world. The Holy Spirit had come and established the christian circle here upon earth; and when that was established, the gospel went out into the world. The power of recovery was there; righteousness and love were there, established in Christ, and in the power of the Spirit. It is a point of the last moment to see that God was pleased, at the very outset, to establish the great principles of recovery in contrast with the principles of departure. The principles of lawlessness and hatred were met by bringing in the principles of righteousness and love, in Christ and in the power of the Spirit.
{321}
Now, I should like to call attention to the case of the blind man in @John 9. The eyes of the blind man were opened by the grace of Christ, but the Jews excommunicated him. Surely that man had never been placed in so trying a situation. Excommunication was no slight thing: it meant being cast out, so that nobody would have any regard for him at all, and his being cut off from all that in which he had lived until then. Now the Lord goes after him; He did not lose sight of that man. He appeals to him, and says, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" (verse 35). The man says, "Who is be, Lord, that I might believe on him?" (verse 36). And Jesus said unto him, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is He" (verse 37). I lay great stress upon that expression. It conveys to my mind that the Son of God had come within the cognisance of man in such a way that man could see Him, and that He on His part could put Himself into communication with man. That is what I believe to be the beginning of recovery. The effect of it on the blind man was that he said, "Lord, I believe, and he worshipped Him". The blind man had found another world; he had found it in the Son of God. If I have the Son of God, I have another world. I am content to be turned out of this world, because I have found another.
The first step which God takes to bring man back from lawlessness is in presenting Christ to man as a point of attraction. You must get attraction before you get attachment. You could not have attachment without a point of attraction, and God has brought in a point of attraction in Christ, the One in whom the grace of God is presented to man in order to attract man. That is the first principle of the gospel. The gospel sets before men the grace of God in a Man to attract men to that Man. It is not the end of the gospel; what God has in view is to form a bond; but before it can be formed you must get people attracted to Christ by the grace which is presented in Him.
I think the blind man presents that to us. He had been
{322}
attracted by Christ, at least in a measure; and when the Lord spoke to him in the way He did, he was in principle attached to Him, and in finding Christ he found another world. The same thing is true in regard to us. In @John 12 the Lord says, "Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out: and I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me" (verse 31). He virtually says, I am the beginning of another world, the beginning of the creation of God.
These principles are brought out in the beginning of the third chapter of John's first epistle. We read, He was manifested to take away our sins. If so, surely Christ has a claim upon us. But that is not the end: it is the beginning, His having been manifested to take away our sins gives Him legitimately a claim upon every man. Then we come to another point: "In Him sin is not" (verse 5). He is the centre and Head of God's universe; in Him is no sin, and God in result intends to have a universe in which there is no sin, the beginning of it is the One in whom is no sin. We are first attracted to Christ by the grace which is presented to us in Him; but what God has in view is to bring about an attachment to the One in whom is no sin, so that we should abide in Him. Once that is the case, then we have escaped from lawlessness. Lawlessness is the contrast to attachment; bring about attachment, and we are delivered from lawlessness.
That is what comes to pass in the grace of God: Christ is presented to us, we are attracted to Him, then attached to Him by the Spirit of God, and then we are delivered from lawlessness, because God has been pleased to bring about attachment. That is a great thing to have been effected. I quite admit that the great point is affection; but you must have attachment before you have affection. When attachment is brought about by the Spirit of God, affection will follow in the train. My impression is that the moral order of things is attraction, attachment, and affection. Attraction is the answer to grace; then the next point is attachment; Christ gives living water to the one who has been attracted to Him;
{323}
then when you have attachment, you get affection. I do not know whether all will agree with me, but I believe that the true affection between a man and his wife really begins when they are married. I do not say that there is not a sort of affection before; but my impression is that it is when the bond is formed the true affection really springs up. The bond is the true starting point; the man and his wife come to know each other's worth in a sense in which they never knew it before, and true affection is formed according to the bond in which they are linked together. Now, I believe that to be the case in regard to Christ and us. We are married to Christ; we have been first attracted to Him, then attached to Him, then we come under His influence, and it is the influence of Christ which brings out our affection to Him. If we are married to Him, He makes known to us all His worth, and He draws out in that way our affection to Him. He makes us conscious of His affection for us, His service and His care for us, and thus turns our affection towards Him. That is the way in which I should suppose affection really exists between Christ and those who have been attached to Him, and in that way we are delivered from lawlessness. Christ gave Himself for us, to deliver us from all lawlessness, that we might be attached to Him in the power of the Spirit, so that under the influence of Christ we might bring forth fruit unto God.
Two great benefits of being attached to Christ are sunshine and rain. To take a figure from natural things: the earth derives great benefits from being attached to the sun: it gains sunshine and rain, and thereby becomes fruitful. If the question were put to me why there is so little fruit for God in saints, I should say it is because they come so little under the sunshine and rain which ought to result from their attachment to Christ. It is a great thing to be in the brightness of Christ; it is really the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. If you come under the influence of that brightness, you will also get rain. The sun draws up the moisture from the earth, and it returns to the earth in the form of rain. Rain is
{324}
dependent on the sun, and the same thing is true in spiritual things. All ministry is dependent upon our sun, and the brightness of our sun is the moral effulgence of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
It is a great thing to have been recovered from lawlessness and brought into attachment, so that we can say we are righteous as Christ is righteous. Christ is the only point of righteousness, as He is the point of attraction and attachment; there is no righteousness in the universe except Christ. He is the righteous One, who has accomplished righteousness, in whom we are righteous, as He is righteous. We stand in relation to Him; we are no longer lawless or unattached; we apprehend Christ as the blessed beginning and centre of God's world, the universe of bliss. That is the first point of attachment, and it is of the greatest importance to apprehend it, so that we should come very definitely under the influence of our sun, that we might be fruitful. Then there is another point as to Christ: He has come within the range of man's vision, and He talks to us. If He could talk to the blind man in @John 9, He can talk to us; He communicates with us, and we can sit at the feet of Jesus and hear His word, like Mary did.
Now, there is another point of attachment, which is equally important, in order that we may escape the world and the hatred in it. God's work is perfect, and His way is perfect. When God set to work to bring about recovery for man, He had in view not only to recover man from lawlessness, but from hatred, and, therefore, before the gospel went out into the world God had established the circle of love down here upon earth. The apostles not only had the testimony of Christ, but there was also the circle of the brethren, and the gospel went out from that circle. It was a point of attachment, so that those who were attracted to Christ might be brought into it, and escape from the hatred in the world. If you come under the rule of Christ, you cannot remain in the world, because that does not come under the rule of Christ. I think the Father holds the world in hand; but
{325}
the rule of Christ refers at present to those who believe in Him, in order that they may be fruitful for God; they leave the world for the circle of love.
I believe that is where a great many christians fail: they have come, in a way, under the rule of Christ, but they do not apprehend the christian circle; they are mixed up with the great christian organisations in the world; they have never really escaped from the world and its hatred. There is no escape from the world except in the christian circle, the circle of love. God saw fit to establish that circle here, the atmosphere of which was to be the love of Christ. In every company on earth -- the House of Commons or any other -- there is a sort of moral atmosphere. So it was with the company formed on the day of Pentecost: its moral atmosphere was the love of Christ. Souls who were converted were brought into it, and thus delivered from the poisonous influences which existed in the world: and they became conscious that they had passed out of death into life. They had left an atmosphere full of moral poison, and come into an atmosphere of life and love, the little circle which had its character from the love of Christ, and they were conscious they had passed from death unto life, because they loved the brethren.
Now, it is in that way that the work of God is complete: not only to deliver souls from lawlessness, but from hatred, from everything that came in by departure. God's work is perfect in contrast with the departure, and, therefore, in the recovery you get the two points of attachment. The one, of supreme importance, is the Son of God, the beginning of God's creation, the head of every man; He is the first point of attachment, so that you may abide in Him. You come under His blessed influence, and get sunshine and rain. The other point is equally important, and that is, that you come into the christian circle, which you find ready prepared. The Spirit of God brings you into the circle of love, and you become conscious that you have passed out of the poisonous influences of the world into life, because you
{326}
love the brethren. You cannot attach too much importance to the christian circle. It is as much a principle of recovery as the rule of Christ. The rule of Christ and the christian circle go together, in order that God's recovery may be complete, so that souls may be delivered not only from lawlessness, but from the world, and the hatred that characterises the world.
Now, if, through the grace of God, you are brought under the influence of Christ, you abide in Him; and if you find yourself in the christian circle, where the love of Christ prevails, you apprehend that you have come into a scene of moral order; you get the benefit of it in your own soul. Depend upon it, moral order can only be found in those who are under the rule of Christ, abiding in Him on the one hand and in the christian circle on the other, conscious that they have passed out of death into life, because they love the brethren. The world is a scene of confusion, full of noxious and poisonous influences. My heart aches when I think of the things to which the young are exposed in the world, the filthiness and abominations which are paraded before their minds. But there is an outlet, and the first point is to come under rule. Rule is a wholesome thing, it brings about order. It is so important to come under rule, to abide in Christ, the blessed Head and centre and sun of God's universe, and then to enjoy the christian circle, the atmosphere of which is the love of Christ. How wonderful to think that there should be a circle down here whose atmosphere is the love of Christ! It is a great thing to come into it and to fulfil our own obligation in it, that is, that we love: we love the brethren. You could not do that, if you did not first recognise that the brethren were there. You were brought into that circle; but it existed a long time before you were converted. It existed at the beginning, before any had been converted by the gospel. Christ formed it, and the Spirit of God sanctioned and gave character to it. Those converted by the gospel were brought into abiding in Christ on the one hand, and into the christian circle on the other.
{327}
It is wonderful to contrast the two I have attempted to bring before you: lawlessness and hatred, as the effect of departure; and on the other hand the principles of attachment, righteousness, and love, which characterise recovery, all blessedly brought to pass in Christ and the christian circle.
{328}
GOD'S NEW CENTRE
@John 2: 1 - 11
I do not touch upon this passage at all in a dispensational way, beloved friends, but entirely in a moral way. You see, everything has reached a very important point for us, for everything now has come under the survey of Christ. It makes all the difference in the world; everything, as I say, has come under the survey of Christ and therefore we get new light thrown upon everything and upon every relationship down here. I think in this passage we get new light thrown upon marriage. I feel this, we shall get on very well in the absence of lawlessness: lawlessness spoils everything. It came in at the beginning and spoilt everything morally and things have been spoilt morally ever since. There has been the coming in of lawlessness which spoilt all, but on the other hand we see the way in which Christ, in which God, has come in to meet it all. God has brought in a new and blessed centre and He has brought us into moral attachment to that centre so that all our movements begin from Christ and are ordered in relation to Christ. There is a moment of beginning for each one of us, a moment when we come into attachment to Christ, but being in attachment to Him our movements are from Him: we abide in Him and we sin not: we abide in Him and bring forth fruit to God and we carry out every other relationship according to God. It is an immense thing to have been delivered from sin and lawlessness, that is what we get from Christ, so that we can take up any and every relationship according to Christ. That is the only thing that will meet the present condition of things.
Now, I do not believe there is anything so severely testing in the world as our natural relationships, we are brought into such close contact with one another that we are bound to be put to the test: and of all the relationships none is so severely testing as the relationship of
{329}
man and wife. We are not sufficient for it. Possibly man might have been spared all the testing had he remained where God set him, but lawlessness came in and we are not sufficient to meet the difficulty, and we can only take up these relationships in relation to Christ. When we move in relation to Christ we partake of the grace of Christ, grace is available for us and it enables us to carry out our relationships down here according to God. Now we have true light as to the relationship of man and wife -- Christ having put Himself in relation to the church, we have a perfect pattern of what should be in man and wife; you have a living pattern before you in what Christ is to the church and what the church is to Christ. Then another thing, you can obtain all grace from Christ and it is a great thing to maintain the sense of the grace of Christ and that it is available for you. If we are left here in the secret of God's testimony there is the grace of the testimony, and we can avail ourselves of it and the grace of Christ will meet every detail of the path down here. I think the test is this -- it is continuance -- the power of stay. Many a marriage has begun brightly enough, but there is no power of continuance there, it lies wholly in the grace of Christ.
Now, what I do desire, and it is what we all desire, I am sure, is that our brother and sister should be maintained in the light and grace of the testimony -- that they may abide in Christ, in fidelity to Christ; that is on their side, but the answer to it from Christ is that Christ will abide in them, and we get the power of continuance there. Our place is to abide in Him, but then He will be to us stay, and support, and power down here.
Just one word in regard of what comes before us here. You see a picture of this world, I think, in what the governor of the feast says, "Every man sets on first the good wine, and when [men] have well drunk, then the inferior;" (verse 10). The good wine is set forth at the beginning and generally speaking the day of marriage is looked on as the day of brightest happiness in the world, that is the good wine, but then when men have
{330}
well drunk, what is inferior comes before them, they are very speedily put to the test and their happiness does not continue. The wine which is inferior is the general history of things in the world because in man there is no real power of stay and continuance. But what we get in Christ is this, "Thou hast kept the good wine till now" -- the real secret of happiness and pleasure is in Christ. I have long ceased for myself to look for exuberant joy down here; I do not think it is our portion; but there is joy and in spite of all statements to the contrary I would maintain that, but the secret of it lies in having Christ for our stay. Then on our part we see to it that we maintain fidelity to Christ. There is many a temptation in the way to seduce us from the path of fidelity to Christ and from the separation that such a path entails, but I do not think that the turning aside from it will tend to happiness or joy, but whatever exercise we may be called upon to pass through, the true joy may be found and will be found in fidelity to Christ and to the testimony of our Lord Jesus. I would say, Seek to maintain fidelity to Him and to the testimony down here and Christ will be your stay and help: He will give you the good wine, and that good wine, and the power of it, and the stay of it, will be known to your hearts as long as you are down here. May our brother and sister know this to the full: we cannot do without Christ because, as I said, we are not sufficient for the state of things, but our one power of stay is Christ. Then on the other hand we get joy by abiding in Christ, it delivers us from lawlessness and He answers us by abiding in us so that we have the power of continuance in the relationships which God has ordained.
Beloved friends, we want Christ and His support and mercy in our pathway, and, as I said, we can count on the grace of Christ for every detail of life.
{331}
CHILDREN OF GOD
@1 John 3: 1 - 24
The spirit that was manifested against the apostles was the spirit of the children of the devil. The children of God were known by their likeness to Christ. They were practising righteousness and loving their brethren. That spirit which the apostles showed was intended to continue. We are not only the children of God but we are manifested as such. We are liberated from the connections we were in naturally, and brought into new ones.
The world as it is began with man's departure from God. It was not very evident at first but the fact was there. Man broke away from divine restraint. That is what Scripture calls lawlessness. The Lord Jesus hated lawlessness, but on the other hand He loved righteousness. He recognised every right of God, and hated everything connected with man's breaking away from God's restraint. Man's breaking away from divine restraint opened the gate to the wicked one. When man was under divine restraint he was content with what lay within his reach. When he broke away man began to look after himself. The word 'self' came in. The wicked one got an entrance into the world because he could minister to 'self', that is, to man's gratification. Another thing that came in was hatred and that came in by the wicked one. It might begin with jealousy, but jealousy causes hatred and hatred, murder. Cain was jealous of his brother's offering being accepted and he slew him. "Cain was of the wicked one and slew his brother".
It is important to see how God has come in to deliver us. The believer is brought into entirely new connections. Following these new connections he is liberated from the old ones. He is delivered from the hatred that is in the world. The very first principle is that we are the children of God. It is the mind of God for us. We have received the Spirit's testimony of Christ, and in receiving that
{332}
testimony we are brought into that which is God's mind for us. In that sense we have been begotten of God. It is God's mind for the believer at this present time. We come into the light of God's mind, and consequent upon that, the Spirit is given to us. "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God". The Spirit brings us into attachment to Christ. I mean attachment in the form of a bond. When a man is married to a woman "the two shall be one flesh". We are married to Him who is risen from the dead. The one who receives the Spirit is brought into inseparable attachment to Christ. It is a connection which does not belong to this world. We are joined to Christ by the Spirit and that is an entirely new thing. None was joined to God until Christ came into the world, and none was joined to Christ until He was raised from the dead. Christianity consists in the reality of these new connections which exist in the Spirit. Christianity does not consist in believing certain doctrines. We start by believing doctrine -- the report.
This world is lawless without a head. It will get a false head -- antichrist. Then God will set it aside and will bring in another world which He has now before Him. All our connections are with that world which will supersede this one. That world will be displayed in the appearing of Christ. Christianity is 'vitality'. The Lord Jesus said, "I am come that they might have life". It consists in living connections with another world.
If we were not married to Christ we could not abide in Him. If we are brought into that relationship to Christ we have a corresponding relationship with our fellow christians, for a very simple reason. They are brought into the same attachment to Christ that we are. The practice of righteousness is the proof of our abiding in Christ. If you practise righteousness you are delivered from lawlessness. The practice of righteousness really means that you give God His rights. Righteousness on the part of God is the assertion of rights. Righteousness on the part of man is the acknowledgment of those
{333}
rights. The law was the assertion of God's rights. He proved Himself to be God by the assertion of His rights. His rights are that He should have the affection of His creature. The Old Testament sets forth the rights of God naturally. The New Testament sets forth the rights of God in mercy. The right of God to show mercy is in virtue of redemption. God has shown Himself in mercy that He might have the natural right to love. We admit God's rights. That is what I should call the first principle, practising righteousness.
Being married to Christ brings us under His influence. He has become a man that He might be the Head of man. I cannot think of Christ without thinking of mercy. If I am under His influence I abide in Him. Then I practise righteousness. No one practises righteousness unless he is under the influence of Christ. I have heard it said, 'There is no harm in this', or 'There is no harm in that', but if you examine them you will find that self-gratification is at the bottom, and if you make self a centre you are lawless. Being under the influence of Christ you not only admit the rights of God, but you love your neighbour.
Throwing a stone into the water causes many circles, but each circle has one common centre. Christ is the centre, and we are in the inmost circle, and being in that circle, we are not only equally near the centre but equally near one another. Therefore we are not only under obligation to love the Centre, but to love one another. Life is love. Death is hatred. Where love is, life is. Life is going to come in by Christ because He is the blessed expression of the love of God. If we understand these things we shall see the wonderful provision God has made even from the beginning. The very fact that we are delivered from hatred shows that we have come into a scene of love. Having been brought into attachment to Christ we are under obligation to abide in Him. We are known down here by practising righteousness, the admission of God's rights. Christ came into this world and died for man that man might be married
{334}
to Him. Therefore He has a claim upon us. We are His. We are brought into the inmost circle of which Christ is the centre.
{335}
THE LIGHT SHINING IN CHRIST
@Matthew 4: 1 - 25
This chapter is a very important presentation of Christ in the beginning of His ministry It brings out the great principles which came out by Him. 1. The temptation; 2. A great light had sprung up; 3. Christ is a great gathering point, a divine centre; 4. Service, that is preaching, teaching and healing. In principle all these things continue true. There is no change in Christ. There is a change in condition. He is risen from the dead and is at the right hand of God, but there is no change in Him. He "is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come". What He was down here will be the same when He comes in glory. These principles follow in divine order. Christ first overcomes the power of the enemy. He was permitted to be put to the test and then the light shines out. When the great light shines out, you get a centre, and when you get the centre you get the diffusion.
There is a power of evil in the universe. Scripture makes that clear. There is hatred and murder. There is a great deal of murder in this world which people do not call murder. There are three great steps in the overthrow of the power of evil. The first is in connection with Christ's incarnation. The second is His death. The third is in His ascension. It is through death that Christ destroyed him that had the power of death, that is the devil. The ascension is the climax. If a man were called upon to be a martyr before the death of Christ it would be much more difficult than after. We see there is a way through death and we see the Lord. The very fact of Christ going through death has opened a way for us because we see Him on the other side. That is the second great step in the dispossession of the enemy. Morally the enemy has been overcome. The Lord was subject to temptation in three spheres: the natural, the spiritual and the worldly.
{336}
Satan was met and rebuked on every ground. Instead of overcoming, as he had been accustomed to, he was overcome. The strong man was bound. Then the Lord set to work to spoil his goods. (See @Revelation 12: 4.) We get Satan represented in thee aspects: the tempter down here, the one who has the power of death and the accuser of the brethren in heaven. He was the accuser of Job in the presence of God. Satan is exposed in being overcome. When Satan offers worldly prosperity it is under certain conditions. The condition is to acknowledge him. It is a very great thing for us that Satan has been met, exposed and overcome. The very fact that the man child, Christ, has been caught up to heaven and to God's throne shows that Satan is about to be cast out of heaven. It is a great thing to see that Satan is not all-powerful. It has been said that the higher you get in this world the nearer you get to the god of it. It is dangerous to wish to become conspicuous in the spiritual sphere.
Verses 12 - 16. A great light had sprung up to those who sat in the region and shadow of death. Jews and gentiles were there and all were under the power of death. Christ was the great Light. It meant the revelation of God. God has revealed Himself to man in Christ. Christ was full of grace and truth.
The point of grace was that God was not imputing trespasses. The mind of God toward man was one of grace. His mind toward Simon the Pharisee was the same as His mind to the woman. "He frankly forgave them both".
It was the purpose of God to set the affections of man in divinely appointed channels. That light is still true. Nothing has been altered. Christ is still full of grace and truth. The Spirit is truth. No greater light could have sprung up. All the Lord's miracles in regard of man were characterised by mercy. The good Samaritan came pouring in oil and wine. When God approached man, He approached him in grace and truth.
Verses 17 - 22. Christ came as a gathering point, a centre, that man might be attracted to Him. There never
{337}
was a gathering centre before. John the baptist had some disciples but he was not a gathering centre. It was only the One who was the Sun of righteousness who could be a centre.
You are not in christianity unless you are in attachment to Christ. What is the Spirit given to you for? It is given to attach you to Christ. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of His". Every benefit of christianity is in Christ. Where is redemption? In Christ. Where is forgiveness of sins? In Christ. Where is salvation? In Christ. Where is sonship? In Christ. We do not realise anything until we are in Christ. All things in Scripture begin very low. David began as the servant of Saul. When the Son of God came into the world He came in the lowest possible way. The One to whom the four in these verses were gathered is now the centre of that universe of bliss. I believe that is the way in which God has appointed a world which will supersede this one. We have come into the great light of Christ. Hence we are acquainted with the mind of God toward man. God desires that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth.
Verses 23 - 25. We have now come to what I might call the influence of Christ. He was preaching and teaching the glad tidings of the kingdom of God and at the same time was healing. The Lord Jesus was the great teacher when He was down here, but now He teaches though the Spirit. The fruits of the Spirit are righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. What follows upon peace is joy. Righteousness, peace and joy are very great principles. They are the contrasts to lawlessness, confusion and murmuring. Instead of lawlessness, we have righteousness. Instead of confusion, peace; and instead of murmuring, joy.
Christ can heal all moral diseases. Moral diseases are, I take it, excitement and fleshly issues. What follows excitement is anger, and what follows fleshly issues is lust. We get healing now by the Spirit, really the virtue of Christ. In a natural kingdom, the government is
{338}
established to maintain order; When we get into the gain of the kingdom we have everything regular. The point in righteousness is that I am simply and purely in my pathway ruled by the will of God. What follows that is peace and there is the accompaniment of joy.
Christ is concerned about your pathway. You are not attached to Him for nothing. You are under His care and influence down here. The apostle Paul walked through this world under the influence of Christ. He could say, "In that I now live in flesh, I live by faith, the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me and given Himself for me". If you come under the influence of Christ how will it come out? You will be merciful according to Christ as you see in @Luke 10.
Christ shows His mercy and says, "Go and do thou likewise". There are three things which should characterise the christian: 1. He should pray in the Holy Spirit. 2. He should look for the mercy which is in Jesus Christ unto eternal life. 3. He should keep himself in the love of God. Christ abides in the love of God. All the power of the enemy has been overcome in Christ. He came here, a point of gathering for man, that we might be brought into the gain of the kingdom by the Spirit, and that we might be healed from all our moral diseases. You could not say anyone was in the kingdom of God except in the Spirit. The gain of the kingdom is the Spirit and influence of Christ -- detachment from everything here and attachment to Christ. Christ is the great Physician and we are brought into attachment to Him that we might be liberated from all the moral diseases in the world.
